Māori culture

sport . māori take part fully in new zealand 's sporting culture with both the national rugby league and rugby union teams have featured many māori players , and other sports also feature many māori players . there are also national māori rugby union , rugby league and cricket teams , which play in international competitions , separate from the main national ones . and are two sports of māori origin . got an unexpected boost when mcdonald 's chose it to represent new zealand . . māori newspapers . māori were quick to learn the power of the printed word . the first māori newspaper appeared in 1842 . a number of different newspapers such as and were written in the māori language to convey information to a widespread māori audience , often of a political or ideological nature . although print runs were often small it was common for a newspaper to be passed around a whole . although the government printed newspapers in māori such as , the movement was anxious to convey their own message to māori . whereas the government and missionaries often used their newspapers as an educational tool – to inform māori of british laws and customs – the countered this with arguments for self-determination . māori newspapers eagerly reported on events from overseas that showed groups such as the irish challenging british sovereignty to obtain home rule . . films and books . films that feature māori themes and culture include : the betrayer , 1921 australian-new zealand film about an inter-racial romance . , 1983 , loosely based on events from te kooti 's war , 1987 , set in 1948 , looking at the threat of unemployment for a local māori community . , 1988 . , 1991 , explored the links between māori political activism , cultural identity and spiritual redemption . once were warriors , 1994 , graphic depiction of urban māori and domestic violence , and its 2001 sequel , what becomes of the broken hearted ? whale rider , 2002 by niki caro , a 12-year-old girl 's struggles for chiefly succession river queen , 2005 , chronicles multi-generational frontier/māori life and war boy , 2010 , by taika waititi , coming-of-age comedy-drama mt . zion , 2013 , demonstrates māori traditions and values . the dead lands , 2014 , an action/fighting movie set prior to european contact the novels of witi ihimaera and the short stories of patricia grace provide an insider 's view of the culture . the bone people a novel by keri hulme , won the booker prize for fiction in 1985 . jacqueline sturm was the first māori woman to complete an undergraduate university degree , at victoria university college , followed by an ma in philosophy . sidney moko mead wrote : living by māori values , which provides a thorough introduction about the māori way of doing things , both in the past and present . well-known māori actors and actresses include temuera morrison , cliff curtis , lawrence makoare , manu bennett , and keisha castle-hughes . they appear in films such as whale rider , star wars : episode iii – revenge of the sith , the matrix , king kong , river queen , the lord of the rings , rapa nui , and others , and famous television series like xena : warrior princess , hercules : the legendary journeys , the lost world and spartacus : blood and sand . in most cases their roles in hollywood productions have them portraying ethnic groups other than māori . in the 2010s māori actor-director taika waititi rose to global fame with the marvel cinematic universe film thor : ragnarok ( in which he played an alien named korg ) , which many critics noted carried a sophisticated commentary on colonization under the comedy . waititi went on to win an academy award , which he dedicated '' to the indigenous kids of the world '' , for the screenplay of his anti-hate satire jojo rabbit , in which he played adolf hitler as imagined by a ten-year-old hitler youth member . his previous films include boy and hunt for the wilderpeople , both of which feature young māori protagonists . broadcasting . māori television is a new zealand tv station broadcasting programmes that tries to make a significant contribution to the revitalisation of and . funded by the new zealand government , the station started broadcasting on 28 march 2004 from a base in newmarket . te reo is the station 's second channel , launched 28 march 2008 . te reo is presented in 100 % māori language with no advertising or subtitles . it features special tribal programming with a particular focus on new programming for the fluent audience . . ( community meeting place ) . the most appropriate venue for any māori cultural event is a , which is an enclosed area of land where a meeting house or ( literally '' big house '' ) stands . a is the centre for much of māori community life . generally the māori language is used in ceremonies and speeches , although translations and explanations are provided when the primary participants are not māori speakers . increasingly , new zealand schools and universities have their own to facilitate the teaching of māori language and culture . the is a communal ceremonial centre where meetings and ceremonies take place in accordance with traditional protocols . the symbolises group unity and generally consists of an open cleared area in front of a large carved meeting house , along with a dining hall and other facilities necessary to provide a comfortable stay for visiting groups . on the official functions take place including formal welcomes , celebrations , weddings , christenings , reunions , and ( funerals ) . the older people have the authority on the , and they impart , primarily through oral tradition , traditions and cultural practices to the young people . these include genealogy , spirituality , oratory , and politics , and arts such as music composition , performance , weaving , or carving . the or meeting , usually on a marae . it begins with a ( a welcoming ceremony ) . if a visitor is noteworthy , he or she may be welcomed with an aggressive challenge by a warrior armed with a ( traditional fighting staff ) , who then offers a token of peace , such as a fern frond , to the visitor . acceptance of the token in the face of such aggression is a demonstration of the courage and of the visitor . the is highly structured , with speeches from both hosts and guests following a traditional format , their sequence dictated by the ( protocol ) of that place , and followed by , songs . are held for business , for festivities or for rites of passage such as baptism , marriage and death . it is appreciated if foreign guests can say a few words in māori and sing a song they are familiar with as a group . protocols . the details of the protocols , called '' '' or '' '' , vary by but in all cases locals and visitors have to respect certain rules especially during the rituals of encounter . when a group of people come to stay on a , they are considered ( guests ) while the hosts of the are known as ( '' people of the land '' ) . . food . although have modern cooking facilities , the traditional is still used to provide meals for large groups because the food it produces is considered flavourful . the consists of a shallow hole dug in the ground , in which a fire is prepared and stones are placed on the top . when the stones are hot , prepared food is placed on top of them , meat first and then vegetables such as kūmara , potatoes and pumpkin . the is then covered with leaves or mats woven out of , or wet sacks , and soil is then heaped over the to seal in the heat to cook the food . events . like in pre-european times , continue to be the location of many ceremonial events , including birthdays , weddings , and anniversaries . the most important event located at are . are the means by which the dead are farewelled and the surviving family members supported in māori society . as indicated by ka'ai and higgins , '' the importance of the and its central place in custom is reflected in the fact that it takes precedence over any other gathering on the '' . the is a māori funeral . it almost always takes place on the home of the deceased . the rituals followed are essentially christian . the begins with a to welcome guests . it is normal for māori to travel very long distances to attend the of a loved one . often black clothes are worn , following victorian practices . guests will speak formally about the deceased on the often referring to tribal history and using humour . pathos is commonly used to create a feeling of comfort and unity . speeches are supported by ( songs ) . the of the deceased sit by the coffin on the porch but do not speak or reply . the family may often hold or display photos of the deceased or important ancestors . a may go on for several days , especially for a person of great . rainfall during a is seen as a divine sign of sorrow . te ara , the encyclopedia of new zealand . tangihanga death customs . . oral tradition . the history of individual tribal groups is kept by means of narratives , songs and chants , hence the importance of music , story and poetry . oratory , the making of speeches , is especially important in the rituals of encounter , and it is regarded as important for a speaker to include allusions to traditional narrative and to a complex system of proverbial sayings , called . oral traditions include songs , calls , chants , and formalised speech patterns that recall the history of the people . other traditional buildings . the standard building in a classic māori settlement was a simple sleeping ( house/hut ) about 2 metres x 3 metres with a low roof , an earth floor , no window and a single low doorway . heating was provided by a small open fire in winter . there was no chimney . material used in construction varied between areas , but raupo reeds , flax and totara bark shingles for the roof were common . te papa museum of nz . wharepuni . similar small , but with interior drains , were used to store kūmara on sloping racks . in the classic period a higher proportion of were located inside than was the case after contact with europeans . a chief 's was similar but larger – often with full headroom in the centre , a small window and a partly enclosed front porch . in times of conflict the chief lived in a on the or summit of a hill . in colder areas , such as in the north island central plateau , it was common for to be partly sunk into the ground for better insulation . food was not cooked in the sleeping but in the open or under a ( lean-to ) . saplings with branches and foliage removed were used to store and dry items such as fishing nets or cloaks . valuable items were stored in pole-mounted storage shelters called . other constructions were large racks for drying split fish . during the construction of important buildings , slaves were sometimes used as a sacrifice . this practice was done in order to express the buildings ' significance and to secure the gods ' protection . for smaller buildings , small animals were sacrificed to distinguish it from other buildings and to exhibit its uniqueness . the traditional māori continued to be used in rural areas in particular well into the post-contact period . they were usually very small with a dirt floor and full of vermin , especially fleas . in winter a central fire was lit that filled the with smoke which slowly filtered through the roof . even as late as 1849 george cooper , the assistant private secretary to george grey , described a village in the relatively affluent lower eastern waihou river area as '' a wretched place , containing about a dozen miserable raupo huts all tumbling to pieces '' . 11 . in the 19th century settlements were -based , and 5 buildings became standardised : the sleeping , or communal cookhouse/shelter , or wood store , or storehouse , and increasingly from the 1870s or community meeting house . significant finance and was invested in increasingly elaborate meeting houses which became a source of or pride and prestige . a meeting house was likely to have outside carvings and increasingly as european tools were used , intricate interior carving and woven panels depicting tribal history . rotorua became a centre of carving excellence under the encouragement of the māori mps in the young māori party . itinerant specialist carvers travelled widely , employing their skills in many locations . meetinghouses became places for tribal celebrations or political meetings , especially after the 1860s land wars . they were a place to display largesse and enhance with elaborate feasts and entertainment . by the 20th century were common and averaged 18–24m long by 8m wide . there were no māori buildings of this size in pre-european days . as māori became familiar with european building construction and design they incorporated features such as chimneys and fireplaces and made use of bigger doorways and windows as well as sawn timber but even by the turn of the 19th century toilet facilities were often primitive , despite the urgings of the māori mps pomare and ngata who worked hard to improve the standard of māori dwellings over their many years in office . maori mps.nz history online . . mythology and religion . traditional māori religion , has deviated little from its tropical eastern polynesian roots on the island of hawaiki . accordingly , all things were thought of as possessing a life force or . the god tangaroa was the personification of the ocean and the ancestor or origin of all fish ; tāne was the personification of the forest and the origin of all birds ; and rongo was the personification of peaceful activities and agriculture and the ancestor of cultivated plants . ( according to some , the supreme personification of the māori was io ; however this idea is controversial . ) christianity plays an important role in māori religion today . in the early 19th century , many māori embraced christianity and its concepts . large numbers of converts joined the church of england and the roman catholic church , both of which are still highly influential in māori society . health and traditional beliefs . classic māori viewed disease as a punishment for breaking tribal , but recognised that some families were prone to a certain disease . the standard practice of was to isolate the victim in a small shelter . the most common serious disease was tuberculosis , which was present in the colonising polynesians . classic māori did not recognise the symptoms as being from one disease . was considered the work of demons and caused by ( witchcraft ) . was the name of the devil that caused tubercular bone disease . tuberculosis of the neck glands was called or . this was very common . tubercular ulcers were called . the early european explorer and painter earle noted in 1827 that these diseases were common even in isolated inland districts such as taupo . his māori advisers said the diseases were very old . earle recognised that used a range of plants to treat minor skin ailments . much later european doctors advocated investigation of the medicinal properties of plants commonly used in māori medicine . missionaries . cms missionaries insisted māori abandon cannibalism and child infanticide before they could be baptised . they tried to discourage polygamy . some early missionaries had sympathy for abandoned wives but henry williams was adamant that polygamy disqualified māori from baptism . cms missionaries also outlawed the use of further , taking part in lewd dances and practising customary funeral rites . catholic missionaries who arrived 20 years after the church of england cms missionaries were less concerned with stopping these customary practices before christian conversion . they reasoned that they could influence māori more effectively after baptism and were subsequently successful in attracting many converts in the western hokianga district , away from the dominant cms influence . missionaries did not arrive in the waikato until about 1834–5 . cms mission stations were established at manakau , maraetai , waikato heads , kaitotehe opposite tuapiri , te awamutu , kopua and kawhia . missionaries helped explain the treaty of waitangi to tainui in 1840 . first māori interpretation of christianity . in the 1830s te atua wera started the papahurihia faith in opposition to the missionaries . it mixed christian , judaic and māori customary influences . they held services on saturday and called themselves or jews . te atua wera reverted to the more customary role of a figure by the late 1830s . te atua wera taught that heaven was a place where there was happiness , no cold or hunger with an abundance of flour , sugar , muskets , ships , murder and voluptuousness . children and education . childhood . early european reports suggest that māori children were indulged and led a carefree and playful life . a french explorer in 1772 commented that '' the women seemed to be good mothers and showed affection for their offspring . i have often seen them play with the children , caress them , chew the fern-root , pick at the stringy parts , and then take it out of their mouth to put it into that of their nurslings . the men were also very fond of and kind to their children . '' french missionary jean-simon bernard wrote , disapprovingly , in 1844 : '' the children here are completely free ; the parents never do anything to them . they never beat them and do not allow anyone else to beat them . '' the killing of children could be the ( cause ) of war . in 1815 the north taranaki ngāti tama killed two ngāti maniapoto boys during a visit to friends at motuawa near the mokau heads . this led to a ngāti maniapoto reprisal raid when warriors pretended to be peaceful visitors and launched a surprise attack on ngāti tama . . tainui . l . kelly . pp . 297–298 . the concept of ( adopting or fostering children ) has been , and still is , important within māori . it is the practice of raising nieces , nephews , cousins and other wider-family members as if they were members of the immediate family . are adopted children who are raised with a , most often as another member of that , like a brother or sister . historian paul moon writes of reports by missionaries of families forcing some of their young girls into the sex trade with the object of obtaining valuable and scarce english goods in the 1820s . he describes how , when a new ship arrived , the fathers came to take girls as young as 10 out of school . moon records reports of widespread infanticide in māori settlements—particularly the killing of baby girls , of slaves captured in battle or of half-caste children . other historians such as vincent o'malley demonstrate that reports of this type are contradictory and often unreliable . sam ritchie points out that moon fails to contextualize his interpretation of missionary writing and accepts it at face value without adequately considering other sources or the reasons behind such reports . census figures in the 19th century showed a marked male/female imbalance throughout the north island amongst māori children . the 1857–8 māori census recorded 32,329 males and only 23,928 females . statistics of nz for 1861 . taken from the 1857–58 native census . aboriginal native population . appendix h . in modern times , child abuse among māori has received a great deal of media attention . from 1978 to 1987 the māori child-homicide rate was 1.15 times the non-māori rate . however , between 1991 and 2000 , the māori rate rose to more than 3.5 times the non-māori rate and from 2001 to 2005 the māori child-homicide rate reached around 2.4 times that of non-māori . as part of a response to these statistics , national māori child-advocacy organisation te kāhui mana ririki formed in 2008 . te kahui mana ririki has commissioned research into traditional māori parenting in order to tackle child abuse in the māori community . . education . according to oral information māori were familiar with the concept of schooling in tradition times as taught by . bishop selwyn took adult māori to sydney where they experienced limited schooling to learn english . when missionaries back in arrived in the bay of islands they realised that if they were going to introduce christianity and change what they considered to be barbaric practices like cannibalism , slavery , lewd dancing and having multiple wives , they would need to establish schools . both the missionaries and their wives constructed schools and provided slates and bibles as reading material . the first school was established by t . kendal in 1816 . recently original slates and written material from that period in the bay of islands has been located , photographed and published . some adults attended school but most pupils were the sons or daughter of chiefs or other persons of status . by 1853 mr and mrs ashwell had been running a mission school at taupiri in the waikato for 50 māori girls for 3 years . the girls learnt arithmetic and reading . in the early 1860s governor grey had provided money to support a trade school near te awamutu in the waikato . the aim was to produce māori workers who were literate but could also work with , and repair , agricultural machinery as used on farms and in the new flour mills . in 1863 rewi maniapoto attacked and burnt down the school , stealing the printing press . he aimed to kill leading europeans in the area but they had been warned by friendly māori and left before the attack . because of the negative influence of maniapoto and other anti-government factions , the school had previously had poor attendance , with as few as 10 boys attending regularly . all teaching by missionaries was in māori and this continued in the native schools until 1900 when at the insistence of the young māori party māori mps , schools started teaching in english . influential māori mps ngata and pōmare insisted that māori be taught modern ways and sponsored the suppression of tohungaism act in parliament . pōmare , in particular , worked hard to banish ancient māori concepts and practices that caused harm in the māori community . the encyclopedia of new zealand , maui pomare . . food . traditional māori foods . eating shellfish such as mussels and oysters was very common . during summer sea fish such as kahawai were caught using bone or hooks , 2-piece lures or large flax nets . in creeks and lakes , eels were caught in large numbers when migrating along known waterways using , a long cone-shaped net . birds such as ducks were targeted during the moulting season and young birds such as petrels and gannets were taken from nests and cooked in their own fat to preserve them . such preserved birds were favourite gifts to fulfil social gift obligations . māori closely observed the natural world to take advantage of seasonal opportunities . native pigeons ate miro berries which made them thirsty . māori carved wooden bowls equipped with multiple neck snares and placed these in miro trees to catch these large birds . evidence from many recent eastern golden bay excavations , especially at tata beach , shows that in middens local shellfish and fish bones were most prominent , followed by dog bones and rat bones . less common were bones from small birds and sea mammals . the tata beach site and other nearby sites such as takapou were in use from 1450 up to 1660 ad , well into the classic period . the coastal sites showed that māori had created man-made soils in the sand dunes ranging from small to very large ( over 100m 2 ) . the natural soil a horizons had been modified by placing dark , humus-rich soil near the surface . this practice was widespread in māori communities where kūmara was grown , although in many cases free-draining sand , gravels and pumice were mixed with humus-rich loam . kūmara are slow-growing in the temperate nz climate and need free-draining subsoils . in the eastern golden bay north-facing slopes were favoured . the warmer climate of the north and northern and central coastal regions allowed better growth of subtropical plants such as kūmara , yam and gourds . in auckland , and on mayor island , volcanic land was cleared of rocks which were used for low shelter walls . in some areas piles of volcanic rock which kept warm at night , were used to train the vines of gourds . many special techniques had been devised to grow and especially to store kūmara so it did not rot . careful storage and use of was essential to prevent unauthorised use . seed kūmara in particular were highly . the main problem for kūmara growers were native caterpillars . early european explorers reported that māori often ringed a garden with burning vegetation in an attempt to control caterpillars . māori continued to use traditional fern roots — — as a normal part of their diet into the mid-19th century . introduced foods . the introduction of european foods changed many aspects of māori agriculture . under tradition , māori agriculture land was abandoned after a few crops because of reduced production . this was the common pattern apart from a few very fertile alluvial river valleys . fertiliser was not used although māori had devised various techniques to enhance production such as the addition of pumice or similar materials to improve drainage on heavy soils . māori allowed gardens to revert to shrubs and plantations were shifted to another area . the introduction of foreign weeds which thrived was a significant issue from the 1820s but offset by the widespread growth of the introduced potato , the traditional varieties of which are still grown and known as or māori potatoes . european farms and the methods they used became a cultural and economic magnet for māori in the north , in auckland and later in the te awamutu area of the waikato . under the tuition of missionaries , māori learnt to mass-produce food , especially potatoes , far in excess of their own needs for trading into the late 1850s . in 1858 european numbers equalled māori numbers and increasingly european farmers were able to supply towns such as auckland . at the same time the strong market demand for supplying food to the gold rush markets in australia and california ended . trade and travel . transport . the normal māori method of travel was on foot . the north island had an extensive network of single lane one metre wide tracks that traversed beaches , plains , valleys and mountain passes . some of these tracks were used by many and were considered neutral territory . missionaries who travelled with māori guides found that at river crossings canoes were left for the use of any traveller . tainui . l . kelly.2002 . between 1840 and 1850 numbers of explorers , artists , government officials including governor grey travelled inland with the aid of māori guides . the guides carried heavy loads and would carry europeans across creeks . crossing swamps was common . although they carried some food they relied on purchasing basic foodstuffs such as potatoes or native pigeons from māori settlements . the most popular payment was in tobacco which was in great demand . in more remote areas travellers sometimes found māori living by themselves and growing a few potatoes . canoes were used extensively . these ranged from small river-going boats , to the large sea-going war vessels carrying up to 80 paddlers , and up to long . waka were used extensively for long-range travel down the east coast and to cross cook strait . in 1822–23 te rauparahā , who had established a base by capturing kapiti island , reconnoitred the upper south island in waka before launching a seaborne invasion the following year against ngāi tahu and rangitāne iwi . te rauparahā later hired a european ship to attack akaroa harbour . this showed that te rauparaha was prepared to use western technology to further his own goals . henry williams , who followed several war parties , reported as many as 50 waka taua travelling together at one time , although he reported they only went out to sea in relatively calm weather . from 1835 large numbers of european ships entered the bay of islands every year with henry williams reporting an average of 70–80 ships per year . many māori men worked on the ships , with a reported average of eight māori seamen per whaling ship . ten metre long whaleboats began to be used by māori . they could be both rowed and sailed . in the 1850s as māori with the active encouragement of grey embraced trade were gradually able to develop a large fleet of small trading schooners and similar craft . all the initial european centres had been supported by maori . during the mid 19th century auckland and northland māori dominated shipping trade . in 1851 51 vessels were registered and 30 smaller vessels licensed . by 1857 there were 37 schooners . the fleet increased steadily during the tasman trade boom of 1853–56 . māori paid customs duties to the government and invested heavily in vessels , so suffered considerably when a dramatic market slump hit new zealand especially effecting the auckland–waikato–hauraki area . climates of war . e . bohan . pp 36–37 . during the musket war period and for a time afterwards , maori , isolated from their tribal support by these devastating conflicts , hid in isolated places , living off patches of vegetables they grew in tiny gardens . this practice was very common in taranaki which had been devastated by waikato attacks in particular . european explorers , such as dieffenbach , often stumbled upon these survivors while exploring . he described these as hotbeds for rats and vermin . trade . with the arrival of europeans māori gradually started to trust the value of british money and use it as a medium of exchange instead of goods . this was rare before 1834 but became increasingly common as more māori worked as sailors on european ships , where they gained a good reputation as being strong capable workers . by 1839 a large proportion of the māori trade in goods was paid for in cash , with māori showing a strong preference for coins rather than paper banknotes . northern māori learnt that they could more easily hide cash from their relatives avoiding the traditional obligatory sharing of goods with their . the period 1835 to 1840 completed the revolution in the north māori economy with māori abandoning many of their former trading habits and adopting those of the europeans to the point where māori became dependent on the flow of european goods to maintain their new way of life . the effect of trading increased the influence of chiefs over their . northern traders assumed that the chief was the organisational head of the and all trade went through him including payments for goods purchased . this gave chiefs much more influence , especially after 1835 , because trade was so regular . in pre-contact times the power of chiefs was never very great , largely being restricted to directing warfare . early european observers noted that at and ( meetings ) every person , including women , had their say and the chief had no more influence than any other person on the final decision . where a chief had great , especially powers of persuasion , chiefs had more influence because of their personality rather than any recognised authority . not all had regular contact with europeans . the french explorer jules dumont d'urville visited tasman bay in 1827 and using knowledge he had picked up at the bay of islands was able to communicate with local māori . he found that although they had some passing awareness of europeans—they seemed to know about firearms—the extent of their understanding was far less than that of the northern māori . in the waikato regular contact did not start until five decades after contact in the north of new zealand . it was not until ngāti toa was forced out of kāwhia in 1821 that the bulk of the tainui people had contact with europeans . in 1823 a man called te puaha visited the bay of islands , bringing back with him captain kent who arrived on his ship , elizabeth henrietta , at kāwhia in 1824 . cw vennell & susan williams : raglan county hills and sea 1876–1976 p . 24 by 1859 trade was the main area in which māori interacted with europeans . trade was an area that māori expected to control . from first contact , they had sold or exchanged fresh foodstuffs initially for high-value goods such as axes and later for money . george grey was keen to encourage māori trade and commerce and established new laws to empower them in 1846 . māori brought numerous cases under this legislation and won . this was their first and most successful legal experience . māori had begun to include european concepts into their own cultural behaviour . in 1886 banknotes were printed ( but not issued ) by te peeke o aotearoa , a bank established by tāwhiao the māori king . the text on these notes was māori and there was also a picture of a flax bush . the bank 's cheques had māori figures and native birds and plants drawn on them . . land negotiations . the māori relationship with the land is complex . traditionally the resources the land held were controlled based on systems of ( power ) and ( ancestral right ) . the land itself was both sacred and abstract . in many cases multiple groups would express a connection with the same important river or mountain . oral tradition would record the migrations of groups from one area to another and their connection with an ancestral location . in the early 19th century many europeans entered into dealings with māori to obtain land for their use . in some cases settlers thought they were buying land to obtain equivalent to freehold title under british law ; māori claimed that the various deeds signed by māori were more limited and conditional , stopping short of outright alienation . it has been argued that the use of the word in deeds , meaning to let or allow or give freely , was not the same as selling . this and other interpretations of early 19th century new zealand land deals have been the source of much disagreement both within the waitangi tribunal process and outside it . waitangi tribunal , muriwhenua land report , p . 394 māori , especially after 1830 , were eager to have europeans living on their land under their protection so they could benefit from european knowledge and trade . missionaries on the other hand were keen to buy land so they could grow their own food to make them less dependent on tribal '' protectors '' , who sometimes used food supplies to coerce them . settlers allowed māori to stay on the land they had '' bought '' and often continued to give presents to tribal chiefs , often prompted by the chiefs themselves , in order to maintain friendly relationships . these compromises stopped with the signing of the treaty of waitangi . another reason for māori to '' sell '' land to missionaries was to protect the title of the land from other tribal competitors . māori who had converted to christianity wanted to protect their land without resorting to warfare . some degree of control passed to the missionaries who māori trusted to allow them continued access and use . from 1840 generally , older chiefs were reluctant to sell while younger chiefs were in favour . the situation was complicated as māori often had overlapping rights on poorly defined land . the settlers and the government also had very limited access to trained surveyors and even freehold land boundaries were ill-defined . surveying was a relatively new skill and involved much hard physical work especially in hill country . new farmers were able to purchase a small freehold farm from māori on which they established their homestead and farm buildings . they then entered into leases with māori owners for much larger areas of land . short-term leases gave māori a powerful position as there was a large demand for grazing land . the native lands act was a policy enforced by the government in 1865 , which allowed the māori people to obtain individual titles for their land to sell . this act abolished the traditional shared landholdings and made it easier for european settlers to directly purchase land for themselves . from the late 1840s some māori tribes felt that the crown was not fulfilling its obligations under the treaty of waitangi or individual land deals . these claims against the government were to become a major feature of politics . each generation of leaders were judged based on their ability to progress a land claim . leadership and politics . māori kingship . from the time of their arrival in new zealand , māori lived in tribes that functioned independently under the leadership of their own chiefs . however , by the 1850s māori were faced with increasing numbers of british settlers , political marginalisation and growing demand from the crown to purchase their lands . from about 1853 māori began reviving the ancient tribal or chiefly war councils where land issues were raised and in may 1854 a large meeting – attracting as many as 2000 māori leaders – was held at manawapou in south taranaki where speakers urged concerted opposition to selling land . inspired by a trip to england during which he had met queen victoria , te rauparaha 's son , tamihana te rauparaha , used the to promote the idea of forming a māori kingdom , with one king ruling over all tribes . the or unity movement was aimed at bringing to māori the unity that was an obvious strength among the europeans . it was believed that by having a monarch who could claim status similar to that of queen victoria , māori would be able to deal with pākehā ( europeans ) on equal footing . it was also intended to establish a system of law and order in māori communities to which the auckland government had so far shown little interest . several north island candidates who were asked to put themselves forward declined , but in february 1857 wiremu tamihana , a chief of the ngāti hauā in eastern waikato , proposed the elderly and high-ranking waikato chief te wherowhero as an ideal monarch and despite his initial reluctance he was crowned at ngāruawāhia in june 1858 , later adopting the name pōtatau te wherowhero or simply pōtatau . though there was widespread respect for the movement 's efforts in establishing a '' land league '' to slow land sales , pōtatau 's role was strongly embraced only by waikato māori , with of north auckland and south of waikato showing him scant recognition . over time the king movement came to have a flag , a council of state , a code of laws , a '' king 's resident magistrate '' , police , a bank , a surveyor and a newspaper , , all of which gave the movement the appearance of an alternative government . pōtatau was succeeded at his death in 1860 by tāwhiao , whose 34-year reign coincided with the military invasion of waikato , which was partly aimed at crushing the kingitanga movement , with the government viewing it as a challenge to the supremacy of the british monarchy . five māori monarchs have subsequently held the throne , including dame te atairangikaahu , who reigned for 40 years until her death in 2006 . her son tūheitia is the current king . the historic traditions such as the ( annual visits by the monarch to and the ( coronation celebrations ) continue . today , the māori monarch is a non-constitutional role with no legal power from the perspective of the new zealand government . reigning monarchs retain the position of paramount chief of several important tribes and wield some power over these , especially within tainui . . warfare . from the classic period warfare was an important part of māori culture . this continued through the contact period and was expressed during the 20th century by large groups of volunteers in the first and second world wars . currently māori men are over-represented in the new zealand army , navy and mercenary . new zealand 's army is identified as its own tribe , ngāti tūmatauenga ( tribe of the war god ) .