Motorcycle personal protective equipment

clothing . leathers . leathers are one-piece suits or two-piece jackets and trousers worn by motorcyclists , mainly for protection in a crash . in most cases , the type of leather used is not fashion leather but protective leather , which is thicker , stronger , and only moderately flexible . today , kangaroo leather is becoming popular for its suppleness , light weight , and strength compared to cowhide . not all leathers used in garments perform equally ; products made from full grain , top grain , corrected grain , and suede can have different levels of resistance to abrasion , as well as tearing and bursting forces . leather suits were the first motorcyclists ' garments to be tested using the cambridge impact abrasion tester , woods , r . i . 1996 belt abrader impact abrasion testing of leathers and fabrics used in motorcycle riders ' clothing . in performance of protective clothing fifth volume , pp . 57-69 some leather products available have been certified as meeting the european standard en 13595-1:2002 . historical development . originally , motorcycle leathers were adapted from tank corps gear immediately following world war i . duster coats , which tended to catch in the wheels , were switched for short coats . wide-pegged breeches were worn by some motorcycle police and by dispatch riders in world war ii . the classic american perfecto motorcycle jacket with epaulets and diagonal zipper , made famous by marlon brando in the wild one , ( 1954 ) was invented in 1928 by irving schott , of schott nyc in new york city . leather chaps , adapted from cowboy gear , were used by american bikers starting in the early 1960s . the one-piece racing leather suit , usually referred to as 'racing leathers ' , was first used by world champion motorcycle racer geoff duke in the 1950s . duke had the suit made for the purposes of streamlining , not safety , and like the majority of the leathers used at the time , was made from horsehide . in 1994 , the first leathers to achieve en 13595 certification were made by bks ( made to measure ) ltd and then hideout leather ltd . these two companies went on to become the main suppliers of motorcycle clothing to the british police and emergency services ( as well as supplying professional racers and ordinary civilians ) . armour . motorcycle garments must have armour on the inside at major impact regions such as shoulders , elbows , hips ( with the exception of class a or b ) and knees . optional protection may be present at the back , chest and lumbar . the european standards for these protectors are en 1621-1:2012 , en 1621-2:2014 and en 1621-3:2018 . motorcycle armor was originally made from high density foam or foam backed hard polymers for impact absorption , and designed to prevent or reduce injury by spreading and dampening impact and shear strains to the wearer . however , viscoelastic materials are increasingly being used because they combine being soft to wear with significant impact absorption . in europe , by law , armor has to have a ce mark . ce-marked armor comes in two levels , with level 2 providing greater protection . there are also motorcycle jackets that use an airbag system , which deploys in the event of an accident , inflating to protect the riders neck , torso , and lower back ( see also airbag and air bag vest ) . airbag protection has been used in motogp since 2007 , and has been compulsory since 2018 . dr roderick woods at cambridge university led the work on which the ce standard is based . initially , there were three levels of armour : level 1 would be tested with an impact of 40 joules , level 2 at 50 joules , and level 3 at 60 joules . the mean transmitted force of all impacts would be below 25 kn , and no single impact should exceed 37.5 kn . two italian manufacturers – allegedly concerned their armour would not pass the highest standard – successfully lobbied for level 3 to be removed . it contributed evidence to the assertion that the eu standards for motorcycle ppe have been subject to regulatory capture by manufacturers ( a claim reiterated with the advent of en 17092 ) . textiles . thumb an alternative to leather is clothing constructed of engineered textiles . these can offer improved weather protection from heat , cold , and water , and the increased utility these garments tend to provide in terms of pockets and vents . common materials include high density ( 600 & ndash ; 1000 denier ) ballistic nylon ( e.g . , cordura ) and kevlar , or blends of kevlar , cordura , and lycra ; and often include waterproof liners made from materials such as gore-tex . in both ce marked ( meets european standards ) and non-protective garments , localised protection may be provided by armour and airbag systems . not all textile clothing is made from synthetic materials . denim and heavyweight waxed cotton was used for many years before the development of modern materials . . boots . thumb boots are worn by motorcycle riders and passengers to prevent or reduce harm to their feet and ankles while riding and in the event of a crash . they are designed using materials and seam construction that are impact , abrasion , cut , tear and burst resistant . tough , strong , moderately flexible boots with stiff soles provide the rider protection from a number of risks . boots with oil-resistant , rubber-based composite soles give a grip on the pavement and help keep the rider 's feet on the pegs . boots may also have energy absorbers and load spreaders on the shin , inside and outside of each ankle . a stiff sole working laterally helps prevent or decrease crash injuries caused by crushing and shear strain . there is a european standard available for motorcycle boots , and it is a legal requirement in europe and the uk for these boots to be ce certified . it tests them for resistance to abrasion , penetration by sharp objects and lateral crushing . the label consists of a motorcycle icon , the designation of the test they 've passed and then a series of four numbers . the more ' 2 's on the ce label , the more protective the boot . ( 1 denotes rudimentary protection , while 2 indicates better protection – in tests of resistance against abrasion , cuts and being crushed . ) . armour . armour increases the chances of a motorcyclist surviving an accident . the most common form of armour was high-density foam but viscoelastic material has become more common . it is fitted into the shoulders , elbows , back , hips and knees of motorcycle ppe clothing . research by afquir et al ( 2019 ) suggested that coccyx protection was crucial but often omitted . a systematic review on the effectiveness of back protectors for motorcyclists . ekmejian r , sarrami p , naylor jm , harris ia . scand j trauma resusc emerg med . 2016 oct 4 ; 24 ( 1 ) :115 . doi : 10.1186/s13049-016-0307-3 . separate protectors are also available , typically for the chest and back , which are worn under other items of clothing . the most widely cited standard for armor is its ce rating : level 1 ( lower protection ) or level 2 ( better impact absorption ) . the criteria for levels 1 and 2 vary by intended use – back protection , air bag vest or body armor each have different requirements . the ce standards also classify the surface area that armor protects . for example , body armour is classed as type a ( limited coverage ) or type b ( better coverage ) . and back protectors are classed as either centre back ( cb ) – which offers no protection to the shoulder blades – or full back ( fb ) coverage . research has found limitations with these standards . de rome et al ( 2011 ) found that motorcycle armour was not associated with less risk of fractures . liz de rome et al . motorcycle protective clothing : protection from injury or just the weather ? accident analysis & prevention . volume 43 , issue 6 , november 2011 , pages 1893-1900 . work by albanese et al ( 2017 ) could explain why : “ the allowable transmitted force of en 1621-1 may be too high to effectively reduce the probability of impact injury . ” . bianca albanese et al . energy attenuation performance of impact protection worn by motorcyclists in real-world crashes . traffic inj prev . 2017 may 29 ; 18 ( sup1 ) : s116-s121 . doi : 0.1080/15389588.2017.1311014 . . helmet . a motorcycle helmet is protective headgear used by motorcycle riders . the primary goal of a motorcycle helmet is to protect the rider 's head during impact , although many helmets provide additional protection such as a face shield . in many countries the wearing of motorcycle helmets is mandatory . helmets are made in two main layers : hard and energy-absorbing . the hard shell spreads an impact over a larger area , while deformation of the liner ( often polystyrene foam ) absorbs energy so less is transferred to the skull and brain . there are three main styles : flip-face , open-face and full-face . an open-face helmet , which includes half helmets and three-quarter helmets , will protect everything but the face . full-face helmets protect the skull , plus providing protection for the lower jaw as well as the face itself . full-face helmets offer much more protection than open-face helmets . several manufacturers have introduced full-face helmets with a flip-up front , combining the protection of a full-face with the ease of communication and donning or doffing that an open-face gives . studies have consistently shown that wearing a helmet : reduces injury and increases a rider 's chance of surviving a crash does not contribute to neck injuries does not impair vision or hearing as with other protective gear , a brightly colored helmet improves the user 's visibility . abstract , quick summary . gloves . motorcycling gloves are typically gloves made of leather . they may have gauntlets to protect the rider 's wrists from injury , and help reduce drafts while riding in colder climates . motorcycling gloves typically have reinforced palms intended to protect the rider from abrasion injuries in case of an accident . under some jurisdictions , if the manufacturer claims the gloves are protective , then they must display ce marking . european standard en 13594:2015 is available for this purpose , with gloves certified to level 1 or level 2 . the latter provides significantly more protection . for example , knuckle protection is not required for a ce level 1 rating , but is required to achieve level 2 . optional features include additional protection or weatherproofing . for touring gloves , such additional features may include advanced insulating materials and waterproof fabric , although touring gloves may still lack advanced armouring features used in motorcycle racing gloves . gloves intended for motorcycle racing typically incorporate pre-curved finger sections and the best available protection , obtained through additional armour incorporated within the glove . additional protection may involve titanium or carbon panels for knuckles and the joints of the fingers . furthermore , racing gloves may and often do incorporate additional wrist and other protection panels to protect the heel of the hand , back of the hand and other easily injured parts of the hand . race gloves often have the pinky finger attached to the ring finger to reduce the chance of it being over flexed backwards during crashes . goggles . motorcycle goggles help protect the eyes from dust , wind and debris while riding and typically feature anti-fog treatment and protection against uv rays . for motorcycle sports such as motocross , goggles typically feature a foam rim which seals against the face and layered , tinted lenses to accommodate for varying light conditions . testing . previously , the most recognized method for evaluating protective motorcycle clothing was en13595-1:2002 . this clothing standard was for professional riders and was more suited towards leather garments . the standard offered 2 levels of protection ; lower ( level 1 ) or higher ( level 2 ) protection with an emphasis on impact abrasion resistance , seam burst resistance , tear strength and cut resistance . the standard specifies the use of the cambridge type impact abrasion tester . this test involves dropping the clothing material onto an abrasive belt moving at 28 km/hr and measuring the time for a hole to form . this method is often criticized for not being similar to that seen on the road however dr woods used both accident damage and that seen in manikins thrown from a moving vehicle to ensure that the test replicated the real world damage as close as possible.this test has been used to show that there is a relationship between fabric thickness and time to hole for protective denim products . in 2017 a new european standard began development and en17092 was created , with the aim of providing satisfactory protection requirements to non professional garments . this immediately allowed the certification of textile garments , without needing the higher ergonomic penalties that the en13595 standard required . the standard itself follows similar testing methods , with abrasion resistance , tear strength and seam strength key factors that are assessed . in replacement of the level 1 and level 2 rating system , a new class system was introduced . class aaa garments provide the highest possible requirements , whilst class aa and class a garments each have lower requirements respectively . two specialist classes are available , class b garments provide abrasion resistance however do not require impact protection to be present and class c garments are to be worn as part of an ensemble and have no abrasiom resistant qualities however have a least 1 impact protector present . this class would be used for garments such as base layers . en17092 abrasion resistance is carried out on a darmstadt impact abrasion machine rather than the previous cambridge abrasion machine . the darmstadt was developed at a similar time but was not adopted by european committee for standardization . it involves dropping the test specimen onto a block of concrete and assessing whether the layer that would be closest to the skin forms a hole of 5mm or more . the specimen is held on the outer edge of a rotating arm and is travelling at speeds of up to 707rpm when it hits the surface . as the specimen holder is no longer driven , once dropped , the sample will slide on the concrete surface until it stops due to surface friction between it and the concrete surface . unlike the cambridge machine , a slide time in seconds is not given therefore no direct comparison is readily available . en17092 was published in march 2020 with en13595 to be withdrawn by the latest of march 2023 . the cambridge abrasion and impact cut test methods will remain present for en13594 glove and en13634 motorcycle boot testing . also , the cambridge impact abrasion test is used by the motorcycle clothing assessment program ( motocap ) in australia and new zealand . a consortium of government and related organisations across australia and new zealand established motocap . its safety ratings assess how well clothing protects a motorcyclist in a crash ( based on impact protection , burst resistance and abrasion resistance ) . test results are weighted to emphasise the need for greater security in high-risk areas . additionally , motocap test results give a breathability score based on the relative vapour permeability index . references . external links . motorcycle protective clothing on motorcycle council of new south wales website