Mary Doria Russell

early life and education . russell was born in elmhurst , illinois , a suburb of chicago . her parents were both in the military , her father a marine corps drill instructor and her mother a navy nurse . she was raised as a catholic but left the church at age fifteen , and her struggles to figure out how much of that culture to pass on to her children fueled the prominence of religion in her work . she graduated from glenbard east high school in lombard , illinois , which has registered its chapter of the national english honor society in her name ( as mary doria russell ) . she is also a major sponsor of a glenbard east scholarship established in memory of english teacher richard cima . russell earned her b.a . in cultural anthropology at the university of illinois at urbana–champaign ; her m.a . in social anthropology at northeastern university , boston ; and her ph.d . in biological anthropology at the university of michigan , ann arbor . academic career . russell 's doctoral research concentrations were in bone biology , craniofacial biomechanics , and paleoanthropology . she twice won the trotter award for outstanding work on bone by a doctoral student and went on to teach graduate-level osteology in the anthropology department of the university of michigan and human gross anatomy at the case western university school of dentistry in cleveland , ohio . her major scientific publications focused on neandertal studies , and included work proposing a biomechanical explanation of the supraorbital torus ( browridges ) and statistical analyses to distinguish taphonomic evidence of secondary burial from that of butchery . writing career . russell 's fiction has been recognized for meticulous research , fine prose and narrative drive . she has worked in a variety of genres . sparrow series . russell 's first two novels , the sparrow and its sequel children of god—sometimes called the sparrow series or emilio sandoz sequence — ( random house villard in 1996 and 1998 ) have been called speculative fiction and focused on the religious and psychological implications of first contact with aliens . both explore the problem of evil ( theodicy ) and how to reconcile a benevolent , omniscient , all-powerful deity with lives filled with undeserved suffering . the sparrow won the arthur c . clarke , bsfa , and tiptree annual science fiction book awards ( below ) , and it was the basis for russell winning the john w . campbell award for best new writer in 1998 . ; in german translation , sperling won the kurd lasswitz prize for best foreign novel . children of god won the american library association 's readers choice award . together , the novels won the spectrum classics hall of fame award and earned russell the cleveland arts council prize for literature . for the science fiction encyclopedia , chief editor john clute calls russell an '' author who established a strong reputation for cognitive subtlety and narrative power in her brief science fiction career ; after the emilio sandoz sequence & nbsp ; . she turned her interest to other fields . & nbsp ; because of the quality of its writing , and the seriousness of its examination of various issues , some critics claimed that the sparrow could not therefore be science fiction . russell herself seems not to have encouraged the claim . '' . other novels . the rest of russell 's novels have been categorized as historical novels , although she draws from a variety of genres when telling these stories . a thread of grace ( random house , 2005 ) is a world war ii thriller set in northern italy and features both the italian resistance movement and the plight of jews escaping nazi persecution throughout europe . much of story is based on accounts by survivors from the period , when many italian citizens allowed jews to seek safe harbor in their farmlands , cities , and ports . ( russell herself is of italian heritage and is a convert to judaism . ) dreamers of the day ( random house , 2008 ) is a historical romance set in the midwestern united states and the middle east during aftermath of the first world war and the great influenza . it focuses on the 1921 cairo peace conference , when winston churchill , t . e . lawrence , gertrude bell and a group of british oilmen invented the modern middle east , thus setting the region up for a hundred years of war . doc ( random house 2011 ) is a murder mystery as well as a realistic and compassionate portrait of the notorious '' gambler and gunman '' known as doc holliday . doc is set in dodge city , kansas , during 1878 , the last year that dr . john henry holliday 's tuberculosis was in check long enough for him to practice dentistry , a profession at which he excelled . the plot revolves around the mysterious death of a half-black , half-indian boy who leaves a remarkable void in the life of the city . doc was the american library association 's top pick in historical fiction as well as the kansas state library 's notable novel and the great lakes great reads pick . epitaph ( ecco/harpercollins , 2015 ) picks up where doc left off , following holliday and the earp brothers to tombstone , arizona , and traces the political and social roots of the infamous gunfight at the o.k . corral , as well as the making of the mythology that surrounds it . epitaph is deeply researched ; in addition to thorough study of the history of those involved , the 60-year-old russell rode 58 miles on horseback through the mountains surrounding tombstone , retracing the earp vendetta ride . the novel was called the best ever written on the subject by earp biographer allen barra and was recognized by true west magazine as the best historical western of 2015 . the ohioana library foundation awarded it the best fiction prize of 2016 ; it also won the ohioana readers choice award for the year . the women of the copper country ( atria books , 2019 ) is a painstakingly researched novel about the copper country strike of 1913–1914 , the first unionized strike against all the copper mines in the copper country of michigan 's upper peninsula . the central character , '' big annie '' clements , is based on '' america 's joan of arc , '' anna clemenc , who founded the women 's auxiliary of the western federation of miners and proudly carried the flag in many marches against the calumet and hecla mining company . other historical figures , including james macnaughton , general manager of calumet and hecla , woodbridge ferris , governor of michigan during the strike , and mother jones , prominent activist and union organizer , are also elaborately and credibly portrayed . the book received a michigan notable book award for 2020 from the library of michigan . russell is active on the lecture circuit , speaking at colleges , universities and libraries . personal life . russell resides in lyndhurst , ohio , a suburb of cleveland . she and her husband don have been married since 1970 ; they have one son . books . the sparrow ( villard , 1996 ; ballantine , 1997 ) children of god ( villard , 1998 ; ballantine , 1999 ) a thread of grace ( random house , 2005 ; ballantine , 2006 ) dreamers of the day ( random house , 2008 ; ballantine 2009 ) doc ( random house 2011 ; ballantine , 2012 ) epitaph : a novel of the o.k . corral ( ecco/harpercollins , 2015 hc , 2016 tradepaper ) the women of the copper country : a novel ( atria books , 2019 hc , 2020 tradepaper ) . awards . james tiptree , jr . award , 1997 , the sparrow british science fiction association ( bsfa ) bsfa award , 1998 , the sparrow ( uk edition : transworld publishers black swan , 1997 ) arthur c . clarke award , 1998 , the sparrow john w . campbell award for best new writer , 1998 , citing the sparrow cleveland arts council prize for literature american library association readers choice award gaylactic spectrum awards , 2001 , the sparrow and children of god kurd-laßwitz-preis ( germany ) , best foreign novel , 2001 , the sparrow usa friends of the library reader 's choice award : children of god , 1999 american library association top pick , historical fiction : doc , 2011 great lakes great reads : doc , 2011 kansas state library notable novel : doc , 2011 true west : best historical western : epitaph , 2015 ohioana best fiction prize : epitaph , 2015 ohioana readers choice award : epitaph , 2015 ; nominations hugo award book of the month club best first fiction book of the month club first fiction award , finalist : the sparrow , 1996 dublin international literary prize : the sparrow , 1998 ; dreamers of the day , 2006 . see also . giordano bruno , the italian philosopher for whom the interstellar ship in children of god is named . references . external links . radio interview of mary doria russell discussing dreamers of the day and more , with richard wolinsky on kpfa 's cover to cover ( april 10 , 2008 ) public radio interview of mary doria russell and npr book reviewer alan cheuse discussing historical fiction . worldcat identities page