Alan Greenspan

late 2000s recession . in march 2008 , greenspan wrote an article for the financial times economists ' forum in which he said that the 2008-financial crisis in the united states is likely to be judged as the most wrenching since the end of world war & nbsp ; ii . in it he argued : '' we will never be able to anticipate all discontinuities in financial markets . '' he concluded : '' it is important , indeed crucial , that any reforms in , and adjustments to , the structure of markets and regulation not inhibit our most reliable and effective safeguards against cumulative economic failure : market flexibility and open competition . '' the article attracted a number of critical responses from forum contributors , who , finding causation between greenspan 's policies and the discontinuities in financial markets that followed , criticized greenspan mainly for what many believed to be his unbalanced and immovable ideological suppositions about global capitalism and free competitive markets . notable critics included j . & nbsp ; bradford delong , paul krugman , alice rivlin , michael hudson , and willem buiter . greenspan responded to his critics in a follow-up article in which he defended his ideology as applied to his conceptual and policy framework , which , among other things , prohibited him from exerting real pressure against the burgeoning housing bubble or , in his words , '' leaning against the wind '' . greenspan argued , '' my view of the range of dispersion of outcomes has been shaken , but not my judgment that free competitive markets are by far the unrivaled way to organize economies '' . he concluded : '' we have tried regulation ranging from heavy to central planning . none meaningfully worked . do we wish to retest the evidence ? '' financial times associate editor and chief economics commentator martin wolf defended greenspan primarily as a scapegoat for the market turmoil . several notable contributors in defense of greenspan included stephen s . roach , allan meltzer , and robert brusca . however , an october 15 , 2008 , article in the washington post analyzing the origins of the economic crisis claims that greenspan vehemently opposed any regulation of derivatives , and actively sought to undermine the office of the commodity futures trading commission when the commission sought to initiate regulation of derivatives . meanwhile , greenspan recommended improving mark-to-market regulations to avoid having derivatives or other complex assets marked to a distressed or illiquid market during times of material adverse conditions seen during the late 2000s credit crisis . greenspan was not alone in his opposition to derivatives regulation . in a 1999 government report that was a key driver in the passage of the commodity futures modernization act of 2000—legislation that clarified that most over-the-counter derivatives were outside the regulatory authority of any government agency—greenspan was joined by treasury secretary lawrence summers , securities and exchange commission chairman arthur levitt , and commodity futures trading commission chairman william ranier in concluding that '' under many circumstances , the trading of financial derivatives by eligible swap participants should be excluded from the cea '' ( commodity exchange act ) . other government agencies also supported that view . in congressional testimony on october 23 , 2008 , greenspan acknowledged that he was '' partially '' wrong in opposing regulation and stated '' those of us who have looked to the self-interest of lending institutions to protect shareholder 's equity—myself especially—are in a state of shocked disbelief . '' referring to his free-market ideology , greenspan said : '' i have found a flaw . i do n't know how significant or permanent it is . but i have been very distressed by that fact . '' when representative henry waxman ( d-ca ) pressed him to clarify his words . '' in other words , you found that your view of the world , your ideology , was not right , it was not working , '' waxman said . '' absolutely , precisely , '' greenspan replied . '' you know , that 's precisely the reason i was shocked , because i have been going for 40 years or more with very considerable evidence that it was working exceptionally well . '' greenspan admitted fault in opposing regulation of derivatives and acknowledged that financial institutions did n't protect shareholders and investments as well as he expected . matt taibbi described the greenspan put and its bad consequences saying : '' every time the banks blew up a speculative bubble , they could go back to the fed and borrow money at zero or one or two percent , and then start the game all over '' , thereby making it '' almost impossible '' for the banks to lose money . he also called greenspan a '' classic con man '' who , through political savvy , '' flattered and bullshitted his way up the matterhorn of american power and.jacked himself off to the attention of wall street for 20 consecutive years '' . in the documentary film inside job , greenspan is cited as one of the persons responsible for the financial crisis of 2007–08 . he is also named in time magazine as one of the '' 25 people to blame for the financial crisis '' . . political views and alleged politicization of office . greenspan describes himself as a '' lifelong libertarian republican '' . in march 2005 , in reaction to greenspan 's support of president bush 's plan to partially privatize social security , then-democratic senate minority leader harry reid attacked greenspan as '' one of the biggest political hacks we have in washington '' and criticized him for supporting bush 's 2001 tax cut plan . then-democratic house minority leader nancy pelosi added that there were serious questions about the fed 's independence as a result of greenspan 's public statements . greenspan also received criticism from democratic congressman barney frank and others for supporting bush 's social security plans favoring private accounts . greenspan had said bush 's model has '' the seeds of developing full funding by its very nature . as i 've said before , i 've always supported moves to full funding in the context of a private account '' . others , like republican senator mitch mcconnell , disagreed that greenspan was too deferential to bush , stating that greenspan '' has been an independent player at the fed for a long time under both parties and made an enormous positive contribution '' . economist paul krugman wrote that greenspan was a '' three-card maestro '' with a '' lack of sincerity '' who , '' by repeatedly shilling for whatever the bush administration wants , has betrayed the trust placed in the fed chairman '' . republican senator jim bunning , who opposed greenspan 's fifth reconfirmation , charged that greenspan should comment only on monetary policy , not fiscal policy . greenspan had used his position as fed chairman to comment upon fiscal policy as early as 1993 , however , when he supported omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 , which included tax increases and budget cuts . in an october 2011 lecture addressing the occupy movement , noam chomsky characterized portions of greenspan 's february 1997 testimony to the u.s . senate as an example of the self-serving attitudes of the so-called 1 % . in that testimony , greenspan had stated that growing worker insecurity is a significant factor keeping inflation and inflation expectation low , thereby promoting long-term investment . . personal life . greenspan has married twice . his first marriage was to canadian artist joan mitchell in 1952 ; the marriage ended in annulment less than a year later . he dated newswoman barbara walters in the late 1970s . in 1984 , greenspan began dating journalist andrea mitchell . greenspan at the time was 58 and mitchell was 38 . in 1997 , they were married by supreme court justice ruth bader ginsburg . . honors . the highest civilian award in the united states , by president george w . bush in november 2005 . ( france ) 2000 ( united kingdom ) 2002 batra , ravi ( 2005 ) ; greenspan 's fraud : how two decades of his policies have undermined the global economy . new york : palgrave macmillan . see p.3 . in 1976 , greenspan received the u.s . senator john heinz award for greatest public service by an elected or appointed official , an award given out annually by jefferson awards . '' historic highlights page with picture of 1976 winner alan greenspan '' , jefferson awards web site . retrieved july 31 , 2013 . in 1989 he was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association . view/search fellows of the asa , accessed november 19 , 2016 . in 2004 , greenspan received the dwight d . eisenhower medal for leadership and service , from eisenhower fellowships . in 2005 , he became the first recipient of the harry s . truman medal for economic policy , presented by the harry s . truman library institute . in 2007 , greenspan was the recipient of the inaugural thomas jefferson foundation medal in citizen leadership , presented by the university of virginia . on december 14 , 2005 , he was awarded an honorary doctor of commercial science degree by new york university , his fourth degree from that institution . on april 19 , 2012 , greenspan received the eugene j . keogh award for distinguished public service from nyu . . books . capitalism in america : a history , 2018 finance and economics discussion series : motor vehicle stocks , scrappage , and sales , 2015 the map and the territory 2.0 : risk , human nature , and the future of forecasting , 2014 the map and the territory : risk , human nature , and the future of forecasting , 2013 finance and economics discussion series : estimates of home mortgage originations , repayments , and debt on one-to-four-family residences , 2013 finance and economics discussion series : sources and uses of equity extracted from homes , 2013 the age of turbulence : adventures in a new world , 2007 the quotations of chairman greenspan : words from the man who can shake the world , 2000 william taylor memorial lectures 3 : global risk management , 1996 1993 monetary policy objectives : midyear review of the federal reserve board , 1993 . see also . list of united states political appointments across party lines fedspeak irrational exuberance greenspan commission . references . works cited . . further reading . . external links . -