The Bachelor (American TV series)

lawsuits . in december 2011 , a producer of the bachelor sued steve carbone , the proprietor of the website realitysteve.com , for leaking unreleased information about the show , claiming carbone encouraged contestants of both the bachelor and the bachelorette to break their confidentiality agreements . carbone has denied that the source of the leaks are current contestants . despite the first two lawsuits in 2012 being settled , a further lawsuit was presented against carbone in 2017 . . criticism . the franchise has long been criticized for its lack of ethnic and cultural diversity , eventually prompting petitions and threats of boycott from the franchise 's only lead of color , rachel lindsay . in june 2020 , the show cast matt james as its first male lead of color for season 25 . james was initially cast for clare crawley 's season of bachelorette , which was delayed due to covid−19 . the show has been criticized for stigmatizing virginity , thus reflecting the patriarchal masculinity stereotypes . . spin-offs . the program 's success has led to the creation of various spin-off series ; the bachelorette premiered in 2003 as a female counterpart of the bachelor , featuring a pool of men competing for a single bachelorette ( who is usually a former contestant of the bachelor ) . the series first ran from 2003 to 2005 , before returning in 2008 after a hiatus . bachelor pad ran from 2010 to 2012 , featuring previous contestants of the bachelor and the bachelorette competing in challenges and eliminations to for a chance to win a 250,000 grand prize . in 2013 , it was replaced by a similar series , bachelor in paradise . the fourth season of bachelor in paradise called into question about the future of its production following an issue of possible misconduct on the set . the fourth season premiered on august 8 , 2017 . two contestants , corinne olympios and demario jackson were involved in an explicit sexual encounter in the pool during the filming of the show and were caught on tape . a producer onset administered a complaint which stated either one or both contestants may have been too drunk to give proper consent for the sexual encounter . this prompted warner bros . to start an internal investigation and both contestants to seek legal counsel . production of the show was halted on june 11 , 2017 and all contestants were asked to go home until further notice . allegations were made against both contestants about their intoxication and actions thereafter , but ended with broadcast statements from both contestants during a talk show that it was all a misunderstanding and the two have remained friends since the incident . the show was given the green light to resume filming on june 21 , 2017 ; neither olympios nor jackson returned to production . the weddings of trista rehn ( the 1st bachelorette ) , jason mesnick ( 13th bachelor ) , ashley hebert ( the 7th bachelorette ) , and sean lowe ( the 17th bachelor ) were broadcast as television specials . rehn 's vow-renewal ceremony upon her 10-year anniversary was also broadcast . bachelor in paradise season 2 couple jade roper and tanner tolbert 's wedding was also broadcast as a television special in february 2016 . sister network freeform premiered two docusoaps focusing on alumni from the series , ben and lauren : happily ever after ? premiered in october 2016 , which showcased the relationship of ben higgins and lauren bushnell following season 20 of the bachelor on their plans for marriage and bushnell 's new life in denver . but then , the couple eventually parted ways on may 15 , 2017 . in march 2017 , freeform premiered the twins : happily ever after , which featured haley and emily ferguson from season 20 of the bachelor . the bachelor winter games premiered on february 13 , 2018 as a winter sports-themed spin-off ( airing against the 2018 winter olympics ) , with a similar format to bachelor in paradise featuring contestants from domestic and international alumni of the franchise , and winter sports challenges . the series was won by ashley iaconetti ( united states ) and kevin wendt ( canada ) , after finishing first in a figure skating competition among the final four couples . in 2020 , abc announced plans to produce a summer counterpart—the bachelor summer games—which would have presumably aired against the 2020 summer olympics . on march 30 , 2020 , due to the covid-19 pandemic ( which itself caused the 2020 olympics to be postponed to 2021 ) , it was reported that the series had been shelved . bachelor live on stage was announced on january 23 , 2019 during the men tell all episode . a local bachelor would go through group date challenges and coveted one-on-ones with local ladies in the audience . audience members and hosts would assist the bachelor . ben higgins and becca kufrin are slated to host the 63 stop tour starting in mesa , arizona on february 13 , 2020 with the final stop in austin , texas , was scheduled on may 17 , 2020 . however , due to the covid-19 pandemic , half of the shows have been postponed and they were initially rescheduled to january 24 , 2021 in cleveland , ohio before postponing indefinitely due to the second wave of the virus in late 2020 . the bachelor presents : listen to your heart premiered on april 13 , 2020 , featuring a cast of musicians as contestants . on april 29 , 2020 , abc announced that it would air a 10-episode retrospective series , the bachelor : the greatest seasons – ever ! , featuring recaps of past seasons . the series was scheduled as a replacement for the next season of the bachelorette , which was postponed due to the covid-19 pandemic . . parodies . the novelty of the show makes it a ripe target for parody . ben stiller produced a web spoof of the series entitled burning love . late night talk show host jimmy kimmel also created a parody called '' the baby bachelor '' in jimmy kimmel live ! , which the titular role is given to his three-year-old nephew wesley . the popularity of the parody also led to the creation of spin-offs the baby bachelorette and baby bachelor in paradise . the fox network produced a show , joe millionaire , based on the premise that the bachelor was a millionaire heir , when in reality , he was not . on june 1 , 2015 , lifetime began airing unreal , a scripted drama about a producer who works on everlasting , a fictional reality series similar to the bachelor . it is based on sarah gertrude shapiro 's short film sequin raze and her experience as a field producer on the bachelor . in a rupaul 's drag race all stars ( season 3 ) , the main challenge consisted of a parody called '' the b tchelor '' where guest judge jeffrey bowyer-chapman played the bachelor while the drag contestants portrayed the romantic interests . see also . who wants to marry a multi-millionaire ? ( 2000 ) the littlest groom ( 2004 ) momma 's boys ( 2008 ) more to love ( 2009 ) . references . external links . the bachelor at yahoo ! tvyahoo ! smart tv the bachelor at vh1 the bachelor at abc.com