Sherry

aging . the fortified wine is stored in 500-litre casks made of north american oak , which is more porous than french or spanish oak . the casks , or butts , are filled five-sixths full , leaving '' the space of two fists '' empty at the top to allow flor to develop on top of the wine . sherry is then aged in the solera system where new wine is put into wine barrels at the beginning of a series of three to nine barrels . periodically , a portion of the wine in a barrel is moved into the next barrel down , using tools called the canoa ( canoe ) and rociador ( sprinkler ) to move the wine gently and avoid damaging the layer of flor in each barrel . at the end of the series only a portion of the final barrel is bottled and sold . depending on the type of wine , the portion moved may be between five and thirty percent of each barrel . this process is called '' running the scales '' because each barrel in the series is called a scale . thus , the age of the youngest wine going in the bottle is determined by the number of barrels in the series , and every bottle also contains some much older wine than is stated . sherry is aged in the solera for a minimum of two years . art . c3 c ) a large solera system may consist of scales that require more than one barrel to hold . the word 'solera ' means 'on the ground ' ; this refers to the stacking system that was , and sometimes still is , used , with the youngest barrels at the top and the oldest scale , also somewhat ambiguously called 'the solera ' , at the bottom . of late , sherry producers and marketers have been bottling their wines en rama , with only a light filtration , and often a selection of a favored barrel from a larger solera . such sherries can be considerably more complex in flavour than the standard bottlings , and , according to many , are worth seeking out . liem , peter and barquín , jesús , sherry , manzanilla , and morilla , a guide to the traditional wines of andalusia , new york : mantius , 2012 . in order to allow the sale of reliable average age-dated sherries , the regulating council has set up a system that accurately tracks the average age of the wines as they move through their solera . two average age-dated categories are recognized : vos ( 'vinum optimum signatum ' – 20 years old average age minimum ) and vors ( 'vinum optimum rare signatum ' – 30 years old average age minimum ) . accession 4/7/2016 . sherry-seasoned casks are sold to the scotch whisky industry for use in aging whisky . other spirits and beverages may also be aged in used sherry casks . contrary to what most people think , these sherry-seasoned casks are specifically prepared for the whisky industry , they are not the same as the old ( and largely inactive ) butts used for the maturation of sherry . . storing and drinking . once bottled , sherry does not generally benefit from further aging and may be consumed immediately , though the sherries that have been aged oxidatively may be stored for years without noticeable loss in flavour . bottles should be stored upright to minimize the wine 's exposed surface area . as with other wines , sherry should be stored in a cool , dark place . the best fino sherries , aged for longer than normal before bottling , such as manzanilla pasada , will continue to develop in the bottle for some years . fino and manzanilla are the most fragile types of sherry and should usually be drunk soon after opening in the same way as unfortified wines . in spain , finos are often sold in half bottles , with any remaining wine being thrown out if it is not drunk the same day it is opened . k . macneil the wine bible pg 447 workman publishing 2001 . amontillados and olorosos will keep for longer , while sweeter versions such as px , and blended cream sherries , are able to last several weeks or even months after opening , since the sugar content acts as a preservative . sherry is traditionally drunk from a copita ( also referred to as a catavino ) , a special tulip-shaped sherry glass . sampling wine directly from a sherry butt may be performed with characteristic flourish by a venenciador , named after the special cup ( the venencia ) traditionally made of silver and fastened to a long whale whisker handle . the cup , narrow enough to pass through the bung hole , withdraws a measure of sherry which is then ceremoniously poured from head height into a copita held in the other hand . various types are often mixed with lemonade ( and usually ice ) . this long drink is now called rebujito . its typically ice-free equivalent in the victorian age was the sherry-cobbler . . in popular culture . many literary figures have written about sherry , including william shakespeare , benito pérez galdós , literatura del jerez at jerezdecine.com and edgar allan poe ( in his story '' the cask of amontillado '' ) . early in the film diamonds are forever , james bond samples a glass of sherry and , despite m 's protest that sherry has no vintage year , he correctly guesses the vintage of the base wine : '' 1851 . unmistakable . '' frasier and niles crane , the brothers crane , frequently consume sherry on the tv sitcom frasier . in the uk television show yes , minister , jim hacker frequently drinks sherry with sir humphrey appleby and bernard woolley in his office . sherry , and amontillado specifically , is heavily featured in season 3 , episode 10 of monty python 's flying circus . sherry is frequently mentioned in the novel tinker tailor soldier spy , and plays an important role in the narrative : the spy jim prideaux is alerted to the presence of a double agent within his division when russian kgb agents are able to correctly identify the brand of sherry that was consumed during a secret meeting of mi6 personnel . in the disney film adaptation of mary poppins , when he returns home from work , mr . banks states in the song '' the life i lead '' , that his slippers , sherry , and pipe are due at 6:02 . in the bbc series house of cards , prime minister francis urquhart mentions that the sherry is one of the highlights of the visits he makes to buckingham palace . he is alarmed by rumors that the palace has switched to serving tea . in john mortimer 's long-running rumpole of the bailey book and television series , horace rumpole continually complains about how various family doctors are served sherry by his wife hilda when they visit . for example , in 'rumpole and the boat people ' : 'dr macclintock , the slow-speaking , edinburgh-bred quack to whom my wife , hilda turns in times of sickness , took a generous gulp of the sherry she always pours him when he visits our mansion flat , ( it 's lucky that all his n.h.s . patients are n't so generous or the sick of gloucester road would be tended by a reeling medico , yellow about the gills and sloshed on amontillado . ) ' the historic sherry cellars have given rise to a breed of spanish dog , the ratonero bodeguero andaluz , and osborne bull used to advertise sherry . the bbc show “ still game ” features sweet sherry as the favoured drink of isa drennan . related products . brandy de jerez sherry vinegar cooking sherry harvey 's bristol cream . references . further reading . external links . jerez-xérès-sherry and manzanilla dop official website website about sherry , with interactive timeline , sherry production process diagram