De La Soul

history . early period . de la soul 's debut album , 3 feet high and rising , released in 1989 , was a critical smash hit in the hip hop genre . they quickly became prominent members of the native tongues posse along with a tribe called quest , black sheep , queen latifah , the jungle brothers and others . the single '' me myself and i '' became a huge hit , further cementing the group 's popularity . however , the sixties pop group the turtles sued de la soul for using a sample from their 1969 hit '' you showed me '' for the interlude track '' transmitting live from mars '' , despite the fact that the turtles did not actually write the original song . lyrically , much of 3 feet high and rising focused on striving for peace and harmony . 3 feet high and rising also introduced de la soul 's concept of the '' d.a.i.s.y . age '' ( an acronym standing for '' da inner sound , y'all '' ) . as a result , audiences were quick to peg the members of de la soul as hippies . this stereotype greatly agitated the group 's members , as they always envisioned their career as a constantly changing style ; this frustration would influence their next recording sessions . in the press kit for 3 feet high and rising , the members explained their pseudonym : trugoy when reversed spells yogurt , because he likes yogurt , and posdnuos spelled backwards is '' sound sop '' . the album artwork was designed by radical british artist collective the grey organisation de la soul 's second album , de la soul is dead ( 1991 ) was a much more mature album . it featured a wealth of material that criticized the violent , careless direction that hip hop was heading in at the time , though it still managed to maintain a light , absurd sense of humor . the cover of the album features a broken daisy flower pot , symbolizing the death of the '' d.a.i.s.y . age '' and the imagery that went along with it . the album spawned several singles , including the dark '' millie pulled a pistol on santa '' , a tale of a young girl who could no longer take the sexual abuse from her father , and the lead single '' ring ring ring ( ha ha hey ) '' , a story about the people rated with the black sheep on '' fanatic of the b word , '' q-tip from a tribe called quest on '' a roller skating jam named '' saturdays '' '' , and prince paul makes an appearance on the mic in '' pass the plugs '' with a verse of his own . the album also more prominently featured vincent mason as a rapper , providing verses of his own on '' bitties in the bk lounge , '' '' afro connections at a hi-5 , '' and '' ring ring ring ( ha ha hey ) '' . though it received mixed reviews and did not sell as well as 3 feet high and rising it eventually became a cult classic . the source magazine listed the album as one of their top 100 hip hop albums of all time , stating that '' its true genius is rarely understood '' . there are several major differences between the cd version of this album and the other formats , as the tracks '' johnny 's dead aka vincent mason '' , '' my brother 's a basehead '' , '' kicked out the house '' , and '' who do u worship ? '' are only available on the cd . the limited edition double vinyl promotional copies of the album distributed to the media before the official release did not feature these . middle period . the group 's third studio release , 1993 's buhloone mindstate , saw the group evolve a new sound as they continued to grow stylistically and musically . there were several moments on the album which proved the band had matured . '' i be blowin ' '' was a departure as the track was an instrumental featuring saxophone playing by maceo parker . the introspective '' i am i be '' showed de la soul at their most self-referential to date with subject matter about pos ' daughter ayana monet as well as his grandmother . '' long island wildin ' '' was a collaboration with japanese hip hop artists kan takagi ( major force ) and trio scha dara parr ( sdp ) . the album 's first single , '' breakadawn '' , used a sample of michael jackson 's '' i ca n't help it '' and smokey robinson 's '' quiet storm '' . de la soul collaborated for the first time with gang starr 's guru on '' patti dooke '' , female mc shortie no mas , a cousin of posdnuos , was prominent on many tracks on the album , showcased particularly '' in the woods '' . the album ended with an old school biz markie collaboration called '' stone age '' . missing from vocal duties is mase , whose voice can only be heard on '' area '' in a break near the end of the track . also rarely featured is his scratching which was heard often on previous albums , with only '' in the woods '' showcasing his talent in that area . the album was a critical success , but it was the biggest commercial failure for the group at the time of its release . many publications , such as rolling stone , have listed this album as one of the best hip hop albums of all time . in 1994 , 500 copies of a promotional ep called clear lake audiotorium were released on clear vinyl and cd . the 6 track ep contained edited versions of tracks off of buhloone mindstate but also featured the tracks '' sh.fe.mc 's '' ( shocking female mc 's ) which was a collaboration with a tribe called quest , and stix & stonz which featured old-school hip hop artists grandmaster caz , tito of fearless four , whipper whip , la sunshine and superstar . the ep was widely bootlegged afterwards . stakes is high ( 1996 ) was the first album not produced by prince paul , with overall production credits given solely to the trio . although it was met with poor sales , it has been critically lauded for its music , lyricism , and its overall message concerning the artistic decline rap music began to face in the mid-90s . the stakes is high ( song ) , produced by j dilla , was not a hit , but the album 's second single , '' itzsoweezee ( hot ) '' , with only dave on vocals , did fare better due to its creative music video . the album spawned a third single '' 4 more '' , featuring zhane which peaked at 52 in the uk . the album did provide a launching pad for future star rapper and actor mos def , who appeared on the track '' big brother beat '' . the album also featured collaborations with common , truth enola , and the jazzyfatnastees . later period . four years later , de la soul announced that they would release a triple album series entitled '' art official intelligence '' ( or aoi ) . all three albums were intended to be released within a year , beginning with the release of art official intelligence : mosaic thump . this was followed by aoi : bionix in late 2001 . after this , however , the third and final album in the aoi series was never released . for the next two years , the only de la soul releases were singles or remix compilations . david jude jolicoeur stated in an interview that it usually takes about four years for the group to record an album , promote it with advertisements , touring and so on . the group was having trouble finishing the last aoi installment for many reasons , one of which being an ongoing struggle with tommy boy records , which had been releasing its albums ever since its debut . in the summer of 2002 , de la soul toured with cake , modest mouse , the flaming lips , kinky , and the hackensaw boys during the unlimited sunshine tour . the band was briefly featured in the video game parappa the rapper 2 with the song '' say '' i got ta believe ! '' '' , featuring double , and also appeared on the soundtrack of the game . in 2004 , de la soul released a new full album : the grind date on sanctuary/bmg records because the venture between tommy boy and warner bros . records was shut down and the group 's contract was shopped to the other wea labels . the band thought about having its contract absorbed by elektra records , but it decided to leave wea altogether . although it was not the third aoi album fans had been expecting , the album was released to some critical acclaim and was well received by most fans . the album features guests mf doom , ghostface killah , butta verses and flavor flav , with production from 9th wonder , jake one , madlib and more . the lead single '' shopping bags ( she got from you ) '' did not fare very well and set the tone for disappointing commercial acceptance . in conjunction with the album 's release , the group also offered up the track '' come on down '' featuring flavor flav for remixing on sony 's acid planet website . the winning remix was '' come on down ( ky raised ny glazed ) '' by interlude jones who said he tried to '' take the influential sound of old new york hip hop and marry it back to its roots . '' . since the grind date . in 2005 , de la soul collaborated with gorillaz on the hit single '' feel good inc . , '' which won a grammy for best pop vocal collaboration ( the first grammy win in the group 's career ) after being nominated for a total of three grammys . de la soul also appeared on the la symphony single '' universal '' and posdnuos collaborated with the portuguese mc boss ac on a track called '' yo ( não brinques com esta merda ) '' . the following year they released mixtapes hip-hop mixtape , a covermount with british dance magazine mixmag , and the impossible : mission tv series - pt . 1 , a release on the group 's own aoi records label . de la soul collaborated with the athletic sneaker company nike to produce two versions of the nike dunk under their skateboarding division , nike sb . in 2008 , the group joined a tribe called quest , nas , tech n9ne , the pharcyde and others on the annual rock the bells tour '' : rock the bells 2008 line-up announced - tour schedule '' , musicpix.net and were honored at the 5th annual vh1 hip hop honors . later in the year they collaborated with dan le sac vs scroobius pip on a re-recording of the british group 's debut single '' thou shalt always kill . '' de la soul returned as a guest on the third gorillaz studio album , plastic beach alongside super furry animals frontman gruff rhys on the song '' superfast jellyfish '' . two other collaborations were recorded , but did not make the final cut for the album . they were supposed to appear on a track entitled '' sloped tropics '' , though this song did not make the final cut . the group remixed indie rockers yo la tengo 's single , '' here to fall for the here to fall '' remixes ep which included remixes by rjd2 and pete rock , and were featured on a remix of matt & kim 's single '' daylight '' by dj troublemaker . in 2011 , the group earned top 5 rankings on both npr and soul train ’ s year end “ best of ” lists with the amerigo gazaway produced de la soul/fela kuti mashup , fela soul . de la soul and nike released are you in ? : nike+ original run , which was the group 's first original material since the impossible : mission tv series - pt . 1 . the album features raheem devaughn as well as production from the chicago-based duo flosstradamus . the recording is a single-track recording at 44 minutes , 17 seconds , part of a continuing series of releases through the '' nike+ sport music '' section of the online store . the group released de la soul 's plug 1 & plug 2 presents . first serve in april 2012 , an album that did not feature any contributions from maseo . with very little promotion , the album was released to positive reviews . this was followed by releasing one track a month during 2013 . in march 2015 , de la soul created a kickstarter to help fund their upcoming album . it surpassed the original goal of 110,000 in under ten hours . the resulting album , and the anonymous nobody , was released in august 2016 . originally planned for an april release , but delayed due to rights issues , the full-length was preceded by 4 track ep for your pain & suffering and the single pain , featuring snoop dogg . the album was nominated at the 59th grammy awards for best rap album . de la soul was featured on the track '' momentz '' on gorillaz ' 2017 album humanz , on leap of faith by mr . jukes , alongside horace andy , and on tom misch 's 2018 single '' it runs through me . '' a tenth studio album , featuring production contributions from pete rock and dj premier , will reportedly be released by mass appeal records . . catalog dispute . de la soul 's back catalog has not been released on audio streaming or digital media stores . until 2017 , it was owned by warner records , which , according to posdnuos , had been reluctant to clear samples and renegotiate contracts . the samples used in de la soul 's music were only cleared for physical media distribution ; the wording of their contracts is not vague enough to enable them to distribute the music digitally on unforeseen technologies . in 2017 , the catalog was purchased by tommy boy records . in february 2019 , de la soul announced that their catalog would soon be available on digital services . however , as they were unhappy receiving 10 % of the revenue , with the rest for tommy boy , the release was postponed pending further negotiations . hip hop artists including nas , pete rock , and questlove called for a boycott of tommy boy . in august , de la soul announced they had been unable to settle the dispute with tommy boy and ended negotiations . in february 2020 , posdnuos said that tommy boy '' sort of came back to the table , we are looking to sort of get it going '' . in april , rostrum records head benjy grinberg said he was attempting to buy tommy boy to return the master recordings to de la soul . . filmography . teen titans go ! as themselves . discography . 3 feet high and rising ( 1989 ) de la soul is dead ( 1991 ) buhloone mindstate ( 1993 ) stakes is high ( 1996 ) art official intelligence : mosaic thump ( 2000 ) aoi : bionix ( 2001 ) the grind date ( 2004 ) plug 1 & plug 2 present . first serve ( 2012 ) and the anonymous nobody . ( 2016 ) . awards and nominations . grammy awards . ! ref . - 1990 '' me myself and i '' best rap performance - 2001 '' oooh . '' ( featuring redman ) best rap performance by a duo or group - rowspan '' 3 '' 2006 rowspan '' 3 '' '' feel good inc . '' ( with gorillaz ) record of the year style '' text-align : center ; '' rowspan '' 3 '' - best pop collaboration with vocals - best short form music video - 2017 and the anonymous nobody best rap album style '' text-align : center ; '' . references . further reading . . external links . de la soul website