Polydactyly

signs and symptoms . in humans/animals this condition can present itself on one or both hands . the extra digit is usually a small piece of soft tissue that can be removed . occasionally it contains bone without joints ; rarely it may be a complete functioning digit . the extra digit is most common on the ulnar ( little finger ) side of the hand , less common on the radial ( thumb ) side , and very rarely within the middle three digits . these are respectively known as postaxial ( little finger ) , preaxial ( thumb ) , and central ( ring , middle , index fingers ) polydactyly . the extra digit is most commonly an abnormal fork in an existing digit , or it may rarely originate at the wrist as a normal digit does . the incidence of congenital deformities in newborns is approximately 2 % , and 10 % of these deformities involve the upper extremity . congenital anomalies of the limb can be classified in seven categories , proposed by frantz and o ’ rahilly and modified by swanson , based on the embryonic failure causing the clinical presentation . these categories are failure of formation of parts , failure of differentiation , duplication , overgrowth , undergrowth , congenital constriction band syndrome , and generalized skeletal abnormalities . polydactyly belongs to the category of duplication . because there is an association between polydactyly and several syndromes , children with a congenital upper extremity deformity should be examined by a geneticist for other congenital anomalies . this should also be done if a syndrome is suspected , or if more than two or three generations of the family are affected . research has shown that the majority of congenital anomalies occur during the 4-week embryologic period of rapid limb development . polydactyly has been associated with 39 genetic mutations . more specific loci and genetic mechanisms responsible for disorders of duplications will be defined with time , as molecular research continues . polydactyly can be divided into three major types , which are discussed below . ulnar or postaxial polydactyly . this is the most common situation , in which the extra digit is on the ulnar side of the hand , thus the side of the little finger . this can also be called postaxial polydactyly . it can manifest itself very subtly , for instance only as a nubbin on the ulnar side of the little finger , or very distinctly , as a fully developed finger . most commonly , the extra finger is rudimentary , consisting of an end phalanx with a nail , and connected to the hand with a small skin pedicle . mostly one neurovascular bundle can be identified , with no tendons present in the extra digit . in case of a fully developed extra finger , the duplication usually presents itself at the level of the metacarpophalangeal joint . a triplication of the little finger is very rare . ulnar polydactyly occurs ten times more often in african populations . the incidence in caucasians is reported as 1 in 1,339 live births , compared with 1 in 143 live births in africans and african americans . ulnar polydactyly is also often part of a syndrome . in patients with african ancestry ulnar polydactyly mostly occurs isolated , whereas the presentation in caucasians is often associated with a syndrome , though in a retrospective review , only 4 of 37 cases of ulnar polydactyly in caucasians were syndromic . in almost 14 % of all patients , this type of polydactyly is hereditary . it usually passes on in an autosomal dominant manner with variable expression and incomplete penetrance . it is genetically heterogenic , meaning that mutations in different genes can be the cause . when the extra digit is pedicled it can be very movable ; however , injuries are rare and have never been reported so far . radial or preaxial polydactyly . this is a less common situation , in which the affectation is on the side of the hand towards the thumb . radial polydactyly refers to the presence of an extra digit ( or extra digits ) on the radial side of the hand . it is most frequent in indian populations and it is the second most common congenital hand disorder . the incidence of radial polydactyly is reported as 1 in every 3,000 live births . the clinical features of radial polydactyly will depend upon the extent of duplication . radial polydactyly varies from a barely visible radial skin tag to complete duplication . thumb polydactyly varies from barely visible broadening of the distal phalanx to full duplication of the thumb including the first metacarpal . radial polydactyly is frequently associated with several syndromes . . central polydactyly . this is a very rare situation , in which the extra digit is on the ring , middle or index finger . of these fingers , the index finger is most often affected , whereas the ring finger is rarely affected . this type of polydactyly can be associated with syndactyly , cleft hand and several syndromes . polysyndactyly presents various degrees of syndactyly affecting fingers three and four . . causes . polydactyly is associated with different mutations , either mutations in a gene itself or in a cis-regulatory element responsible for the expression of a specific gene . mutations in hoxa- or hoxd clusters are reported leading to polydactyly . interactions of hoxd13 and gli3 induce synpolydactyly , a combination of extra and consolidated digits . other signal transduction pathways in this context are the wnt signaling pathway or notch . in the specific case of preaxial polydactyly ( hemingway mutant ) , a cis-acting mutation approximately 1mb upstream of shh gene has been implicated . normally shh is expressed in an organiser region , called the zone of polarizing activity ( zpa ) on the posterior limb side . from there it diffuses anteriorly , laterally to the growth direction of the limb . in the mutant , smaller ectopic expression in a new organiser region is seen on the anterior side of the limb . this ectopic expression causes cell proliferation delivering the raw material for one or more new digits . in addition to the study of genetic causes of polydactyly limb patterning models are used to simulate the congenital disorder at the limb , being able to explain the development paths of polydactyly . polydactyly can occur by itself , or more commonly , as one feature of a syndrome of congenital anomalies . when it occurs by itself , it is associated with autosomal dominant mutations in single genes , i.e . it is not a multifactorial trait . but mutation in a variety of genes can give rise to polydactyly . typically the mutated gene is involved in developmental patterning , and a syndrome of congenital anomalies results , of which polydactyly is one feature or two . polydactyly has been linked to the prenatal environment , however , with a recent study showing a relationship to maternal pollution exposure in china . types include :