Minimoog

development . in the 1960s , ra moog co manufactured moog synthesizer , which helped bring electronic sounds to music but remained inaccessible to ordinary people . these modular synthesizer were difficult to use and required users to connect components manually with patch cables to create sounds . they were also sensitive to temperature and humidity , and cost tens of thousands of dollars . most were owned by universities or record labels , and used to create soundtracks or jingles ; by 1970 , only 28 were owned by musicians . hoping to create a smaller , more reliable synthesizer , moog engineer bill hemsath created a prototype by sawing a keyboard in half and wiring several components into a small cabinet . moog president robert moog felt the prototype was fun , but did not initially see a market for it . moog and the engineers created several more prototypes , adding features such as the suitcase design to aid portability . in early 1970 , moog co began losing money as interest in its modular synthesizers fell . fearing they would lose their jobs if the company closed , the engineers developed a version of hemsath 's miniature synthesizer , the minimoog model d , while moog was away . moog chastised them , but came to see the potential in the model d and authorized its production . as the engineers could not properly stabilize the power supply , the minimoog 's three oscillators were never completely synchronized . although unintentional , this created the synthesizer 's '' warm , rich '' sound . its voltage-controlled filter was unique , allowing users to shape sounds to create '' everything from blistering , funky bass blurps . to spacey whistle lead tones '' . the minimoog also was the first synthesizer to feature a pitch wheel , which allows players to bend notes as a guitarist or saxophonist does , allowing for more expressive playing . moog 's associate david borden felt that moog would have become extremely wealthy had he patented the pitch wheel . . release . moog co released the first minimoog in 1971 . moog said it was '' conceived originally as a session musician 's axe , something a guy could carry to the studio , do a gig and walk out . we thought we 'd sell maybe 100 of them . '' moog hired engineer and musicologist david van koevering to demonstrate minimoogs to musicians and music stores . van koevering 's friend glen bell , founder of the restaurant chain taco bell , allowed him to use a building on a private island bell owned in florida . there , van koevering hosted an event he billed as island of electronicus , a '' pseudo-psychedelic experience that brought counterculture ( minus the drugs ) to straight families and connected it with the sound of the minimoog '' . the minimoog was in continuous production for 13 years and over 12,000 were made . it was the first synthesiser sold in retail stores . despite the success , moog co could not afford to meet demand , nor had credit for a loan , and moog sold the company . production of the minimoog stopped in 1981 and moog co ceased all production in 1993 . in the 1980s the rights to use the moog music name in the united kingdom were purchased by alex winter of caerphilly , wales , who commenced limited production of an updated minimoog in 1998 as the moog minimoog 204e . sound on sound : moog minimoog 204e , october 1998 the 204e added pulse width modulation and midi to the model d specification . although the welsh incarnation of moog music went into administration shortly afterwards alex winter retained the rights to the moog name in the uk , with the result that the minimoog voyager was launched in that territory as the voyager by bob moog , and all references to the minimoog name were censored from the product manual . sound on sound : voyager by bob moog , june 2003 . later models . in 2002 , robert moog reacquired the rights to the moog name and bought the company . in 2002 , moog co released the minimoog voyager , an updated version of the minimoog that sold more than 14,000 units , more than the original minimoog . in 2016 , moog music began manufacturing an updated version of the model d , with an independent lfo and midi , and an aftertouch and velocity-sensitive keyboard . production ended in june 2017 . in 2018 , moog music released the minimoog model d app for ios . . impact . according to tj pinch , author of analog days , the minimoog was the first synthesizer to become a '' classic '' . wired described it as '' the most famous synthesizer in music history . a ubiquitous analog keyboard that can be heard in countless pop , rock , hip-hop , and techno tracks from the 1970s , 80s , and 90s '' . it was also important for its portability . david borden , an associate of moog , said that the minimoog '' took the synthesizer out of the studio and put it into the concert hall '' . franklin crawford ( august 23 , 2005 ) . '' robert moog , ph.d . '64 , inventor of the music synthesizer , dies of brain cancer '' . cornell university news service . retrieved 4 may 2007 . according to the guardian , '' tweaked now so that the synthesiser could reliably perform as either a melodic lead or propulsive bass instrument ( rather than just as a complex sound-generating machine ) , the minimoog changed everything . the moogs oozed character . their sound could be quirky , kitsch and cute , or pulverising , but it was always identifiable as moog . '' the minimoog changed the dynamics of rock bands . for the first time , keyboardists could play solos in the style of lead guitarists , or play synthesized bassline . yes keyboardist rick wakeman said : '' for the first time you could go on stage and give the guitarist a run for his money.a guitarist would say , 'oh shoot , he 's got a minimoog ' , so they 're up to eleven on their volume control - it 's the only way they can compete . '' wakeman said the instrument '' absolutely changed the face of music '' . hans fjellestad ( 2004 ) . moog the minimoog took a place in mainstream black music , most notably in the work of stevie wonder . its use for basslines became particularly popular in funk , as in the parliament track '' flash light '' . it was also popular in jazz , and sun ra became perhaps the first musician to perform and record with the instrument ( on his 1970 album my brother the wind ) . herbie hancock , dick hyman and chick corea were other early adopters . the minimoog became a staple of progressive rock . in the early 1970s , keith emerson of emerson , lake & palmer made the minimoog a central part of his performances . wakeman used five minimoogs on stage so he could play different sounds without having to reconfigure them . it was also used by electronic artists such as kraftwerk , who used it on their albums autobahn ( 1974 ) and the man-machine ( 1978 ) , and later by tangerine dream , klaus schulze , and gary numan . in the late 1970s and the early 1980s , it was widely used in the emerging disco genre by artists including abba and giorgio moroder . in 2012 , to celebrate moog 's birthday , google created an interactive version of the minimoog as its google doodle . . see also . multimoog micromoog memorymoog polymoog . notable minimoog users . andy whitmore ( greystoke studios ) . notes . further reading . . external links . minimoog at synthmuseum.com minimoog at vintage synth explorer minimoog at synthsale minimoog resource minimoog d info , pictures and audio clips moog music 's minimoog model d app