Arabic name

name structure . the , is the given name , first name , or personal name ; e.g . '' ahmad '' or '' fatimah '' . most arabic names have meaning as ordinary adjectives and nouns , and are often aspirational of character . for example , muhammad means 'praiseworthy ' and ali means 'exalted ' or 'high ' . the syntactic context will generally differentiate the name from the noun/adjective . however arabic newspapers will occasionally place names in brackets , or quotation marks , to avoid confusion . indeed , such is the popularity of the name muhammad throughout parts of africa , arabia , the middle east , south asia and southeast asia , it is often represented by the abbreviation '' md . '' , '' mohd . '' , '' muhd . '' , or just '' m . '' . in india , pakistan , bangladesh , malaysia , indonesia and the philippines , due to its almost ubiquitous use as a first name , a person will often be referred to by their second name : md . dinar ibn raihan mohd . umair tanvir md . osman . the nasab is a patronymic or series of patronymics . it indicates the person 's heritage by the word ibn '' son '' , colloquially bin ) or ibnat ( '' daughter '' , also bint , abbreviated bte . ) . ibn khaldun means '' son of khaldun '' . khaldun is the father 's personal name or , in this particular case , the name of a remote ancestor . several nasab names can follow in a chain to trace a person 's ancestry backwards in time , as was important in the tribe based society of the ancient arabs , both for purposes of identification and for socio-political interactions . today , however , ibn or bint is no longer used ( unless it is the official naming style in a country , region , etc . : adnen bin abdallah ) . the plural is for males and for females . however , or is tribal and encompasses both sexes . the laqab , & nbsp ; pl . alqāb ; agnomen ; cognomen ; nickname ; title , honorific ; last name , surname , family name . dnsi.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/hans-wehr-english-arabic-dctionary-searchable-format-.pdf the laqab is typically descriptive of the person . an example is the abbasid caliph harun al-rashid ( of one thousand and one nights fame ) . is the arabic version of the name aaron and means '' the rightly-guided '' . in ancient arab societies , use of a laqab was common , but today is restricted to the surname , or family name , of birth . the surname could be an everyday name , but is mostly the name of the ancestral tribe , city , country , or any other term used to show relevance . it follows a family through several generations . it most often appears as a demonym , for example , meaning that the person is of baghdad or descendant of people from baghdad ) . the laqab and nisbah are similar in use , thus , a name rarely contains both . a kunya , kunyah ) shahpurshah hormasji hodivala , historical studies in mug̲h̲al numismatics , numismatic society of india , 1976 ( reprint of the 1923 ed . ) is a teknonym in arabic names . it is a component of an arabic name , a type of epithet , in theory referring to the bearer 's first-born son or daughter . by extension , it may also have hypothetical or metaphorical references , e.g . in a nom de guerre or a nickname , without literally referring to a son or a daughter . pedzisai mashiri , '' terms of address in shona : a sociolinguistic approach '' , zambezia , xxvi ( i ) , pp . 93–110 , 1999 for example , sabri khalil al-banna was known as abu nidal , '' father of struggle '' . use of a kunya implies a familiar but respectful setting . a kunya is expressed by the use of abū ( father ) or umm ( mother ) in a idafah , i.e . '' father of '' or '' mother of '' as an honorific in place of or alongside given names in the arab world . a kunya may also be a nickname expressing the attachment of an individual to a certain thing , as in abu bakr , '' father of the camel foal '' , given because of this person 's kindness towards camels . common naming practices . arab muslim . a common name-form among arab muslims is the prefix ( '' worshipper '' , combined with the name of allah ( god ) , '' worshipper of god '' ) , or with one of the epithets of allah . as a mark of deference , is usually not conjoined with the prophets ' names . nonetheless such names are accepted in some areas . its use is not exclusive to muslims and throughout all arab countries , the name abdel-massih , '' servant of christ '' , is a common christian last name . converts to islam may often continue using the native non-arabic non-islamic names that are without any polytheistic connotation , or association . arab christian . to an extent arab christians have names indistinguishable from muslims , except some explicitly islamic names , e.g . muhammad . some common christian names are : arabic versions of christian names ( e.g . saints ' names : for saint peter ) . names of greek , armenian , and aramaic or neo-aramaic origin . use of european names , especially french , greek and , to a lesser extent , spanish ones ( in morocco ) . this has been a relatively recent centuries-long convention for christian arabs , especially in the levant . for example : émile eddé , george habash , charles helou , camille chamoun . names in honor of jesus christ : : ) / ( '' servant of jesus '' ) : ( masc . ) / ( fem . ) ( '' servant of the messiah '' ) : derivations of ( '' messiah '' ) : ( '' most anointed '' ) , ( '' more anointed '' ) , '' anointed '' and '' infant christ '' . the root , , means '' to anoint '' ( as in masah ) and is cognate to the hebrew . dynastic or family name . some people , especially in the arabian peninsula , when descendant of a famous ancestor , start their last name with āl '' family , clan '' , like the house of saud āl ṣaʻūd or al ash-sheikh ( '' family of the sheikh '' ) . āl is distinct from the al- . if a reliably-sourced version of the arabic spelling includes ( as a separate graphic word ) , then this is a case of the definite article , so ( capitalised and followed by a space , not a hyphen ) should be used . ahl , which has a similar meaning , is sometimes used and should be used if the arabic spelling is . dynasty membership alone does necessarily imply that the dynastic is used – e.g . bashar al-assad . the popular romanization of the arabized and hebrew names are written first , then the standardized romanization are written in oblique . notice that arabized names may have variants . if a literal arabic translation of a name exists , it will be placed after the final standardized romanization . if an arabic correlation is ambiguous , ( ? ) will be placed following the name in question . : yassou ' is the arab christian name , while ʿīsā is the muslim version of the name , as used in the qur'an . there is debate as to which is the better rendition of the aramaic yeshua , because both names are of late origin . : youhanna is the arab christian name of john , while yahya is the muslim version of the name , as used in the qur'an . they have completely different triconsonantal roots : h-n-n ( '' grace '' ) vs h-y-y ( '' life '' ) . specifically , youhanna may be the biblical john the baptist or the apostle . yahya refers specifically to john the baptist . el , the hebrew word for strength/might or deity , is usually represented as īl in arabic , although it carries no meaning in classical and modern arabic . the only exception is its usage in the archaic iraqi dialect . indexing . according to the chicago manual of style , arabic names are indexed by their surnames . names may be alphabetized under abu abd and ibn , while names are not alphabetized under al- and el- and are instead alphabetized under the following element . '' indexes : a chapter from the chicago manual of style '' ( archive ) . chicago manual of style . retrieved on december 23 , 2014 . p . 25 ( pdf document p . 27/56 ) . . see also . list of arabic star names list of arabic place names . references . . external links . arabic nomenclature : a summary guide for beginners . a.f.l . beeston ( oxford , 1971 ) . period arabic names and naming practices ( 2003 ) by da'ud ibn auda ( david b . appleton ) automated recognition of arabic person names arabic names with meaning and calligraphy design by nihad nadam