Typesetting

pre-digital era . manual typesetting . during much of the letterpress era , movable type was composed by hand for each page . cast metal sorts were composed into words , then lines , then paragraphs , then pages of text and tightly bound together to make up a form , with all letter faces exactly the same '' height to paper '' , creating an even surface of type . the form was placed in a press , inked , and an impression made on paper . lyons , m . ( 2001 ) . books : a living history . ( p . 59-61 ) . during typesetting , individual sorts are picked from a type case with the right hand , and set into a composing stick held in the left hand from left to right , and as viewed by the setter upside down . as seen in the photo of the composing stick , a lower case ' q ' looks like a 'd ' , a lower case ' b ' looks like a ' p ' , a lower case ' p ' looks like a ' b ' and a lower case 'd ' looks like a ' q ' . this is reputed to be the origin of the expression '' mind your p 's and q 's '' . it might just as easily have been '' mind your b 's and d 's '' . lyons , m . ( 2001 ) . books : a living history . ( p . 59-61 ) . the diagram at right illustrates a cast metal sort : a face , b body or shank , c point size , 1 shoulder , 2 nick , 3 groove , 4 foot . wooden printing sorts were in use for centuries in combination with metal type . not shown , and more the concern of the casterman , is the “ set ” , or width of each sort . set width , like body size , is measured in points . in order to extend the working life of type , and to account for the finite sorts in a case of type , copies of forms were cast when anticipating subsequent printings of a text , freeing the costly type for other work . this was particularly prevalent in book and newspaper work where rotary presses required type forms to wrap an impression cylinder rather than set in the bed of a press . in this process , called stereotyping , the entire form is pressed into a fine matrix such as plaster of paris or papier mâché called a flong to create a positive , from which the stereotype form was electrotyped , cast of type metal . advances such as the typewriter and computer would push the state of the art even farther ahead . still , hand composition and letterpress printing have not fallen completely out of use , and since the introduction of digital typesetting , it has seen a revival as an artisanal pursuit . however , it is a very small niche within the larger typesetting market . hot metal typesetting . the time and effort required to manually compose the text led to several efforts in the 19th century to produce mechanical typesetting . while some , such as the paige compositor , met with limited success , by the end of the 19th century , several methods had been devised whereby an operator working a keyboard or other devices could produce the desired text . most of the successful systems involved the in-house casting of the type to be used , hence are termed '' hot metal '' typesetting . the linotype machine , invented in 1884 , used a keyboard to assemble the casting matrices , and cast an entire line of type at a time ( hence its name ) . in the monotype system , a keyboard was used to punched tape , which was then fed to control a casting machine . the ludlow typograph involved hand-set matrices , but otherwise used hot metal . by the early 20th century , the various systems were nearly universal in large newspapers and publishing houses . phototypesetting . thumb phototypesetting systems first appeared in the early 1960s and rapidly displaced continuous casting machines . these devices consisted of glass or film disks or strips ( one per font ) that spun in front of a light source to selectively expose characters onto light-sensitive paper . originally they were driven by pre-punched paper tapes . later they were connected to computer front ends . one of the earliest electronic photocomposition systems was introduced by fairchild semiconductor . the typesetter typed a line of text on a fairchild keyboard that had no display . to verify correct content of the line it was typed a second time . if the two lines were identical a bell rang and the machine produced a punched tape corresponding to the text . with the completion of a block of lines the typesetter fed the corresponding paper tapes into a phototypesetting device that mechanically set type outlines printed on glass sheets into place for exposure onto a negative film . photosensitive paper was exposed to light through the negative film , resulting in a column of black type on white paper , or a galley . the galley was then cut up and used to create a mechanical drawing or paste up of a whole page . a large film negative of the page is shot and used to make plates for offset printing . digital era . the next generation of phototypesetting machines to emerge were those that generated characters on a cathode ray tube . typical of the type were the alphanumeric aps2 ( 1963 ) , encyclopedia of computer science and technology , 1976 ibm 2680 ( 1967 ) , i.i.i . videocomp ( 1973 ? ) , autologic aps5 ( 1975 ) , encyclopedia of computer science and technology and linotron 202 ( 1978 ) . linotype history these machines were the mainstay of phototypesetting for much of the 1970s and 1980s . such machines could be '' driven online '' by a computer front-end system or took their data from magnetic tape . type fonts were stored digitally on conventional magnetic disk drives . computers excel at automatically typesetting and correcting documents . ( webpage has a translation button ) character-by-character , computer-aided phototypesetting was , in turn , rapidly rendered obsolete in the 1980s by fully digital systems employing a raster image processor to render an entire page to a single high-resolution digital image , now known as imagesetting . the first commercially successful laser imagesetter , able to make use of a raster image processor was the monotype lasercomp . ecrm , compugraphic ( later purchased by agfa ) and others rapidly followed suit with machines of their own . early minicomputer-based typesetting software introduced in the 1970s and early 1980s , such as datalogics pager , penta , atex , miles 33 , xyvision , troff from bell labs , and ibm 's script product with crt terminals , were better able to drive these electromechanical devices , and used text markup languages to describe type and other page formatting information . the descendants of these text markup languages include sgml , xml and html . the minicomputer systems output columns of text on film for paste-up and eventually produced entire pages and signatures of 4 , 8 , 16 or more pages using imposition software on devices such as the israeli-made scitex dolev . the data stream used by these systems to drive page layout on printers and imagesetters , often proprietary or specific to a manufacturer or device , drove development of generalized printer control languages , such as adobe systems ' postscript and hewlett-packard 's pcl . image : oscar wilde english renaissance of art 2.png thumb right 200px text sample ( an extract of the essay the renaissance of english art by oscar wilde ) typeset in iowan old style roman , italics and small caps , adjusted to approximately 10 line length , with the typeface sized at 14 points on 1.4 x leading , with 0.2 points extra tracking . computerized typesetting was so rare that byte magazine ( comparing itself to '' the proverbial shoemaker 's children who went barefoot '' ) did not use any computers in production until its august 1979 issue used a compugraphics system for typesetting and page layout . the magazine did not yet accept articles on floppy disks , but hoped to do so '' as matters progress '' . before the 1980s , practically all typesetting for publishers and advertisers was performed by specialist typesetting companies . these companies performed keyboarding , editing and production of paper or film output , and formed a large component of the graphic arts industry . in the united states , these companies were located in rural pennsylvania , new england or the midwest , where labor was cheap and paper was produced nearby , but still within a few hours ' travel time of the major publishing centers . in 1985 , with the new concept of wysiwyg ( for what you see is what you get ) in text editing and word processing on personal computers , desktop publishing became available , starting with the apple macintosh , adobe pagemaker ( and later quarkxpress ) and postscript and on the pc platform with xerox ventura publisher under dos as well as pagemaker under windows . improvements in software and hardware , and rapidly lowering costs , popularized desktop publishing and enabled very fine control of typeset results much less expensively than the minicomputer dedicated systems . at the same time , word processing systems , such as wang and wordperfect and microsoft word , revolutionized office documents . they did not , however , have the typographic ability or flexibility required for complicated book layout , graphics , mathematics , or advanced hyphenation and justification rules ( h and j ) . by the year 2000 , this industry segment had shrunk because publishers were now capable of integrating typesetting and graphic design on their own in-house computers . many found the cost of maintaining high standards of typographic design and technical skill made it more economical to outsource to freelancers and graphic design specialists . the availability of cheap or free fonts made the conversion to do-it-yourself easier , but also opened up a gap between skilled designers and amateurs . the advent of postscript , supplemented by the pdf file format , provided a universal method of proofing designs and layouts , readable on major computers and operating systems . script variants . thumb ibm created and inspired a family of typesetting languages with names that were derivatives of the word '' script '' . later versions of script included advanced features , such as automatic generation of a table of contents and index , multicolumn page layout , footnotes , boxes , automatic hyphenation and spelling verification . u01-0547 , '' introduction to script , '' is available through prtdoc . nscript was a port of script to os and tso from cp-67/cms script . script 90.1 implementation guide , june 6 , 1990 waterloo script was created at the university of waterloo later . csg.uwaterloo.ca one version of script was created at mit and the aa/cs at uw took over project development in 1974 . the program was first used at uw in 1975 . in the 1970s , script was the only practical way to word process and format documents using a computer . by the late 1980s , the script system had been extended to incorporate various upgrades . a chronology of computing at the university of waterloo the initial implementation of script at uw was documented in the may 1975 issue of the computing centre newsletter , which noted some the advantages of using script : the article also pointed out script had over 100 commands to assist in formatting documents , though 8 to 10 of these commands were sufficient to complete most formatting jobs . thus , script had many of the capabilities computer users generally associate with contemporary word processors . glossary of university of waterloo computing chronology script/vs was a script variant developed at ibm in the 1980s . dwscript is a version of script for ms-dos , called after its author , d . d . williams , dwscript – document composition facility for the ibm personal computer version 4.6 updates , dw-04167 , nov 8th , 1985 but was never released to the public and only used internally by ibm . script is still available from ibm as part of the document composition facility for the z/os operating system . ibm document composition facility ( dcf ) . sgml and xml systems . the standard generalized markup language ( sgml ) was based upon ibm generalized markup language ( gml ) . gml was a set of macros on top of ibm script . dsssl is an international standard developed to provide a stylesheets for sgml documents . xml is a successor of sgml . xsl-fo is most often used to generate pdf files from xml files . the arrival of sgml/xml as the document model made other typesetting engines popular . such engines include datalogics pager , penta , miles 33 's oasys , xyvision 's xml professional publisher ( xpp ) , framemaker , arbortext . xsl-fo compatible engines include apache fop , antenna house formatter , renderx 's xep . these products allow users to program their sgml/xml typesetting process with the help of scripting languages . yeslogic 's prince is another one , which is based on css paged media . troff and successors . during the mid-1970s , joe ossanna , working at bell laboratories , wrote the troff typesetting program to drive a wang c/a/t phototypesetter owned by the labs ; it was later enhanced by brian kernighan to support output to different equipment , such as laser printers . while its use has fallen off , it is still included with a number of unix and unix-like systems , and has been used to typeset a number of high-profile technical and computer books . some versions , as well as a gnu work-alike called groff , are now open source . tex and latex . image : ams euler sample.png right 200px thumb mathematical text typeset using tex and the ams euler font . the tex system , developed by donald e . knuth at the end of the 1970s , is another widespread and powerful automated typesetting system that has set high standards , especially for typesetting mathematics . luatex and lualatex are variants of tex and of latex scriptable in lua . tex is considered fairly difficult to learn on its own , and deals more with appearance than structure . the latex macro package written by leslie lamport at the beginning of the 1980s offered a simpler interface , and an easier way to systematically encode the structure of a document . latex markup is very widely used in academic circles for published papers and even books . although standard tex does not provide an interface of any sort , there are programs that do . these programs include scientific workplace and lyx , which are graphical/interactive editors ; texmacs , while being an independent typesetting system , can also be used as an aid for the preparation of tex documents through its export capability . other text formatters . gnu texmacs ( whose name is a combination of tex and emacs , although it is independent from both of these programs ) is a typesetting system which is at the same time a wysiwyg word processor . several other text formatting software exist , but are not widely used . notably lout , patoline , sile , pollen , ant . see also . composing stick dingbat font history of western typography ligature ( typography ) prepress printing printing press strut ( typesetting ) technical writing typeface formula editor the long short cut lout ( software ) . references . external links . metal type – for those who remember hot metal typesetting tex users group fundamentals of typesetting the lout document formatting system xml page at www.w3c.org sgml page at www.xml.org typeset-8 , the first low cost computerized type setting system 1960 era typesetting in the 1960 era . symbols – comprehensive list of typographical symbols