Chico Marx

early years . chico was born in manhattan , new york city , on march 22 , 1887 . during his lifetime , his year of birth had commonly been given as 1891 instead of the true year of 1887 . as a result , obituaries reported his age at the time of his death as 70 rather than 74 his parents were sam marx ( called '' frenchie '' throughout his life ) , and his wife , minnie marx . minnie 's brother was al shean . the marx family was franco-german jewish . his father was a native of alsace who worked as a tailor and his mother was from east frisia in germany . la famille paternelle des marx brothers viewed august 21 , 2007 . billing himself as chico , he used an italian persona for his onstage character ; stereotyped ethnic characters were common with vaudevillians . his non-italian-ness was specifically referred to twice on film . in their second feature , animal crackers , he recognizes someone he knows to be a fish peddler impersonating a respected art collector : ravelli ( chico ) : '' how is it you got to be roscoe w . chandler ? '' chandler : '' say , how did you get to be an italian ? '' ravelli : '' never mind—whose confession is this ? '' in a night at the opera , which begins in italy , his character , fiorello , claims not to be italian , eliciting a surprised look from groucho : driftwood ( groucho ) : '' well , things seem to be getting better around the country . '' fiorello ( chico ) : '' i do n't know , i 'm a stranger here myself . '' a scene in the film go west , in which chico attempts to placate an indian chief of whom groucho has run afoul , has a line that plays a bit on chico 's lack of italian nationality , but is more or less proper marxian wordplay : s . quentin quayle ( groucho ) : '' can you talk indian ? '' joe panello ( chico ) : '' i was born in indianapolis ! '' there are moments , however , where chico 's characters appear to be genuinely italian ; examples include the film the big store , in which his character ravelli runs into an old friend he worked with in naples ( after a brief misunderstanding due to his accent ) , the film monkey business , in which chico claims his grandfather sailed with christopher columbus , and their very first outing the cocoanuts , where mr . hammer ( groucho ) asks him if he knew what an auction was , in which he responds '' i come from italy on the atlantic ocean ! '' chico 's character is often assumed to be dim-witted , as he frequently misunderstands words spoken by other characters ( particularly groucho ) . however , he often gets the better of the same characters by extorting money from them , either by con or blackmail ; again , groucho is his most frequent target . chico was a talented pianist . he originally started playing with only his right hand and fake playing with his left , as his teacher did so herself . chico eventually acquired a better teacher and learned to play the piano correctly . as a young boy , he gained jobs playing piano to earn money for the marx family . sometimes chico even worked playing in two places at the same time . he would acquire the first job with his piano-playing skills , work for a few nights , and then substitute harpo on one of the jobs . ( during their boyhood , chico and harpo looked so much alike that they were often mistaken for each other . ) in the brothers ' last film , love happy , chico plays a piano and violin duet with 'mr . lyons ' ( leon belasco ) . lyons plays some ornate riffs on the violin ; chico comments , '' look-a , mister lyons , i know you wan na make a good impression , but please don't-a play better than me ! '' in a record album about the marx brothers , narrator gary owens stated that '' although chico 's technique was limited , his repertoire was not . '' the opposite was true of harpo , who reportedly could play only two tunes on the piano , which typically thwarted chico 's scam and resulted in both brothers being fired . groucho marx once said that chico never practiced the pieces he played . instead , before performances he soaked his fingers in hot water . he was known for 'shooting ' the keys of the piano . he played passages with his thumb up and index finger straight , like a gun , as part of the act . other examples of his keyboard flamboyance are found in a night at the opera ( 1935 ) , where he plays the piano for a group of delighted children , and a night in casablanca ( 1946 ) , where he performs a rendition of '' the beer barrel polka '' . chico became the unofficial manager of the marx brothers after their mother , minnie , died in 1929 . as manager , he cut a deal to get the brothers a percentage of a film 's gross receipts—the first of its kind in hollywood . furthermore , it was chico 's connection with irving thalberg of metro-goldwyn-mayer that led to thalberg 's signing the brothers when they were in a career slump after duck soup ( 1933 ) , the last of their films for paramount . for a while in the 1930s and 1940s , chico led a big band . singer mel tormé began his professional career singing with the chico marx orchestra . through the 1950s , chico occasionally appeared on a variety of television anthology shows and some television commercials , most memorably with harpo in '' the incredible jewelry robbery '' , a pantomime episode of general electric theater in 1959 . pronunciation and origin of name . his nickname ( acquired during a card game in chicago in 1915 ) was originally spelled chicko . it was changed to chico but still pronounced '' chick-oh '' although those who were unaware of its origin tended to pronounce it '' cheek-oh '' . numerous radio recordings from the 1940s exist where announcers and fellow actors mispronounce the nickname , but chico apparently felt it was unnecessary to correct them . as late as the 1950s , groucho was happy to use the wrong pronunciation for comedic effect . a guest on you bet your life told the quizmaster she grew up around chico ( california ) and groucho responded , '' i grew up around chico myself . you are n't gummo , are you ? '' groucho is heard in videos pronouncing it '' chicko '' , as in a dick cavett episode with groucho talking to dan rowan . during groucho 's live performance at carnegie hall in 1972 , he states that his brother got the name chico because he was a '' chicken-chaser '' ( early 20th century slang for womanizer ) . groucho live at carnegie hall . gambling . as well as being a compulsive womanizer , chico had a lifelong gambling habit . his favorite gambling pursuits were card games , horse racing , dog racing , and various sports betting . his addiction cost him millions of dollars by his own account . when an interviewer in the late 1930s asked him how much money he had lost from gambling , he answered , '' find out how much money harpo 's got . that 's how much i 've lost . '' gummo marx , in an interview years after chico 's death , said : '' chico 's favorite people were actors who gambled , producers who gambled , and women who screwed . '' referring to chico 's love life , george jessel quipped , '' chico did n't button his fly until he was seventy . '' bader , robert s . , four of the three musketeers : the marx brothers on stage , northwestern university press , 2017 , pg . 132 chico 's lifelong gambling addiction compelled him to continue in show business long after his brothers had retired in comfort from their hollywood income , and in the early 1940s he found himself playing in the same small , cheap halls in which he had begun his career 30 years earlier . the marx brothers ' penultimate film , a night in casablanca ( 1946 ) , was made for chico 's benefit since he had filed for bankruptcy a few years prior . because of his out-of-control gambling , the brothers finally took the money as he earned it and put him on an allowance , on which he stayed until his death . chico had a reputation as a world-class pinochle player , a game he and harpo learned from their father . groucho said chico would throw away good cards ( with the knowledge of spectators ) to make the play '' more interesting '' . chico 's last public appearance was in 1960 , playing cards on the television show championship bridge . he and his partner lost the game . personal life . chico was married twice . his first marriage was to betty karp in 1917 . their union produced one daughter named maxine ( 1918–2009 ) . his first marriage was plagued by his infidelity , ending in divorce in 1940 ; he was very close to his daughter maxine and gave her acting lessons . chico 's second marriage was to mary de vithas . they married in 1958 , three years before his death . . awards and honors . in the 46th academy awards , jack lemmon presented groucho with an honorary academy award to a standing ovation . the award was also for harpo , chico , and zeppo , whom lemmon mentioned by name . it was one of groucho 's final major public appearances . '' i wish that harpo and chico could be here to share with me this great honor , '' he said , naming the two deceased brothers ( zeppo was still alive at the time and in the audience ) . groucho also praised the late margaret dumont as a great straight woman who never understood any of his jokes . . death . chico died of arteriosclerosis at age 74 on october 11 , 1961 , at his hollywood home . he was the eldest brother and the first to die . chico is entombed in the mausoleum at forest lawn memorial park cemetery in glendale , california . chico 's younger brother gummo is in a crypt across the hall from him . portrayals . many actors have portrayed chico in stage revivals of marx brothers works , including peter slutsker , and matt roper . references . external links . how to play piano like chico marx chico marx at marx brothers.org news - the marx brothers