Spacelab

background and history . in august 1973 , nasa and esro ( now european space agency or esa ) signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to build a science laboratory for use on space shuttle flights . lord 1987 , pp . 24–28 . construction of spacelab was started in 1974 by erno ( a subsidiary of vfw-fokker gmbh , after merger with mbb named mbb/erno , and merged into eads space transportation in 2003 ) . the first lab module , lm1 , was donated to nasa in exchange for flight opportunities for european astronauts . a second module , lm2 , was bought by nasa for its own use from erno . space transportation system – haer no . tx-116 – p . 46 . quote : '' . later , nasa purchased lm2 , the second lab '' construction on the spacelab modules began in 1974 by what was then the company erno-vfw-fokker . space transportation system – haer no . tx-116 – p . 46 in the early 1970s nasa shifted its focus from the lunar missions to the space shuttle , and also space research . the nasa administrator at the time moved the focus from a new space station to space laboratory for planned space shuttle . this would allow technologies for future space stations to be researched and harness the capabilities of the space shuttle for research . spacelab was produced by esro , a consortium of ten european countries including : austria belgium denmark france west germany italy netherlands spain switzerland united kingdom . components . in addition to the laboratory module , the complete set also included five external pallets for experiments in vacuum built by british aerospace ( bae ) and a pressurized igloo containing the subsystems needed for the pallet-only flight configuration operation . eight flight configurations were qualified , though more could be assembled if needed . the system had some unique features including an intended two-week turn-around time ( for the original space shuttle launch turn-around time ) and the roll-on-roll-off for loading in aircraft ( earth-transportation ) . spacelab consisted of a variety of interchangeable components , with the major one being a crewed laboratory that could be flown in space shuttle orbiter 's bay and returned to earth . however , the habitable module did not have to be flown to conduct a spacelab-type mission and there was a variety of pallets and other hardware supporting space research . the habitable module expanded the volume for astronauts to work in a shirt-sleeve environment and had space for equipment racks and related support equipment . when the habitable module was not used , some of the support equipment for the pallets could be housed in the smaller igloo , a pressurized cylinder connected to the space shuttle orbiter crew area . spacelab mission typically supported multiple experiments , and the spacelab 1 mission had experiments in the fields of space plasma physics , solar physics , atmosphere physics , astronomy , and earth observation . the selection of appropriate modules was part of mission planning for spacelab shuttle missions , and for example , a mission might need less habitable space and more pallets , or vice versa . habitable module . the spacelab module comprises a cylindrical main laboratory configurable as short or long module flown in the rear of the space shuttle cargo bay , connected to the crew compartment by a tunnel . the laboratory had an outer diameter of , and each segment a length of . most of the time two segments were used in forming the long module configuration . a pressurized tunnel connected the space shuttle orbiter main cabin to spacelab habitable module ( s ) , with a connection point at the mid-deck . there were two different length tunnels depending on the location of the hm in the payload bay . when the habitable module was not used , but additional space was needed for support equipment another structure called the igloo could be used . the larger configuration of the habitation module consisted of the core module and experiment module . it was also possible to operate spacelab experiments from the space shuttle orbiter aft flight deck . two habitable modules were built , named lm1 and lm2 . lm1 is on display at the udvar-hazy center at the national air and space museum behind the space shuttle discovery . lm2 was on display in the bremenhalle exhibition in the bremen airport of bremen , germany from 2000 to 2010 . it is residing in building 4c at the nearby airbus space and defence plant since 2010 and can only be viewed during guided tours . pallet . the spacelab pallet is a u-shaped platform for mounting instrumentation , large instruments , experiments requiring exposure to space , and instruments requiring a large field of view , such as telescopes . the pallet has several hard points for mounting heavy equipment . the pallet can be used in single configuration or stacked end to end in double or triple configurations . up to five pallets can be configured in the space shuttle cargo bay by using a double pallet plus triple pallet configurations . the spacelab pallet used to transport both canadarm-2 and dextre to the international space station is currently at the canada aviation and space museum , on loan from nasa through the canadian space agency ( csa ) . a spacelab pallet was transferred to the swiss museum of transport for permanent display on 5 march 2010 . the pallet , nicknamed elvis , was used during the eight-day sts-46 mission , 31 july – 8 august 1992 , when esa astronaut claude nicollier was on board shuttle atlantis to deploy esa 's european retrievable carrier ( eureca ) scientific mission and the joint nasa/italian space agency tether satellite system ( tss-1 ) . the pallet carried tss-1 in the shuttle 's cargo bay . another spacelab pallet is on display at the u.s . national air and space museum in washington , dc . there was a total of ten space-flown spacelab pallets . . igloo . on spaceflight where a habitable module was not flown , but pallets were flown , a pressurized cylinder known as the igloo carried the subsystems needed to operate the spacelab equipment . the igloo was 10 feet tall , had a diameter of 5 feet , and weighed 2,500 & nbsp ; lb . two igloo units were manufactured , both by belgium company sabca , and both were used on spaceflight . an igloo component was flown on spacelab 2 , astro-1 , atlas-1 , atlas-2 , atlas-3 , and astro-2 . a spacelab igloo is on display at the james s . mcdonnell space hangar at the steven f . udvar-hazy center in the united states . . instrument pointing system . the ips was a gimbaled pointing device , capable of aiming telescopes , cameras , or other instruments . ips was used on three different space shuttle missions between 1985 and 1995 . ips was manufactured by dornier , and two units were made . the ips was primarily constructed out of aluminum , steel , and multi-layer insulation . ips would be mounted inside the payload bay of the space shuttle orbiter , and could provide gimbaled 3-axis pointing . it was designed for a pointing accuracy of less than 1 arcsecond ( a unit of degree ) , and three pointing modes including earth , sun , and stellar focused modes . the ips was mounted on a pallet exposed to outer space in the payload bay . ips missions : spacelab 2 , a.k.a . sts-51-f launched 1985 astro-1 , a.k.a . sts-35 launched 1990 astro-2 , a.k.a . sts-67 launched 1995 the spacelab 2 mission flew the infrared telescope ( irt ) , which was a 15.2 & nbsp ; cm aperture helium-cooled infrared telescope , observing light between wavelengths of 1.7 to 118 μm . kent , et al . – galactic structure from the spacelab infrared telescope ( 1992 ) . irt collected infrared data on 60 % of the galactic plane . spacelab ips.jpg instrument pointing system ( ips ) astro2 sts67 big.jpg ips at work above the sky on astro-2 , 1995 spacelab_instrument_pointing_system_in_smithsonian.jpg dornier instrument pointing system at the smithsonian museum ( udvar hazy center ) . list of parts . examples of spacelab components or hardware : eva airlock tunnel tunnel adapter igloo spacelab module forward end cone aft end cone core segment/module experiment racks experiment segment/module electrical ground support equipment mechanical ground support equipment electrical power distribution subsystem command and data management subsystem environmental control subsystem instrument pointing system pallet structure multi-purpose experiment support structure ( mpess ) the extended duration orbiter ( edo ) assembly was not spacelab hardware , strictly speaking . however , it was used most often on spacelab flights . also , nasa later used it with the spacehab modules . spacelab missions . spacelab components flew on 22 space shuttle missions from november 1983 to april 1998 . the spacelab components were decommissioned in 1998 , except the pallets . science work was moved to the international space station and spacehab module , a pressurized carrier similar to the spacelab module . a spacelab pallet was recommissioned in 2000 for flight on sts-99 . the '' spacelab pallet – deployable 1 ( slp-d1 ) with canadian special purpose dexterous manipulator , dextre '' was launched on sts-123 . '' spacelab pallet – deployable 2 ( slp-d2 ) '' was scheduled for sts-127 . the spacelab components were used on 32 shuttle missions in total . the habitable modules were flown on 16 space shuttle missions in the 1980s and 1990s . . diagram , spacelab module and pallet . left . see also . space station freedom space shuttle retirement international space station columbus module columbus man-tended free flyer hermes ( spacecraft ) spacelab , a 1978 song by kraftwerk spacehab module , various , not to be confused with spacelab . references . ; notes ; sources lord , douglas r . spacelab an international success story , nasa-sp-487 . nasa , january 1 , 1987 . slp/2104-2 : spacelab payload accommodation handbook . external links . spacelab history on nasa.gov spacelab : an international short-stay orbiting laboratory , nasa-ep-165 on nasa.gov science in orbit : the shuttle & spacelab experience , 1981–1986 , nasa-np-119 on nasa.gov spacelab payloads on shuttle flights on nasa.gov spacelab illustration for nasa publication ep-165