Decebalus

early life . after the death of great king burebista , dacia split into four , then five smaller kingdoms . nothing is known about decebalus ' youth or background . decebalus appears to have risen to prominence in the court of the dacian king duras , who claimed authority over all dacian territory . an ancient dacian pot bearing the words “ decebalus per scorilo ” led to the suggestion that this might mean '' decebalus son of scorilo '' . according to lucian boia this suggestion was originally a '' scholarly joke '' , but the theory has been considered plausible by several writers . lucian boia , history and myth in romanian consciousness , central european university press , budapest , 2001 , p.221 it has been suggested that '' scorilo '' may be identical to the '' coryllus '' or '' scorillus '' identified by jordanes as a dacian king prior to duras . ion grumeza , dacia : land of transylvania , cornerstone of ancient eastern europe , university press of america , 2009 , p.72 . duras may have been decebalus ' uncle , having taken over the throne by agnatic right on his brother 's death . mihai bǎrbulescu et al , the history of transylvania : ( until 1541 ) , romanian cultural institute , 2005 , p.88 . in 85 ad the dacian army began minor raids upon the heavily fortified roman province of moesia , located south of the danube . in 86 king duras ordered a more vigorous attack south into moesia . roman sources refer to the attack being led by '' diurpaneus '' ( or '' dorpaneus '' ) . many authors have taken this person to be duras himself , and refer to him as '' duras-diurpaneus '' . hildegard temporini , wolfgang haas , politische geschichte : ( provinzen und randvölker : griechischer balkanraum ; kleinasien ) , walter de gruyter , 1979 , p.167 . constantin olteanu , the romanian armed power concept : a historical approach , military pub . house , 1982 , p.39 . romania : pages of history , volume 4 , agerpres publishing house . , 1979 , p.75 . other scholars argue that duras and diurpaneus are different individuals , or that diurpaneus is identical to decebalus . ioana a . oltean , dacia : landscape , colonization and romanization , routledge , 2007 , p.49-50 . recent sources take the view that '' diurpaneus '' is most likely decebalus . the dacians defeated and killed oppius sabinus , the governor of moesia , forcing domitian to deploy more troops to the area . marcus cornelius nigrinus replaced sabinus . domitian took command to deal with the problem himself , arriving with his general , prefect of the praetorian guards , cornelius fuscus . brian w . jones , the emperor domitian , routledge , 1992 , p.138 . . war against emperor domitian . domitian pushed back the dacians from moesia , then returned to rome to celebrate a triumph , leaving fuscus in charge of the army . fuscus advanced into dacia , but his four or five legions suffered a major defeat when ambushed by the forces of decebalus ( the sources say '' diurpaneus '' was in command , which might mean decebalus or duras ) . two roman legions ( among which was the v alaudae ) were ambushed and defeated at a mountain pass the romans called tapae ( widely known as the tapae ) . fuscus was killed , and decebalus was crowned king after the ageing duras abdicated . dio cassius described decebalus as follows : fuscus was replaced by tettius julianus . in 88 julianus commanded another roman army under domitian against the dacians , defeating them in a battle near tapae . however , elsewhere in europe , domitian was having to deal with revolts along the rhine , and suffered heavy defeats at the hands of the marcomanni , and sarmatian tribes in the east , notably the iazyges . needing the troops in moesia , domitian agreed to peace terms with decebalus . he agreed to pay large sums ( eight million sesterces ) in annual tribute to the dacians for maintaining peace . brian w . jones , the emperor domitian , ( london : routledge , 1992 ) , p . 150 decebalus sent his brother diegis to rome to accept a diadem from the emperor , officially recognising decebalus 's royal status . . consolidation of power . decebalus ' victory greatly increased his prestige . he proceeded to centralize power and build up his fortifications and war machines , using engineers supplied by domitian . michael schmitz , the dacian threat , 101-106 ad . armidale , australia : caeros pty , 2005 , , p.9 decebalus 's court also became a haven for malcontents and deserters from the roman empire becoming '' the nucleus for anti-roman sentiment '' in the words of historian julian bennett . julian bennett , trajan : optimus princeps : a life and times : routledge , london , 1997 , p.86 . he also sought to build alliances with independent tribes , notably the getic bastarnae and the sarmatian roxolani . he failed to secure the support of the quadi , marcomanni and jazyges , but ensured that they would not interfere with his plans . conflicts with trajan . first dacian war . when trajan came to power in 98 , he immediately toured the danube area and ordered the strengthening of fortifications along the dacian frontier . three years later , trajan decided to launch an offensive against dacia . according to cassius dio this was because '' he had taken stock of their previous record , resented the annual sums of money they were getting , and saw that their powers and their pride were on the increase . '' julian bennett , trajan : optimus princeps : a life and times : routledge , london , 1997 , p.87 . trajan 's force crossed the danube in 101 and advanced into dacia , pushing back dacian forces . according to dio , decebalus sent envoys asking for negotiations , but trajan refused a personal meeting . at the second battle of tapae , decebalus was defeated , but he inflicted serious losses on the romans . julian bennett , trajan : optimus princeps : a life and times : routledge , london , 1997 , p.93 . trajan chose not to pursue the war until the spring . decebalus tried to wrongfoot trajan by launching a surprise attack on moesia , but he suffered a major defeat at the battle of adamclisi . despite stiff resistance , the romans closed on the dacian capital by early 102 . decebalus was forced to concede defeat and accept trajan 's terms , which included the loss of some territories in the vicinity of the danube and the dismantling of his fortresses . however , decebalus retained his throne . second dacian war . decebalus had no intention of remaining subject to rome , or giving up his lost territory . as soon as he was able to , he took revenge on those who had supported rome . he annexed territory from the jazyges and violated the peace treaty by re-arming and receiving refugees and deserters from roman territory . julian bennett , trajan : optimus princeps : a life and times : routledge , london , 1997 , p.98-100 . he also restored his fortifications . this time , decebalus did not wait for trajan to strike . in 105 he authorised a direct attack on the newly occupied roman territory , probably the fortress at banat . the attack seems to have taken trajan and the senate by surprise . trajan immediately travelled north to review fortifications . meanwhile , decebalus continued to disrupt roman positions with guerrilla attacks . he also developed a plan to assassinate trajan by using roman auxiliaries who had defected to the dacians to infiltrate the emperor 's camp . the plot failed . however he succeeded in capturing one of trajan 's senior officers , pompeius longinus , whom he tried to use as a hostage to bargain with trajan . longinus took poison to avoid being used . trajan , meanwhile , was building a large force for a full-scale invasion . decebalus tried to negotiate a peace settlement , but trajan demanded that decebalus surrender himself , which he refused to do . decebalus ' allies among the surrounding tribes seem to have deserted him at this point . trajan launched a direct attack on the dacian capital , sarmizegetusa . after a long siege of sarmizegetusa and a few skirmishes in the nearby region , the romans conquered the dacian capital . decebalus managed to escape with his family . he and his remaining supporters continued a guerrilla campaign in the carpathian mountains . . death . decebalus was hunted down and finally cornered by roman detachments seeking his head . rather than being captured only to be exhibited and humiliated at rome , decebalus committed suicide by slashing his own throat , as depicted on trajan 's column ( spiral 22 , panel b ) . it is likely that he killed himself as a roman cavalry scout named tiberius claudius maximus from legio vii claudia was approaching . he was probably still alive when maximus reached him , as is claimed on maximus ' funerary stele discovered at gramini in greece . maximus is presumably the figure seen on trajan 's column reaching out to decebalus from his horse . decebalus ' head and right hand were then taken to trajan in '' ranisstorum '' ( an unidentified dacian village , perhaps piatra craivii ) by maximus , who was decorated by the emperor . the trophy was sent to rome where it was thrown down the gemonian stairs . m spiedel - jrs 60 page 142-153 tiberius claudius maximus ' tomb cites two occasions where the legionary was decorated for his part in the dacian wars , one of which being the acquisition of decebalus ' head . '' julian bennett -traian . romanian national hero . decebalus is considered a folk hero in romania , and has been portrayed in numerous literary works , movies , public sculptures , and other memorials . decebalus began to be seen in these terms during the 19th century , when he came to be associated with romantic ideals of national freedom and resistance to imperialism . romanian politician mihail kogălniceanu gave a speech in 1843 in which he called decebalus '' the greatest barbarian king of all time , more worthy to be on the throne of rome than the rascally descendants of augustus ! '' lucian boia myth in romanian consciousness , central european university press , budapest , 2001 , p.89 alecu russo compared him to the medieval hero stephen the great , saying '' the one and the other both had the same aim , the same sublime idea : the independence of their country ! both are heroes , but stephen is a more local hero , a moldavian hero , while decebalus is the hero of the world . '' mihai eminescu , the romanian national poet , wrote the historical drama decebalus . george coșbuc 's 1896 poem decebal către popor ( decebalus to his people ) lauds the dacian leader 's scorn of death . decebalus is often paired with his enemy trajan , with the former representing national identity and the latter the grandeur and classical values brought by rome . lavinia stan , lucian turcescu , religion and politics in post-communist romania , oxford university press , 2007 , p.46 decebalus and trajan were depicted as a pair on many romanian banknotes . bartetzky , arnold , et al , neue staaten - neue bilder ? : visuelle kultur im dienst staatlicher selbstdarstellung in zentral- und osteuropa seit 1918 , böhlau verlag , cologne , weimar , 2005 , p.343 decebalus and trajan were regularly invoked at the coronation of new rulers . both featured significantly in the imagery of ferdinand i of romania and his wife marie of romania . the romanian poet aron cotruş wrote a long poem '' maria doamna '' ( “ lady marie ” ) after marie 's death , invoking both decebalus and trajan as admirers of marie . lucian boia myth in romanian consciousness , central european university press , budapest , 2001 , p.209 . he remained a hero in the communist era , especially in the stalinist '' national communism '' of gheorghe gheorghiu-dej . according to lavinia stan and lucian turcescu , '' in a process paralleling the way modern serbs perceive the defeat by the ottomans in the battle of kosovo of 1389 , decebal 's defeat at the hands of trajan in 101–107 ce and the resulting population mix were reclaimed as the cornerstones of romanian ethnic identity '' . the nationalist model progressed further under nicolae ceaușescu , under whom decebalus was listed as one of the ten great leaders of romania . lucian boia myth in romanian consciousness , central european university press , budapest , 2001 , p.222 . he was depicted as a great national leader in two major epic films in this period , the dacians ( 1967 , directed by sergiu nicolaescu ) , and the column ( 1968 , directed by mircea drăgan ) . in both films he was portrayed by amza pellea . several public statues of decebalus were also set up in the ceaușescu era , including an equestrian statue in deva created in 1978 by the sculptor ion jalea , and a column topped by a bust in drobeta-turnu severin , created in 1972 . he was central to the nationalist protochronism movement , which identifies romania as the cradle of east-european civilisation . during the 1990s , a team of sculptors carved a 40-metre-tall rock sculpture of decebalus from a stone outcrop overlooking the danube near the city of orşova , romania . it was devised and funded by iosif constantin drăgan , a supporter of the protochronism movement . he is quoted saying , '' anyone travelling towards 'decebal rex dragan fecit ' king decebalus made by dragan is also travelling towards the origins of east-european civilization and will discover that a united europe represents the natural course of history '' . . image gallery . file : decebalus.jpg decebalus ' statue in timișoara file : statue of decebal - deva 01.jpg decebalus ' statue in deva , romania file : rock sculpture of decebalus5.jpg the rock sculpture of decebalus at the iron gates file : romania leubanknote 1915.jpg 1915 romanian banknote pairing trajan and decebalus