Timeline of computer viruses and worms

pre-1970 . john von neumann 's article on the '' theory of self-reproducing automata '' is published in 1966 . the article is based on lectures given by von neumann at the university of illinois about the '' theory and organization of complicated automata '' in 1949 . 1971–1974 . 1970 ( fiction ) . the first story written about a computer virus is the scarred man by gregory benford . 1971 . the creeper system , an experimental self-replicating program , is written by bob thomas at bbn technologies to test john von neumann 's theory . creeper infected dec pdp-10 computers running the tenex operating system . creeper gained access via the arpanet and copied itself to the remote system where the message '' i 'm the creeper , catch me if you can ! '' was displayed . the reaper program was later created to delete creeper . . 1972 ( fiction ) . the science fiction novel , when harlie was one , by david gerrold , contains one of the first fictional representations of a computer virus , as well as one of the first uses of the word '' virus '' to denote a program that infects a computer . 1973 ( fiction ) . in fiction , the 1973 michael crichton movie westworld made an early mention of the concept of a computer virus , being a central plot theme that causes androids to run amok . alan oppenheimer 's character summarizes the problem by stating that '' . there 's a clear pattern here which suggests an analogy to an infectious disease process , spreading from one.area to the next . '' to which the replies are stated : '' perhaps there are superficial similarities to disease '' and , '' i must confess i find it difficult to believe in a disease of machinery . '' ( crichton 's earlier work , the 1969 novel the andromeda strain and 1971 film were about an extraterrestrial biological virus-like disease that threatened the human race . ) . 1974 . the rabbit ( or wabbit ) virus , more a fork bomb than a virus , is written . the rabbit virus makes multiple copies of itself on a single computer ( and was named '' rabbit '' for the speed at which it did so ) until it clogs the system , reducing system performance , before finally reaching a threshold and crashing the computer . '' the very first viruses : creeper , wabbit and brain '' , daniel snyder , infocarnivore , may 30 , 2010 , . 1975 . april : animal is written by john walker for the univac 1108 . . 1981–1989 . 1982 . a program called elk cloner , written for apple ii systems , was created by high school student rich skrenta , originally as a prank . the apple ii was particularly vulnerable due to the storage of its operating system on a floppy disk . elk cloner 's design combined with public ignorance about what malware was and how to protect against it led to elk cloner being responsible for the first large-scale computer virus outbreak in history . . 1983 . november : the term '' virus '' is re-coined by fred cohen in describing self-replicating computer programs . in 1984 cohen uses the phrase '' computer virus '' ( suggested by his teacher leonard adleman ) to describe the operation of such programs in terms of '' infection '' . he defines a '' virus '' as '' a program that can 'infect ' other programs by modifying them to include a possibly evolved copy of itself . '' cohen demonstrates a virus-like program on a vax system at lehigh university . the program could install itself in , or infect , other system objects . . 1984 . august : ken thompson publishes his seminal paper , reflections on trusting trust , in which he describes how he modified a c compiler so that when used to compile a specific version of the unix operating system , it inserts a backdoor into the login command , and when used to compile a new copy of itself , it inserts the backdoor insertion code , even if neither the backdoor nor the backdoor insertion code is present in the source code of this new copy . . 1986 . january : the brain boot sector virus is released . brain is considered the first ibm pc compatible virus , and the program responsible for the first ibm pc compatible virus epidemic . the virus is also known as lahore , pakistani , pakistani brain , and pakistani flu as it was created in lahore , pakistan by 19-year-old pakistani programmer , basit farooq alvi , and his brother , amjad farooq alvi . december : ralf burger presented the virdem model of programs at a meeting of the underground chaos computer club in germany . the virdem model represented the first programs that could replicate themselves via addition of their code to executable dos files in com format . . 1987 . appearance of the vienna virus , which was subsequently neutralized – the first time this had happened on the ibm platform . appearance of lehigh virus ( discovered at its lehigh university ) , boot sector viruses such as yale from the us , stoned from new zealand , ping pong from italy , and appearance of the first self-encrypting file virus , cascade . lehigh was stopped on campus before it spread to the '' wild '' ( to computers beyond the university ) , and as a result has never been found elsewhere . a subsequent infection of cascade in the offices of ibm belgium led to ibm responding with its own antivirus product development . prior to this , antivirus solutions developed at ibm were intended for staff use only . october : the jerusalem virus , part of the ( at that time unknown ) suriv family , is detected in the city of jerusalem . the virus destroys all executable files on infected machines upon every occurrence of friday the 13th ( except friday 13 november 1987 making its first trigger date may 13 , 1988 ) . jerusalem caused a worldwide epidemic in 1988 . november : the sca virus , a boot sector virus for amiga computers , appears . it immediately creates a pandemic virus-writer storm . a short time later , sca releases another , considerably more destructive virus , the byte bandit . december : christmas tree exec was the first widely disruptive replicating network program , which paralyzed several international computer networks in december 1987 . it was written in rexx on the vm/cms operating system and originated in what was then west germany . it re-emerged in 1990 . 1988 . march 1 : the ping-pong virus ( also called boot , bouncing ball , bouncing dot , italian , italian-a or veracruz ) , an ms-dos boot sector virus , is discovered at the university of turin in italy . june : the festering hate apple prodos viruses spreads from underground pirate bbs systems and starts infecting mainstream networks . festering hate was the last iteration of the cyberaids series extending back to 1985 and 1986 . unlike the few apple viruses that had come before which were essentially annoying , but did no damage , the festering hate series of viruses was extremely destructive , spreading to all system files it could find on the host computer ( hard drive , floppy , and system memory ) and then destroying everything when it could no longer find any uninfected files . november 2 : the morris worm , created by robert tappan morris , infects dec vax and sun machines running bsd unix that are connected to the internet , and becomes the first worm to spread extensively '' in the wild '' , and one of the first well-known programs exploiting buffer overrun vulnerabilities . december : the father christmas worm attacks dec vax machines running vax/vms that are connected to the decnet internet ( an international scientific research network using decnet protocols ) , affecting nasa and other research centers . its purpose was to deliver a christmas greeting to all affected users . 1989 . october : ghostball , the first multipartite virus , is discovered by friðrik skúlason . it infects both executable . com files and boot sectors on ms-dos systems . december : several thousand floppy disks containing the aids trojan , the first known ransomware , are mailed to subscribers of pc business world magazine and a who aids conference mailing list . this dos trojan lies dormant for 90 boot cycles , then encrypts all filenames on the system , displaying a notice asking for 189 to be sent to a post office box in panama in order to receive a decryption program . 1990–1999 . 1990 . mark washburn , working on an analysis of the vienna and cascade viruses with ralf burger , develops the first family of polymorphic code , the chameleon family . chameleon series debuted with the release of 1260 . june : the form computer virus is isolated in switzerland . it would remain in the wild for almost 20 years and reappear afterward ; during the 1990s it tended to be the most common virus in the wild with 20 to more than 50 percent of reported infections . 1992 . march : the michelangelo virus was expected to create a digital apocalypse on march 6 , with millions of computers having their information wiped , according to mass media hysteria surrounding the virus . later assessments of the damage showed the aftermath to be minimal . john mcafee had been quoted by the media as saying that 5 million computers would be affected . he later said that pressed by the interviewer to come up with a number , he had estimated a range from 5 thousand to 5 million , but the media naturally went with just the higher number . 1993 . '' leandro '' or '' leandro & kelly '' '' leandro '' , threat encyclopedia , trend micro , 9 march 2000 . retrieved 9 september 2013 . and '' freddy krueger '' '' freddy virus '' , virus information summary list , december 1992 . retrieved 9 september 2013 . spread quickly due to popularity of bbs and shareware distribution . 1994 . april : onehalf is a dos-based polymorphic computer virus . september : reboot first airs , containing another memorable fictional , sentient computer virus , megabyte . 1995 . the first macro virus , called '' concept '' , is created . it attacked microsoft word documents . . 1996 . '' ply '' & nbsp ; – dos 16-bit based complicated polymorphic virus appeared with a built-in permutation engine . boza , the first virus designed specifically for windows 95 files arrives . laroux , the first excel macro virus appears . staog , the first linux virus attacks linux machines . 1998 . june 2 : the first version of the cih virus appears . it is the first known virus able to erase flash rom bios content . 1999 . january 20 : the happy99 worm first appeared . it invisibly attaches itself to emails , displays fireworks to hide the changes being made , and wishes the user a happy new year . it modifies system files related to outlook express and internet explorer ( ie ) on windows 95 and windows 98 . march 26 : the melissa worm was released , targeting microsoft word and outlook-based systems , and creating considerable network traffic . june 6 : the explorezip worm , which destroys microsoft office documents , was first detected . september : the ctx virus is isolated december 30 : the kak worm is a javascript computer worm that spread itself by exploiting a bug in outlook express . . 2000–2009 . 2000 . may 5 : the iloveyou worm ( also known as the love letter , vbs , or love bug worm ) , a computer worm written in vbscript and using social engineering techniques , infects millions of windows computers worldwide within a few hours of its release . june 28 : the pikachu virus is believed to be the first computer virus geared at children . it contains the character '' pikachu '' from the pokémon series . the operating systems affected by this worm are windows 95 , windows 98 , and windows me . 2001 . february 11 : the anna kournikova virus hits e-mail servers hard by sending e-mail to contacts in the microsoft outlook addressbook . its creator , jan de wit , was sentenced to 150 hours of community service . may 8 : the sadmind worm spreads by exploiting holes in both sun solaris and microsoft iis . july : the sircam worm is released , spreading through microsoft systems via e-mail and unprotected network shares . july 13 : the code red worm attacking the index server isapi extension in microsoft internet information services is released . august 4 : a complete re-write of the code red worm , code red ii begins aggressively spreading onto microsoft systems , primarily in china . september 18 : the nimda worm is discovered and spreads through a variety of means including vulnerabilities in microsoft windows and backdoors left by code red ii and sadmind worm . october 26 : the klez worm is first identified . it exploits a vulnerability in microsoft internet explorer and microsoft outlook and outlook express . 2002 . february 11 : the simile virus is a metamorphic computer virus written in assembly . beast is a windows-based backdoor trojan horse , more commonly known as a rat ( remote administration tool ) . it is capable of infecting almost all versions of windows . written in delphi and released first by its author tataye in 2002 , its most current version was released on october 3 , 2004 . march 7 : mylife is a computer worm that spread itself by sending malicious emails to all the contacts in microsoft outlook . september 16 : another fictional , sentient computer virus appears in animation - swayzak from toonami 's total immersion event trapped in hyperspace and its corresponding game on the cartoon network website . 2003 . january 24 : the sql slammer worm , aka sapphire worm , helkern and other names , attacks vulnerabilities in microsoft sql server and msde becomes the fastest spreading worm of all time ( measured by doubling time at the peak rate of growth ) , causing massive internet access disruptions worldwide just fifteen minutes after infecting its first victim . april 2 : graybird is a trojan horse also known as backdoor.graybird . june 13 : prorat is a turkish-made microsoft windows based backdoor trojan horse , more commonly known as a rat ( remote administration tool ) . august 12 : the blaster worm , aka the lovesan worm , rapidly spreads by exploiting a vulnerability in system services present on windows computers . august 18 : the welchia ( nachi ) worm is discovered . the worm tries to remove the blaster worm and patch windows . august 19 : the sobig worm ( technically the sobigf worm ) spreads rapidly through microsoft systems via mail and network shares . september 18 : swen is a computer worm written in c++ . october 24 : the sober worm is first seen on microsoft systems and maintains its presence until 2005 with many new variants . the simultaneous attacks on network weak points by the blaster and sobig worms cause massive damage . november 10 : agobot is a computer worm that can spread itself by exploiting vulnerabilities on microsoft windows . some of the vulnerabilities are ms03-026 and ms05-039 . november 20 : bolgimo is a computer worm that spread itself by exploiting a buffer overflow vulnerability at microsoft windows dcom rpc interface . brontok was a mass-email worm and the origin for the worm was from indonesia . june : starbucks is a virus that infects staroffice and openoffice . late september : stration or warezov worm first discovered . development of stuxnet is presumed to have been started between 2005 and 2006 . 2007 . january 17 : storm worm identified as a fast-spreading email spamming threat to microsoft systems . it begins gathering infected computers into the storm botnet . by around june 30 , it had infected 1.7 million computers , and it had compromised between 1 and 10 million computers by september . thought to have originated from russia , it disguises itself as a news email containing a film about bogus news stories asking you to download the attachment which it claims is a film . july : zeus is a trojan that targets microsoft windows to steal banking information by keystroke logging . 2008 . february 17 : mocmex is a trojan , which was found in a digital photo frame in february 2008 . it was the first serious computer virus on a digital photo frame . the virus was traced back to a group in china . march 3 : torpig , also known as sinowal and mebroot , is a trojan horse that affects windows , turning off anti-virus applications . it allows others to access the computer , modifies data , steals confidential information ( such as user passwords and other sensitive data ) and installs more malware on the victim 's computer . may 6 : rustock.c , a hitherto-rumored spambot-type malware with advanced rootkit capabilities , was announced to have been detected on microsoft systems and analyzed , having been in the wild and undetected since october 2007 at the very least . july 6 : bohmini.a is a configurable remote access tool or trojan that exploits security flaws in adobe flash 9.0.115 with internet explorer 7.0 and firefox 2.0 under windows xp sp2 . july 31 : the koobface computer worm targets users of facebook and myspace . new variants constantly appear . november 21 : computer worm conficker infects anywhere from 9 to 15 million microsoft server systems running everything from windows 2000 to the windows 7 beta . the french navy , uk ministry of defence ( including royal navy warships and submarines ) , sheffield hospital network , german bundeswehr and norwegian police were all affected . microsoft sets a bounty of us 250,000 for information leading to the capture of the worm 's author ( s ) . five main variants of the conficker worm are known and have been dubbed conficker a , b , c , d and e . they were discovered 21 november 2008 , 29 december 2008 , 20 february 2009 , 4 march 2009 and 7 april 2009 , respectively . on december 16 , 2008 , microsoft releases kb958644 patching the server service vulnerability responsible for the spread of conficker . 2009 . july 4 : the july 2009 cyber attacks occur and the emergence of the w32.dozer attack the united states and south korea . july 15 : symantec discovered daprosy worm , a trojan worm is intended to steal online-game passwords in internet cafes . it could intercept all keystrokes and send them to its author , making it potentially a very dangerous worm to infect b2b ( business-to-business ) systems . august 24 : source code for megapanzer is released by its author under gplv3 . and appears to have been apparently detected in the wild . november 27 : the virus kenzero is a virus that spreads online from peer-to-peer networks ( p2p ) taking browsing history . . 2010–present . 2010 . january : the waledac botnet sent spam emails . in february 2010 , an international group of security researchers and microsoft took waledac down . january : the psyb0t worm is discovered . it is thought to be unique in that it can infect routers and high-speed modems . february 18 : microsoft announced that a bsod problem on some windows machines which was triggered by a batch of patch tuesday updates was caused by the alureon trojan . june 17 : stuxnet , a windows trojan , was detected . it is the first worm to attack scada systems . there are suggestions that it was designed to target iranian nuclear facilities . stuxnet virus : worm 'could be aimed at high-profile iranian targets ’ , telegraph , 23 sep 2010 it uses a valid certificate from realtek . september 9 : the virus , called '' here you have '' or '' vbmania '' , is a simple trojan horse that arrives in the inbox with the odd-but-suggestive subject line '' here you have '' . the body reads '' this is the document i told you about , you can find it here '' or '' this is the free download sex movies , you can find it here '' . 2011 . spyeye and zeus merged code is seen . new variants attack mobile banking information . anti-spyware 2011 , a trojan horse that attacks windows 9x , 2000 , xp , vista , and windows 7 , posing as an anti-spyware program . it disables security-related processes of anti-virus programs , while also blocking access to the internet , which prevents updates . summer 2011 : the morto worm attempts to propagate itself to additional computers via the microsoft windows remote desktop protocol ( rdp ) . morto spreads by forcing infected systems to scan for windows servers allowing rdp login . once morto finds an rdp-accessible system , it attempts to log into a domain or local system account named 'administrator ' using several common passwords . a detailed overview of how the worm works – along with the password dictionary morto uses – was done by imperva . july 13 : the zeroaccess rootkit ( also known as sirefef or max++ ) was discovered . september 1 : duqu is a worm thought to be related to the stuxnet worm . the laboratory of cryptography and system security ( crysys lab ) of the budapest university of technology and economics in hungary discovered the threat , analysed the malware , and wrote a 60-page report naming the threat duqu . duqu gets its name from the prefix '' ~dq '' it gives to the names of files it creates . . 2012 . may : flame – also known as flamer , skywiper , and skywiper – a modular computer malware that attacks computers running microsoft windows . used for targeted cyber espionage in middle eastern countries . its discovery was announced on 28 may 2012 by maher center of iranian national computer emergency response team ( cert ) , kaspersky lab and crysys lab of the budapest university of technology and economics . crysys stated in their report that '' skywiper is certainly the most sophisticated malware we encountered during our practice ; arguably , it is the most complex malware ever found '' . august 16 : shamoon is a computer virus designed to target computers running microsoft windows in the energy sector . symantec , kaspersky lab , and seculert announced its discovery on august 16 , 2012 . september 20 : ngrbot is a worm that uses the irc network for file transfer , sending and receiving commands between zombie network machines and the attacker 's irc server , and monitoring and controlling network connectivity and intercept . it employs a user-mode rootkit technique to hide and steal its victim 's information . this family of bot is also designed to infect html pages with inline frames ( iframes ) , causing redirections , blocking victims from getting updates from security/antimalware products , and killing those services . the bot is designed to connect via a predefined irc channel and communicate with a remote botnet . '' ngrbot '' , enigma software group , 15 october 2012 . retrieved 9 september 2013 . '' dissecting the ngr bot framework : irc botnets die hard '' , aditya k . sood and richard j . enbody , michigan state university , usa , and rohit bansal , secniche security , usa , with helen martin1 ( ed . ) , january 2012 . retrieved 9 september 2013 . . 2013 . september : the cryptolocker trojan horse is discovered . cryptolocker encrypts the files on a user 's hard drive , then prompts them to pay a ransom to the developer to receive the decryption key . in the following months , several copycat ransomware trojans were also discovered . december : the gameover zeus trojan is discovered . this type of virus steals one 's login details on popular web sites that involve monetary transactions . it works by detecting a login page , then proceeds to inject malicious code into the page , keystroke logging the computer user 's details . december : linux.darlloz targets the internet of things and infects routers , security cameras , set-top boxes by exploiting a php vulnerability . . 2014 . november : the regin trojan horse is discovered . regin is a dropper , primarily spread via spoofed web pages . once installed , it quietly downloads additional malware , making it difficult for signature-based anti-virus programs to detect . it is believed to have been created by the united states and united kingdom as a tool for espionage and mass surveillance . 2015 . the bashlite malware is leaked leading to a massive spike in ddos attacks . linux.wifatch is revealed to the general public . it is found to attempt to secure devices from other more malicious malware . . 2016 . january : a trojan named '' memz '' is created . the creator , leurak , explained that the trojan was intended merely as a joke . the trojan alerts the user to the fact that it is a trojan and warns them that if they proceed , the computer may no longer be usable . it contains complex payloads that corrupt the system , displaying artifacts on the screen as it runs . once run , the application can not be closed without causing further damage to the computer , which will stop functioning properly regardless . when the computer is restarted , in place of the bootsplash is a message that reads '' your computer has been trashed by the memz trojan . now enjoy the nyan cat… '' , which follows with an animation of the nyan cat . february : ransomware locky with its over 60 derivatives spread throughout europe and infected several million computers . at the height of the spread over five thousand computers per hour were infected in germany alone . '' ransomware : erpresserische schadprogramme '' , bsi-fuer-buerger.de , 9 february 2016 . retrieved 10 march 2016 . although ransomware was not a new thing at the time , insufficient cyber security as well as a lack of standards in it was responsible for the high number of infections . '' locky ransomware on aggressive hunt for victims '' , symantec.com , 18 february 2016 . retrieved 10 march 2016 . unfortunately , even up to date antivirus and internet security software was unable to protect systems from early versions of locky . '' antivirus scan for ( locky ) '' , virustotal.com , 16 february 2016 . retrieved 10 march 2016 . february : tiny banker trojan ( tinba ) makes headlines . since its discovery , it has been found to have infected more than two dozen major banking institutions in the united states , including td bank , chase , hsbc , wells fargo , pnc and bank of america . tiny banker trojan uses http injection to force the user 's computer to believe that it is on the bank 's website . this spoof page will look and function just as the real one . the user then enters their information to log on , at which point tinba can launch the bank webpage 's '' incorrect login information '' return , and redirect the user to the real website . this is to trick the user into thinking they had entered the wrong information and proceed as normal , although now tinba has captured the credentials and sent them to its host . september : mirai creates headlines by launching some of the most powerful and disruptive ddos attacks seen to date by infecting the internet of things . mirai ends up being used in the ddos attack on 20 september 2016 on the krebs on security site which reached 620 gbit/s . the economist , 8 october 2016 , the internet of stings ars technica also reported a 1 tbit/s attack on french web host ovh . on 21 october 2016 multiple major ddos attacks in dns services of dns service provider dyn occurred using mirai malware installed on a large number of iot devices , resulting in the inaccessibility of several high-profile websites such as github , twitter , reddit , netflix , airbnb and many others . the attribution of the attack to the mirai botnet was originally reported by backconnect inc . , a security firm . . 2017 . may : the wannacry ransomware attack spreads globally . exploits revealed in the nsa hacking toolkit leak of late 2016 were used to enable the propagation of the malware . shortly after the news of the infections broke online , a uk cybersecurity researcher in collaboration with others found and activated a '' kill switch '' hidden within the ransomware , effectively halting the initial wave of its global propagation . the next day , researchers announced that they had found new variants of the malware without the kill switch . june : the petya ( malware ) attack spreads globally affecting windows systems . researchers at symantec reveal that this ransomware uses the eternalblue exploit , similar to the one used in the wannacry ransomware attack . september : the xafecopy trojan attacks 47 countries , affecting only android operating systems . kaspersky lab identified it as a malware from the ubsod family , stealing money through click based wap billing systems . september : a new variety of remote access trojan ( rat ) , kedi rat , is distributed in a spear phishing campaign . the attack targeted citrix users . the trojan was able to evade usual system scanners . kedi trojan had all the characteristics of a common remote access trojan and it could communicate to its command and control center via gmail using common html , http protocols . . 2018 . february : thanatos , a ransomware , becomes the first ransomware program to accept ransom payment in bitcoin cash . . 2019 . november : titanium is an advanced backdoor malware , developed by the platinum apt .