Battle of Salamanca

background . in april 1812 , following the successful siege of badajoz , wellington and the greater part of the anglo-portuguese army marched north to expel marmont 's french army who had temporarily invaded portugal . following marmont 's retreat to salamanca wellington took position behind the agueda and coa rivers . in may , acting on wellington 's orders general hill took a force of 7,000 men to destroy the bridge at almaraz , breaking the only direct communications between soult 's and marmont 's armies . on 13 june wellington crossed the agueda and advanced eastward to salamanca , a town that was a major supply depot for the french army . the french had converted three convents into powerful forts to defend the town and the bridge across the river tormes . on 19 june the first battery opened fire but it was not until 27 june that , with two of the convents battered and in flames and with no sign of relief , the french troops asked for surrender terms . for several weeks wellington found his movements north of salamanca blocked by marmont 's army , which was constantly swelled by reinforcements . with the armies often marching close together , separated by the river and marmont repeatedly threatening wellington 's supply line . moving east , the french crossed to the south bank of the tormes across another bridge at huerta and by marching south then west hoped to turn the flank of wellingtons ' army . by the day of the battle wellington had decided to withdraw his army all the way back to portugal , but observed that with the two armies marching parallel to each other , with the british on the inside line , the french became strung out and marmont had made the tactical error of separating his left flank from the main body of his army . the duke immediately ordered the major part of his army to attack the overextended french left wing . forces . marshal marmont 's 50,000-man army of portugal contained eight infantry and two cavalry divisions , plus 78 artillery pieces . the infantry divisions were maximilien sebastien foy 's 1st ( 4,900 ) , bertrand clausel 's 2nd ( 6,300 ) , claude françois ferey 's 3rd ( 5,400 ) , jacques thomas sarrut 's 4th ( 5,000 ) , antoine louis popon de maucune 's 5th ( 5,000 ) , antoine françois brenier de montmorand 's 6th ( 4,300 ) , jean guillaume barthélemy thomières 's 7th ( 4,300 ) , and jean pierre françois bonet 's 8th ( 6,400 ) . pierre françois xavier boyer led 1,500 dragoons and jean-baptiste theodore curto commanded 1,900 light cavalry . louis tirlet directed 3,300 artillerymen and there were also 1,300 engineers , military police and wagon drivers . wellington 's 48,500-man army included eight infantry divisions , formed mainly by british and portuguese units ( also german and one of french royalists ) , and two independent brigades , five cavalry brigades and 54 cannons . the infantry divisions were henry frederick campbell 's 1st ( 6,200 ) , edward pakenham 's 3rd ( 5,800 ) , lowry cole 's 4th ( 5,191 ) , james leith 's 5th ( 6,700 ) , henry clinton 's 6th ( 5,500 ) , john hope 's 7th ( 5,100 ) and charles alten 's light ( 3,500 ) . carlos de españa commanded a 3,400-man spanish division , while denis pack ( 2,600 ) and thomas bradford ( 1,900 ) led the independent portuguese brigades . stapleton cotton supervised the cavalry brigades . these included 1,000 british heavy dragoons ( 1st cavalry brigade ) led by john le marchant , 1,000 british light dragoons ( 2nd cavalry brigade ) under george anson , 700 anglo-german light horse under victor alten , 800 king 's german legion ( kgl ) heavy dragoons led by eberhardt otto george von bock and 500 portuguese dragoons under benjamin d'urban . hoylet framingham commanded eight british ( rha : ross , bull , macdonald ; ra : lawson 's , gardiner , greene , douglas , may ) and one portuguese ( arriaga ) six-gun artillery batteries . manoeuvres . marmont 's army moved south early on 22july , its leading elements reaching an area southeast of salamanca . to the west , the marshal could see wellington 's 7th division deployed on a ridge . spotting a dust cloud in the distance , marmont assumed that most of the british army was in retreat and that he faced only a rearguard . he planned to move his french army south , then west to turn the british right flank . this was a mistake as wellington had most of his forces hidden behind the ridge , while his 3rd and 5th divisions were en route from salamanca . wellington had planned to retreat if outflanked , but waited to see if marmont would make a blunder . the marshal 's army planned to move along an l-shaped ridge , with its angle near a steep height known as the greater arapile . that morning , the french occupied only the short , north-pointing part of the l . for his flanking move , marmont marched his divisions west along the long side of the l . the anglo-allied army lay behind another l-shaped ridge , inside and parallel to the french l , and separated from it by a valley . unseen by the french , wellington assembled a powerful striking force along the long side of the british l . as marmont moved westward , the french became strung out along the long side of the l . thomières 's division led the way , supported by curto 's cavalry . after that maucune , brenier , and clausel . bonet , sarrut and boyer advanced close to the greater arapile , while foy and ferey held the short side of the l . battle . when the british 3rd division and d'urban 's brigade reached the top of the french l , they attacked thomières . at the same time , wellington launched the 5th and 4th divisions , backed by the 7th and 6th divisions , at the long side of the french l . the 3rd division came at the head of thomières 's division in a two-deep line . despite its deployment in column formation , the french division initially repulsed its attackers , but was then routed by a bayonet charge . thomières was killed . seeing british cavalry in the area , maucune formed his division into squares , the standard formation to receive a mounted attack , but a poor choice when defending against infantry . with their two-deep line , leith 's 5th division easily defeated maucune in a musketry duel . as the french foot soldiers fell back , cotton ordered john le marchant 's heavy brigade ( 5th dragoon guards , 3rd and 4th dragoons ) to attack them . the left wing of the french army were on the point of being defeated by the 3rd and 5th divisions of anglo-portuguese infantry when le marchant 's dragoons charged in and destroyed battalion after battalion with the heavy cavalrymen 's weapons , the sword and exercise for which had been designed by le marchant . many of the french infantrymen sought the protection of the british infantry to escape the sabres of the dragoons . le marchant , knowing he had achieved a magnificent success , having crushed eight french battalions , was leading a squadron when he was shot in the spine and killed . william ponsonby succeeded to command of the brigade . the french army lost its commander very early in the crisis . as pakenham 's 3rd division prepared to attack thomières , marmont finally woke up to his army 's peril . he dashed for his horse , but was caught in a british shellburst which broke his arm and two ribs . his second-in-command , bonet , was wounded very soon afterwards . records conflict however , with marmont claiming that he was wounded as his wing became overextended , and his incapacitation led to the error not being corrected before wellington attacked . his enemies place the time of his wounding as during wellington 's attack . for somewhere between 20 minutes and over an hour , the french army of portugal remained leaderless . cole 's 4th division attacked bonet 's division while pack 's portuguese assaulted the greater arapile . with the help of a 40-gun battery firing from the greater arapile , both attacks were repulsed by the french . assuming command , clausel did his best to salvage the dire situation . he committed sarrut 's division to shore up the wrecked left flank , then launched a dangerous counterattack at cole 's 4th division using his own and bonet 's divisions , supported by boyer 's dragoons . this attack brushed aside cole 's survivors and struck the 6th division in wellington 's second line . marshal william carr beresford reacted promptly to the developing threat and immediately sent spry 's portuguese brigade of the 5th division to engage the french infantry , while wellington moved the 1st and 7th divisions to assist . after bitter resistance , the divisions of clausel and bonet were defeated and the french army began to retreat . as the rest of the french army streamed away , clausel ordered ferey to hold off the victorious allies at all costs . ferey formed his division in a convex line , following the shape of the hillside . the french infantry had fought in battalion columns this day , but ferey deployed seven battalions into a three-deep line , with both flanks covered by a battalion in square . the french divisional artillery battery was in close support . with its two british brigades in the front line , clinton 's victorious 6th division attacked ferey 's division . the first volley of the french soldiers was particularly lethal . the slope was so steep that ferey 's third rank could fire over the heads of the first two ranks . in the gathering dusk , it appeared to the soldiers of clinton 's division that they were attacking a flaming mountain . on the british right flank , major general richard hulse 's brigade suffered appalling losses : the 1st/11th foot lost 340 men out of 516 as casualties while the 1/61st foot lost 366 out of 546 . the french also suffered severe losses and slowly edged backwards until the survivors formed at the edge of the forest . in this position , ferey was killed by a round shot from the british artillery . there was a lull as clinton withdrew his two mauled british brigades and placed brigadier general conde de rezende 's portuguese brigade in the front line for a final attack . the french shot the attacking formation to pieces ; the portuguese brigade reported 487 casualties . clinton was compelled to replace them with his sadly reduced british brigades . by this time the allied 5th division was pressing against the french left flank and ferey 's line collapsed from left to right and disappeared into the forest . the french 31st light infantry regiment on the right flank acted as rear guard . ferey 's division lost over 1,100 men in this action . wellington ordered clinton to pursue , but his soldiers were completely exhausted . they advanced only 100 yards into the woods and went into bivouac . foy 's division covered the french retreat towards alba de tormes , where there was a bridge they could use to escape . wellington , believing that the alba de tormes crossing was blocked by a spanish battalion in a fortified castle , directed his pursuit along a different road . de espana , however , had withdrawn the unit without informing wellington , which allowed the french to escape . the french army of portugal suffered 7,000 killed and wounded and 7,000 captured . besides marmont 's severe wounding , two divisional commanders were killed and another wounded . half of the 5,214 anglo-allied losses came from the 4th and 6th divisions . cotton , cole , and leith were all wounded . outcome . the battle established wellington as an offensive general . it was said that he '' defeated an army of 40,000 men in 40 minutes . '' six days after the battle , foy wrote in his diary , '' this battle is the most cleverly fought , the largest in scale , the most important in results , of any that the english have won in recent times . it brings up lord wellington 's reputation almost to the level of that of marlborough . up to this day we knew his prudence , his eye for choosing good positions , and the skill with which he used them . but at salamanca he has shown himself a great and able master of manoeuvring . he kept his dispositions hidden nearly the whole day : he allowed us to develop our movement before he pronounced his own : he played a close game : he utilized the oblique order in the style of frederick the great . '' oman p 58 the battle of salamanca was a damaging defeat for the french and while they regrouped , anglo-portuguese forces entered madrid on 6august . the siege of burgos ensued , then in the autumn the anglo-portuguese retreated to portugal when renewed french concentrations threatened to trap them , although the french forces , which had been stripped of several experienced units to join the russian campaign , were reluctant to go on the offensive . a failure by spanish troops to guard a crucial escape route over the bridge at alba de tormes tainted the victory . this may have resulted from a misunderstanding between spanish and british commanders . subsequent pursuit failed to destroy or to capture the fleeing french . action at garcia hernandez . the following day , wellington 's king 's german legion ( kgl ) heavy dragoons performed the astounding feat of '' infantry square '' and over-running a portion of the french rearguard at the battle of garcia hernandez . moreover , they accomplished this twice within a few minutes . imperial eagle . two imperial eagles were captured at the battle of salamanca . ensign john pratt of the light company of the 2nd battalion 30th foot took the eagle of the 22nd line regiment , which is today on display in the queen 's lancashire regiment museum at fulwood barracks in preston , lancashire . the eagle of the french 62nd line ( thomières ) was captured by lieutenant pearce of the 44th ( east essex ) regiment of foot , a part of lieutenant general leith 's 5th division . it is on display in the essex regiment museum in oaklands park , chelmsford , essex . three terracotta statues representing the captured eagles sit between the high pointed gables of essex house , 375 high street in stratford , london . . cultural references . the battle is mentioned in tolstoy 's novel war and peace , book 10 chapter xxvi . prior to the battle of borodino , tolstoy describes napoleon as receiving an aide-de-camp , fabvier , who has just arrived with news of the battle of salamanca . '' fabvier told him of the heroism and devotion of his troops fighting at salamanca , at the other end of europe , but with one thought – to be worthy of their emperor – but with one fear – to fail to please him . the result of that battle had been deplorable . napoleon made ironic remarks during fabvier 's account , as if he had not expected that matters could not go otherwise in his absence '' . the battle features in sharpe 's sword by bernard cornwell , in which richard sharpe helps wellington bring the french to battle by feeding a known french spy disinformation . cornwell also duplicated wellington 's tactics at salamanca in his retelling of arthur 's victory at the battle of mount badon , in excalibur , the third and final volume of cornwell 's the warlord chronicles . the battle is described in suzanna clarke 's jonathan strange and mr . norrell , during the time that jonathan strange served under lord wellington . salamanca place , in hobart , tasmania , commemorates the battle . mount wellington is nearby . a mock-up of the battle is featured in episode 6 , season 2 of the tv series the crown , '' vergangenheit '' . benito pérez galdós 's novel la batalla de los arapiles , part of his series episodios nacionales features the battle extensively . the spanish bride , by georgette heyer . references . notes . . bibliography . . further reading . beamish , n . ludlow history of the king 's german legion vol 2 ( reprint ) naval and military press 1997 muir , rory salamanca , 1812 yale university press , 2001 , young , peter wellington 's masterpiece : the battle and campaign of salamanca allen and unwin , 1972 , . external links . battle of salamanca original reports from the times dispatches : london gazette 16 august 1812 details on battle of salamanca includes british and allied oob the cruel war in spain – armies , battles , skirmishes batalla de los arapiles ( in spanish )