Tourism in Poland

history . the first polish tourists were pilgrims traveling to shrines both within poland and abroad . the development of commercial tourism began in the 19th century . the most popular regions were mountains , especially the tatra mountains , explored for example by tytus chałubiński . in 1873 , the pttk and in 1909 the pttk were established to organize and develop tourism . the 19th century was also the time of the rapid appearance of spa resorts , mostly in sudetes , beskids and along the baltic sea coast , with some of them associated , since 1910 , with the polish balneology association . after poland regained independence in 1918 , polish tourism boomed , and was encouraged by the government . the first professional polish tour operator , orbis , was founded in lviv in 1923 , followed in 1937 by gromada tourist organization and tour operator . after world war ii all tourist organizations were nationalized by the new communism government . the polish tatra society and polish sightseeing society were combined into pttk and most of the tourist infrastructure was handed over to the newly created workers vacations fund ( fwp ) . tourism was limited to the comecon countries . this was the era of governmentally-founded tourism , characterised by mass but low-standard tourism . a typical sight was a holiday campground with small bungalows managed by one of the state-owned companies . holidays for children and teenagers were organized by juventur . after the fall of communism much of the infrastructure was privatized , although many company-owned resorts were downgraded because of their unprofitability . the early 1990s saw the foundation of many new tour operators . some of them prevailed and strengthened their position on the market , being able to compete with multinational tour operators . natural environment . poland has a diversified natural environment , which is relatively unaffected by human development . there are 23 national parks in the country that meet the criteria of the iucn . visitors are attracted by mountains , sea-coast with wide sandy beaches , and forests , lakes , rivers . among the most popular destinations are : tatra mountains , in which is the highest peak of poland ( rysy ) and the famous orla perć ( old trail in the style of via ferrata ) ; sudetes with main sudetes trail , karkonosze , table mountains , owl mountains ; białowieża forest , lower silesian wilderness , bieszczady , dunajec river gorge in pieniny , pojezierze mazurskie and many others . tourist destinations . the royal road of kraków tourist attractions in warsaw wrocław zoo ( most frequently visited attraction in poland zoo wrocław – lepsze od wawelu i wieliczki ) hunting on the wrocław 's dwarfs old town in gdańsk the royal-imperial route in poznań jewish heritage trail in bialystok european route of brick gothic białowieża national park dunajec river gorge tatra mountains krkonoše . historic buildings and places . kraków old town wrocław old town including ostrów tumski with wrocław cathedral ; market square with wrocław town hall ; centennial hall , wrocław opera narodowy instytut dziedzictwa , '' wrocław – zespół historycznego centrum . '' auschwitz-birkenau state museum krasiński palace 13th century wieliczka salt mine medieval town of toruń old city of zamość wilanów palace jasna góra monastery in częstochowa cistercian lubiąż abbey cistercian krzeszów abbey royal gniezno cathedral wooden churches of southern little poland wooden churches of peace in jawor and świdnica kalwaria zebrzydowska park poznań old town and its ostrów tumski , poznań st . mary 's basilica in kraków mount ślęża in the sudetes saints peter and paul church in kraków kłodzko fortress complex pszczyna castle augustów canal with sluices benedictine abbey in tyniec rogalin palace muskau park shared with germany palace on the isle poznań fara frombork cathedral st . mary 's church in gdańsk łańcut castle kozłówka palace historic town of sandomierz kazimierz dolny poznań cathedral national museum in warsaw seaside resort of sopot branicki palace historic town of kłodzko kurozwęki palace nieborów palace czapski palace elbląg canal spa town of kudowa-zdrój palace of the kraków bishops in kielce historic town of wadowice czartoryski museum national museum in wrocław national museum in poznań święta lipka basilica historical town of przemyśl seaside resort of kołobrzeg juliusz słowacki theatre ląd abbey historic town of jelenia góra zakopane ; known as '' the winter capital of poland '' spa town of karpacz royal baths park palace in otwock wielki collegiate church of st . mary and st . alexius in tum pławniowice palace project riese wolf 's lair wuwa . castles . wawel castle royal castle in warsaw niedzica castle malbork castle baranów sandomierski castle książ castle nowy wiśnicz castle czocha castle moszna castle ujazdowski castle imperial castle , poznań grodziec castle krasiczyn castle pieskowa skała lidzbark warmiński castle kwidzyn castle gołuchów castle kliczków castle golub-dobrzyń castle krzyżtopór ogrodzieniec castle rzeszów castle dunajec river castles chojnik castle kórnik castle bobolice castle będzin castle pomeranian dukes ' castle , szczecin bytów castle tenczyn castle bolków castle czersk castle ciechanów castle lublin castle uniejów castle darłowo castle bielsko-biała museum and castle sanok castle dzików castle . cultural events . ; warsaw international frederick chopin piano competition warsaw autumn music festival warsaw international film festival jazz jamboree orange warsaw festival ursynalia – warsaw student festival festival of jewish culture in warsaw warsaw comic con parada równości ; kraków live music festival kraków film festival jewish culture festival in kraków conrad festival wianki kraków szopka nativity crèche festival etiuda & anima international film festival international festival of independent cinema off plus camera kraków equality march ; wrocław wratislavia cantans new horizons film festival festival of good beer american film festival ; poznań animator ( festival ) henryk wieniawski violin competition malta festival poznań international fair ; tricity st . dominic 's fair in gdańsk sopot international song festival open'er festival in gdynia gdynia film festival gdańsk shakespeare festival ; łódź transatlantyk festival international festival of comics and games soundedit festival łódź design festival łódź biennale ; katowice grzegorz fitelberg international competition for conductors off festival in katowice ; other camerimage film festival in bydgoszcz pol'and'rock festival in kostrzyn nad odrą national festival of polish song in opole international cycling film festival szczecin festival of contemporary painting two riversides film and art festival in kazimierz dolny . tourist resorts . there are dozens of sea resorts on the coast of baltic sea like wolin island , located close to the german border and the coast of pomerania . in southern poland there are resorts for skiing and hiking in the karkonosze mountains , which is part of the sudetes mountain range . karkonosze includes the tourist centres of karpacz and szklarska poręba . other famous resorts for skiing and hiking include in carpathian mountains : zakopane in the tatra mountains ; szczyrk , krynica-zdrój , ustroń , wisła in the beskids or szczawnica and krościenko in pieniny mountains . christian pilgrimage . it 's estimated that 13 % ( of the 1.8 & nbsp ; million in 2005 ) of visitors of the basilica of our lady of licheń arrive from abroad . jasna góra monastery was visited by 3.6 & nbsp ; million of pilgrims from 78 countries in 2014 . . transport in poland . tourist infrastructure and facilities are abundant , especially in larger cities and in major tourist resorts . transport is well developed . most major polish cities ( e.g . kraków , wrocław , poznań , gdańsk and szczecin ) have international airports with connections with many european cities and with the warsaw chopin airport in warsaw , which is the main hub of lot polish airlines . intercity connections are offered by pkp intercity , polregio , arriva rp , leo express , regiojet , local trains ( koleje dolnośląskie , koleje śląskie , koleje małopolskie , szybka kolej miejska , pomorska kolej metropolitalna , koleje mazowieckie , łódzka kolej aglomeracyjna , koleje wielkopolskie ) and pks 's , flixbus as well as many smaller companies . there are also coach connections to other countries provided by various companies ( inter alia sindbad , flixbus ) . connections by ferry to sweden and denmark through the baltic sea are for example from gdańsk , gdynia and świnoujście ( inter alia polferries ) .