Optical mouse

mechanical mice . though not commonly referred to as optical mice , nearly all mechanical mice tracked movement using leds and photodiodes to detect when beams of infrared light did and did n't pass through holes in a pair of incremental rotary encoder wheels ( one for left/right , another for forward/back ) , driven by a rubberized ball . thus , the primary distinction of “ optical mice ” is not their use of optics , but their complete lack of moving parts to track mouse movement , instead employing an entirely solid-state system . early optical mice . the first two optical mice , first demonstrated by two independent inventors in december 1980 , had different basic designs : one of these , invented by steve kirsch of mit and mouse systems corporation , used an infrared led and a four-quadrant infrared sensor to detect grid lines printed with infrared absorbing ink on a special metallic surface . predictive algorithms in the cpu of the mouse calculated the speed and direction over the grid . the other type , invented by richard f . lyon of xerox , used a 16-pixel visible-light image sensor with integrated motion detection on the same ntype ( 5µm ) mos integrated circuit chip , and tracked the motion of light dots in a dark field of a printed paper or similar mouse pad . the kirsch and lyon mouse types had very different behaviors , as the kirsch mouse used an x-y coordinate system embedded in the pad , and would not work correctly when the pad was rotated , while the lyon mouse used the x-y coordinate system of the mouse body , as mechanical mice do . the optical mouse ultimately sold with the xerox star office computer used an inverted sensor chip packaging approach patented by lisa m . williams and robert s . cherry of the xerox microelectronics center . lisa m . williams and robert s . cherry , u.s . patent 4,751,505 optical mouse . . modern optical mice . modern surface-independent optical mice work by using an optoelectronic sensor ( essentially , a tiny low-resolution video camera ) to take successive images of the surface on which the mouse operates . as computing power grew cheaper , it became possible to embed more powerful special-purpose image processing chips in the mouse itself . this advance enabled the mouse to detect relative motion on a wide variety of surfaces , translating the movement of the mouse into the movement of the cursor and eliminating the need for a special mouse-pad . a surface-independent coherent light optical mouse design was patented by stephen b . jackson at xerox in 1988 . stephen b . jackson , u.s . patent 4,794,384 optical translator device . the first commercially available , modern optical computer mice were the microsoft intellimouse with intellieye and intellimouse explorer , introduced in 1999 using technology developed by hewlett-packard . it worked on almost any surface , and represented a welcome improvement over mechanical mice , which would pick up dirt , track capriciously , invite rough handling , and need to be taken apart and cleaned frequently . other manufacturers soon followed microsoft 's lead using components manufactured by the hp spin-off agilent technologies , and over the next several years mechanical mice became obsolete . the technology underlying the modern optical computer mouse is known as digital image correlation , a technology pioneered by the defense industry for tracking military targets . a simple binary-image version of digital image correlation was used in the 1980 lyon optical mouse . optical mice use image sensors to image naturally occurring texture in materials such as wood , cloth , mouse pads and formica . these surfaces , when lit at a grazing angle by a light emitting diode , cast distinct shadows that resemble a hilly terrain lit at sunset . images of these surfaces are captured in continuous succession and compared with each other to determine how far the mouse has moved . to understand how optical flow is used in optical mice , imagine two photographs of the same object except slightly offset from each other . place both photographs on a light table to make them transparent , and slide one across the other until their images line up . the amount that the edges of one photograph overhang the other represents the offset between the images , and in the case of an optical computer mouse the distance it has moved . optical mice capture one thousand successive images or more per second . depending on how fast the mouse is moving , each image will be offset from the previous one by a fraction of a pixel or as many as several pixels . optical mice mathematically process these images using cross correlation to calculate how much each successive image is offset from the previous one . an optical mouse might use an image sensor having an 18 × 18 pixel array of monochromatic pixels . its sensor would normally share the same asic as that used for storing and processing the images . one refinement would be accelerating the correlation process by using information from previous motions , and another refinement would be preventing deadbands when moving slowly by adding interpolation or frame-skipping . the development of the modern optical mouse at hewlett-packard co . was supported by a succession of related projects during the 1990s at hp laboratories . in 1992 william holland was awarded us patent 5,089,712 and john ertel , william holland , kent vincent , rueiming jamp , and richard baldwin were awarded us patent 5,149,980 for measuring linear paper advance in a printer by correlating images of paper fibers . ross r . allen , david beard , mark t . smith , and barclay j . tullis were awarded us patents 5,578,813 ( 1996 ) and 5,644,139 ( 1997 ) for 2-dimensional optical navigational ( i.e . , position measurement ) principles based on detecting and correlating microscopic , inherent features of the surface over which the navigation sensor travelled , and using position measurements of each end of a linear ( document ) image sensor to reconstruct an image of the document . this is the freehand scanning concept used in the hp capshare 920 handheld scanner . by describing an optical means that explicitly overcame the limitations of wheels , balls , and rollers used in contemporary computer mice , the optical mouse was anticipated . these patents formed the basis for us patent 5,729,008 ( 1998 ) awarded to travis n . blalock , richard a . baumgartner , thomas hornak , mark t . smith , and barclay j . tullis , where surface feature image sensing , image processing , and image correlation was realized by an integrated circuit to produce a position measurement . improved precision of 2d optical navigation , needed for application of optical navigation to precise 2d measurement of media ( paper ) advance in hp designjet large format printers , was further refined in us patent 6,195,475 awarded in 2001 to raymond g . beausoleil , jr . , and ross r . allen . while the reconstruction of the image in the document scanning application ( allen et al . ) required resolution by the optical navigators on the order of 1/600th of an inch , implementation of optical position measurement in computer mice not only benefit from the cost reductions inherent in navigating at lower resolution , but also enjoy the advantage of visual feedback to the user of the cursor position on the computer display . in 2002 , gary gordon , derek knee , rajeev badyal and jason hartlove were awarded us patent 6,433,780 for an optical computer mouse that measured position using image correlation . some small trackpads work like an optical mouse . light source . led mice . optical mice often used light-emitting diodes ( leds ) for illumination when first popularized . the color of the optical mouse 's leds can vary , but red is most common , as red diodes are inexpensive and silicon photodetectors are very sensitive to red light . ir leds are also widely used . other colors are sometimes used , such as the blue led of the v-mouse vm-101 illustrated at right . laser mice . the laser mouse uses an infrared laser diode instead of an led to illuminate the surface beneath their sensor . as early as 1998 , sun microsystems provided a laser mouse with their sun sparcstation servers and workstations . computer engineering tips – mouse . retrieved 31 december 2006 . however , laser mice did not enter the mainstream consumer market until 2004 , following the development by a team at agilent laboratories , palo alto , led by doug baney of a laser-based mouse based on a 850 & nbsp ; nm vcsel ( laser ) that offered 20x improvement in tracking performance . tong xie , marshall t . depue , and douglas m . baney were awarded us patents 7,116,427 and 7,321,359 for their work on low power consumption broad navigability vcsel-based consumer mice . paul machin at logitech , in partnership with agilent technologies introduced the new technology as the mx 1000 laser mouse . this mouse uses a small infrared laser ( vcsel ) instead of an led and has significantly increased the resolution of the image taken by the mouse . the laser illumination enables superior surface tracking compared to led-illuminated optical mice . glass laser ( or glaser ) mice have the same capability of a laser mouse but work far better on mirror or transparent glass surfaces than other optical mice on those surfaces . comparison of optical , laser , and glass laser mouse . glass laser mouse by a4tech . in 2008 , avago technologies introduced laser navigation sensors whose emitter was integrated into the ic using vcsel technology . in august 2009 , logitech introduced mice with two lasers , to track on glass and glossy surfaces better ; they dubbed them a '' darkfield '' laser sensor . . power . manufacturers often engineer their optical mice—especially battery-powered wireless models—to save power when possible . to do this , the mouse dims or blinks the laser or led when in standby mode ( each mouse has a different standby time ) . a typical implementation ( by logitech ) has four power states , where the sensor is pulsed at different rates per second : 11500 : full on , for accurate response while moving , illumination appears bright . 1100 : fallback active condition while not moving , illumination appears dull . 110 : standby 12 : sleep state movement can be detected in any of these states ; some mice turn the sensor fully off in the sleep state , requiring a button click to wake . certain models of targus mice work this way . optical mice utilizing infrared elements ( leds or lasers ) offer substantial increases in battery life over visible spectrum illumination . some mice , such as the logitech v450 848 & nbsp ; nm laser mouse , are capable of functioning on two aa batteries for a full year , due to the low power requirements of the infrared laser . mice designed for use where low latency and high responsiveness are important , such as in playing video games , may omit power-saving features and require a wired connection to improve performance . examples of mice which sacrifice power-saving in favor of performance are the logitech g5 and the razer copperhead . optical versus mechanical mice . unlike mechanical mice , whose tracking mechanisms can become clogged with lint , optical mice have no moving parts ( besides buttons and scroll wheels ) ; therefore , they do not require maintenance other than removing debris that might collect under the light emitter . however , they generally can not track on glossy and transparent surfaces , including some mouse-pads , causing the cursor to drift unpredictably during operation . mice with less image-processing power also have problems tracking fast movement , whereas some high-quality mice can track faster than 2 m/s . some models of laser mouse can track on glossy and transparent surfaces , and have a much higher sensitivity . mechanical mice had lower average power requirements than their optical counterparts ; the power used by mice is relatively small , and only an important consideration when the power is derived from batteries , with their limited capacity . optical models outperform mechanical mice on uneven , slick , soft , sticky , or loose surfaces , and generally in mobile situations lacking mouse pads . because optical mice render movement based on an image which the led ( or infrared diode ) lighting , use with multicolored mouse pads may result in unreliable performance ; however , laser mice do not suffer these problems and will track on such surfaces .