Sam Walton

early life . samuel moore walton was born to thomas gibson walton and nancy lee , in kingfisher , oklahoma . he lived there with his parents on their farm until 1923 . however , farming did not provide enough money to raise a family , and thomas walton went into farm mortgaging . he worked for his brother 's walton mortgage company , which was an agent for metropolitan life insurance , where he foreclosed on farms during the great depression . he and his family ( now with another son , james , born in 1921 ) moved from oklahoma . they moved from one small town to another for several years , mostly in missouri . while attending eighth grade in shelbina , missouri , sam became the youngest eagle scout in the state 's history . in adult life , walton became a recipient of the distinguished eagle scout award from the boy scouts of america . eventually the family moved to columbia , missouri . growing up during the great depression , he did chores to help make financial ends meet for his family as was common at the time . he milked the family cow , bottled the surplus , and drove it to customers . afterwards , he would deliver columbia daily tribune newspapers on a paper route . in addition , he sold magazine subscriptions . upon graduating from david h . hickman high school in columbia , he was voted '' most versatile boy '' . after high school , walton decided to attend college , hoping to find a better way to help support his family . he attended the university of missouri as an rotc cadet . during this time , he worked various odd jobs , including waiting tables in exchange for meals . also during his time in college , walton joined the zeta phi chapter of beta theta pi fraternity . he was also tapped by qebh , the well-known secret society on campus honoring the top senior men , and the national military honor society scabbard and blade . additionally , walton served as president of burall bible class , a large class of students from the university of missouri and stephens college . upon graduating in 1940 with a bachelor 's degree in economics , he was voted '' permanent president '' of the class . furthermore , he elaborated that he learned from a very early age that it was important for them as kids to help provide for the home , to be givers rather than takers . walton realized while serving in the army , that he wanted to go into retailing and to go into business for himself . walton joined j . c . penney as a management trainee in des moines , iowa , three days after graduating from college . this position paid him 75 a month . walton spent approximately 18 months with j . c . penney . he resigned in 1942 in anticipation of being inducted into the military for service in world war ii . in the meantime , he worked at a dupont munitions plant near tulsa , oklahoma . soon afterwards , walton joined the military in the u.s . army intelligence corps , supervising security at aircraft plants and prisoner-of-war camp . in this position he served at fort douglas in salt lake city , utah . he eventually reached the rank of captain . the first stores . in 1945 , after leaving the military , walton took over management of his first variety store at the age of 26 . with the help of a 20,000 loan from his father-in-law , plus 5,000 he had saved from his time in the army , walton purchased a ben franklin variety store in newport , arkansas . the store was a franchise of the butler brothers chain . walton pioneered many concepts that became crucial to his success . according to walton , if he offered prices as good or better than stores in cities that were four hours away by car , people would shop at home . walton made sure the shelves were consistently stocked with a wide range of goods . his second store , the tiny '' eagle '' department store , was down the street from his first ben franklin and next door to its main competitor in newport . with the sales volume growing from 80,000 to 225,000 in three years , walton drew the attention of the landlord , p . k . holmes , whose family had a history in retail . admiring sam 's great success , and desiring to reclaim the store ( and franchise rights ) for his son , he refused to renew the lease . the lack of a renewal option , together with the prohibitively high rent of 5 % of sales , were early business lessons to walton . despite forcing walton out , holmes bought the store 's inventory and fixtures for 50,000 , which walton called '' a fair price '' . walton & huey , made in america : my story , p . 30 . with a year left on the lease , but the store effectively sold , he , his wife helen and his father-in-law managed to negotiate the purchase of a new location on the downtown square of bentonville , arkansas . walton negotiated the purchase of a small discount store , and the title to the building , on the condition that he get a 99-year lease to expand into the shop next door . the owner of the shop next door refused six times , and walton gave up on bentonville when his father-in-law , without sam 's knowledge , paid the shop owner a final visit and 20,000 to secure the lease . he had just enough left from the sale of the first store to close the deal , and reimburse helen 's father . they opened for business with a one-day remodeling sale on may 9 , 1950 . before he bought the bentonville store , it was doing 72,000 in sales and it increased to 105,000 in the first year and then 140,000 and 175,000 . . a chain of ben franklin stores . with the new bentonville '' five and dime '' opening for business , and 220 miles away , a year left on the lease in newport , the money-strapped young walton had to learn to delegate responsibility . after succeeding with two stores at such a distance ( and with the postwar baby boom in full effect ) , sam became enthusiastic about scouting more locations and opening more ben franklin ( company ) . ( also , having spent countless hours behind the wheel , and with his close brother james '' bud '' walton having been a pilot in the war , he decided to buy a small second-hand airplane . both he and his son john would later become accomplished pilots and log thousands of hours scouting locations and expanding the family business . ) in 1954 , he opened a store with his brother bud in a shopping center in ruskin heights , a suburb of kansas city , missouri . with the help of his brother and father-in-law , sam went on to open many new variety stores . he encouraged his managers to invest and take an equity stake in the business , often as much as 1000 in their store , or the next outlet to open . ( this motivated the managers to sharpen their managerial skills and take ownership over their role in the enterprise . ) by 1962 , along with his brother bud , he owned 16 stores in arkansas , missouri , and kansas ( fifteen ben franklin 's and one independent , in fayetteville ) . sam walton is regarded as one of the greatest project entrepreneurs in the retail chain industry . he had a great passion for learning . he frequently made unannounced visits to walmarts around the country to learn what local innovations were working that then could be shared with other walmarts . on one of those visits he was puzzled by a greeter saying “ hello ” at the entrance of the store and asked the fellow what he was doing . the greeter explained that his main job was to discourage shoplifters from taking unpaid merchandise out of the store through the entrance . walton was delighted and shared the innovation with “ associates ” throughout his chain . . first walmart . the first true walmart opened on july 2 , 1962 , in rogers , arkansas . called the wal-mart discount city store , it was located at 719 west walnut street . he launched a determined effort to market american-made products . included in the effort was a willingness to find american manufacturers who could supply merchandise for the entire walmart chain at a price low enough to meet the foreign competition . as the meijer store chain grew , it caught the attention of walton . he came to acknowledge that his one-stop-shopping center format was based on meijer ’ s original innovative concept . contrary to the prevailing practice of american discount store chains , walton located stores in smaller towns , not larger cities . to be near consumers , the only option at the time was to open outlets in small towns . walton 's model offered two advantages . first , existing competition was limited and secondly , if a store was large enough to control business in a town and its surrounding areas , other merchants would be discouraged from entering the market . to make his model work , he emphasized logistics , particularly locating stores within a day 's drive of walmart 's regional warehouses , and distributed through its own trucking service . buying in volume and efficient delivery permitted sale of discounted name brand merchandise . thus , sustained growth from 1977 's 190 stores to 1985 's 800 was achieved . given its scale and economic influence , walmart is noted to significantly impact any region in which it establishes a store . these impacts , both positive and negative , have been dubbed the '' walmart effect '' . . personal life . walton married helen walton on february 14 , 1943 . they had four children : samuel robson ( rob ) born in 1944 , john thomas ( 1946–2005 ) , james carr ( jim ) born in 1948 , and alice louise born in 1949 . walton supported various charitable causes . he and helen were active in 1st presbyterian church in bentonville ; sam served as an elder and a sunday school teacher , teaching high school age students . the family made substantial contributions to the congregation . death . walton died on sunday , april 5 , 1992 ( three months shy of walmart 's thirtieth anniversary ) , of multiple myeloma , a type of blood cancer , in little rock , arkansas . the news of his death was relayed by satellite to all 1,960 walmart stores . at the time , his company employed 380,000 people . annual sales of nearly 50 & nbsp ; billion flowed from 1,735 walmarts , 212 sam ’ s clubs , and 13 supercenters . his remains are interred at the bentonville cemetery . he left his ownership in walmart to his wife and their children : rob walton succeeded his father as the chairman of walmart , and john walton was a director until his death in a 2005 plane crash . the others are not directly involved in the company ( except through their voting power as shareholders ) , however his son jim walton is chairman of arvest bank . the walton family held five spots in the top ten richest people in the united states until 2005 . two daughters of sam 's brother bud walton & mdash ; ann kroenke and nancy laurie & mdash ; hold smaller shares in the company . . legacy . in 1998 , walton was included in times time 100 : the most important people of the century . at wayback machine walton was honored for his work in retail in march 1992 , just one month before his death , when he received the presidential medal of freedom from then-president george h . w . bush . forbes ranked sam walton as the richest person in the united states from 1982–88 , ceding the top spot to john kluge in 1989 when the editors began to credit walton 's fortune jointly to him and his four children . ( bill gates first headed the list in 1992 , the year walton died ) . wal-mart stores , inc . also runs sam 's club warehouse stores . walmart operates in the united states and in more than fifteen international markets , including : argentina , brazil , canada , chile , china , costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , india , south africa , botswana , ghana , malawi , mozambique , namibia , tanzania , uganda , zambia , kenya , lesotho , swaziland , honduras , japan , mexico , nicaragua and the united kingdom . international operations data sheet walmart corporation , july 2009 . at the university of arkansas , the business college ( sam m . walton college of business ) is named in his honor . walton was inducted into the junior achievement u.s . business hall of fame in 1992 . . see also . walton family list of wealthiest historical figures list of richest americans in history . references . sources . . further reading . fishman , c . ( 2006 ) . the wal-mart effect : how the world 's most powerful company really works -- and howit 's transforming the american economy . penguin . marquard , w . h . ( 2007 ) . wal-smart : what it really takes to profit in a wal-mart world . mcgraw hill professional . sam walton , bibliography . external links . at wayback machine week sam walton : the king of the discounters august 8 , 2004 sam m . walton college of business , university of arkansas voices of oklahoma interview , chapters 12-16 , with frank robson . first person interview conducted on november 2 , 2009 , with frank robson , brother-in-law of sam walton .