Isaac Butt

early life . butt was born in 1813 in glenfin , a district bordering the finn valley in county donegal in ulster , the northern province in ireland . glenfin is a short distance west of ballybofey , a town in east donegal . he was born into an ulster protestant family , being the son of a church of ireland rector , and was descended from the o'donnells of tyrconnell , through the ramsays . butt received his secondary school education at the royal school in raphoe in the laggan district of east donegal , and at midleton college in county cork , before going to trinity college , dublin ( tcd ) , at the age of fifteen , where he was elected a scholar , and president of the ( extern ) college historical society . whilst there he co-founded the dublin university magazine and edited it for four years . for much of his life he was a member of the irish conservative party , and he founded the conservative ulster times newspaper . he became whately professor of political economy at trinity in 1836 and held that position until 1841 . . legal career . after being called to the bar in 1838 , butt quickly established a name for himself as a brilliant barrister . he was known for his opposition to the irish nationalism leader daniel o'connell 's campaign for the repeal of the act of union . he also lectured at trinity college , dublin , in political economy . his experiences during the great famine led him to move from being an irish unionist and an orangeman to supporting a federal political system for the united kingdom of great britain and ireland that would give ireland a greater degree of self-rule . this led to his involvement in irish nationalist politics and the foundation of the home rule league . butt was instrumental in fostering links between constitutional and revolutionary nationalism through his representation of members of the fenians society in court . political career . he began his career as a tory politician on dublin corporation . he was member of parliament for youghal from 1852 to 1865 , and for limerick from 1871 to 1879 ( at the 1852 general election he had also been elected for the english constituency of harwich , but chose to sit for youghal ) . the failed fenian rising in 1867 strengthened butt 's belief that a federal system was the only way to break the dreary cycle of inefficient administration punctuated by incompetent uprisings . having defended the leaders of the fenian revolt , butt then from june 1869 became president of the amnesty association formed to secure the release of imprisoned fenians , supported actively amongst others by p . f . johnson . in 1870 butt then founded the home government association . this was in no sense a revolutionary organisation . it was designed to mobilise public opinion behind the demand for an irish parliament , with , as he put it , '' full control over our domestic affairs . '' he believed that home rule would promote friendship between ireland and her neighbour to the east . in november 1873 butt replaced the association with a new body , the home rule league , which he regarded as a pressure-group , rather than a political party . in the general election the following year , 60 of its members were elected , forming then in 1874 the irish parliamentary party . however , most of those elected were men of property who were closer to the liberal cause . in the meantime charles stewart parnell had joined the league , with more radical ideas than most of the incumbent home rulers , and was elected to parliament in a by-election in county meath in 1875 . butt had failed to win substantial concessions at westminster on the things that mattered to most irish people : an amnesty for the fenians of 1867 , fixity of tenure for tenant-farmers and home rule . although they worked to get home rulers elected , many fenians along with tenant farmers were dissatisfied with butt 's gentlemanly approach to have bills enacted , although they did not openly attack him , as his defence of the fenian prisoners in 1867 still stood in his favour . however , soon a belfast home ruler , joseph gillis biggar ( then a senior member of the irb ) , began making extensive use of the ungentlemanly tactic of '' obstructionism '' to prevent bills being passed by the house . declined influence . when parnell entered parliament he took his cue from john o'connor power and joseph biggar and allied himself with those irish members who would support him in his obstructionist campaign . mps at that time could stand up and talk for as long as they wished on any subject . this caused havoc in parliament . in one case they talked for 45 hours non-stop , stopping any important bills from being passed . butt , ageing , and in failing health , could not keep up with this tactic and considered it counter-productive . in july 1877 butt threatened to resign from the party if obstruction continued , and a gulf developed between himself and parnell , who was growing steadily in the estimation of both the fenians and the home rulers . the climax came in december 1878 , when parliament was recalled to discuss the war in afghanistan . butt considered this discussion too important to the british empire to be interrupted by obstructionism and publicly warned the irish members to refrain from this tactic . he was fiercely denounced by the young nationalist john dillon , who continued his attacks with considerable support from other home rulers at a meeting of the home rule league in february 1879 . although he defended himself with dignity , butt , and all and sundry , knew that his role in the party was at an end . barry o'brien , in his biography of parnell , interviews ' x ' who relates : 'it was very painful . i was very fond of butt . he was himself the kindest-hearted man in the world , and here was i going to do the unkindest thing to him . ' butt , who had been suffering from bronchitis , had a stroke the following may and died within a week . he was replaced by william shaw , who in turn was replaced by charles stewart parnell in 1880 . personal life . butt amassed debts and pursued romances . it was said that at meetings he was occasionally heckled by women with whom he had fathered children . he was also involved in a financial scandal when it was revealed that he had taken money from several indian princes to represent their interests in parliament . he died on 5 may 1879 in clonskeagh in dublin . his remains were brought by train , via strabane , to stranorlar in the east of county donegal , where he is buried in a corner of the church of ireland cemetery beneath a tree by which he used to sit and dream as a boy . despite his chaotic lifestyle and political limitations , butt was capable of inspiring deep personal loyalty . some of his friends , such as john butler yeats ( father of the poet w . b . yeats ) and the future catholic bishop of limerick , edward thomas o'dwyer , retained a lasting hostility towards parnell for his role in butt 's downfall . in may 2010 the church of ireland ( anglican ) parishes of stranorlar , meenglass and kilteevogue instigated an annual memorial service and lecture in butt 's honour , inviting members of the professions of law , politics and journalism to reflect aspects of his life . speakers have included dr . joe mulholland , senator david norris , dr . chris mcgimpsey and prof . brian walker . his grave has been restored and the memorial now includes a wreath . in literature . the novel hogan mp by may laffan hartley features a hostile portrait of butt as '' mr . rebutter '' . the eponymous protagonist , john o'rooney hogan , shares some traits and background of john o'connor power . butt briefly appears in harry harrison 's alternate history novels stars and stripes trilogy . references . further reading . > hall , wayne e . '' the 'dublin university magazine ' and isaac butt , 1834-1838 . '' victorian periodicals review 20.2 ( 1987 ) : 43-56 . online mccaffrey , lawrence j . '' isaac butt and the home rule movement : a study in conservative nationalism . '' review of politics 22.1 ( 1960 ) : 72-95 . online moss , laurence s . '' isaac butt and the early development of the marginal utility theory of imputation . '' american journal of economics and sociology 69.1 ( 2010 ) : 210-231 . online o ’ day , alan . '' isaac butt and neglected political economists . '' in english , irish and subversives among the dismal scientists ( 2010 ) : 375+ . reid , colin w . '' ‘ an experiment in constructive unionism ’ : isaac butt , home rule and federalist political thought during the 1870s . '' english historical review 129.537 ( 2014 ) : 332-361 . online spence , joseph . '' isaac butt , irish nationality and the conditional defence of the union , 1833–70 . '' in d . george boyce ed . defenders of the union : a survey of british and irish unionism since 1801 ( routledge , 2002 ) pp . 73-97 . , part one pp . & nbsp ; 39–40 , 43–46 , part two , 'parliamentary manoeuvres , ' pp . & nbsp ; 43–46 . thornley , david . isaac butt and home rule ( macgibbon & kee , 1964 ) . white , terence de vere , the road of excess , dublin , 1946 . primary sources . butt , isaac . irish federalism : its meaning , its objects , and its hopes ( 1870 ) a primary source ; online butt , isaac . the irish people and the irish land : a letter to lord lifford , with comments on the publications of lord dufferin and lord rosse ( j . falconer , 1867 ) online . butt , isaac . land tenure in ireland : a plea for the celtic race ( j . falconer , 1866 ) online . butt , isaac . protection to home industry : some cases of its advantages considered : the substance of two lectures delivered before the university of dublin , in michaelmas term , 1840 : to which is added an appendix , containing dissertations on some points connected with the subject ( hodges and smith , 1846 ) online butt , isaac . home government for ireland : irish federalism ! its meaning , its objects , and its hopes ( irish home rule league , 1874 ) online . external links . butt 's speech on the union in 1874