NBC News

history . caravan era . the first regularly scheduled american television newscast in history was made by nbc news on february 21 , 1940 , anchored by lowell thomas ( 1892-1981 ) , and airing weeknights at 6:45 & nbsp ; p.m . it was simply lowell thomas in front of a television camera while doing his nbc network radio broadcast , the television simulcast seen only in new york . in june 1940 , nbc , through its flagship station in new york city , w2xbs ( renamed commercial wnbt in 1941 , now wnbc ) operating on channel one , televised 30¼ hours of coverage of the republican national convention live and direct from philadelphia . the station used a series of relays from philadelphia to new york and on to upper new york state , for rebroadcast on w2xb in schenectady ( now wrgb ) , making this among the first '' network '' programs of nbc television . due to wartime and technical restrictions , there were no live telecasts of the 1944 conventions , although films of the events were reportedly shown over wnbt the next day . about this time , there were irregularly scheduled , quasi-network newscasts originating from nbc 's wnbt in new york city , ( wnbc ) , and reportedly fed to wptz ( now kyw-tv ) in philadelphia and wrgb in schenectady , ny . such as , esso sponsored news features a well as the war as it happens in the final days of world war ii , another irregularly scheduled nbc television newsreel program which was also seen in new york , philadelphia and schenectady on the relatively few ( roughly 5000 ) television sets which existed at the time . after the war , nbc television newsreel aired filmed news highlights with narration . later in 1948 , when sponsored by camel cigarettes , nbc television newsreel was renamed camel newsreel theatre and then , when john cameron swayze was added as an on-camera anchor in 1949 , the program was renamed camel news caravan . in 1948 , nbc teamed up with life magazine to provide election night coverage of president harry s . truman 's surprising victory over new york governor thomas e . dewey . the television audience was small , but nbc 's share in new york was double that of any other outlet . '' new york city hooper ratings for election night 1948 '' tvobscurities.com . the following year , the camel news caravan , anchored by john cameron swayze , debuted on nbc . lacking the graphics and technology of later years , it nonetheless contained many of the elements of modern newscasts . nbc hired its own film crews and in the program 's early years , it dominated cbs 's competing program , which did not hire its own film crews until 1953 . ( by contrast , cbs spent lavishly on edward r . murrow 's weekly series , see it now ) . in 1950 , david brinkley began serving as the program 's washington correspondent , but attracted little attention outside the network until paired with chet huntley in 1956 . in 1955 , the camel news caravan fell behind cbs 's cbs evening news , and swayze lost the already tepid support of nbc executives . the following year , nbc replaced the program with the huntley-brinkley report . beginning in 1951 , nbc news was managed by director of news bill mcandrew , who reported to vice president of news and public affairs j . davidson taylor . . huntley-brinkley era . television assumed an increasingly prominent role in american family life in the late 1950s , and nbc news was called television 's '' champion of news coverage . '' nbc president robert kintner provided the news division with ample amounts of both financial resources and air time . in 1956 , the network paired anchors chet huntley and david brinkley and the two became celebrities , supported by reporters including john chancellor , frank mcgee , edwin newman , sander vanocur , nancy dickerson , tom pettit , and ray scherer . created by producer reuven frank , nbc 's the huntley–brinkley report had its debut on october 29 , 1956 . during much of its 14-year run , it exceeded the viewership levels of its cbs news competition , anchored initially by douglas edwards and , beginning in april 1962 , by walter cronkite . nbc 's vice president of news and public affairs , j . davidson taylor , was a southerner who , with producer reuven frank , was determined that nbc would lead television 's coverage of the civil rights movement . in 1955 , nbc provided national coverage of martin luther king jr . 's leadership of the montgomery bus boycott in montgomery , alabama , airing reports from frank mcgee , then news director of nbc 's montgomery affiliate wsfa , who would later join the network . a year later , john chancellor 's coverage of the little rock nine to central high school in little rock , arkansas was the first occasion when the key news story came from television rather than print and prompted a prominent u.s . senator to observe later , '' when i think of little rock , i think of john chancellor . '' other reporters who covered the movement for the network included sander vanocur , herbert kaplow , charles quinn , and richard valeriani , who was hit with an ax handle at a demonstration in marion , alabama in 1965 . while walter cronkite 's enthusiasm for the space race eventually won the anchorman viewers for cbs and nbc news , with the work of correspondents such as frank mcgee , roy neal , jay barbree , and peter hackes , also provided ample coverage of american manned space missions in the project mercury , project gemini , and project apollo programs . in an era when space missions rated continuous coverage , nbc configured its largest studio , studio 8h , for space coverage . it utilized models and mockups of rockets and spacecraft , maps of the earth and moon to show orbital trackage , and stages on which animated figures created by puppeteer bil baird were used to depict movements of astronauts before on-board spacecraft television cameras were feasible . ( studio 8h had been home to the nbc symphony orchestra and is now the home of saturday night live . ) nbc 's coverage of the first moon landing in 1969 earned the network an emmy award . in the late 1950s , kintner reorganized the chain of command at the network , making bill mcandrew president of nbc news , reporting directly to kintner . mcandrew served in that position until his death in 1968 . mcandrew was succeeded by his executive vice president , producer reuven frank , who held the position until 1973 . on november 22 , 1963 , nbc interrupted various programs on its affiliate stations at 1:45 & nbsp ; p.m . to announce that assassination of john f . kennedy in dallas , texas . eight minutes later , at 1:53:12 & nbsp ; p.m . , nbc broke into programming with a network bumper slide and chet huntley , bill ryan and frank mcgee informing the viewers what was going on as it happened ; but since a camera was not in service , the reports were audio-only . however , nbc did not begin broadcasting over the air until 1:57 & nbsp ; p.m . et . about 40 minutes later , after word came that jfk was pronounced dead , nbc suspended regular programming and carried 71 hours of uninterrupted news coverage of the assassination and the funeral of the president—including the only live broadcast of the fatal shooting of kennedy 's assassin , lee harvey oswald , by jack ruby as oswald was being led in handcuffs by law-enforcement officials through the basement of dallas police headquarters . . nbc nightly news era . nbc 's ratings lead began to slip toward the end of the 1960s and fell sharply when chet huntley retired in 1970 ( huntley died of cancer in 1974 ) . the loss of huntley , along with a reluctance by rca to fund nbc news at a similar level as cbs was funding its news division , left nbc news in the doldrums . nbc 's primary news show gained its present title , nbc nightly news , on august 3 , 1970 . the network tried a platoon of anchors ( brinkley , mcgee , and john chancellor ) during the early months of nightly news . despite the efforts of the network 's eventual lead anchor , the articulate , even-toned chancellor , and an occasional first-place finish in the nielsens , nightly news in the 1970s was primarily a strong second . by the end of the decade , nbc had to contend not only with a powerful cbs but also a surging abc , led by roone arledge . tom brokaw became sole anchor in 1983 , after co-anchoring with roger mudd for a year , and began leading nbc 's efforts . in 1986 and 1987 , nbc won the top spot in the nielsens for the first time in years , only to fall back when nielsen 's ratings methodology changed . in late 1996 , nightly news again moved into first place , a spot it has held onto in most of the succeeding years . brian williams assumed primary anchor duties when brokaw retired in december 2004 . in february 2015 , nbc suspended williams for six months for telling an inaccurate story about his experience in the 2003 invasion of iraq . he was replaced by lester holt on an interim basis . on june 18 , 2015 , it was announced that holt would become the permanent anchor and williams would be moved to msnbc as an anchor of breaking news and special reports beginning in august . in 1993 , dateline nbc broadcast an investigative report about the safety of general motors ( gm ) trucks . gm discovered the '' actual footage '' utilized in the broadcast had been rigged by the inclusion of explosive incendiaries attached to the gas tanks and the use of improper sealants for those tanks . gm subsequently filed an anti-defamation lawsuit against nbc , which publicly admitted the results of the tests were rigged and settled the lawsuit with gm on the very same day . on october 22 , 2007 , nightly news moved into its new high definition studios , at studio 3c at nbc studios in 30 rockefeller plaza in new york city . the network 's 24-hour cable network , msnbc , joined the network in new york on that day as well . the new studios/headquarters for nbc news and msnbc are now located in one area . 2007–2016 . during the financial crisis of 2007–2010 , nbc news was urged to save 500 million by nbc universal . on that occasion , nbc news laid off several of its in-house reporters such as kevin corke , jeannie ohm and don teague . this was the largest layoff in nbc news history . after the sudden death of the influential moderator tim russert of meet the press in june 2008 , tom brokaw took over as an interim host ; and on december 14 , 2008 , david gregory became the new moderator of the show until august 14 , 2014 , when nbc announced that nbc news political director chuck todd would take over as the 12th moderator of meet the press starting september 7 , 2014 . david gregory 's last broadcast was august 10 , 2014 . by 2009 , nbc had established leadership in network news , airing the highest-rated morning , evening , and sunday interview news programs . its ability to share costs with msnbc and share in the cable network 's advertising and subscriber revenue made it far more profitable than its network rivals . on march 27 , 2012 , nbc news broadcast an edited segment from a 911 call placed by george zimmerman before he shot trayvon martin . the editing made it appear that zimmerman volunteered that martin was black , rather than merely responding to the dispatcher 's inquiry , which would support a view that the shooting was racially motivated . a media watchdog organization accused nbc news of engaging in '' an all-out falsehood . '' while nbc news initially declined to comment , the news agency did issue an apology to viewers . the washington post called the statement '' skimpy on the details on just how the mistake unfolded . '' on december 13 , 2012 , nbc news reporter richard engel and his five crew members , aziz akyavaş , ghazi balkiz , john kooistra , ian rivers and ammar cheikh omar , were kidnapped in syria . having escaped after five days in captivity , engel said he believed that a shabiha group loyal to al-assad was behind the abduction , and that the crew was freed by the ahrar al-sham group five days later . engel 's account was however challenged from early on . in april 2015 , nbc had to revise the kidnapping account , following further investigations by the new york times , which suggested that the nbc team '' was almost certainly taken by a sunni criminal element affiliated with the free syrian army , '' rather than by a loyalist shia group . in 2013 john lapinski was director of elections , replacing sheldon gawiser . in 2015 the election team 's decision desk group was given its first permanent space at 30 rockefeller , replacing the news sales archives that had occupied the space previously . the nbc news division was the first news team to possess the donald trump access hollywood tape , after a producer of the nbc show had made the news division aware of it ; the news division internally debated publishing it for three days , and then an unidentified source gave a copy of the tape to the washington post reporter david fahrenthold , who contacted nbc for comment , notified the trump campaign that he had the video , obtained confirmation of its authenticity , and released a story and the tape itself , scooping nbc . alerted that the post might release the story immediately , nbc news released its own story shortly after the post story was published . . sexual misconduct and nbc news . on november 29 , 2017 , nbc news announced that matt lauer 's employment had been terminated after an unidentified female nbc employee reported that lauer had sexually harassed her during the 2014 winter olympics in sochi , russia , and that the harassment continued after they returned to new york . nbc news management said it had been aware that the new york times and variety had been conducting independent investigations of lauer 's behavior , but that management had been unaware of previous allegations against lauer . linda vester , a former nbc news correspondent , disputed the claims that management knew nothing , saying that '' everybody knew '' that lauer was dangerous . according to ronan farrow , multiple sources have stated that nbc news was not only aware of lauer 's misconduct beforehand , but that harvey weinstein used this knowledge to pressure them into killing a story that would have outed his own sexual misconduct . variety reported allegations by at least ten of lauer 's current and former colleagues . additional accusations went public in the ensuing days . nbc news president noah oppenheim suggested an investigation into alleged sexual misconduct by harvey weinstein after nbc contributor ronan farrow pitched a general idea to report on sexual harassment in hollywood . after a 10-month investigation by farrow and nbc producer rich mchugh , nbc chose not to publish it . the story , with very few changes , was published a few weeks later in the new yorker magazine instead . a story on the subject of weinstein 's alleged behavior also appeared several days earlier in the new york times . following criticism for missing a major story it had initiated , nbc news defended the decision , saying that at the time farrow was at nbc , the early reporting still had important missing necessary elements . farrow later disputed this characterization , saying that he had multiple named accusers willing to come forward and that the version ultimately published in the new yorker had very few changes from the version that nbc news rejected . this version went on to win the pulitzer prize for public service in april 2018 . a former nbc news executive has said that the story on weinstein was killed because nbc news was aware of the sexual misconduct by lauer ; in catch and kill : lies , spies , and a conspiracy to protect predators , ronan farrow cites two sources within american media , inc stating that the story was killed in response to an overt threat from weinstein to out lauer . . presidents . eleven people have served as president of nbc news during its history : reuven frank ( 1968–73 , 1981–85 ) , richard wald ( 1973–77 ) , lester crystal ( 1977–79 ) , william j . small ( 1979–81 ) , lawrence grossman ( 1985–88 ) , michael gartner ( 1988–93 ) , andrew lack ( 1993–2001 ) , neal shapiro ( 2001–05 ) , and steve capus ( 2005–march 5 , 2013 ) . in august 2013 , deborah turness assumed the role as president of nbc news , becoming the first woman to head the division . new nbc news president deborah turness : 'my first job is to listen ' , tvnewser , august 5 , 2013 . in february 2017 , today show producer and executive noah oppenheim was named president of nbc news . . programming . meet the press ( 1947–present ) today ( 1952–present ) today 3rd hour ( 2018–present ) nbc nightly news ( 1970–present ) weekend today ( 1987–present ) dateline nbc ( 1992–present ) early today ( 1999–present ) today with hoda & jenna ( 2019–present ) weekend today ( 2016–present ) . former programming . weekend ( 1974–79 ) ask nbc news ( 197 ? -1983 ) nbc news overnight ( 1982–83 ) nbc news at sunrise ( 1983–99 ) real life with jane pauley ( 1990–91 ) expose with tom brokaw ( 1991 ) nbc nightside ( 1991–98 ) now with tom brokaw and katie couric ( 1993–94 ) nbc news at this hour ( 1975 –1990s ; previously branded as nbc news update , nbc news capsule and nbc news digest ) later today ( 1999–2000 ) today with kathie lee and hoda ( 2008–2019 ) rock center with brian williams ( 2011–13 ) today 's take ( 2012–2017 ) sunday night with megyn kelly ( june 4–july 30 , 2017 ) megyn kelly today ( 2017–2018 ) . syndicated productions . the chris matthews show ( 2002–13 ) . other productions . nbc news provides content for the internet , as well as cable-only news networks cnbc and msnbc . it produces a daily ( formerly twice-daily show ) called stay tuned for snapchat 's discover platform . it also produced programming for quibi callled the report . the stay tuned team launched the overview on peacock in 2021 . nbc news international . in november 2016 , nbc news group chairman andy lack announced nbcuniversal intended to purchase a 25 % stake in euronews , a european news organization competing against the likes of bbc news and itv news the transaction was completed at the end of may 2017 ; deborah turness , former president of nbc news , was appointed to run '' nbc news international , '' to perform nbc 's role in the partnership , in which each network would contribute reporting to the other . in april 2020 , nbcuniversal sold its stake in euronews to focus all resources on the launch of nbc sky world news , which was scheduled to launch later in 2020 . however , the proposed new service was scrapped in august 2020 , resulting in layoffs of 60 employees . . nbc news radio . nbc news radio is an internet-only , all-news and current affairs radio station produced by iheartmedia through its ttwn networks subsidiary , in partnership with nbcu 's news division . it has been available on iheartradio , iheartmedia 's online live audio and podcast platform , on different supports ( web and mobile app ) since july 2016 . it can be heard around the clock in 15-minute cycles with the latest news , sports and other features . it uses the slogan '' the news you want , when you want it . '' iheart.com/live/nbc-news-radio while it is not owned by nbcuniversal itself , it features reports from nbc news correspondents , presented by anchors who are iheartmedia employees . it is also provided to nbc 's 24/7 news source radio station affiliates as a service , including one-minute and two-minute hourly newscasts along with other audio content , such as features on money , health , politics and sports , heard on over 1,000 radio stations . as of 2016 , wor in new york city serves as nbc news radio 's east coast flagship , while kogo in san diego serves as the network 's west coast flagship station . the current nbc news radio digital station is nbc 's first step into the all-news radio format since the closure of its ephemeral nbc news & information service ( nis ) , a former analog radio network targeted at fm stations , which lasted only from 1975 till 1977 . the original major nbc radio network would be purchased by westwood one a decade later , in 1987 , as general electric , which had acquired nbc 's parent company rca , divested most properties not pertaining to the nbc television network , thus ending its direct participation in the radio business . nbc radio network 's news operation was merged into the mutual broadcasting system , then into westwood one 's then-corporate sibling cbs radio , and eventually assimilated into the syndicator itself . for years , westwood one has carried on syndicating several nbc-branded shows to affiliate radio stations , including audio versions of current-affairs nbc tv shows such as meet the press , a practice that continues to date . as for hard news programming , westwood one used to provide an homonymous nbc news radio service , which was initially limited to a feed of one-hour reports updated from 6 a.m . to 10 p.m . et offered to subscriber local stations . dial global –which has branded itself westwood one since 2013– announced on march 5 , 2012 its aim to expand nbc news radio to a full-time 24-hour radio news network , replacing cnn radio ( that itself replaced both nbc radio and mutual in 1999 ) . the original nbc news radio service was eventually discontinued on december 14 , 2014 , coinciding with the launch of the new , white-label westwood one news service , which uses content and human resources from warnermedia 's cnn instead of those of nbc news . in addition to nbc news radio , audio-only simulcast of nbc news ' tv channels msnbc and cnbc are also officially available as internet radio stations through the tunein podcasting service as well as the siriusxm satellite radio platform . nbc news overnight and nbc nightside . in 1982 , nbc news began production on nbc news overnight with anchors linda ellerbee , lloyd dobyns , and bill schechner . it usually aired at 1:35 & nbsp ; a.m . e.t . , following the tonight show and late night with david letterman . nbc news overnight was cancelled in december 1983 , but in 1991 , nbc news launched another overnight news show called nbc nightside . during its run , the show 's anchors included sara james , bruce hall , antonio mora , tom miller , campbell brown , kim hindrew , tom donavan , and tonya strong . it was based at nbc network affiliate wcnc-tv in charlotte , north carolina . it provided an overnight news service which nbc affiliates could air until early morning programming began , in effect providing programming to help them stay on the air 24/7 . at the time , a few nbc affiliates had begun using cnn 's headline news service to provide overnight programming , and nbc decided to offer the network 's own overnight news service . cbs and abc also began their own overnight news programming , as well . in addition , the facility produced a 24-hour news service aimed to latin american viewers called '' canal de noticias , nbc . the serviced closed in 1997 and five years later , the network bought telemundo . nbc nightside lasted until 1998 and was replaced by '' nbc all night , '' composed of reruns of the tonight show with jay leno and late night with conan o'brien , and later from january 1 , 2007 to september 23 , 2011 , poker after dark . nbc now airs same day repeats of the fourth hour of today and cnbc 's mad money on weekdays , lxtv programs on early sunday mornings , and meet the press and dateline encores on early monday mornings . units . current . nbcuniversal archives nbc news studios - documentary production unit founded on january 23 , 2020 msnbc nbc news channel - is a news video and report feed service similar to a wire service , providing pre-produced international , national and regional stories some with fronting reporters customized for nbc network affiliates . it is based in charlotte , north carolina with bureaus in new york city at 30 rockefeller plaza , washington , d.c . on north capital street nw , chicago at the nbc tower , and in los angeles at the brokaw news center on the universal studios hollywood lot with satellite bureaus at wfla-tv in tampa , florida and at kusa-tv in denver , colorado . its headquarters in charlotte are connected to the studios of charlotte nbc affiliate wcnc-tv . nbc news channel also served as the production base of nbc nightside and '' canal de noticias , nbc '' . nbc news digital group nbc news now - free streaming service operating live 6 a.m.-11 p.m . eastern monday through friday and launched may 29 , 2019 under janelle rodriguez , senior vice president of editorial for nbc news and msnbc . initial operated without an anchor until they hired alison morris , formerly of fox 5 in new york , starting on july 1 , 2019 . the ott services was announced in october 2018 as nbc news signal with simone boyce original tapped as the evening ( 7 pm ) host with two msnbc as acting as hosts . . former . peacock productions . bureaus . major bureaus . new york city : nbc news headquarters ( wnbc ) 1 universal city , california ( los angeles ) : west coast bureau ( knbc ) 1 washington , d.c . : government affairs bureau ( wrc-tv ) 1 london : foreign desk . minor bureaus ( within the united states ) . atlanta ( wxia-tv ) boston ( wbts-cd ) 1 chicago ( wmaq-tv ) 1 denver ( kusa-tv ) fort worth – dallas ( kxas-tv ) 1 houston ( kprc-tv ) template : miami tv ( wtvj ) 1 template : hartford/new haven tv ( wvit ) 1 philadelphia ( wcau ) 1 san diego ( knsd ) 1 template : sf tv ( kntv ) 1 san juan , pr ( wkaq-tv ) 1 1 all nbc owned-and-operated stations are considered nbc news bureaus . foreign bureaus ( nbc news/cnbc/msnbc ) . johannesburg , south africa ( cnbc africa headquarters ) kabul , afghanistan ( nbc news ) nairobi , kenya ( cnbc africa ) abuja , nigeria ( cnbc africa ) lagos , nigeria ( cnbc africa ) cape town , south africa ( cnbc africa ) singapore ( cnbc asia headquarters ) sydney , australia ( cnbc asia pacific ) melbourne , australia ( nbc news asia pacific ) managua , nicaragua ( canal 15 nicaragua-telemundo 51 wscv ) tokyo , japan ( nikkei cnbc ) hong kong ( cnbc asia ) beijing , china ( nbc news , msnbc , and cnbc ) frankfurt , germany ( cnbc europe ) baghdad , iraq ( msnbc and cnbc asia ) beirut , lebanon ( msnbc and cnbc asia ) jerusalem , israel ( msnbc and cnbc asia ) new delhi , india ( cnbc-tv18 ) jakarta , indonesia ( cnbc indonesia ) bangkok , thailand ( jkn-cnbc ) . noted coverage . nbc news got the first american news interviews from two russian presidents ( vladimir putin , mikhail gorbachev ) , and brokaw was the only american television news correspondent to witness the fall of the berlin wall in 1989 . . notable personnel . julia ainsley – justice department and department of homeland security correspondent monica alba – white house correspondent blayne alexander – atlanta-based correspondent peter alexander – weekend today saturday co-anchor & chief white house correspondent ( 2004–present ) ron allen ( journalist ) – new york-based correspondent miguel almaguer – los angeles-based correspondent ali arouzi – tehran-based correspondent ellison barber – new york-based correspondent jeremy bash – senior national security analyst catie beck – atlanta-based correspondent geoff bennett – white house correspondent lisa bloom – legal analyst matt bradley ( journalist ) – london-based foreign correspondent shaquille brewster – correspondent sam brock – miami-based correspondent dara brown – msnbc live overnight anchor mika brzezinski – msnbc 's morning joe co-anchor mike barnicle – msnbc 's morning joe contributor leigh ann caldwell – capitol hill correspondent andrea canning – nbc news correspondent & dateline nbc correspondent ( 2012–present ) jean chatzky – today financial editor morgan chesky - correspondent kelly cobiella - london-based correspondent tom costello – aviation , transportation , economics , and cybersecurity correspondent ( 1996–present ) kristen dahlgren – correspondent carson daly – today features anchor & nbc 's the voice host josé díaz-balart – nbc nightly news saturday anchor ( 2015–present ) dylan dreyer – 3rd hour today co-anchor & weekend today and sunday today weather anchor & nbc news meteorologist rehema ellis – education correspondent ( 1994–present ) richard engel – chief foreign correspondent meagan fitzgerald – national correspondent joe fryer – correspondent and morning news now co-anchor joelle garguilo – weekend today correspondent willie geist – sunday today anchor , msnbc 's morning joe co-anchor and nbc news correspondent stephanie gosk – correspondent gabe gutierrez – new york-based correspondent savannah guthrie – today co-anchor & nbc news chief legal correspondent ( 2007–present ) garrett haake – washington d.c.-based correspondent jenna bush hager – co-host of today with hoda & jenna , nbc news correspondent sarah harman – london-based foreign correspondent chris hayes – host of all in with chris hayes on msnbc vaughn hillyard – political reporter lester holt – nbc nightly news anchor ; also primary anchor of dateline nbc ( 2011–present ) kasie hunt – capitol hill correspondent & way too early anchor with kasie hunt molly hunter ( journalist ) – london-based foreign correspondent antonia hylton – correspondent hallie jackson – senior washington correspondent & msnbc anchor chris jansing – msnbc/nbc news senior national correspondent & msnbc breaking news coverage anchor joshua johnson - nbc news correspondent & the week anchor sheinelle jones - 3rd hour today co-anchor & nbc news correspondent bill karins – early today weather anchor , msnbc weather anchor & nbc news chief meteorologist jo ling kent – los angeles-based correspondent jinah kim – business and technology correspondent steve kornacki – national political correspondent hoda kotb – today co-anchor , and co-host of today with hoda & jenna courtney kube – pentagon correspondent maria larosa – wnbc today in new york weather anchor & nbc news contributing meteorologist carol lee ( journalist ) – correspondent richard lui – msnbc live weekend updates anchor janis mackey frayer – beijing-based foreign correspondent rachel maddow – msnbc 's the rachel maddow show anchor and nbc news senior political analyst josh mankiewicz – dateline nbc correspondent cynthia mcfadden – senior legal and investigative correspondent erin mclaughlin – correspondent ari melber – chief legal correspondent and anchor of msnbc 's the beat with ari melber craig melvin – today news anchor , 3rd hour today co-anchor & msnbc live anchor mike memoli – washington d.c.-based correspondent andrea mitchell – msnbc 's andrea mitchell reports anchor & nbc news chief foreign affairs & chief washington correspondent ( 1978–present ) ayman mohyeldin – correspondent , morning joe first look co-anchor natalie morales – today west coast anchor/correspondent , dateline nbc correspondent/anchor alison morris – anchor , nbc news now keith morrison – dateline nbc correspondent dennis murphy – dateline nbc correspondent bill neely – chief global correspondent vicki nguyen – investigative and consumer correspondent kelly o'donnell – white house correspondent lawrence o'donnell – host of the last word on msnbc steve patterson – los angeles-based correspondent kathy park – new york-based correspondent carl quintanilla – cnbc 's squawk on the street and squawk alley co-anchor & nbc news correspondent milissa rehberger – msnbc now anchor morgan radford – correspondent joy reid – msnbc 's the reidout anchor frances rivera – early today co-anchor & nbc news correspondent al roker – chief nbc news meteorologist , today weather & features anchor , and 3rd hour today co-anchor stephanie ruhle – senior business correspondent , msnbc live anchor kerry sanders – miami-based correspondent joe scarborough – msnbc 's morning joe co-anchor & nbc news senior political analyst steve schmidt – nbc news senior political analyst & msnbc contributor gadi schwartz – correspondent maria shriver – special anchor & correspondent savannah sellers – anchor , nbc news now & correspondent keir simmons – senior foreign correspondent harry smith – senior correspondent kate snow – nbc nightly news sunday anchor & nbc news senior national correspondent jacob soboroff – correspondent bret stephens – senior political contributor kevin tibbles – chicago-based correspondent chuck todd – nbc news political director & meet the press moderator anne thompson – chief environmental affairs correspondent dr . john torres – senior medical correspondent katy tur – nbc news correspondent & msnbc live anchor ali velshi – correspondent , anchor of velshi meredith vieira– special correspondent ( 2006–present ) nicolle wallace – nbc news senior political analyst & deadline : white house anchor ( 2015–present ) jacob ward – technology correspondent ( 2018–present ) kristen welker – weekend today saturday co-anchor & chief white house correspondent ( 2010–present ) brian williams – msnbc breaking news anchor & anchor of the 11th hour ( news program ) ( 1993–present ) pete williams – justice correspondent ( 1993–present ) alex witt – weekends with alex witt anchor yasmin vossoughian – msnbc live weekend anchor . former staff . elie abel ( state department correspondent ) ( 1961-1970 ) + bob abernethy ( 1952-1994 ) dan abrams ( chief legal analyst ) – now at abc news martin agronsky ( foreign correspondent ) + jodi applegate ( anchor , msnbc and weekend today ) tom aspell + jim avila ( correspondent ) – now with abc news martin bashir ( later msnbc 's martin bashir anchor & dateline nbc correspondent ) robert bazell ( chief science & health correspondent ) – now an adjunct professor at yale university jim bittermann – now at cnn frank blair ( today show news anchor ) + david bloom ( correspondent and weekend today ) + mike boettcher frank bourgholtzer – first full-time nbc white house correspondent + david brinkley + tom brokaw ( anchor/correspondent ; 1966-2021 ) ( now retired ) ned brooks + campbell brown christina brown erin burnett – now at cnn billy bush – fired due to the aftermath of sexual allegations about donald trump henry champ + john chancellor ( 1956-1964 ; 1968-1993 ) + connie chung – retired chelsea clinton – left to focus on the clinton foundation ned colt ( journalist ) + kevin corke katie couric ( 1989-2006 ) jim cummins + ann curry faith daniels lisa daniels veronica de la cruz – now at kpix in san francisco nancy dickerson + lloyd dobyns phil donahue bob dotson – retired hugh downs + paul duke + rosey edeh linda ellerbee ( retired ) josh elliott bonnie erbe bob faw giselle fernández martin fletcher – foreign correspondent jack ford – now chief legal analyst at cbs news eliot frankel + michelle franzen – now at abc news dawn fratangelo stephen frazier pauline frederick + dawna friesen ( 1999-2010 ) – now anchor for canada 's global tv 's global national betty furness + joe garagiola + anne garrels + damien garcia ( news division production specialist , global mobile computing ) dave garroway + kathie lee gifford – left today to focus on producing alexis glick robert goralski + peter greenberg ( travel editor , '' today '' ) – now at cbs news david gregory bryant gumbel ( 1981-1997 ) – now host of hbo sports ' real sports tony guida – now at cbs news robert hager ( 1969-2004 ) – retired from journalism sara haines – now at abc news tamron hall – former today 's take co-host , msnbc live with tamron hall anchor & nbc news correspondent mark halperin – fired due to inappropriate sexual behavior steve handelsman – retired chris hansen nanette hansen + richard harkness + don harris + john hart jim hartz – retired james hattori john hockenberry chet huntley + gwen ifill + michael isikoff bob jamieson – retired from journalist rosalind jordan – now at al jazeera english bernard kalb marvin kalb floyd kalber + megyn kelly - sunday night with megyn kelly host and megyn kelly today host arthur kent douglas kiker + dan kloeffler michelle kosinski ( 2005-2014 ) bob kur ( 1976-2006 ) matt lauer – today co-anchor & dateline nbc contributing anchor and correspondent ( 1992–2017 ) - fired due to inappropriate sexual behavior jack lescoulie ( 1952-1967 ) + irving r . levine + george lewis – retired from journalism lilia luciano – now freelancing at cbs news jim maceda – special foreign correspondent cassie mackin + robert macneil – retired from journalist chris matthews - retired from journalist , former host of hardball with chris matthews john macvane + boyd matson frank mcgee + preston mendenhall jim miklaszewski ( 1985-2016 ) - retired from journalism keith miller bill monroe + ron mott ( 2005-2020 ) - retired roger mudd ( 1981-1986 ) – retired from journalism merrill mueller + lisa myers ( 1981-2014 ) - retired roy neal + ron nessen - later white house press secretary under gerald ford , retired from journalism jackie nespral ( now main anchor with nbc o & o operated station wtvj in miami ) edwin newman hans nichols – now at axios deborah norville – now weekday host of inside edition soledad o'brien norah o'donnell ( nbc news washington correspondent & msnbc chief washington correspondent ) – now at cbs news michael okwu – now at deutsche welle keith olbermann ( anchor , '' countdown with keith olbermann '' ) don oliver ( journalist ) + john palmer + jane pauley ( now with cbs news ) jack perkins + tom pettit + stone phillips mark potter ( journalist ) gabe pressman + charles quinn + jacob rascon – now at kprc-tv in houston jill rappaport chip reid – now at cbs news john rich + amy robach – now at abc news betty rollin brian ross ford rowan + tim russert + bill ryan + aline saarinen + charles sabine martin savidge – now at cnn jessica savitch + chuck scarborough – now at wnbc channel 4 in new york city bill schechner mike schneider – now at njtv willard scott – today contributing correspondent – retired john seigenthaler scott simon ( now with npr ) gene shalit – retired claire shipman lynn smith – now at hln lawrence e . spivak + john cameron swayze + nancy snyderman don teague patricia thompson + liz trotta thanh truong ( journalist ) lem tucker + garrick utley + richard valeriani + charles van doren + sander vanocur + linda vester mike viqueira ( white house & capitol hill correspondent ) lindsey vonn ( 2014 winter olympics correspondent ) chris wallace – now at fox news barbara walters – retired from journalism fredricka whitfield – now at cnn mary alice williams brad willis joe witte – ( later at cnbc , and wjla-tv ; now a researcher at the goddard spaceflight center ) lew wood + judy woodruff – now monday–friday anchor of pbs newshour tony zappone + – deceased . international broadcasts . msnbc is not shown outside the americas on a channel in its own right . however , both nbc news and msnbc are shown for a few hours a day on osn news in mena region . msnbc is also shown occasionally on sister network cnbc europe during breaking news , and nightly news and meet the press are also shown regularly . nbc nightly news is shown in the philippines on 9tv ( formerly talk tv and solar news channel ) , while early today was officially dropped from the network in december 2013 , but they replaced by the repeats of inside edition . nbc nightly news , along with the full program lineup of nbc , was carried by affiliate vsb-tv in bermuda . the seven network in australia has close ties with nbc and has used a majority of the network 's imaging and slogans since the 1970s . seven news has featured the mission as its news theme since the mid-1980s . local newscasts were named seven nightly news from the mid-1980s until around 2000 . nbc and seven will often share news recourses between the two countries . nbc news has been known to use seven news reporters for live reports on a developing news story in australia . seven news will sometimes also incorporate an nbc news report into its national bulletins . today , weekend today and meet the press are all broadcast on the seven network during the early morning hours from 3-5 a.m . , just before seven 's own morning show sunrise . in hong kong , nbc nightly news is live television ( or delayed ) on tvb pearl daily from 7:00 am until 8:00 am hong kong time ( 6:00 pm until 7:00 pm new york city time ) . in the united kingdom , the itv network , used to air segments from nbc nightly news on their itv news at 5:30 morning newscast before it was cancelled in december 2012 . nbc news share facilities and crew in the uk with itn , which is the news provider for itv . theme music . most of nbc 's news television programs use '' the mission '' by john williams as their theme . the composition was first used by nbc in 1985 and was updated in 2004 . . references . external links .