Revenge

proverbs . the popular expression '' revenge is a dish best served cold '' suggests that revenge is more satisfying if enacted when unexpected or long feared , inverting traditional civilized revulsion toward '' cold-blooded '' violence . the idea 's origin is obscure . the french diplomat charles maurice de talleyrand-périgord ( 1754–1838 ) has been credited with the saying , '' la vengeance est un met que l'on doit manger froid '' '' revenge is a dish that must be eaten cold '' , albeit without supporting detail . it has been in the english language at least since the 1846 translation of the 1845 french novel mathilde by eugène sue : '' la vengeance se mange très bien froide '' , there italicized as if quoting a proverbial saying , and translated '' revenge is very good eaten cold '' . it has been wrongly credited to the novel les liaisons dangereuses ( 1782 ) . its path to modern popularity may begin with the 1949 film kind hearts and coronets which had revenge is a dish which people of taste prefer to eat cold . the familiar wording appears in the film death rides a horse ( 1967 ) , in the novel the godfather by mario puzo ( 1969 ) , and as if from an '' old klingon proverb '' in the film star trek ii : the wrath of khan ( 1982 ) . the title sequence of the quentin tarantino film kill bill : volume 1 ( 2003 ) referred to this last movie by again citing it as a klingon proverb . after that , it appeared in the 2004 version of man on fire . the phrase has also been credited to the pashtuns of afghanistan . another proverb states , '' if you want revenge , then dig two graves '' . another version proposes that a son who does not take revenge for his parents is not a son . other interpretations include the idea that when pursuing revenge to kill another person , you might as well destroy yourself as well . in art . revenge is a popular subject across many forms of art . some examples include the painting herodias ' revenge by juan de flandes and the operas don giovanni and the marriage of figaro , both by wolfgang amadeus mozart . in japanese art , revenge is a theme in various woodblock prints depicting the forty-seven rōnin by many well-known and influential artists , including utagawa kuniyoshi . the chinese playwright ji junxiang used revenge as the central theme in his theatrical work the orphan of zhao ; it depicts more specifically familial revenge , which is placed in the context of confucianism and social hierarchical structure . . in literature . revenge has been a popular literary theme historically and continues to play a role in contemporary works . examples of literature that feature revenge as a theme include the plays hamlet and othello by william shakespeare , the novel the count of monte cristo by alexandre dumas , and the short story '' the cask of amontillado '' by edgar allan poe . more modern examples include the novels carrie by stephen king , gone girl by gillian flynn , and the princess bride by william goldman . although revenge is a theme in itself , it is also considered to be a genre . revenge as a genre has been consistent with a variety of themes that have frequently appeared in different texts over the last few centuries . such themes include but are not limited to : disguise , masking , sex , cannibalism , the grotesque , bodily fluids , power , violent murders , and secrecy . each theme is usually coupled with the concept of dramatic irony . dramatic irony is a literary device in which the audience possesses knowledge unavailable to characters in a novel , play , or film . its purpose is to intensify the tragic events that are going to unfold by creating tension between the audience and the actions of the characters . the most common theme within the genre of revenge is the recurring violent murders that take place throughout the text , especially in the final act or scene . the root of the violence is usually derived from the characters ' childhood development . violent murders are seen in many texts ranging from dramas to novels . carrie , a 20th-century novel written by stephen king , has examples of this theme that do occur during the final scenes . another text that incorporates this theme is the 16th-century drama titus andronicus by william shakespeare . the themes of masking and disguise have the ability to go hand in hand with one another . a character may employ disguise literally or metaphorically . a mask is the literal example of this theme ; while pretending to be something one is not is considered to be the metaphoric example . additional themes that may cause the protagonist and antagonist to develop a masked or disguised identity include sex , power , and even cannibalism . examples of sex and power being used as themes can be seen in the novel gone girl by gillian flynn , as well as the already mentioned drama , titus andronicus . . on the internet . the emergence of the internet has provided new ways of exacting revenge . customer revenge targets businesses and corporations with the intent to cause damage or harm . in general , people tend to place more credence in online reviews rather than corporate communications . with technology becoming more readily available , corporations and firms are more likely to experience damage caused by negative reviews posted online going viral . recent studies indicate this type of consumer rage is becoming more common , especially in western world . the rise of social media sites like facebook , twitter , and youtube act as public platforms for exacting new forms of revenge . revenge porn involves the public dissemination of intimate pictures and videos of another person 's sexual activity out of motives for revenge with the intent of creating widespread shame . participation in online revenge porn activities incites a sense of pleasure through the harm being caused . the allowance of anonymity on revenge porn sites encourages further incivility by empowering and encouraging this type of behavior . in many instances , the original poster provides the victim 's personal information , including links to social media accounts . online revenge porn 's origins can be traced to 2010 when hunter moore created the first site , isanyoneup , to share photos of his nude girlfriend . . in animals . humans are not the only species known to take revenge . there are several species such as camels , elephants , fish , lions , coots , crows , and many species of primates ( chimpanzees , macaques , baboons , etc . ) that have been recognized to seek revenge . primatology frans de waal and lesleigh luttrellave conducted numerous studies that provide evidence of revenge in many species of primates . they observed chimpanzees and noticed patterns of revenge . for example , if chimpanzee a helped chimpanzee b defeat his opponent , chimpanzee c , then chimpanzee c would be more likely to help chimpanzee a 's opponent in a later squabble . chimpanzees are one of the most common species that show revenge due to their desire for dominance . studies have also been performed on less cognitive species such as fish to demonstrate that not only intellectual animals execute revenge .