Chabad

chabad house . a chabad house is a form of jewish community center , primarily serving both educational and observance purposes . often , until the community can support its own center , the chabad house is located in the shaliach 's home , with the living room being used as the '' synagogue '' . effort is made to provide an atmosphere in which the nonobservant will not feel intimidated by any perceived contrast between their lack of knowledge of jewish practice and the advanced knowledge of some of the people they meet there . the term '' chabad house '' originated with the creation of the first such outreach center on the campus of ucla by rabbi shlomo cunin . challenge a key to the chabad house was given to the rebbe and he asked if that meant that the new house was his home . he was told yes and he replied , '' my hand will be on the door of this house to keep it open twenty-four hours a day for young and old , men and women alike . '' in the 2008 mumbai attacks , the local chabad house was targeted . the local chabad emissaries , rabbi gavriel holtzberg and his wife rivka , and four other jews were tortured and murdered by islamic terrorists . chabad received condolences from around the world . . fundraising . funds for activities of a chabad center rely entirely on the local community . chabad centers do not receive funding from lubavitch headquarters . for the day-to-day operations , local emissaries do all the fundraising by themselves . chabad emissaries often solicit the support of local jews . funds are used toward purchasing or renovating chabad centers , synagogues and mikveh . fishkoff , sue , the rebbe 's army : inside the world of chabad-lubavitch , schocken books 2003 pages 160–161 . . activities . the chabad movement has been involved in numerous activities in contemporary jewish life . these activities include providing jewish education to different age groups , outreach to non-affiliated jews , publishing jewish literature , and summer camps for children , among other activities . education . chabad runs a number of educational institutions . most are jewish day schools ; others offer secondary and adult education . day schools – in the united states , there are close to 300 & nbsp ; day schools and supplementary schools run by chabad . secondary schools – chabad runs multiple secondary education institutions , most notable are tomchei tmimim for young men , and bais rivka for young women . adult education – chabad run adult education programs include those organized by the rohr jewish learning institute , and the jewish learning network . outreach activities . much of the movement 's activities emphasize on outreach activities . this is due to rabbi menachem mendel schneerson encouraging his followers to reach out to other jews . hayom yom , p . a38 chabad outreach includes activities promoting the practice of jewish commandments ( mitzvah campaigns ) , as well as other forms of jewish outreach . much of chabad 's outreach is performed by chabad emissaries ( see shaliach ( chabad ) ) . mitzvah campaigns . the rebbes of chabad have issued the call to all jews to attract non-observant jews to adopt orthodox jewish observance , teaching that this activity is part of the process of bringing the messiah . rabbi menachem mendel schneerson issued a call to every jew : '' even if you are not fully committed to a torah life , do something . begin with a mitzvah — any mitzvah – its value will not be diminished by the fact that there are others that you are not prepared to do '' . schneerson also suggested ten specific mitzvot that he believed were ideally suited for the emissaries to introduce to non-observant jews . these were called mivtzoim — meaning '' campaigns '' or '' endeavors '' . these were lighting candles before shabbat and the jewish holidays by jewish women , putting on tefillin , affixing a mezuzah , regular torah study , giving tzedakah , purchasing jewish books , observing kashrut ( kosher ) , kindness to others , jewish education , and observing niddah laws . in addition , schneerson emphasized spreading awareness of preparing for and the coming of the moshiach , consistent with his philosophy . he wrote on the responsibility to reach out to teach every fellow jew with love , and implored that all jews believe in the imminent coming of the moshiach as explained by maimonides . he argued that redemption was predicated on jews doing good deeds , and that gentiles should be educated about the noahide laws . schneerson was emphatic about the need to encourage and provide strong education for every child , jew and non-jew alike . in honor of schneerson 's efforts in education the united states congress has made education and sharing day on the rebbe 's hebrew birthday ( 11 nissan ) . shluchim ( emissaries ) . following the initiative of rabbi yosef yitzchak schneersohn , rabbi menachem mendel schneerson spurred on the movement to what has become known as shlichus ( '' serving as an emissary performing outreach '' ) in 1950–1951 . as a result , chabad shluchim ( '' emissaries '' , sing . shliach ) have moved all over the world with the stated mission of encouraging non-observant jews to adopt orthodox jewish observance . they assist jews with all their religious needs , as well as with physical assistance and spiritual guidance and teaching . the stated goal is to encourage jews to learn more about their jewish heritage and to practice judaism . fishkoff , sue , the rebbe 's army , schocken books 2003 the chabad movement , motivated by schneerson , has trained and semikhah thousands of rabbis , educators , ritual slaughterers , and mohel , who are then accompanied by their spouses to many locations around the world . typically , a young lubavitch rabbi and his wife , in their early twenties , with one or two children , will move to a new location , and as they settle in will raise a large family who , as a family unit , will aim to fulfill their mandate of bringing jewish people closer to orthodox judaism and encouraging gentiles to adhere to the seven laws of noah . to date , there are around 5000 shluchim in 100 different countries . . mitzvah tank . a mitzvah tank is a vehicle used by chabad members involved in outreach as a portable '' educational and outreach center '' and '' mini-synagogue '' ( or '' minagogue '' ) . mitzvah tanks are commonly used for advancing the mitzvah campaigns . mitzvah tanks have been commonplace on the streets of new york city since 1974 . today , they are used all over the globe , in countries where chabad is active . campus outreach . in recent years , chabad has greatly expanded its outreach on university and college campuses . chabad student centers are active on over 100 campuses , and chabad offers varied activities at an additional 150 universities worldwide . professor alan dershowitz has said '' chabad 's presence on college campuses today is absolutely crucial , '' and '' we can not rest until chabad is on every major college campus in the world . '' . teenage organization . cteen is a program and a youth movement created for teenagers between the ages of 13 and 18 years old . the program aims to integrate fun and judaism for young people . cteen is in several countries , and the participants receive special study material for several jewish holidays , different activities to be performed by their local groups , and constant advice to help them develop these studies and activities in the best possible way for them . . chabad young professionals . targeting the demographic of young professionals , chabad 's new initiative focuses on social events and business networking to fuel jewish activity in young professional 's lives . with seminars on career advancement , social gatherings for jewish holidays , and the ability to connect with other like-minded jews in the area , chabad young professionals ( cyp ) combines networking and meaning into many young people 's lives . publishing . chabad publishes and distributes jewish religious literature . under kehot publication society , chabad 's main publishing house , sefer ( hebrew ) has been translated into 12 different languages . kehot regularly provides books at discounted prices , and hosts book-a-thons . kehot commonly distributes books written or transcribed from the rebbes of chabad , prominent chassidim and other authors who have written jewish materials . kehot is a division of merkos l'inyonei chinuch , the movement 's educational arm . media . more than any other jewish movement , chabad has used media as part of its religious , social , and political experience . their latest leader , menachem mendel schneerson , was the most video-documented jewish leader in history . . chabad.org . the chabad movement publishes a wealth of jewish material on the internet . chabad 's main website chabad.org , is one of the first jewish websites and the first and largest virtual congregation . our founding director , chabad.org it serves not just its own members but jews worldwide in general . . community websites . popular chabad community websites include chabad.org , asktherav.com , anash.org , crownheights.info , shmais.com , chdailynews.com , and the hebrew site , col.org.il . . summer camps . chabad has set up an extensive network of camps around the world , most using the name gan israel , a name chosen by schneerson although the first overnight camp was the girls division called camp emunah . there are 1,200 sites serving 210,000 children – most of whom do not come from orthodox homes . of these , 500 camps are in the united states . . political activities . schneerson involved himself in matters relating to the resolution of the israeli-arab conflict . '' when silence is a sin '' . sichos in english . letter to zalman shazar he maintained that as a matter of jewish law , based on shulchan aruch orach chayim , 328 any territorial concession on israel 's part would endanger the lives of all jews in the land of israel , and is therefore forbidden . he also insisted that even discussing the possibility of such concessions showed weakness , would encourage arab attacks , and therefore endanger jewish lives . essentially his argument sought merely the position that would prevent loss of life , rather than taking a stance in the nature of the land of israel and zionism . in us domestic politics , schneerson supported government involvement in education and welcomed the establishment of the united states department of education in 1980 , yet insisted that part of a school 's educational mission was to incorporate the values espoused in the seven laws of noah . he called for the introduction of a moment of silence at the beginning of the school day , and for students to be encouraged to use this time for such improving thoughts or prayers as their parents might suggest . hayom yom , p . a29 in 1981 , schneerson publicly called for the use of solar energy . schneerson believed that the us could achieve energy independence by developing solar energy technologies . he argued that the dependence on foreign oil may lead to the country compromising on its principles . . library dispute with russia . in 2013 , us federal judge royce lamberth ruled in favor of chabad lawyers who sought contempt sanctions on three russian organizations to return the schneersohn library – 12,000 books belonging to rabbi yosef schneersohn seized and nationalized by the bolsheviks in 1917–18 , to the brooklyn chabad library . chabad rabbi berel lazar , russia 's chief rabbi , reluctantly accepted putin 's request in moving the schneerson library to moscow 's jewish museum and tolerance center as a form of compromise , which was criticized by the chabad library . . controversies . several movement-wide controversies have occurred in chabad 's 200-year history . two major leadership succession controversies occurred in the 19th century , one took place in the 1810s following the death of the movement 's founder , the other occurred in the 1860s following the death of the third rebbe . two other minor offshoot groups were formed later in the movement 's history . the movement 's other major controversy is chabad messianism , which began in the 1990s . succession disputes and offshoot groups . a number of groups have split from the chabad movement , forming their own hasidic groups , and at times positioning themselves as possible successors of previous chabad rebbes . following the deaths of the first and third rebbes of chabad , disputes arose over their succession . following the death of rabbi shneur zalman of liadi , the first chabad rebbe , a dispute over his succession led to a break within the movement . while the recognized successor was his oldest son , rabbi dovber schneuri , a student of rabbi shneur zalman , rabbi aaron halevi assumed the title of rebbe , and led a number of followers from the town of strashelye . the new group had two rebbes , rabbi aaron and his son rabbi haim rephael . the new group eventually disbanded , following rabbi haim rephael 's death . one of the main points the two rabbis disagreed on was the place of religious ecstasy in prayer . r ' aaron supported the idea while rabbi dovber emphasized genuine ecstasy can only be a result of meditative contemplation ( hisbonenus ) . rabbi dovber published his arguments on the subject in an compilation titled kuntres hispa'alus ( '' tract on ecstasy '' ) . ehrlich , leadership in the habad movement , pp . 160–192 , esp . pp . 167–172 . following the death of the third chabad rebbe , rabbi menachem mendel schneersohn ( the tzemach tzedek ) , a dispute over his succession led to the formation of several chabad groups . while rabbi shmuel schneersohn was recognized as the heir to the chabad-lubavitch line , several of his brothers formed groups of their own in the towns of kopys ( forming the kapust ) , nezhin ( forming the niezhin dynasty ) , lyady ( forming the liadi dynasty ) , and ovruch ( forming the avrutch dynasty ) . the lifespan of these groups varied ; niezhin and avrutch had one rebbe each , liadi had two rebbes , and kapust had four . following the deaths of their last rebbes , these groups eventually disbanded . encyclopedia of hasidism , entry : schneersohn , shmaryahu noah . naftali lowenthal . aronson , london 1996 . two other minor offshoot groups were formed by chabad hasidim . the malachim were formed as a quasi-hasidic group . the group claims to recognize the teachings of the first four rebbes of chabad , thus rivaling the later chabad rebbes . the malachim 's first and only rebbe , rabbi chaim avraham dov ber levine hacohen ( 1859/1860–1938 ) , also known as '' the malach '' ( lit . '' the angel '' ) , was a follower of the fourth and fifth rebbes of chabad . b . sobel , the m'lochim ehrlich , leadership in the habad movement , pp . 269–271 while levine 's son chose not to succeed him , the malachim group continues to maintain a yeshiva and minyan in williamsburg , brooklyn . following the death of the seventh chabad rebbe , rabbi menachem mendel schneerson , an attempt by shaul shimon deutsch to form a breakaway chabad movement , with deutsch as '' liozna rebbe '' , failed to gain popular support . '' dissidents name 'rebbe ' , '' the forward , december 6 , 1996 heinon , herb , '' bigger than death , '' the jerusalem post , august 15 , 1997 segall , rebecca , '' holy daze the problems of young lubavitcher hasidim in a world without the rebbe , '' the village voice , september 30 , 2000 eisenberg , charles . the book of daniel : a well kept secret . xulon press . 2007 . page 103 . . chabad messianism . in the late 1980s , the rebbe called for his followers to become involved in outreach activities with the purpose of bringing about the jewish messianic age . statements concerning the advancement of the messianic age was a factor leading to the controversy surrounding the messianic beliefs of some members of the movement . some chabad hasidim , called mashichists , '' have not yet accepted the rebbe 's passing '' and even after his death regard him as the ( living ) 'king messiah ' and 'moses of the generation ' . in the arts . art . chabad hasidic artists hendel lieberman and zalman kleinman have painted a number of scenes depicting chabad hasidic culture , including religious ceremonies , study and prayer . chabad artist michoel muchnik has painted scenes of the mitzvah campaigns . artist and shaliach yitzchok moully has adapted silkscreen techniques , bright colours and jewish and hasidic images to create a form of '' chasidic pop art '' . . music . vocalists avraham fried and benny friedman have included recordings of traditional chabad songs on their albums of contemporary orthodox jewish music . bluegrass artist andy statman has also recorded chabad spiritual melodies ( niggunim ) . reggae artist matisyahu has included portions of chabad niggunim and lyrics with chabad philosophical themes in some of his songs . literature . in the late 1930s , dr fishl schneersohn , a psychiatrist , pedagogical theorist , and descendant of the founder of chabad authored a yiddish novel titled chaim gravitzer : the tale of the downfallen one from the world of chabad . the novel explores the spiritual struggle of a chabad hasid who doubts his faith and finally finds peace in doing charitable work . novelist chaim potok authored a work my name is asher lev in which a hasidic teen struggles between his artistic passions and the norms of the community . the '' ladover '' community is a thinly veiled reference to the lubavitcher community in crown heights . chabad poet zvi yair has written poems on chabad philosophical topics including ratzo v'shov ( spiritual yearning ) . the american jewish writer and publisher , clifford meth , wrote a short science fiction story depicting the future followers of the '' 70th rebbe '' of chabad and their outreach efforts on an alien planet called tau ceti iv . the story is told through the eyes of a young extraterrestrial yeshiva student . the american jewish writer and publisher , richard horowitz , wrote a memoir , the boys yeshiva , describing his time teaching at a chabad yeshiva in los angeles . . film and television . the chabad-lubavitch community has been the subject of a number of documentary films . these films include : the spark – a 28-minute film , produced in 1974 , providing an overview of the lubavitch and satmar of new york . documentary films about hasidism . pbs the film was directed by mel epstein . the return : a hasidic experience – a 1979 documentary film on jews who joined the chabad movement , directed by yisrael lifshutz and barry ralbag . what is a jew ? – a 1989 documentary on chabad produced by the bbc for the series everyman . king of crown heights – a 60-minute , 1993 film on lubavitcher hasidim by columbia university student roggerio gabbai fires in the mirror – a 1993 tv adaptation of the one-person play by anna deavere smith . it explores the black and hasidic viewpoints of people connected directly and indirectly to the crown heights riots . smith , anna deavere . fires in the mirror . new york city : bantam doubleday dell publishing group , inc . , 1993 . the adaptation was produced by pbs as part of its american playhouse series . the return of sarah 's daughters – a 1997 documentary film contrasting three jewish women , one of whome joins chabad . blacks and jews – a 1997 documentary written and directed by deborah kaufman and alan snitow on the crown heights riot and other incidents involving intergroup conflict . welcome to the waks family – a 2003 documentary of a chabad family in australia . leaving the fold – a 2008 documentary on young men and women who left the hasidic jewish community . the film was directed by eric r . scott and the stories featured include former hasidic jews living in the united states , israel and canada . featured in the film are two young men from a chabad family in montreal as well as a french lubavitch rabbi . gut shabbes vietnam – a 2008 documentary on a chabad family in vietnam . written and directed by ido & yael zand . shekinah rising – a 70 & nbsp ; min , 2013 documentary exploring the perspectives of the female students of a chabad school in montreal kathmandu – a 2012 television series aired on israeli television based on the lives of the chabad emissaries in kathmandu , thailand . project 2x1 – a 30 & nbsp ; min , 2013 documentary on the chabad hasidim and west indian residents of crown heights , using google glass in place of conventional camera techniques the rabbi goes west – a 2019 documentary on a chabad rabbi who moves to montana . . other television . religious america – a 28-minute , 1974 pbs documentary series episode focusing on a day in the life of a lubavitcher man outback rabbis – ( 2018 ) 50 min television segment by australian tv network , sbs , covering the regional and rural australia ( rara ) program of chabad . directed by danny ben-moshe . featured on the sbs '' untold australia '' series .