Seraph

origins and development . there is emerging consensus that the motifs used to display seraphs in hyksos-era caanan had their original sources in egyptian uraeus iconography . the word saraph/seraphim appears four times in the book of isaiah ( 6:2–6 , 14:29 , 30:6 ) . in isaiah 6:2–6 the term is used to describe a type of celestial being or angel . the other uses of the word refer to serpents . the vision in isaiah 6 of seraphim in an idealized version of solomon 's temple represents the sole instance in the hebrew bible of this word being used to describe celestial beings . '' . i saw also the lord sitting upon a throne , high and lifted up , and his train filled the temple . above it stood the seraphim : each one had six wings ; with twain he covered his face , and with twain he covered his feet , and with twain he did fly . '' ( isaiah 6:1–3 ) and one cried to another , '' holy , holy , holy , is yhwh of hosts : the whole earth is full of his glory . '' ( verses 2–3 ) one seraph carries out an act of ritual purification for the prophet by touching his lips with a live coal from the altar ( verses 6–7 ) '' and he laid it upon my mouth , and said , lo , this hath touched thy lips ; and thine iniquity is taken away , and thy sin purged . '' the text describes the '' seraphim '' as winged celestial beings with a fiery passion for doing god 's good work . notwithstanding the wording of the text itself , at least one hebrew scholar claims that in the hebrew bible the seraphim do not have the status of angels , and that it is only in later sources ( like de coelesti hierarchia or summa theologica ) that they are considered to be a division of the divine messengers . seraphim appear in the 2nd-century bc book of enoch , enoch , xx . 7 , lxi . 10 , lxxi . 7 . where they are mentioned , in conjunction with cherubim , as the heavenly creatures standing nearest to the throne of god . in non-biblical sources they are sometimes called the akyəst '' serpents '' , '' dragons '' ; an alternate term for hell ) . sola , david aaron . signification of the proper names , etc . , occurring in the book of enoch : from the hebrew and chaldee languages london , 1852 . rev . x.y.z . merry england , volume 22 , '' the story of a conversion '' 1894 . pg . 151 enoch 1 68:9-16 in the second book of enoch , two classes of celestial beings are mentioned alongside the seraphim and cherubim , known as the phoenixes and the chalkydri khalkýdrai , compound of khalkós '' brass , copper '' + hýdra '' hydra '' , '' water-serpent '' —lit . '' brazen hydras '' , '' copper serpents '' ) . both are described as '' flying elements of the sun '' that reside in either the 4th or 6th heaven , who have twelve wings and burst into song at sunrise . davidson , gustav . ( 1967 ) a dictionary of angels , including the fallen angels , entries : 'chalkydri ' , p . 84 ; 'phoenixes ' , p . 224 . in the book of revelation ( 4:4–8 ) , the beasts are described as being forever in god 's presence and praising him : '' and they rest not day and night , saying , 'holy , holy , holy , lord god almighty , which was , and is , and is to come . '' this account differs slightly from the account of isaiah , stating in the eighth verse , '' and the four beasts had each of them six wings about him ; and they were full of eyes within '' . they appear also in the gnostic text , on the origin of the world . . in judaism . the 12th-century scholar maimonides placed the seraphim in the fifth of ten ranks of angels in his exposition of the jewish angelic hierarchy . in kabbalah , the seraphim are the higher angels of the world of beriah ( '' creation '' , first created realm , divine understanding ) , angels 2 : wings on fire , kabbalaonline.org : '' these creatures of the world of beriya , are the higher angels , called serafim , from the hebrew word for burn , saraf . '' whose understanding of their distance from the absolute divinity of atziluth causes their continual '' burning up '' in ayin and yesh . through this they ascend to god , and return to their place . below them in the world of yetzirah ( '' formation '' , archetypal creation , divine emotions ) are the hayot angels of ezekiel 's vision , who serve god with self-aware instinctive emotions ( '' face of a lion , ox , eagle '' ) . seraphim are part of the angelarchy of modern orthodox judaism . isaiah 's vision is repeated several times in daily jewish services , including at kedushah prayer as part of the repetition of the amidah , and in several other prayers as well . conservative judaism retains the traditional doctrines regarding angels and includes references to them in the liturgy , although a literal belief in angels is by no means universal among adherents . adherents of reform judaism and reconstructionist judaism generally take images of angels as symbolic . an ancient judean seal from the 8th century bce depicts them as flying asps , yet having human characteristics , as encountered by isaiah in his commissioning as a prophet . berlin , adele ; brettler , marc zvi ; and jewish publication society . ( 2014 ) . the jewish study bible jewish publication society tanakh translation . new york , new york : oxford university press . p . 779 . . in christianity . image : seraphim - petites heures de jean de berry.jpg thumb 250px seraphim surround the divine throne in this illustration from the petites heures de jean de berry , a 14th-century illuminated manuscript , commissioned by john , duke of berry . image : giotto - legend of st francis - -19- - stigmatization of st francis.jpg thumb 250px st . francis ' vision of a seraph ( fresco attributed to giotto ) ( 1267–1337 ) medieval christian theology places seraphim in the highest choir of the angelic hierarchy . they are the caretakers of god 's throne , continuously singing '' holy , holy , holy '' . pseudo-dionysius the areopagite in his celestial hierarchy ( vii ) , drew upon the book of isaiah in fixing the fiery nature of seraphim in the medieval imagination . seraphim in his view helped the deity maintain perfect order and are not limited to chanting the trisagion . taking his cue as well from writings in the rabbinic tradition , the author gave an etymology for the seraphim as '' those who kindle or make hot '' the name seraphim clearly indicates their ceaseless and eternal revolution about divine principles , their heat and keenness , the exuberance of their intense , perpetual , tireless activity , and their elevative and energetic assimilation of those below , kindling them and firing them to their own heat , and wholly purifying them by a burning and all-consuming flame ; and by the unhidden , unquenchable , changeless , radiant and enlightening power , dispelling and destroying the shadows of darkness origen wrote in on first principles that the seraphim , in the book of isaiah , are the physical representation of the christ and the holy spirit . his rationale comes from the idea that nothing '' can wholly know the beginnings of all things and the ends of the universe '' aside from god . origen concludes this section in writing about the seraphim as beings that have the knowledge of god revealed to them which elevates the role of the seraphim to divine levels : nevertheless whatever it is that these powers may have learned through the revelation of the son of god and of the holy spirit-and they will certainly be able to acquire a great deal of knowledge , and the higher ones much more than the lower-still it is impossible for them to comprehend everything ; for it is written , 'the more part of god 's works are secret . this quote suggests that origen believed the seraphim are revealed this knowledge because of their anointed status as son of god and the holy spirit . he was later criticized for making such claims and labeled a heretic by the christian church . however , his theory about the seraphim , as referred to in isaiah , would be reflected in other early christian literature , as well as early christian belief through the second century . thomas aquinas in his summa theologica offers a description of the nature of seraphim : the seraphim took on a mystic role in giovanni pico della mirandola 's oration on the dignity of man ( 1487 ) , the epitome of renaissance humanism . pico took the fiery seraphim— '' they burn with the fire of charity '' —as the highest models of human aspiration : '' impatient of any second place , let us emulate dignity and glory . and , if we will it , we shall be inferior to them in nothing '' , the young pico announced , in the first flush of optimistic confidence in the human capacity that is the coinage of the renaissance . '' in the light of intelligence , meditating upon the creator in his work , and the work in its creator , we shall be resplendent with the light of the cherubim . if we burn with love for the creator only , his consuming fire will quickly transform us into the flaming likeness of the seraphim . '' bonaventure , a franciscan theologian who was a contemporary of aquinas , uses the six wings of the seraph as an important analogical construct in his mystical work the journey of the mind to god . christian theology developed an idea of seraphim as beings of pure light who enjoy direct communication with god . . in islam . seraphim ( sarufiyyun or musharifin ) jerrold seigel between cultures : europe and its others in five exemplary lives university of pennsylvania press 2015 are mentioned in a hadith from al-tirmidhi , about a conversation between muhammad and god , during the night journey , concerning what is between the heavens and the earth , often interpreted as a reference to the '' exalted assembly '' disputing the creation of adam in surah . mir valiuddin ( 1987 ) . the quranic sufism . motilal banarsidass publ . page 69 . apart from that , seraphim rarely appear in islam . sometimes , specific archangels , like jibrāʾīl and israfil , are identified as seraphim . mir valiuddin the quranic sufism motilal banarsidass publ 1987 page 69 sophy burnham ( 2011 ) . a book of angels : reflections on angels past and present , and true stories of how they touch our lives . penguin . robert southey also noted an islamic narration about angels commanded to prostrate before adam , whereupon iblis refused as he boasted about himself being a seraph created from celestial fire , more excellent than adam . robert southey the poetical works , collected by himself , band 3 longman 1838 digitized 4 . jan . 2012 page 68 . in culture . arts , entertainment , and media . galeem , from the super smash bros . ultimate single-player campaign '' world of light '' , resembles a seraph . it is an ethereal being of light with six wings . also , galeem attempted to destroy everything in existence and turn everyone ( except the fighters ) into spirits . in the bastard executioner , the order of seraphim are charged with preserving and protecting jesus christ 's nine-volume , handwritten libro nazareni ( new testament ) from the church , which , as annora and ventrishire 's manor priest , father ruskin , discuss in the bastard executioner episodes , could be toppled by the book 's release to the public . for that reason , the church 's leaders , such as the bastard executioner cast , and their knights of the rosebud/rosula , have targeted both the book and its protectors to be hunted and destroyed . in episode 3 , some young welsh people who want to earn credibility with the rebels against the government unwisely masquerade as members of the order of seraphim , by adorning themselves with seraphim face paint and attack the baroness ' wagon and its knights , which causes repercussions throughout the season for those captured , for their village , and for those affected by escalated hunts for rebels and for members of the order of seraphim . in doom ( 2016 video game ) it is mentioned that a seraph blesses the doom slayer with great strength and speed . in doom eternal it is confirmed that the character samuel hayden is in fact the seraphim who blessed the doom slayer . from the street fighter series , the character gill uses a move called seraphic wing , in which he reveals six wings and unleashes godly energy that does several hits . in street fighter iii , it is the strongest move in the game and can one-hit ko an opponent if they are not blocking . in , street fighter v , it is his critical art . while it can not instantly defeat an opponent like before , it deals a lot of damage . seraphs also appear in the '' cw '' tv show supernatural . they are shown as more powerful angels , but still weaker than an archangel . when the angel castiel ( originated from '' cassiel '' ) dies , he is brought back as a seraph , although he still does not possess the power to go up against the archangel who killed him , raphael . seraph is a supporting character in the second and third films of the matrix trilogy . seraph is an exile program who is seen acting as a '' guardian angel '' of the oracle , and is described as the personification of a sophisticated challenge-handshake authentication protocol which guards the oracle . in the armored core series , the villain nine-ball is featured as a recurring antagonist . its second and most powerful form , debuting in armored core : master of arena , is known as nine-ball seraph . the term seraph is applied to the mysterious beings of light in various battlestar galactica comics . in mega man zero , copy x transforms into a seraph-like appearance in his second form . in the voxel-based video game vintage story , the species of the main character are called seraphs . logos and mascots . several catholic schools use a seraph or a seraph-related symbol as their mascot : koinonia academy , plainfield , new jersey , united states mater dei high school ( new jersey ) , middletown , new jersey , united states st . bonaventure high school , ventura , california , united states st . madeleine sophie catholic school , bellevue , washington , united states kingswood college in randles hill , kandy , sri lanka , a public school , claims the seraph as its mascot . the university of pisa , italy , features a seraph as its logo , despite referring to it as '' cherubino '' ( cherub ) . several rolls-royce models use a '' flying lady '' symbol or moniker , which some equate to a seraph . . see also . bearers of the throne fiery flying serpent great chain of being royal order of the seraphim serpents in the bible tetramorph thrones . references . external links . jewish encyclopedia : '' seraphim '' the seraphim mosaic in hagia sophia