Joseph (Genesis)

jewish tradition . selling joseph . in the midrash , the selling of joseph was part of god 's divine plan for him to save his tribes . the favoritism israel showed joseph and the plot against him by his brothers were divine means of getting him into egypt . scharfstein , s . torah and commentary : the five books of moses , , 2008 , p.124 maimonides comments that even the villager in shechem , about whom joseph inquired his brother 's whereabouts , was a '' divine messenger '' working behind the scene . scharfstein , 2008 , p . 120 a midrash asked , how many times was joseph sold ? in analyzing , there are five different hebrew names used to describe five different groups of people involved in the transaction of selling joseph , according to rabbi judah and rav huna . the first group identified , are joseph 's brothers when judah brings up the idea of selling joseph in verses 26 and 27 . the first mention of ishmaelites ( yishma'elîm ) is in verse 25 . then the hebrew phrase ŉāshîm midyanîm sōĥrîm in verse 28 describes midianite traders . a fourth group in verse 36 is named in hebrew as m ‘ danîm that is properly identified as medanites . the final group , where a transaction is made , is among the egyptians in the same verse . after identifying the hebrew names , rabbi judah claims that joseph was sold four times : first his brothers sold joseph to the ishmaelites ( yishma'elîm ) , then the ishmaelites sold him to the midianite traders ( ŉāshîm midyanîm sōĥrîm ) , the midianite traders to the medanites ( m ‘ danîm ) , and the medanites into egypt . rav huna adds one more sale by concluding that after the medanites sold him to the egyptians , a fifth sale occurred when the egyptians sold him to potiphar . ( genesis rabbah 84:22 ) . potiphar ’ s wife . joseph had good reasons not to have an affair with potiphar 's wife : he did not want to abuse his master 's trust ; he believed in the sanctity of marriage ; and it went against his ethical , moral and religious principles taught to him by his father jacob . according to the midrash , joseph would have been immediately executed by the sexual assault charge against him by potiphar 's wife . abravanel explains that she had accused other servants of the same crime in the past . potiphar believed that joseph was incapable of such an act and petitioned pharaoh to spare his life . scharfstein , 2008 , pp . 125–26 however , punishment could not have been avoided because of her class status and limited public knowledge of her scheme . according to legend of the jews , the name of potiphar 's wife is zuleikha and when she was enticing joseph to give up to her sinful passion , god appeared unto him , holding the foundation of earth ( eben shetiyah ) , that he would destroy the world if joseph touched her . . silver cup for divination . jewish tradition holds that joseph had his steward plant his personal silver cup in benjamin 's sack to test his brothers . he wanted to know if they would be willing to risk danger in order to save their half brother benjamin . since joseph and benjamin were born from rachel , this test was necessary to reveal if they would betray benjamin as they did with joseph when he was seventeen . because joseph the dreamer predicts the future by analyzing dreams , alternative jewish tradition claims that he practiced divination using this silver cup as the steward charged and as joseph himself claimed in . scharfstein , 2008 , pp . 138–39 . raising joseph . in one talmudic story , joseph was buried in the nile river , as there was some dispute as to which province should be honored by having his tomb within its boundaries . moses , led there by an ancient holy woman named serach , was able by a miracle to raise the sarcophagus and to take it with him at the time of the exodus . christian tradition . joseph is mentioned in the new testament as an example of faith . joseph is commemorated as one of the holy forefathers in the calendar of saints of the armenian apostolic church on 26 july . in the eastern orthodox church and those eastern catholic churches which follow the byzantine rite , he is known as '' joseph the all-comely '' , a reference not only to his physical appearance , but more importantly to the beauty of his spiritual life . they commemorate him on the sunday of the holy forefathers ( two sundays before christmas ) and on holy and great monday ( monday of holy week ) . in icons , he is sometimes depicted wearing the nemes headdress of an egyptian vizier . the lutheran church–missouri synod commemorates him as a patriarch on 31 march . typological interpretation . in addition to honoring him , there was a strong tendency in the patristic period to view his life as a typological precursor to christ . this tendency is represented in john chrysostom who said that joseph 's suffering was '' a type of things to come '' , caesarius of arles who interpreted joseph 's famous coat as representative of the diverse nations who would follow christ , ambrose of milan who interpreted the standing sheaf as prefiguring the resurrection of christ , and others . this tendency , although greatly diminished , was followed throughout late antiquity , the medieval era , and into the reformation . even john calvin , sometimes hailed as the father of modern grammatico-historical exegesis , writes '' in the person of joseph , a lively image of christ is presented . '' in addition , some christian authors have argued that this typological interpretation finds its origin in the speech of stephen in acts , as well as the gospel of luke and the parables of jesus , noting strong verbal and conceptual collocation between the greek translation of the portion of genesis concerning joseph and the parable of the wicked tenants and the parable of the prodigal son . . islamic tradition . joseph , is regarded by muslims as a prophet ( quran , suras vi . 84 , xl . 34 ) , and a whole chapter yusuf ( sura xii . ) is devoted to him , the only instance in the quran in which an entire chapter is devoted to a complete story of a prophet . it is described as the 'best of stories' . joseph is said to have been extremely handsome , which attracted his egyptian master 's wife to attempt to seduce him . muhammad is believed to have once said , '' one half of all the beauty god apportioned for mankind went to joseph and his mother ; the other one half went to the rest of mankind . '' the story has a lot in common with the biblical narrative , but with certain differences . in the quran the brothers ask jacob ( '' yaqub '' ) to let joseph go with them . joseph is thrown into a well , and was taken as a slave by a passing caravan . when the brothers revealed to the father that a wolf had eaten joseph , he observed patience . in the bible , joseph discloses himself to his brethren before they return to their father the second time after buying grain . differences of tradition but in islam they returned leaving behind benjamin because the mizzen bowl of the king was found in his bag . similarly , the eldest son of jacob had decided not to leave the land because of the oath taken to protect benjamin beforehand . when jacob learned their story after their return , he wept in grief till he lost his eyesight because of sorrow . he thus charged his sons to go and inquire about joseph and his brother and despair not of god 's mercy . it was during this return to egypt that joseph disclosed his real identity to his brothers . he admonished and forgave them , he sent also his garment which healed the patriarch 's eyes as soon as it was casted unto his face . the remaining verses describe the migration of jacob 's family to egypt and the emotional meeting of jacob and his long lost son , joseph . the family prostrated before him hence the fulfilment of his dream aforetime . the story concludes by joseph praying '' my lord you have indeed bestowed upon me of the sovereignty and taught me something of the interpretation of dreams- the ( only ) creator of heavens and the earth ! you are my guardian in this world and in the hereafter . cause me to die as a muslim and join me with the righteous '' ( qur'an 12:101 ) . baha ' i tradition . there are numerous mentions of joseph in bahá ' í writings . these come in the forms of allusions written by the báb and bahá ' u'lláh . in the kitáb-i-aqdas , bahá ' u'lláh states that '' from my laws , the sweet-smelling savour of my garment can be smelled '' and , in the four valleys , states that '' the fragrance of his garment blowing from the egypt of baha , '' referring to joseph . bahá ' í commentaries have described these as metaphors with the garment implying the recognition of a manifestation of god . in the qayyumu ' l-asma ' , the báb refers to bahá ' u'lláh as the true joseph and makes an analogous prophecy regarding bahá ' u'lláh suffering at the hands of his brother , mírzá yahyá . . literature and culture . thomas mann retells the genesis stories surrounding joseph in his four novel omnibus , joseph and his brothers , identifying joseph with the figure of osarseph known from josephus , and the pharaoh with akhenaten . joseph and his brethren , 1743 , an oratorio by george frideric handel . josephslegende ( the legend of joseph ) is a 1914 work by richard strauss for the ballets russes . 1961 film , the story of joseph and his brethren ( giuseppe venduto dai fratelli ) 1974 film , the story of jacob and joseph 1979 , new media bible genesis project ( tv ) -cap . joseph and his brothers the long-running musical joseph and the amazing technicolor dreamcoat by andrew lloyd webber and tim rice is loosely based on the biblical story of joseph , up through genesis chapter 46 . it was adapted into the 1999 film of the same name . in 1995 , turner network television released the made-for-television movie joseph starring ben kingsley as potiphar , lesley ann warren as potiphar 's wife , paul mercurio as joseph and martin landau as jacob . in 2000 , dreamworks animation released a direct-to-video animated musical film based on the life of joseph , titled joseph : king of dreams . yousuf e payambar or joseph , the prophet is an iranian television series from 2008 , directed by farajullah salahshur , which tells the story of prophet joseph from the quran and islamic traditions . the cultural impact of the joseph story in early-modern times is discussed in rappresentatione di giuseppe e i suoi fratelli / joseph and his brethren - a musical drama in three acts composed by elam rotem for ensemble profeti della quinta ( 2013 , pan classics ) . josé do egito ( english : joseph from egypt ) is a brazilian miniseries produced and broadcast by recordtv . it premiered on january 30 , 2013 and ended on october 9 , 2013 . it is based on the biblical account of the book of genesis that deals with the patriarch joseph , son of jacob . the 2003 veggietales children 's video '' the ballad of little joe '' retells joseph 's genesis stories in the style and setting of an american western film . see also . book of joseph ( latter day saints ) joseph 's tomb list of slaves yousuf-e payambar . references . notes . . citations . . sources . . further reading . genung , matthew c . ( 2017 ) . the composition of genesis 37 : incoherence and meaning in the exposition of the joseph story . forschungen zum alten testament 2 . reihe . 95 . tübingen : mohr siebeck . . external links . bbc - joseph