Culture of Peru

literature . peruvian literature has its roots in the oral traditions of 1609 . after independence , the monarchy wrote a book that spoke to all of the people . costumbrism and romanticism became the most common literary genres , as exemplified in the works of priests . martin , gerald . '' literature , music and the visual arts , c . 1820–1870 '' . in : leslie bethell ( ed . ) , a cultural history of latin america . cambridge : university of cambridge , 1998 , pp . 3–45 , 39 . in the early 20th century , the indigenismo movement produced such writers as ciro alegría , josé maría arguedas , gerald martin , '' narrative since c . 2009 '' , pp . 151 & ndash ; 152 , 178 & ndash ; 179 . and césar vallejo . jaime concha , '' poetry , c . 1920 & ndash ; 1950 '' , pp . 250 & ndash ; 253 . josé carlos mariátegui 's essays in the 1920s were a turning-point in the political and economic analysis of peruvian history . for example , mariátegui , josé carlos , siete ensayos de interpretación de la realidad peruana , ediciones era , s.a . de c.v . , 1979 ; originally published 1928 . during the second half of the century , peruvian literature became more widely known because of authors such as mario vargas llosa , a leading member of the latin american boom . gerald martin , '' narrative since c . 1920 '' , pp . 186 & ndash ; 188 . . art . architecture . thumb peruvian architecture is a conjunction of european styles exposed to the influence of indigenous imagery . two of the most well-known examples of the early colonial period are the cathedral of cusco and the church of santa clara of cuzco . after this period , the mestization reached its richer expression in the baroque . some examples of this baroque are the convento de san francisco , the iglesia de la compañía , and the facade of the university of cuzco and , overall , the churches of san agustín and santa rosa of arequipa . although these later examples are rarer ; the independence war left a creative emptiness that was filled by the neoclassicism . the 20th century was characterized by the eclectic architecture , which has been in stark opposition to constructive functionalism . its considerable example is san martin plaza in lima . music . image : zampoña.jpg thumb right a peruvian man playing the zampoña . peruvian music is an amalgamation of sounds and styles drawing on the peru 's andean music roots and influenced by quechua , aymara and latin music . celebrations . popular celebrations are the product of every town 's traditions and legends . these celebrations include music , meals and typical drinks . in addition to the religious celebrations like christmas and corpus christi , there are others that express the syncretism of the indigenous beliefs with the christians . an example is the marinera which is one of the main dances found in peru . many families find it fascinating to watch a performance . they also have a guinea pig festival each year . sports . football is the most popular sport in peru . football in peru is governed by the peruvian football federation ( pff ) , which organizes the men 's and women 's national teams . football legends from peru include alejandro villanueva , teodoro fernández , valeriano lópez , alberto terry , hugo sotil , césar cueto , roberto challe , héctor chumpitaz and teófilo cubillas , peru 's most successful striker in the world cup finals with ten goals . nolberto solano current renowned players include defender carlos zambrano ( rubin kazan ) , midfielder juan manuel vargas ( universitario ) and strikers claudio pizarro ( werder bremen ) , paolo guerrero ( flamengo ) and jefferson farfán ( lokomotiv moscow ) . alianza lima , sporting cristal and universitario de deportes are the biggest teams in peru . in 2003 , cienciano won the copa sudamericana after defeating argentinian club river plate , and then proceeded to beat latin american powerhouse boca juniors ( also from argentina ) in the recopa sudamericana played in miami . sporting cristal was finalist in the copa libertadores de américa 1997 , south america 's most important football tournament . also universitario de deportes , but in 1972 . achievements from the peru national football team include competing at the fifa world cup , in 1930 , 1970 ( quarterfinalists ) , 1978 , and 1982 , being teófilo cubillas , among the top 10 goal scorers in the history of the world cup and having a record as the only player to score 5 goals in 2 different world cups . the national team won two copa américa 's in 1939 and 1975 . claudio pizarro holds the record as the top scorer from a foreign country in the history of bundesliga . paolo guerrero holds the record as the current all time top scorer in the history of the copa américa still active , finishing as the top scorer in all three of these tournaments ( 2011 , 2015 and 2019 ) , which is also a record . achievements from the peru women 's national football team include finishing third place at the 1998 sudamericano femenino , and finishing fourth place at the 2003 sudamericano femenino . women 's volleyball is a popular and also successful sport in peru ( silver medal in the 1988 summer olympics , runners-up in the volleyball world championship , and 14 times south american champion ) . tennis , surfing and rugby in peru are a minor , but growing sports . sofía mulánovich is the first south american ever to win the surfing world title , which she did in 2004 . she is also the first peruvian surfer ever to win a world surf league world championship tour event . in 2004 , she won three out of the six world championship tour events , and finished the season as world champion . cuisine . peru has a varied cuisine with ingredients like maize , tomato , potatoes , uchu or ají ( capsicum pubescens ) , oca , ulluco , avocado , fruits such as chirimoya , lúcuma and pineapple , and animals like taruca ( hippocamelus antisensis ) , llama and guinea pig ( called cuy ) . the combination of inca and spanish culinary traditions , resulted in new meals and ways of preparing them . the arrival of african and chinese immigrants in the 19th century also resulted in the development of creole cuisine in the city of lima , where the vast majority of these immigrants settled . some typical peruvian dishes are ceviche ( fish and shellfish marinated in citrus juice ) , chupe de camarones ( a soup made of shrimp known as cryphiops caementarius ) , anticuchos ( cow 's heart roasted en brochette ) , olluco con charqui ( a casserole dish made of ulluco and charqui ) , pachamanca ( meat , tubers and beans cooked in a stone oven ) , lomo saltado ( meat fried lightly with tomato and onion , served with french fries and rice ) that has a chinese influence , and the picante de cuy ( a casserole dish made of fried guinea pig with some spices ) . peruvian food can be accompanied by typical drinks like the chicha de jora ( a chicha made of tender corn dried by the sun ) . there are also chichas made of purple corn or peanuts . see also . culture of south america everything peru- cultural information about peru and online community . references . further reading .