Spruce

morphology . determining that a tree is a spruce is not difficult ; evergreen needles that are more or less quadrangled , and especially the pulvinus , give it away . beyond that , determination can become more difficult . intensive sampling in the smithers/hazelton/houston area of british columbia showed douglas ( 1975 ) , douglas , g.w . ( 1975 ) . spruce ( picea ) hybridization in west-central british columbia . b.c . min . for . , forest science , smithers bc , unpublished report , cited by coates et al . 1994 . ( cited by coates et al . 1994 , orig . not seen ) according to coates et al . ( 1994 ) , coates , k.d . ; haeussler , s . ; lindeburgh , s . ; pojar , r . ; stock , a.j . ( 1994 ) . ecology and silviculture of interior spruce in british columbia . canada/british columbia partnership agreement for . resour . devel . , victoria bc , frda rep . 220 . 182 p . that cone scale morphology was the feature most useful in differentiating species of spruce ; the length , width , length : width ratio , the length of free scale ( the distance from the imprint of the seed wing to the tip of the scale ) , and the percentage free scale ( length of free scale as a percentage of the total length of the scale ) were most useful in this regard . daubenmire ( 1974 ) , after range-wide sampling , had already recognized the importance of the 2 latter characters . taylor ( 1959 ) ( cited in coates et al . 1994 ) . had noted that the most obvious morphological difference between typical picea glauca and typical p . engelmannii was the cone scale , and horton ( 1956,1959 ) horton , k.w . ( 1956 ) . a taxonomic and ecological study of picea glauca and picea engelmannii in north america . diploma thesis , oxford univ . , u.k . 103 p . horton , k.w . ( 1959 ) . characteristics of subalpine spruce in alberta . can . dep . northern affairs national resour . , for . branch , for . res . div . , ottawa on , tech . note 76 . 20 p . found that the most useful diagnostic features of the 2 spruces are in the cone ; differences occur in the flower , shoot and needle , '' but those in the cone are most easily assessed '' ( horton 1959 ) . coupé et al . ( 1982 ) coupé , r . ; ray , c.a . ; comeau , a . ; ketcheson , m.v . ; annas , r.m . ( 1982 ) . a guide to some common plants of the skeena area , british columbia . b.c . min . for . , res . branch , victoria bc . recommended that cone scale characters be based on samples taken from the midsection of each of 10 cones from each of 5 trees in the population of interest . without cones , morphological differentiation among spruce species and their hybrids is more difficult . species classification for seeds collected from spruce stands in which introgressive hybridization between white and sitka spruces ( p . sitchensis ) may have occurred is important for determining appropriate cultural regimens in the nursery . if , for instance , white spruce grown at container nurseries in southwestern british columbia are not given an extended photoperiod , leader growth ceases early in the first growing season , and seedlings do not reach the minimum height specifications . arnott , j.t . ( 1974 ) . '' germination and seedling establishment '' . pp . 55–66 in cayford , j.h . ( ed . ) . direct seeding symposium , timmins on , sept . 1973 , can . dep . environ . , can . for . serv . , ottawa on , proc . , publ . 1339 . but , if an extended photoperiod is provided for sitka spruce , seedlings become unacceptably tall by the end of the first growing season . species classification of seedlots collected in areas where hybridization of white and sitka spruces has been reported has depended on ( i ) easily measured cone scale characters of seed trees , especially free scale length , ( ii ) visual judgements of morphological characters , e.g . , growth rhythm , shoot and root weight , and needle serration , or ( iii ) some combination of ( i ) and ( ii ) ( yeh and arnott 1986 ) . useful to a degree , these classification procedures have important limitations ; genetic composition of the seeds produced by a stand is determined by both the seed trees and the pollen parents , and species classification of hybrid seedlots and estimates of their level of introgression on the basis of seed-tree characteristics can be unreliable when hybrid seedlots vary in their introgressiveness in consequence of spatial and temporal variations in contributions from the pollen parent ( yeh and arnott 1986 ) . secondly , morphological characters are markedly influenced by ontogenetic and environmental influences , so that to discern spruce hybrid seedlot composition with accuracy , hybrid seedlots must differ substantially in morphology from both parent species . yeh and arnott ( 1986 ) pointed out the difficulties of estimating accurately the degree of introgression between white and sitka spruces ; introgression may have occurred at low levels , and/or hybrid seed lots may vary in their degree of introgression in consequence of repeated backcrossing with parental species . growth . spruce seedlings are most susceptible immediately following germination , and remain highly susceptible through to the following spring . more than half of spruce seedling mortality probably occurs during the first growing season and is also very high during the first winter , alexander , r.r . ( 1987 ) . ecology , silviculture , and management of the engelmann spruce–subalpine fir type in the central and southern rocky mountains . usda , for . serv . , washington dc , agric . handb . 659 . 144 p . when seedlings are subjected to freezing damage , frost heaving and erosion , as well as smothering by litter and snow-pressed vegetation . seedlings that germinate late in the growing season are particularly vulnerable because they are tiny and have not had time to harden off fully . mortality rates generally decrease sharply thereafter , but losses often remain high for some years . '' establishment '' is a subjective concept based on the idea that once a seedling has successfully reached a certain size , not much is likely to prevent its further development . criteria vary , of course , but noble and ronco ( 1978 ) , noble , d.l . ; ronco , f . ( 1978 ) . seedfall and establishment of engelmann spruce and subalpine fir in clearcut openings in colorado . usda , for . serv . , rocky mountain for . range exp . sta . , res . pap . rm-200 . 12 p . for instance , considered that seedlings 4 to 5 years old , or 8 & nbsp ; cm to 10 & nbsp ; cm tall , warranted the designation '' established '' , since only unusual factors such as snow mold , fire , trampling , or predation would then impair regeneration success . eis ( 1967 ) suggested that in dry habitats on either mineral soil or litter seedbeds a 3-year-old seedling may be considered established ; in moist habitats , seedlings may need 4 or 5 years to become established on mineral soil , possibly longer on litter seedbeds . growth remains very slow for several to many years . three years after shelterwood cutting in subalpine alberta , dominant regeneration averaged 5.5 & nbsp ; cm in height in scarified blocks , and 7.3 & nbsp ; cm in non-scarified blocks ( day 1970 ) , day , m.w . ; rudolph , v.j . ( 1970 ) . development of a white spruce plantation . michigan state univ . , agric . exp . sta . , east lansing mi , res . pap . 111 . 4 p . possibly reflecting diminished fertility with the removal of the a horizon . uses . timber . spruce is useful as a building wood , commonly referred to by several different names including north american timber , spf ( spruce , pine , fir ) and whitewood ( the collective name for spruce wood ) . spruce wood is used for many purposes , ranging from general construction work and crates to highly specialised uses in wooden aircraft . the wright brothers ' first aircraft , the flyer , was built of spruce . because this species has no insect or decay resistance qualities after logging , it is generally recommended for construction purposes as indoor use only ( indoor drywall framing , for example ) . spruce wood , when left outside can not be expected to last more than 12–18 months depending on the type of climate it is exposed to . . pulpwood . spruce is one of the most important woods for paper uses , as it has long wood fibres which bind together to make strong paper . the fibres are thin walled and collapse to thin bands upon drying . spruces are commonly used in mechanical pulping as they are easily bleached . together with northern pines , northern spruces are commonly used to make nbsk . spruces are plantation over vast areas as pulpwood . food and medicine . the fresh shoots of many spruces are a natural source of vitamin c . captain cook made alcoholic sugar-based spruce beer during his sea voyages in order to prevent scurvy in his crew . the leaves and branches , or the essential oils , can be used to brew spruce beer . the tips from the needles can be used to make spruce tip syrup . in survival situations spruce needles can be directly ingested or boiled into a tea . this replaces large amounts of vitamin c . also , water is stored in a spruce 's needles , providing an alternative means of hydration . spruce can be used as a preventive measure for scurvy in an environment where meat is the only prominent food source . tonewood . spruce is the standard material used in soundboards for many musical instruments , including guitars , mandolins , cellos , violins , and the soundboard at the heart of a piano and the harp . wood used for this purpose is referred to as tonewood . spruce , along with cedar , is often used for the soundboard/top of an acoustic guitar . the main types of spruce used for this purpose are sitka , engelmann , adirondack and european spruces . other uses . the resin was used in the manufacture of pitch in the past ( before the use of petrochemicals ) ; the scientific name picea derives from latin '' pitch pine '' ( referring to scots pine ) , from , an adjective from '' pitch '' . native americans in north america use the thin , pliable roots of some species for weaving baskets and for sewing together pieces of birch bark for canoes . see also kiidk'yaas for an unusual golden sitka spruce sacred to the haida people . spruces are popular ornamental trees in horticulture , admired for their evergreen , symmetrical narrow-conic growth habit . for the same reason , some ( particularly picea abies and p . omorika ) are also extensively used as christmas trees , with artificial christmas trees often being produced in their likenesses . spruce branches are also used at aintree racecourse , liverpool , to build several of the fences on the grand national course . it is also used to make sculptures . diseases . sirococcus blight ( deuteromycotina , coelomtcetes ) . the closely related species sirococcus conigenus and s . piceicola cause shoot blight and seedling mortality of conifers in north america , europe , and north africa . twig blight damage to seedlings of white and red spruces in a nursery near asheville , north carolina , was reported by graves ( 1914 ) . hosts include white , black , engelmann , norway , and red spruces , although they are not the plants most commonly damaged . sirococcus blight of spruces in nurseries show up randomly in seedlings to which the fungus was transmitted in infested seed . first-year seedlings are often killed , and larger plants may become too deformed for planting . outbreaks involving davis , c . ( 24 september 1997 ) '' tree talk '' . the sault star . marie , ontario . p . b2 . . valsa kunzei branch and stem canker . a branch and stem canker associated with the fungus valsa kunzei fr . var . picea was reported on white and norway spruces in ontario ( jorgensen and cafley 1961 ) and quebec ( ouellette and bard 1962 ) . in ontario , only trees of low vigour were affected , but in quebec vigorous trees were also infected . predators . small mammals consume conifer seeds , and also eat seedlings . cage feeding of deer mice ( peromyscus maniculatus ) and red-backed vole ( myodes gapperi ) showed a daily maximum seed consumption of 2000 white spruce seeds and of 1000 seeds of pinus contorta , with the 2 species of mice consuming equal amounts of seed , but showing a preference for the pine over the spruce ( wagg 1963 ) . the short-tailed meadow vole ( microtus pennsylvanicus ord ) voraciously ate all available white spruce and lodgepole pine seedlings , pulling them out of the ground and holding them between their front feet until the whole seedling had been consumed . wagg ( 1963 ) attributed damage observed to the bark and cambium at ground level of small white spruce seedlings over several seasons to meadow voles . once shed , seeds contribute to the diet of small mammals , e.g . , deer mice , red-backed voles , montane vole ( microtus montanus ) , and chipmunks ( eutamias minimus ) . the magnitude of the loss is difficult to determine , and studies with and without seed protection have yielded conflicting results . in western montana , for example , spruce seedling success was little better on protected than on unprotected seed spots ( schopmeyer and helmers 1947 ) , schopmeyer , c.s . ; helmers , a.e . 1947 . seeding as a means of reforestation in the northern rocky mountain region . usda for . serv . , washington dc , circular 772 . 30 p . but in british columbia spruce regeneration depended on protection from rodents ( smith 1955 ) . smith , j.h.g . 1955 1956 acc to e3999 bib . some factors affecting reproduction of engelmann spruce and alpine fir . british columbia dep . lands for . , for . serv . , victoria bc , tech . publ . 43 p . coates et al . 1994 , nienstaedt and teich 1972 an important albeit indirect biotic constraint on spruce establishment is the depredation of seed by squirrels . as much as 90 % of a cone crop has been harvested by red squirrels ( zasada et al . 1978 ) . zasada , j.c . ; foote , m.j . ; deneke , f.j . ; parkerson , r.h . 1978 . case history of an excellent white spruce cone and seed crop in interior alaska : cone and seed production , germination and seedling survival . usda , for . serv . , pacific nw for . range exp . sta . , portland or , gen . tech . rep . pnw-65 . 53 p . deer mice , voles , chipmunks , and shrews can consume large quantities of seed ; 1 mouse can eat 2000 seeds per night . repeated applications of half a million seeds/ha failed to produce the 750 trees/ha sought by northwest pulp and power , ltd . , near hinton , alberta ( radvanyi 1972 ) , radvanyi , a . 1972 . small mammals and regeneration of white spruce in western alberta . p . 21–23 in mcminn , r.g . ( ed . ) . white spruce : ecology of a northern resource . can . dep . environ . , can . for . serv . , edmonton ab , inf . rep . nor-x-40 . but no doubt left a lot of well-fed small mammals . foraging by squirrels for winter buds ( rowe 1952 ) rowe , j.s . 1952 . squirrel damage to white spruce . can . dep . resour . devel . , for . branch , for . res . div . , ottawa on , silv . leafl . 61 . 2 p . has not been reported in relation to young plantations , but wagg ( 1963 ) noted that at hinton ab , red squirrels were observed cutting the lateral and terminal twigs and feeding on the vegetative and flower buds of white spruce . red squirrels in alaska have harvested as much as 90 % of a cone crop ( zasada et al . 1978 ) ; their modus operandi is to cut off great numbers of cones with great expedition early in the fall , and then '' spend the rest of the fall shelling out the seeds '' . in manitoba , rowe ( 1952 ) ascribed widespread severing of branch tips 5 & nbsp ; cm to 10 & nbsp ; cm long on white spruce ranging '' from sapling to veteran size '' to squirrels foraging for winter buds , cone failure having excluded the more usual food source . the damage has not been reported in relation to small trees , outplants or otherwise . porcupines ( erethizon dorsatum l . ) may damage spruce ( nienstaedt 1957 ) , nienstaedt , h . 1957 . silvical characteristics of white spruce ( picea glauca ) . usda , for . serv . , lake states for . exp . sta . , st . paul mn , pap . 55 . 24 p . but prefer red pine ( mcleod 1956 ) . mcleod , j.w . 1956 . plantations of the acadia forest experiment station . can . dep . northern affairs national resour . , for . branch , for . res . div . , ottawa on , tech . note 31 . 25 p . bark-stripping of white spruce by black bear ( euarctos americanus perniger ) is locally important in alaska ( lutz 1951 ) , but the bark of white spruce is not attacked by field mice ( microtus pennsylvanicus ord ) , even in years of heavy infestation . pests . the eastern spruce budworm ( choristoneura fumiferana ) is a major pest of spruce trees in forests throughout canada and the eastern united states . two of the main host plants are black spruce and white spruce . balch , r.e . ; webb , f.e . ; morris , r.f . ( 1954 ) . results of spraying against spruce budworm in new brunswick . can . dep . agric . , for . biol . div . , ottawa on , bi-mo . progr . rep . 10 ( 1 ) . population levels oscillate , sometimes reaching extreme outbreak levels that can cause extreme defoliation of and damage to spruce trees . to reduce destruction , there are multiple methods of control in place , including pesticides . horntails , or wood wasps , use this tree for egg laying and the larvae will live in the outer inch of the tree under the bark . spruce beetles ( dendroctonus rufipennis ) have destroyed swathes of spruce forest in western north america from alaska to wyoming . genome . the nuclear , mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of british columbia interior spruce have been sequenced . the large ( 20 gbp ) nuclear genome and associated gene annotations of interior spruce ( genotype pg29 ) were published in 2013 . and 2015 . . references . external links . theplantlist.org / picea ( spruce ) conifers.org / gymnosperm database - picea efloras.org / picea pinetum.org / arboretum de villardebelle : cones of selected species of picea : page 1 , arboretum de villardebelle page 2