Intersection (road)

types . road segments . one way to classify intersections is by the number of road segments ( arms ) that are involved . a three-way junction is a junction between three road segments ( arms ) : a t junction when two arms form one road , or a y junction , the latter also known as a fork if approached from the stem of the y . a four-way intersection , or crossroads , usually involves a crossing over of two streets or roads . in areas where there are blocks and in some other cases , the crossing streets or roads are perpendicular to each other . however , two roads may cross at a different angle . in a few cases , the junction of two road segments may be offset from each when reaching an intersection , even though both ends may be considered the same street . six-way intersections usually involve a crossing of three streets at one junction ; for example , a crossing of two perpendicular streets and a diagonal street is a rather common type of 6-way intersection . five , seven or more approaches to a single intersection , such as at seven dials , london , are not common . traffic controls . another way of classifying intersections is by traffic control technology : uncontrolled intersections , without signs or signals ( or sometimes with a warning sign ) . priority ( right-of-way ) rules may vary by country : on a 4-way intersection traffic from the right often has priority ; on a 3-way intersection either traffic from the right has priority again , or traffic on the continuing road . for traffic coming from the same or opposite direction , that which goes straight has priority over that which turns off . yield-controlled intersections may or may not have specific yield signs ( known as '' give way '' signs in some countries ) . stop-controlled intersections have one or more stop sign . two-way stops are common , while some countries also employ all-way stops . signal-controlled intersections depend on traffic signals , usually electric , which indicate which traffic is allowed to proceed at any particular time . lane design . a roundabout is a type of intersection at which traffic streams are directed around a circle . types of traffic circles include roundabouts , '' mini-roundabouts '' , '' rotaries '' , '' stop '' -controlled circles , and signal-controlled circles . some people consider roundabouts to be a distinct type of intersection from traffic circles ( with the distinction based on certain differences in size and engineering ) . a box junction can be added to an intersection , generally prohibiting entry to the intersection unless the exit is clear . some ( unconventional or alternative ) intersections employ indirect left turns to increase capacity and reduce delays . the michigan left combines a right turn and a u-turn . jughandle lefts diverge to the right , then curve to the left , converting a left turn to a crossing maneuver , similar to throughabouts . these techniques are generally used in conjunction with signal-controlled intersections , although they may also be used at stop-controlled intersections . steyn , hermanus . ( 2014 ) . displaced left-turn intersection informational guide . washington , d.c . : u.s . department of transportation , federal highway administration . other designs include advanced stop lines , parallel-flow and continuous-flow intersections , hook turns , quadrants , seagull intersections , slip lanes , staggered junctions , superstreets , texas ts , texas u-turns and turnarounds . a roundabout and its variants like turbo roundabouts , bowties and distributing circles like traffic circles and right-in/right-out ( riro ) intersections . turns . at intersections , turns are usually allowed , but are often regulated to avoid interference with other traffic . certain turns may be not allowed or may be limited by regulatory signs or signals , particularly those that cross oncoming traffic . alternative designs often attempt to reduce or eliminate such potential conflicts . turn lanes . at intersections with large proportions of turning traffic , turn lanes ( also known as turn bays ) may be provided . for example , in the intersection shown in the diagram , left turn lanes are present in the right-left street . turn lanes allow vehicles to cross oncoming traffic ( i.e . , a left turn in right-side driving countries , or a right turn in left-side driving countries ) , or to exit a road without crossing traffic ( i.e . , a right turn in right-side driving countries , or a left turn in left-side driving countries ) . absence of a turn lane does not normally indicate a prohibition of turns in that direction . instead , traffic control signs are used to prohibit specific turns . turn lanes can increase the capacity of an intersection or improve safety . turn lanes can have a dramatic effect on the safety of a junction . in rural areas , crash frequency can be reduced by up to 48 % if left turn lanes are provided on both main-road approaches at stop-controlled intersections . at signalized intersections , crashes can be reduced by 33 % . results are slightly lower in urban areas . d.w . harwood , et al . , safety effectiveness of intersection left- and right-turn lanes , federal highway administration office of safety research and development , 2002 , turn lanes are marked with an arrow bending into the direction of the turn which is to be made from that lane . multi-headed arrows indicate that vehicle drivers may travel in any one of the directions pointed to by an arrow . turn signals . traffic signals facing vehicles in turn lanes often have arrow-shaped indications . north america uses various indication patterns . green arrows indicate protected turn phases , when vehicles may turn unhindered by oncoming traffic . red arrows may be displayed to prohibit turns in that direction . red arrows may be displayed along with a circular green indication to show that turns in the direction of the arrow are prohibited , but other movements are allowed . in some jurisdictions , a red arrow prohibits a turn on red . new york state driver 's manual , chapter 4 . in europe , if different lanes have differing phases , red , yellow and green traffic lights corresponding to each lane have blacked-out areas in the middle in the shape of arrows indicating the direction ( s ) drivers in that lane may travel in . this makes it easier for drivers to be aware which traffic light they need to pay attention to . a green arrow may also be provided ; when it is on , drivers heading in the direction of the arrow may proceed , but must yield to all other vehicles . this is similar to the right turn on red in the us . vienna convention on road signs and signals disadvantages to turn lanes include increased pavement area , with associated increases in construction and maintenance costs , as well as increased amounts of stormwater runoff . they also increase the distance over which pedestrians crossing the street are exposed to vehicle traffic . if a turn lane has a separate signal phase , it often increases the delay experienced by oncoming through traffic . without a separate phase , left crossing traffic does not get the full safety benefit of the turn lane . lane management . alternative intersection configurations , formerly called unconventional intersections , can manage turning traffic to increase safety and intersection throughput . these include the michigan left/superstreet ( rcut/mut ) and continuous flow intersection ( cfi/dlt ) , to improve traffic flow , and also interchange types like diverging diamond interchange ( ddi/dcd ) design as part of the federal highway administration 's every day counts initiative which started in 2012 . frame . vulnerable road users . pedestrians . intersections generally must manage pedestrian as well as vehicle traffic . pedestrian aids include crosswalks , pedestrian-directed traffic signals ( '' walk light '' ) and over/underpasses . traffic signals can be time consuming to navigate , especially if programmed to prioritise vehicle flow over pedestrians , while over and underpasses which rely on stairs are inaccessible to those who ca n't climb them . walk lights may be accompanied by audio signals to aid the visually impaired . medians can offer pedestrian islands , allowing pedestrians to divide their crossings into a separate segment for each traffic direction , possibly with a separate signal for each . some intersections display red lights in all directions for a period of time . known as a pedestrian scramble , this type of vehicle all-way stop allows pedestrians to cross safely in any direction , including diagonally . all green for non motorists is known from the crossing at shibuya station , tokyo . . cyclists and motorcyclists . poor visibility at junctions can lead to drivers colliding with cyclists and motorcyclists . some junctions use advanced stop lines which allow cyclists to filter to the front of a traffic queue which makes them more visible to drivers . safety . a european study found that in germany and denmark , the most important crash scenario involving vulnerable road users was : motor vehicle turning right/left while cyclist going straight ; motor vehicle turning right/left while pedestrian crossing the intersection approach . . at grade railways . in the case of railways or rail tracks the term at grade applies to a rail line that is not on an embankment nor in an open cut . as such , it crosses streets and roads without going under or over them . this requires level crossings . at-grade railways may run along the median of a highway . the opposite is grade-separated . there may be overpasses or underpasses .