John MacBride

early life . john macbride was born at the quay , westport , county mayo , ireland , to patrick macbride , a shopkeeper and trader , and the former honoria gill , who survived her son . john macbride . the national library of ireland . retrieved on 23 september 2007 . a plaque marks the building on the westport quays where he was born ( now the helm bar and restaurant ) . he was educated at the christian brothers ' school , westport , and at st . malachy 's college , belfast . his red hair and long nose led to him being given the nickname '' foxy jack '' . he worked for a period in a drapery shop in castlerea , county roscommon . he had studied medicine , but gave it up and began working with a chemist 's firm in dublin . he joined the irish republican brotherhood and was associated with michael cusack in the early days of the catholic church founded gaelic athletic association . he also joined the celtic literary society through which he came to know arthur griffith who was to remain a friend and influence throughout his life . beginning in 1893 , macbride was termed a '' dangerous nationalist '' by the british government . in 1896 he went to the united states on behalf of the irb . in the same year he returned and emigrated to south africa . . participation in the second anglo-boer war . he took part in the second boer war , where he raised the irish transvaal brigade . what became known as macbride 's brigade was first commanded by an irish american , colonel john blake , an ex-us cavalry officer . macbride recommended blake as commander since macbride himself had no military experience . jordan , anthony j . boer war to easter rising , westport books 2006 p.13 the brigade was given official recognition by the boer government with the commissions of the brigade 's officers signed by state secretary f.w . reitz . macbride was commissioned with the rank of major in the boer army and given boer citizenship . the 500 irish and irish-americans fought the british . often these irish commandos were fighting opposite such irish regiments as the royal dublin fusiliers and the royal inniskilling fusiliers . from the hills around the besieged town of ladysmith to the plains of the orange free state , macbride 's brigade first looked after the 155 mm creusot long tom , then fought in the battle of colenso and later held the rearguard , harassing lord roberts ' cavalry as the boer army retreated . a second irish brigade was organised by arthur lynch . the arrival in the irish camp of an irish-american ambulance corps bolstered macbride 's brigade . michael davitt who had resigned as an m.p , visited macbride 's brigade . when col . blake was injured at ladysmith macbride had to take sole command of the brigade . though blake later returned for a short period he later left the brigade to join another commando . in ireland , pro-boer feeling , informed by arthur griffith and maud gonne formed the most popular and most fervent of the european pro-boer movements . however , more than 16,000 irish-british fought for the british army against the boers . . marriage to maud gonne . when macbride became a citizen of the transvaal , the british considered that , as an irishman and citizen of the united kingdom of great britain and ireland , he had given aid to the enemy . after the war he travelled to paris where maud gonne lived . in 1903 , he married her to the disapproval of many , including w . b . yeats , who considered her his muse and had previously proposed to her . patrick j . little , editor of 'new ireland ' , who had published both yeats and gonne recalled an extreme case that almost prevented the marriage : the following year their son sean macbride was born . yeats wrote to lady gregory in january 1905 , the month macbride and maud separated , that he had been told macbride had molested his stepdaughter , iseult , who was 10 at that time . sinead mccoole , '' no ordinary women '' ( dublin 2012 ) , biographies the marriage had already failed but the couple could not agree on custody of sean . maud instituted divorce proceedings in paris . no divorce was given but in a separation agreement , maud won custody to the baby until age 12 . the father got visiting rights and one month each summer . macbride returned to dublin and never saw his son again . jordan anthony j . the yeats gonne macbride triangle ( westport books 2000 ) pp . & nbsp ; 49–104 anthony j . jordan argues that macbride was a much-maligned man in the divorce proceedings . he posits that on the merit of wb yeats believing maud gonne 's accusations against her husband , successive biographers of yeats have treated them as factual , ignoring the verdict of the parisian divorce court which found macbride innocent . dr . caoimhe nic dhaibhid writes that '' the target of jordan 's argument has been a number of biographies of w . b . yeats , particularly roy foster 's landmark 1997 . '' she appears to endorse jordan 's position . irish historical studies no 140 . november 2010 caoimhe nic dhaibhid '' the breakdown of the macbride-gonne marriage 1904-08 '' no . 144 november 2010 donal fallon , macbride 's recent biographer , quotes the poet paul durcan , the grandson of joseph macbride and eileen wilson , as believing that macbride '' was unquestionably defamed '' and lays much of the blame on the '' people in the yeats-maud gonne industry '' . about forty years after the marriage had ended , maud herself attributed the breakdown of the marriage to john 's loneliness and a drink problem in paris , during her frequent trips to ireland without him . . 1916 easter rising . after returning permanently from paris to dublin in 1905 macbride joined other irish nationalists in preparing for an insurrection . because he was so well known to the british , the leaders thought it wise to keep him outside their secret military group planning a rising . as a result he happened to find himself in the midst of the rising without notice . he was in dublin early on easter monday morning to meet his brother dr . anthony macbride , who was arriving from westport to be married on the wednesday . the major walked up grafton st and saw thomas macdonagh in uniform and leading his troops . he offered his services and was appointed second-in-command at the jacob 's factory . after the rising , macbride , following a court martial under the defence of the realm act , was shot by british army in kilmainham gaol , dublin . in dublin . yeats , who was jealous of macbride for marrying maud gonne ( and later proposed to her daughter iseult ) gave macbride an ambivalent eulogy in his poem '' easter , 1916 '' : maud gonne wrote to yeats , '' no i dont like your poem , it is n't worthy of you & above all it is n't worthy of its subject . as for my husband he has entered eternity by the great door of sacrifice… so that praying for him i can also ask for his prayers '' . . legacy . in november 2016 ciarán macsuibhne , a member of the local st patrick ’ s drama group wrote an amateur , three-act play detailing various stages in macbride 's life including his experiences in the second boer war , his marriage to and separation from maud gonne and the concern regarding the future of their only child , seán , which followed . the play , which featured the poetry of yeats , also covers the period following macbride 's execution . the opening and closing scenes of the play , in particular were described as '' very moving '' . the character of maud gonne 's half-sister , eileen wilson was played by wilson 's great-granddaughter , bernardine walsh macbride . the play , which was shown in the westport town hall theatre , was described by the mayo news as '' a fitting tribute by a local drama group to a local hero '' . . notes . bibliography . boylan , henry , a dictionary of irish biography dublin , gill & macmillan 1999 fallon , donal , john macbride , dublin , o'brien press , 2015 jordan , anthony j . ' major john macbride ' , westport historical society 1991 jordan anthony j . ' willie yeats & the gonne macbrides ' , westport historical society 1997 . jordan anthony j . ' the yeats/gonne/macbride triangle ' , westport books 2000 . jordan anthony j . ' boer war to easter rising ; the writings of major john macbride ' westport books 2006 . o'malley , ernie , on another man 's wound published 1937 purdon , edward , the 1916 rising mercier press ltd 1999 . external links . '' john macbride ( 1865-1916 ) '' , ricorso