An Extremely Goofy Movie

plot . after max goof goes to college with his friends p.j . and bobby , goofy 's empty nest syndrome causes him to disastrously falter at work , resulting in his dismissal . at the unemployment office , goofy is told that he needs a college degree to get another job . max and his friends meet bradley uppercrust iii , the leader of the gamma mu mu fraternity and a veteran skateboarder . bradley is impressed by max 's own skateboarding talent and invites him to join the gammas and take part in the college 's x games . max declines the offer due to the condition that he can not bring his friends along . following a skirmish , the two parties place a bet in which the loser becomes the other group 's towel boy . to max 's horror , goofy begins attending the same college and interrupts the group 's down-time with chores . max decides to distract his father by introducing him to the college librarian , sylvia marpole , with whom he has much in common . goofy accidentally impresses bradley with his clumsy attempt at skateboarding and is invited to join the gammas , which he accepts upon max 's encouragement . during the first qualifiers for the x games , bradley discreetly blinds max with a pocket mirror during his performance and installs a rocket booster on goofy 's skateboard . goofy beats max and max 's team barely makes the semi-finals . eventually , max lashes out at goofy , telling him to stay out of his life and storms off in anger . a depressed goofy fails his first midterm exam and misses a date with sylvia . returning home , goofy is inspired by his neighbor , pete to regain his focus . goofy goes back to college and reconciles with sylvia , who helps him ace the rest of his exams . as goofy decides to quit the gammas , he overhears the group plotting to cheat for the semi-finals , but max , still angry with his father over beating him in the qualifiers , refuses to listen . at the semi-finals , all teams but max 's and the gammas ' are eliminated . just before the final triathlon , bradley eliminates p.j . from the games , leaving max 's team short one player and spurring max to recruit and apologize to goofy via the jumbotron . throughout the race , bradley and his team attempt to hinder max 's team , but fail . although goofy manages to temporarily knock out bradley with a horseshoe in the final section of the race , his final trick results in max and gamma member , tank , getting trapped underneath the wreckage of a logo . as bradley passes them by , max and goofy rescue tank , who assists max in winning the race . afterwards , bradley concedes his defeat as max calls off the bet , but allows a vengeful tank to advance on bradley for betraying him , telling him that he is now the current leader of the gammas before flinging him into the x games blimp overhead . during graduation day , max gives goofy his grand-prize trophy engraved with an affirmation of their bond as an apology gift for his outburst towards him just before goofy drives off with sylvia . voice cast . bill farmer as goofy . goofy inconveniences the lives of those around him by accident , but always has the best intentions at heart . he spends most of the movie coming to terms with not being needed as a guardian for max anymore . andrew collins served as the supervising animator for goofy . jason marsden as max . now 18-years-old and college-bound , his attempts to distance himself from goofy wind up making things worse for him . by finally accepting goofy as a major part of his life , he was able to find the independence he long sought . bob baxter and steven trenbirth served as the supervising animators for max . jeff bennett as bradley uppercrust iii , the leader of the gamma mu mu fraternity and the main antagonist of the film . he is extremely arrogant and proud of his position as head of the fraternity and will do everything he can to keep it that way . kevin peaty served as the supervising animator for bradley . bennett also voices the unemployment lady , chuck the sportscaster , ken clark ( uncredited ) , a diminutive member of the gammas ( uncredited ) , and an x-games referee ( uncredited ) . jim cummings as pete , p.j . 's father . unlike goofy , pete is looking forward to rid himself of p.j . according to p.j . , pete intends to turn the latter 's room into a bowling alley once he leaves for college . cummings also voices goofy 's boss at beekins toy company ( uncredited ) , a member of the gammas who wears sunglasses ( uncredited ) , and both a professor and a tour guide at the college ( both uncredited ) . vicki lewis as the beret girl , a charismatic and suave stage performer in the college café called the '' bean scene '' . she becomes p.j . 's love interest when the latter shows innate talent in poetry , and supports max 's group in general as they take on the gammas . kevin peaty served as the supervising animator for the beret girl . bebe neuwirth as sylvia marpole , the college librarian who immediately becomes goofy 's love interest when she is shown to share goofy 's love for american culture from the 1970s . andrew collins served as the supervising animator for sylvia . rob paulsen as p.j . max 's best friend since childhood . unlike max , p.j . is somewhat woeful about how he never earned his dad 's genuine respect but finds confidence after meeting with beret girl . bob baxter and steven trenbirth served as the supervising animators for p.j . paulsen also voices a member of the gammas with black hair and a big snout ( uncredited ) , and an attendant at the x-games semifinals ( uncredited ) . pauly shore as robert '' bobby '' zimuruski . max 's other best friend . bob baxter and steven trenbirth served as the supervising animators for bobby . unlike the first film , shore receives credit for his work . brad garrett as tank , the second-in-command ( later current leader ) of the gammas . tank is big in stature , towering over the other characters , and serves as a typical muscle man for the gammas . additional voices include paddi edwards as a receptionist and kath soucie , jenna von oÿ ( who voiced stacey in the first film ) and cree summer as college students . soundtrack . unlike its predecessor , this film has no musical sequences where the characters sing on-screen . however , a number of songs are used in the soundtrack and have been included in the official album release which is titled disney 's an extremely goofy movie dance party ! , released in february 2000 alongside the film itself . '' future 's so bright i got ta wear shades '' – pat benatar and neil giraldo '' do n't give up '' – john avila , terrence a . carson , carmen carter and carl graves '' nowhere to run '' – john avila '' pressure drop '' – the specials '' shake your groove thing '' – peaches & herb '' you make me feel like dancing '' – carmen carter and donnie mcclurkin espn x games theme 1 and theme 2 '' c'mon get happy ! '' – the partridge family '' knock on wood '' – carmen carter espn x games theme 3 '' right back where we started from '' – cleopatra . promotion . a number of mcdonald 's happy meal toys based on the film were produced and released for the month of february 2000 . reception . the film was released on february 29 , 2000 to positive reviews from critics , who called it '' likable , '' '' fun , '' '' funny , '' '' ambitious and surprisingly good , '' and goofy 's character in the film '' limber and funny as ever . '' the houston chronicles bruce westbrook praised its '' fluid '' animation , '' handsomely detailed '' backgrounds , and the '' charming '' sequences with the beret girl . randy myers of the contra costa times complimented its positive take on the father-and-son relationship trope as '' refreshing '' compared to other films painting it in a negative manner . many touches were positively noted , such as the elements of 1970s ' culture , the soundtrack ( particularly its 1970s tracks and the newly-recorded covers ) , movie parodies ( such as the gooffather , the goofinator and pup fiction too ) , and a line making fun of characters '' always wearing gloves '' in the disney universe . subplots such the skateboard competition and the '' sweet '' relationship between goofy and sylvia were highlighted as well . an extremely goofy movies less favorable reviews categorized the film as a weaker version of rodney dangerfield 's back to school . and the los angeles times susan king who wrote that despite '' some funny lines and scenes , '' it lacked heart due to lack of character development for goofy . michael scheinfeld of common sense media praised the film 's morals of '' the importance of education , of not cheating , and staying focused on one 's goals , '' but disliked its attempts to be hip and the '' less-than-exemplary character traits '' that paint an inaccurate picture of college students . barbara bova of naples daily news also dismissed the film for the immature behavior of the college students as well as the dysfunctional relationship between max and goofy and a '' depressing , '' humorless plot where '' the adults are no smarter than the kids '' and '' goofy is the essential innocent who is stupid with a capital s . '' scheinfeld also called the animation '' less sophisticated than disney 's theatrical films , but features some amusing and stylish touches , such as a psychedelic dream sequence in the style of yellow submarine , and a school dance that goofy turns into a disco inferno . '' petrana radulovic of polygon , in 2019 , ranked an extremely goofy movie the sixth best disney sequel , labeling it as '' all delightfully bonkers '' and claiming its best aspects to be the beret girl and bobby 's poke on disney characters wearing gloves ; she also , however , criticized some of its content as '' stuck in a gnarly late- ’ 90s vortex . '' an extremely goofy movie won the award for '' best animated home video production '' and bill farmer was nominated for '' best voice acting by a male performer '' at the 28th annie awards in 2000 . rotten tomatoes rates the film at 63 % based on 8 reviews , making it one of the few disney sequels to be rated higher than its predecessor . . censorship . following the september 11 attacks , the scene in which goofy rescues max and tank from under the burning x games logo structure was removed from television broadcasts of the film ; the scene remains in all other versions of the movie , but the broadcast version skips this scene entirely to show them skating out of the wreckage . references . external links .