1956 in literature

events . c . january – the first book in ed mcbain 's long-running 87th precinct police procedural series , cop hater , is published in the united states under evan hunter 's new pseudonym . february 2 – eugene o'neill 's semi-autobiographical long day 's journey into night ( completed in 1942 ) receives a posthumous world première at the royal dramatic theatre , stockholm , in swedish ( lång dags färd mot natt ) , directed by bengt ekerot and starring lars hanson . its broadway debut at the helen hayes theatre on november 7 follows an american première at the shubert theatre ( new haven ) . february 25 – the english poet ted hughes and american poet sylvia plath meet in cambridge , england . march 11 – the u.s . release of sir laurence olivier 's film version of shakespeare 's richard iii plays simultaneously on nbc network television and as afternoon matinée screenings in movie theaters . its tv audience is put at 25–40 million – almost certainly the largest to date for a shakespeare production . march 19 – the widowed english author aldous huxley marries the italian-american film-maker and author laura archera at a drive-in wedding chapel in yuma , arizona . april 23 – the british author c . s . lewis and american poet joy gresham have a civil marriage at oxford register office . 42 , st giles ' . may 8 – the first performance of john osborne 's play look back in anger is given by the newly formed english stage company at the royal court theatre in london . alan bates has his first major role as cliff . the press release describes osborne as one of the angry young men of the time , a phrase used on july 26 in a daily express headline . june 16 – ted hughes and sylvia plath marry at st george the martyr , holborn in the london borough of camden . june 21 – playwright arthur miller appears before the house un-american activities committee in washington , d.c . june 26 and august 23 – books published by the discredited psychoanalyst wilhelm reich are burned in the united states under a court injunction . june – nineteen-year-old hunter s . thompson is arrested as an accessory to robbery . june 29 – arthur miller marries marilyn monroe in white plains , new york . july – after pleas by israeli diplomats , the communist romania releases a . l . zissu , formally sentenced to life imprisonment in 1954 . zissu emigrates to israel , where he dies on september 6 . july 4 – the national library of scotland 's first purpose-built premises open in edinburgh . july 8 – the drama series armchair theatre , produced by abc television for the itv network in the united kingdom , begins a twelve-year run . august 14 – iris murdoch marries john bayley at oxford register office . september 14 – harold pinter marries vivien merchant in a civil ceremony at bournemouth , after they meet while touring in repertory theatre . october – the ladder becomes the first nationally distributed lesbian magazine in the united states . november 1 – allen ginsberg 's howl and other poems , a signal work of the beat generation , is published by city lights bookstore in san francisco . december j . g . ballard 's first professional publications , the science fiction short stories '' escapement '' and '' prima belladonna '' , appear in this month 's issues of new worlds and science fantasy respectively . martin gardner begins his mathematical games column in scientific american . december 3 – the author romain gary wins the prix goncourt for les racines du ciel . he would later become the only person to win the prize twice , publishing la vie devant soi under the pseudonym émile ajar in 1975 . unknown dates finished in 1952 , egyptian author naguib mahfouz 's cairo trilogy ( palace walk , palace of desire , sugar street ) , is first published . sixteen-year-old michael moorcock becomes editor of tarzan adventures . jorge luis borges becomes a professor of english and american literature at the university of buenos aires . . new books . fiction . nelson algren – a walk on the wild side kingsley amis – that uncertain feeling poul anderson – planet of no return isaac asimov – the naked sun james baldwin – giovanni 's room sybille bedford – a legacy saul bellow – seize the day pierre berton – the mysterious north alfred bester – the stars my destination ( as tiger ! tiger ! ) w . e . bowman – the ascent of rum doodle pearl s . buck – imperial woman anthony burgess – time for a tiger albert camus – the fall ( la chute ) john dickson carr patrick butler for the defense fear is the same ( as carter dickson ) agatha christie – dead man 's folly arthur c . clarke – the city and the stars a . j . cronin a thing of beauty crusader 's tomb antonio di benedetto – zama r.f . delderfield – the adventures of ben gunn nh . dini – dua dunia ( two worlds , stories ) philip k . dick the man who japed the minority report gordon r . dickson alien from arcturus mankind on the run alfred döblin – tales of a long night ( hamlet oder die lange nacht nimmt ein ende ) friedrich dürrenmatt – a dangerous game ( die panne – the breakdown – or traps ) ian fleming – diamonds are forever naomi frankel – shaul ve-yohannah ( שאול ויוהאנה , '' saul and joanna '' , publication begins ) romain gary – les racines du ciel william golding – pincher martin winston graham – the sleeping partner henri rené guieu – les monstres du néant mark harris – bang the drum slowly frank herbert – the dragon in the sea ( first book publication ) georgette heyer – sprig muslin kathryn hulme – the nun 's story james kennaway – tunes of glory feri lainšček – petelinji zajtrk meyer levin – compulsion c . s . lewis – till we have faces : a myth retold rose macaulay – the towers of trebizond compton mackenzie – thin ice ed mcbain – cop hater naguib mahfouz – palace walk ( بين القصرين , bein el-qasrein , first of the cairo trilogy ) grace metalious – peyton place yukio mishima ( 三島 由紀夫 ) – the temple of the golden pavilion ( 金閣寺 ) nicholas monsarrat – the tribe that lost its head farley mowat – lost in the barrens agnar mykle – the song of the red ruby ( sangen om den røde rubin ) edwin o'connor – the last hurrah pier paolo pasolini – ragazzi di vita mervyn peake – boy in darkness mary renault – the last of the wine kenneth roberts – boon island joão guimarães rosa – the devil to pay in the backlands ( grande sertão : veredas ) françoise sagan – a certain smile ( un certain sourire ) samuel selvon – the lonely londoners irwin shaw – lucy crown georges simenon – the little man from archangel ( le petit homme d'arkhangelsk ) khushwant singh – train to pakistan rex stout might as well be dead three witnesses a . e . van vogt – the wizard of linn heimito von doderer – die dämonen : nach der chronik des sektionsrates geyrenhoff ( the demons ) angus wilson – anglo-saxon attitudes p . g . wodehouse – french leave kateb yacine – nedjma eiji yoshikawa ( 吉川 英治 ) – the heike story : a modern translation of the classic tale of love and war ( shin heike monogatari , a retelling of the tale of the heike ) francis brett young – wistanslow . children and young people . polly cameron – the cat who thought he was a tiger fred gipson – old yeller rumer godden – the fairy doll c . s . lewis – the last battle alf prøysen – mrs . pepperpot ( first in a long series of mrs pepperpot – teskjekjerringa – books ) maurice sendak – kenny 's window ian serraillier – the silver sword dodie smith – the hundred and one dalmatians eve titus – anatole ( first in the anatole and basil series of 14 books ) . drama . jean anouilh – pauvre bitos , ou le dîner de têtes ( poor bitos ) ferdinand bruckner – the fight with the angel ( der kampf mit dem engel ) josé manuel castañón – moletú-volevá friedrich dürrenmatt – the visit ( der besuch der alten dame ) max frisch – philipp hotz 's fury ( die grosse wut des philipp hotz ) anna langfus – les lepreux ( the lepers , first performed ) hugh leonard – the birthday party saunders lewis – siwan bruce mason – the pohutukawa tree ronald millar – the bride and the bachelor arthur miller – a view from the bridge ( revised version ) yukio mishima – rokumeikan heiner müller and inge müller – der lohndrücker ( the scab , written ) eugene o'neill – long day 's journey into night john osborne – look back in anger arnold wesker – chicken soup with barley ( written ) . poetry . allen ginsberg – howl anne morrow lindbergh – the unicorn and other poems harry martinson – aniara yevgeny yevtushenko – stantsiia zima ( станция зима , zima station , translated as winter station ) . non-fiction . peter anson – the call of the cloister : religious communities and kindred bodies in the anglican communion john g . bennett – dramatic universe peter blau – bureaucracy in modern society gerald durrell – my family and other animals margery fish – we made a garden georges friedmann – le travail en miettes ( the anatomy of work ) carl gustav jung – mysterium coniunctionis a . j . liebling – the sweet science norman mailer – the white negro karl mannheim – essays on the sociology of culture c . wright mills – the power elite octavio paz – el arco y la lira lobsang rampa – the third eye irving stone – men to match my mountains ( account of the opening of the american old west , 1840–1900 ) john strachey – contemporary capitalism . births . january 2 – storm constantine , british science fiction and fantasy author january 4 – sarojini sahoo , indian journalist , author , and poet january 8 – jack womack , american novelist january 10 – antonio muñoz molina , spanish novelist january 21 – ian mcmillan , english poet march 7 – andrea levy , english novelist ( died 2019 ) march 12 – ruth ozeki , american novelist and filmmaker march 23 – steven saylor , american historical novelist april 29 – alexander jablokov , american writer and novelist may 4 – david guterson , american journalist and novelist may 18 – john godber , english dramatist may 20 – boris akunin , russian novelist and essayist june 9 – patricia cornwell , american crime novelist july 4 – éric neuhoff , french novelist july 11 – amitav ghosh , bengali indian novelist october 9 – robert reed , american science fiction author october 13 – chris carter , american screenwriter october 18 – lucy ellmann , anglo-american novelist november 11 – tim pears , english novelist november 20 – elena gremina , russian dramatist ( died 2018 ) november 26 – john mccarthy , english journalist and hostage december 22 – percival everett , american writer and novelist unknown dates james aboud , trinidad poet and judge james belich , new zealand historian amy gerstler , american poet . deaths . january 13 – wickham steed , english journalist , editor and historian ( born 1871 ) january 14 – sheila kaye-smith , english novelist ( born 1887 ) january 29 – h . l . mencken , american journalist and english language scholar ( born 1880 ) january 31 – a . a . milne , english children 's author , novelist and dramatist ( born 1882 ) march 30 – edmund clerihew bentley , english novelist and inventor of the clerihew ( born 1875 ) may 15 – arthur talmage abernethy , american theologian and poet ( born 1872 ) may 20 – max beerbohm , english humorist ( born 1872 ) may 22 – ion călugăru , romanian novelist , short story writer and journalist ( born 1902 ) june 22 – walter de la mare , english poet ( born 1873 ) june 24 – nicos nicolaides , greek writer ( born 1884 ) july 8 – giovanni papini , italian essayist , poet and novelist ( born 1881 ) august 14 – bertolt brecht , german dramatist ( born 1898 ) september 6 michael ventris , english linguistic scholar ( born 1922 ) a . l . zissu , romanian novelist and zionist leader ( born 1888 ) october 30 – pío baroja , spanish novelist ( born 1872 ) december 6 - bhimrao ramji ambedkar , the principal architect of the constitution of india ( born 1891 ) december 13 – arthur grimble , hong kong-born english travel writer ( born 1888 ) december 25 – robert walser , swiss novelist and poet writing in german ( born 1878 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : c . s . lewis , the last battle deutscher jugendbuchpreis ( first award ) : roger duvoisin and louise fatio , happy lion ( der glückliche löwe ) ; astrid lindgren , mio , my son ; and kurt lütgen , kein winter für wölfe ( '' two against the arctic : story of a restless life between greenland and alaska '' ) duff cooper prize : alan moorehead , gallipoli james tait black memorial prize for fiction : rose macaulay , the towers of trebizond james tait black memorial prize for biography : st john greer ervine , george bernard shaw madan puraskar ( first award ) : satya mohan joshi , hamro lok sanskriti ; chittaranjan nepali , janaral bhimsen thapa ra tatkalin nepal ; and bala ram joshi , adhikbibhav sthirbidhoot utpadhak newbery medal for children 's literature : jean lee latham , carry on , mr . bowditch nobel prize for literature : juan ramón jiménez premio nadal : josé luis martín descalzo , la frontera de dios prix goncourt : romain gary for the roots of heaven pulitzer prize for drama : albert hackett and frances goodrich , diary of anne frank pulitzer prize for fiction : mackinlay kantor , andersonville pulitzer prize for poetry : elizabeth bishop , poems – north & south queen 's gold medal for poetry : edmund blunden . references .