Notre-Dame-de-Grâce

history . at the time of montreal 's founding in 1642 most of the land stretching past mount royal to the northwest was a vast forest running the length of a long , narrow ridge known as the saint jacques escarpment . the area that was to become notre-dame-de-grace was founded along that ridge , near a since-drained lac st . pierre . the first europeans settled the area eight years after the founding of the colony of ville marie , on november 18 , 1650 . they were jean descarries ( or descaris ) dit le houx and jean leduc , from igé , perche , france . both settlers received thirty acres of land in notre-dame-de-grâce , a vast territory that stretched from what would become atwater avenue to lachine . in 1853 , construction of the church of notre-dame-de-grâce was completed . in december 1876 , the municipality of the village of notre-dame-de-grâce was established through proclamation . in 1906 , the village of notre-dame-de-grâce was incorporated as a town . on june 4 , 1910 , notre-dame-de-grâce was annexed to the city of montreal . it was during this period that the long established descarries family reached its peak . daniel-jérémie décarie ( 1836-1904 ) was mayor of notre-dame-de-grâce from 1877 to 1904 and his son , lawyer jérémie-louis décarie ( 1870-1927 ) , was a quebec parliamentarian . in may 1912 , the décarie boulevard was officially designated , running north–south from cote-des-neiges and the town of mount royal in the north to saint-henri and cote-st-paul in the south ( a section of the road was already known as décarie avenue ) . in 1908 , the first tramway made its appearance in notre-dame-de-grâce , running around the north side of mount royal from snowdon station to the intersection of mount royal and parc avenues . gradually the village developed around the church of notre-dame-de-grâce which was the head church of the seven parishes on the western part of the island of montreal . it was around 1920 that anglophones began settling in ndg , resulting in the construction of numerous schools and churches . the décarie expressway opened to motorists in 1966 , in time for expo 67 . the highway construction forced the displacement of 285 families and had a major impact on the neighbourhood , severing the easternmost part from the whole and leading to the area being referred to as 'westmount-adjacent ' ( a term implying housing costs and lifestyles more on par with westmount , one of the most affluent communities in north america , rather than ndg which as a whole is more middle class ) . since 2002 , the area has been administratively attached to côte-des-neiges as the borough of côte-des-neiges–notre-dame-de-grâce . geography . notre-dame-de-grâce is bounded on the east by the border with westmount and cote-des-neiges , the south by the falaise saint-jacques , and the north by côte-saint-luc road , extending west to the border with montreal west . demographics . broadly speaking notre-dame-de-grâce is a middle class first-ring residential suburb with a culturally and linguistically diverse urban population . the cityscape and history of the community is rooted firmly in ndg 's role as a home for an upwardly-mobile french canadian middle class that developed much of the land roughly between confederation and the first world war . the neighbourhood is characterized by traditional quebecois housing styles - notably the detached or semidetached duplex - as well as being organized along the historic land division system developed by for agricultural purposes during quebec 's colonial period ( i.e . long , rectangular city blocks running perpendicular to a river or ridge ) . it is a predominantly residential neighbourhood with considerable appeal to a wide variety of montrealers , owing principally to its local cultural cachet , proximity to the urban core of the city , and wide variety of commercial and public services . ndg is a community of communities , as there are several somewhat distinct neighbourhoods within it . officially the community is divided into an eastern and western ward with cavendish boulevard serving as the bisecting line . the eastern part of notre-dame-de-grâce is itself split in two parts by the decarie expressway ( running north–south ) , which was built in the late 1950s and resulted in the destruction of many hundreds of homes . the eastern ward is focused around the parish church at the intersection of decarie and notre-dame-de-grâce avenue , with many of the neighbourhood 's oldest buildings being found nearby . owing to its history , the eastern ward is primarily francophone , middle class and has a strong french and quebecois cultural and aesthetic character . the western ward developed during the interwar and post-ww2 era and is more varied in terms of housing styles , income levels , cultural representation and spoken languages . generally speaking ndg is associated with montreal 's multi-ethnic middle-class anglophone community , given the presence of major anglophone institutions like loyola college of concordia university and the muhc super-hospital , but despite this association the majority of residents are fully bilingual in french and english and speak both on a regular , if not daily , basis . affordable housing and proximity to major anglophone post-secondary educational institutions , particularly dawson college and concordia university , has resulted in a large and consistent student population residing in ndg . the visible minority population of the neighborhood is 33 % , with the ethnic breakdown of the neighborhood varied over the territory of ndg . there is also a sizeable afro-canadian and immigrant community , concentrated mostly around the parts of the district north of somerled avenue as well as south of sherbrooke street , and a 'little italy ' located south of the canadian pacific line , colloquially referred to as saint raymond . saint raymond , with a population of 5 915 , has a black population of 18 % and a chinese population of 12 % , both notably higher than montreal as a whole . in recent years , notre-dame-de-grâce has developed into a highly desirable neighbourhood for young professionals , though little gentrification has occurred outside of the monkland village . cityscape . geographically ndg is situated on a long plateau extending southwest from mount royal , cascading in wide terraces down from cote st . luc road ( cote being the french word for ridge ) towards the far steeper saint-jacques escarpment . the land is divided , as is traditional in quebec , in long narrow strips , an evolution of the seigneurial system of new france of the province 's colonial era . thus , ndg has many avenues running north-south , but far fewer running east-west . as such , the community is characterized by several prominent boulevards where commercial activity is concentrated . this design element also traces its history back to the earliest urban design planning native to canada . ndg is almost exclusively residential and institutional in nature , defined in part by major anglophone civic institutions anchoring its eastern and western ends . these are the muhc hospital at the glen yards , adjacent to the vendôme ( montreal metro ) and the loyola campus of concordia university ( situated next to the montréal-ouest ( amt ) , respectively ) . public schools , libraries , places of worship , parks , playgrounds , and public athletic facilities , including a local chapter of the montreal ymca , are distributed throughout the area . housing tends towards the antique , with much of the construction occurring between 1910 and 1940 and providing a unique mix of art nouveau , art deco , and beaux-arts influences on traditional quebecois architectural styles . there a variety of housing styles found in the borough , though the dominant and favored style remains the red brick duplex row-house . adding to its residential appeal , the community is well known for its tree-lined streets and general walkability . an important housing project is situated near the geographical center of ndg on boulevard cavendish , which bisects the borough into its eastern and western halves . the benny farm housing project was built to serve the needs of veterans returning from second world war service , though was later designated as subsidized housing . the housing and surrounding landscaping was rehabilitated in the early 2000s , with new low-cost housing and additional public facilities built , such as the benny farm clsc ( a community center with many social services including a clinic run by the provincial health ministry ) . the decarie expressway trench and the mainline of the canadian pacific railway each forms barriers that arguably disrupt the cohesiveness of the borough . as such , sections of ndg have unique characteristics and be characterized as well-defined neighborhoods . as an example , the sliver of ndg running between the rail line and the saint-jacques escarpment ( from cavendish boulevard to the décarie expressway ) is known as st . raymond 's and has a strong association with montreal 's italian community . another section , separated from the rest of ndg by a highway trench and sharing a border with westmount , is closer to where the village of notre-dame-de-grâce was founded , and as such is occasionally referred to as 'old ndg ' . ndg first rose to prominence as an important middle-class suburb towards the end of the 19th century , initially populated by the ( then ) new white-collar workforce of the canadian metropolis and accessible via tramways running to and from the city center . as widespread suburbanization developed in the post-ww2 period , ndg became home to successive waves of immigrants , first from eastern europe ( including a sizeable jewish population ) , then from the caribbean , and more recently from africa , the middle east , and southeast asia . concurrently , anglophone montrealers consolidated in the west end broadly speaking , with montreal 's irish and black communities shifting away from their traditional neighborhoods ( griffintown and little burgundy respectively ) and taking a more prominent position within the demographics of the area . today ndg is a cosmopolitan mixed-income urban neighborhood highly sought after by young professionals . the multitude of services , including parks and other green spaces , schools , clinics , and major institutions , make it an ideal neighborhood to raise a family close to the center of the city of montreal and its central business district . the vintage and antique housing is generally well kept and the aesthetic of the early 20th-century first-ring suburb has been preserved . additionally , ndg is well-served by public transit , including numerous bus lines , two métro , and two commuter train stations , allowing the area to be one of the most 'walkable ' in the entire city . sports and recreation . ndg is well known for many large parks including ndg park ( known as girouard park ) , loyola park , and trenholme park . the area has three indoor hockey arenas : the public doug harvey arena ( formerly confederation arena ) and the private lower canada college high school and concordia university ( ed meagher arena ) rinks . ndg is also home to the ndg ymca , which includes a pool , gym , and recreation programs for youth and adults . the ndg senior lynx made it to little league baseball 's senior league world series in 2011 and 2012 , representing the region of canada . ndg is home to the montreal exiles rugby football club ( www.montrealexiles.com ) who have mini-rugby teams ( ndg dragons ) at u-6 , u-8 , u-10 u-12 and u-14 levels , junior rugby at u-18 and senior men 's rugby . founded in 2011 , the senior men 's side featured in the provincial finals in 2011 , losing to westmount in the semi-final , and again in 2012 winning the division c league and cup . their home field is confederation park . transportation . the public transport agency that operates transit bus and rapid transit services in montreal is the société de transport de montréal . rapid transit . the orange line of montreal metro runs through the borough , following the décarie expressway with villa maria and vendôme located on the eastern side of the autoroute trench . ndg is also served by a variety of stm bus lines offering various service levels : 10 minute max ( 6:00-21:00 ) 24 sherbrooke : east-west local bus serving decarie boulevard in ndg , villa maria metro station is its western terminus . 51 edouard-montpetit : east-west local bus serving fielding avenue . montreal-ouest commuter rail station is its western terminus . 105 sherbrooke : east-west local bus serving sherbrooke street in ndg . montreal-ouest commuter rail station and vendôme metro station are its western and eastern termini , respectively . 10 minute max ( 6:00-14:00 east ) ( 14:00-21:00 west ) 90 st-jacques : east-west local bus serving st . jacques boulevard in ndg . connections with vendôme metro station . 103 monkland : east-west local bus serving monkland , grand boulevard in ndg . villa maria metro station serves as its eastern terminus . local ( day ) 17 decarie : north-south local bus serving girouard boulevard in ndg . connections with vendôme metro station . 63 girouard : north-south local bus serving girouard boulevard in ndg . 102 somerled : east-west local bus serving somerled avenue in ndg . its eastern terminus is vendôme metro station . 104 cavendish : east-west local bus serving cavendish boulevard in ndg . connections with vendôme metro station . 138 notre-dame-de-grace : east-west local bus serving notre-dame-de-grace and cavendish in ndg . 162 westminster : east-west local bus serving monkland avenue in ndg . its eastern terminus is villa maria metro station . express ( day ) 420 notre-dame-de-grâce express : commuter express bus that stops along cavendish boulevard and sherbrooke before it goes to downtown montreal . all-night 356 : night bus that serves sherbrooke street in ndg . operates from 2:30 & nbsp ; a.m . and 5:00 & nbsp ; a.m . streetscape . the major commercial streets are monkland avenue , somerled avenue and sherbrooke street west . monkland village comprises a cluster of businesses on the eastern part of monkland avenue that was revitalized in the 1990s . the décarie expressway is a major sunken urban highway that runs north–south and splits eastern ndg into two segments . several bridges connect both sides of the borough for both vehicles and pedestrians . street names . the following is a list of street names in the area and what/who they 're named after : trenholme street named after the founder of elmhurst dairy bessborough : vere ponsonby , 9th earl of bessborough , 14th governor general of canada borden : robert borden , 8th prime minister of canada cavendish : most likely the british house of cavendish connaught : prince arthur , duke of connaught and strathearn , 10th governor general of canada décarie : one or many of several prominent members of the décarie family ; possibly specifically jérémie-louis décarie , who was born in ndg fielding : william stevens fielding , 7th premier of nova scotia and federal minister of finance commission de la toponymie du québec girouard : désiré girouard , canadian lawyer , politician , and puisne justice of the supreme court of canada commission de la toponymie du québec hingston : william hales hingston , a canadian senator & mayor of montreal marcil : georges marcil , last mayor of ndg before its annexation into the city of montreal . monkland : james monk , former chief justice of lower canada ; landowner notre-dame-de-grâce : ndg & nbsp ; — the community in which the street is situated old orchard : the orchards that used to make up large parts of modern-day ndg ; sherbrooke : john coape sherbrooke , governor general of british north america , circa 1816 somerled : 12th-century scottish leader terrebonne : a french seigniory near what is now the city of terrebonne wilson : named for former montreal mayor charles wilson . education . the commission scolaire de montréal ( csdm ) operates francophone public schools . the administrative offices of the english montreal school board ( esmb ) , which operates anglophone public schools in this borough , are located in notre-dame-de-grâce . '' frequently asked questions . '' english montreal school board . retrieved on december 20 , 2012 . '' a : the emsb 's administration building is located at 6000 fielding avenue , corner cote st . luc road , in the montreal district of n.d.g . '' version in french - french address : '' a : the emsb 's administration building is located at 6000 fielding avenue , corner cote st . luc road , in the montreal district of n.d.g . '' the emsb operates 40 primaries , 17 secondaries and 32 other learning institutions with a total student population of 38,000 . there are numerous private and public educational institutions within the community : . elementary schools . french schools ( csdm ) école internationale de montréal ( primaire ) école marc-favreau '' l ’ école marc-favreau est une belle école du quartier notre-dame-de-grâce '' l'étoile filante école notre-dame-de-grâce école anne-hébert '' anne-hébert est une magnifique petite école du quartier notre-dame-de-grâce . '' école rudolph-steiner de montreal english schools royal vale willingdon school herbert symonds ( closed 1981 ) st . monica school . high schools . ; private centennial academy greaves adventist academy lower canada college loyola high school villa maria kells academy ; public marymount academy royal vale school ( k-11 ) west hill high school ( montreal ) ( closed 1992 ) ecole saint-luc . universities . concordia university ( loyola campus ) . public libraries . the montreal public libraries network operates libraries . '' les bibliothèques par arrondissement . '' montreal public libraries network . retrieved on december 7 , 2014 . . famous people and residents . actors , musicians , artists jay baruchel , actor anne dorval , actress irving layton , poet laurence leboeuf , actress laura lloyd , musician , member of shoegazing band no joy jessica paré , actress michel rivard , french canadian singer william shatner , actor athletes & sports officials/personalities steven fletcher ( ice hockey ) , nhl player frank greenleaf , president of the canadian and quebec amateur hockey associations doug harvey , former nhl player russell martin , major league baseball catcher jim mckean , former cfl player and mlb umpire ian mofford , former cfl player and grey cup champion sergio momesso , former nhl player and current sports commentator gabriel morency , sportstalk radio personality sam pollock , general manager ; montreal canadiens marco scandella , nhl player . geographic location . see also . oxford park , montreal . references . external links . borough of côte-des-neiges–notre-dame-de-grâce