It's a Good Life (The Twilight Zone)

opening narration . plot summary . six-year-old anthony fremont has godlike mental powers , including mind-reading . he has isolated his town of peaksville , ohio , from the rest of the universe . the people must thus grow their own food , and supplies of common household items , such as bar soap , have been dwindling . he has blocked television signals and caused cars not to work . he creates horrible creatures , such as three-headed gophers , which he then kills . everybody is under his rule , even his parents . the people live in fear of him , constantly telling him how everything he does is '' good , '' since he banishes anyone thinking unhappy thoughts into the otherworldly cornfield from which there is no return . never having experienced any form of discipline , anthony does not even understand that his actions are wrong , and is confused when his father tells him that the neighbors are reluctant to let their children play with him after he sent several of his playmates to the cornfield . one night each week , anthony gives the townsfolk one hour of television , which he creates and projects onto the family tv set . the adults gather around in the fremonts ' living room , squirming uncomfortably as anthony shows them a vision of screaming dinosaurs , engaged in a gory battle . unable to voice their real feelings , they tell anthony that it was far better than what used to be on tv . after the program is over , the adults celebrate dan hollis ' birthday . he gets two presents from his wife : a bottle of brandy ( which is one of only five bottles of liquor left in the village ) and a perry como record . dan is eager to listen to the record , but he 's reminded by everyone that anthony does not like singing . getting drunk from the brandy , he starts complaining about the miserable state of the town , not being able to listen to the record , and no one singing '' happy birthday '' to him . dan snaps and confronts the child , calling him a monster and a murderer . while anthony 's anger grows , dan yells for someone to attack anthony from behind and end his reign of terror . aunt amy ( who is n't able to sing anymore because of anthony ) tentatively reaches for a fireplace poker , but no one has the courage to act . anthony transforms dan into a jack-in-the-box , causing his wife to break down . the adults are horrified at what anthony has done , and his father asks him to wish dan into the cornfield , which anthony does . he then causes snow to begin falling outside . the snow will kill off at least half the crops and the town will face starvation . anthony 's father starts to rebuke anthony about this , but his wife and the other adults look on with worried smiles on their faces . the father then smiles and tells anthony in a terrified voice , '' . but it 's good you 're making it snow . a real good thing . and tomorrow . tomorrow 's gon na be a . real good day ! '' . closing narration . cast . john larch as mr . fremont cloris leachman as mrs . fremont don keefer as dan hollis bill mumy as anthony fremont alice frost as aunt amy max showalter ( as casey adams ) as pat riley jeanne bates as ethel hollis lenore kingston as thelma dunn tom hatcher as bill soames . reception and legacy . time named this the third-best twilight zone episode , behind '' time enough at last '' and '' the monsters are due on maple street '' . rod serling 's introduction at the beginning of this episode was recycled and digitally edited for the preshow of the disney parks attraction the twilight zone tower of terror . in the preshow video , serling stands in front of a service elevator door , rather than a map of the united states , and explains to guests the journey they 're about to experience . the attraction , which first opened at disney-mgm studios in 1994 , almost two decades after serling 's death , is an homage to the original series with an original story based on it . when conceiving the attraction , disney imagineers wanted to include serling in the attraction and opted for a voice artist to play him ; mark silverman was chosen by serling 's widow to provide his voice . a poster advertising '' anthony fremont 's orchestra '' is displayed next to the concierge desk in the lobby of the attraction , an ironic reference to anthony 's hate for music . in 1997 tv guide ranked the episode number 31 on its 100 greatest episodes of all time list . the opening narration of this episode is sampled in '' threatened '' by michael jackson in his 2001 album , invincible . remake . in a 1974 interview with marvel comics , rod serling said '' i 'm on my third draft of a feature film based on jerome bixby 's short story , 'it 's a good life ' . we did it originally on twilight zone but now we 're doing a full-length version . alan landsburg , who produced chariots of the gods , is producing it . it 's in the fantasy-horror genre . '' rod serling recalls—'marvel planet of the apes ' uk issue 12 ( 1975 ) this was one of serling 's last interviews before his death in 1975 . twilight zone : the movies '' it 's a good life '' segment is a remake of the original episode directed by joe dante . pop culture . in the omen series , the antichrist as a child has supernatural powers similar to the main character . the 1980 song '' cemetery girls '' by novelty rock group barnes & barnes refers to the episode in its lyrics ( '' fresh souls in the cornfield.anthony put them there . '' ) , and with samples of lines . since the album was released several years before fictional twin brothers art ( bill mumy ) barnes and artie ( robert haimer ) went '' public '' about their identities , the reference is somewhat of an in-joke . this episode was also remade as a parody in the simpsons episode '' treehouse of horror ii '' in 1991 . this episode is evoked in the regulators , a 1996 novel by stephen king writing under the pseudonym richard bachman , in which an alien entity with psychic powers possesses young seth garin and uses his abilities to kill seth 's parents , terrorizes the folks that subsequently take seth in , and isolates the suburban street on which they live from the rest of the world while turning it into a child 's version of the old west . the 1997 episode '' johnny real good '' from johnny bravo is also based on this episode . johnny has to babysit a boy named timmy , who also has supernatural powers and sends johnny several times to a nearby cornfield for '' thinking bad thoughts . '' the episode was referenced in a 1997 episode of the drew carey show in which drew enters his house and calls out for his parents . when they don ’ t reply , he says “ i must have wished them to the cornfield . ” ( season 2 , episode 12 . ) the episode was referenced in a 2015 episode of better call saul , '' bingo '' in which howard tells jimmy that kim was moved to the east wing of his law firm , to which jimmy responds '' the east wing ? that 's the corn field , why are you sending her to the corn field ? '' the episode was referenced in a 2007 episode of american dad ! , '' i ca n't stan you '' , where stan listened in on his neighbors ' private conversations . anyone who was heard criticizing him had their house seized by the cia and was summarily banished to the cornfield motel . the episode was referenced in the season two premiere of martin , '' do you remember the time ? '' . during a ( false ) memory of when martin payne met his girlfriend , gina , gina cries out , '' you 're a bad man ! you 're a very bad man ! '' as martin holds gina hostage from the police . this is the phrase anthony yells at dan hollis shortly before turning him into a jack-in-the-box and banishing him to the corn field . fallout 3s quest tranquility lane pulls heavy inspiration from this episode . the on-line virtual world second life has a '' region of mythological status where once naughty avatars were sent to think about what they had done '' called '' the cornfield '' . second life ; second life wiki . sequel . in the 2002 revival series , a sequel to this episode was broadcast , titled '' it 's still a good life '' . in the episode , anthony is a middle-aged man who now has a daughter audrey who has inherited his powers . bill mumy and cloris leachman reprised their roles from the original episode . anthony fremont 's daughter , audrey , is played by actor bill mumy 's real-life daughter liliana mumy . a commercial for me-tv airing on that channel in 2015 features an adult bill mumy as adult anthony intercut with scenes from the original episode , apparently interacting as the adult anthony uses his powers to beam me-tv to little anthony 's set . in early 2017 , the network used clips from this episode in promos for the show 's late-night reruns . see also . '' uss callister '' , an episode of black mirror inspired by this episode . references . bibliography . zicree , marc scott : the twilight zone companion . sillman-james press , 1982 ( second edition ) devoe , bill . ( 2008 ) . trivia from the twilight zone . albany , ga : bear manor media . grams , martin . ( 2008 ) . the twilight zone : unlocking the door to a television classic . churchville , md : otr publishing . diaz , junot . penguin books new york ( 2007 ) the brief wondrous life of oscar wao p.g 224 wiater , stan , et al . ( 2007 ) . the stephen king universe : the guide to the worlds of the king of horror ( 1st ed . ) . los angeles , ca : renaissance books . p . & nbsp ; 427 . external links .