Hawking radiation

overview . black holes are astrophysical objects of interest due to their immense gravitational attraction . a black hole occurs when more than a certain amount of matter and/or energy is located within a small enough space . given a large enough mass in a small enough space , the gravitational forces become large enough that within a nearby region of space , nothing - not even light - can escape from inside that region to the wider universe . the boundary of that region is known as the event horizon because an observer outside it can not observe , become aware of , or be affected by events within the event horizon . this region is the black hole 's boundary , in effect . it is unknown what exactly happens to the mass inside a black hole . it is possible that a gravitational singularity forms at the center - a point of zero size and infinite density - or perhaps quantum effects prevent that happening . however , in either case , the event horizon is at some distance from any such point , so the force of gravity is a little weaker at the event horizon ( although still exceedingly strong ) . that means that regardless of the interior conditions , our current understandings of physics can be used to predict what may happen in the region of the event horizon . in 1974 , british physicist stephen hawking used quantum field theory in curved spacetime to show that in theory , the force of gravity at the event horizon was strong enough to cause energy to '' leak '' into the wider universe within a tiny distance of the event horizon . in effect this energy acted as if the black hole itself was slowly evaporation ( although it actually came from outside it ) . l- susskind and j . lindesay , '' an introduction to black holes . information and the string theory revolution , world scientific ( 2005 ) . the tunneling process is described on pp.26-28 , and described as black hole evaporation on pp.48-49 . hawking 's insight was based on a phenomenon of quantum physics known as virtual particles , and their behaviour near the event horizon . even in empty space , subatomic '' virtual '' particles and antiparticles come briefly into existence , then mutually annihilate and vanish again . close to a black hole , this manifests as pairs of photons . one of these photons might be pulled beyond the event horizon , leaving the other to escape into the wider universe . careful analysis showed that if this happened , quantum effects would cause a '' partner wave '' carrying negative energy to be created and also pass into the black hole , reducing the black hole 's total mass , or energy . in effect to an observer it would appear as if the gravitational force had somehow allowed the black hole 's energy to be reduced and the energy of the wider universe to be increased . hence black holes must gradually lose energy and evaporate over time . considering the thermal properties of black holes , and conservation laws affecting this process , hawking calculated that the visible outcome would be a very low level of exact black-body radiation - electromagnetic radiation produced as if emitted by a black body with a temperature inversely proportional to the mass of the black hole . physical insight into the process may be gained by imagining that particle–antiparticle radiation is emitted from just beyond the event horizon . this radiation does not come directly from the black hole itself , but rather is a result of virtual particles being '' boosted '' by the black hole 's gravitation into becoming real particles . as the particle–antiparticle pair was produced by the black hole 's gravitational energy , the escape of one of the particles lowers the mass of the black hole . an alternative view of the process is that vacuum fluctuations cause a particle–antiparticle pair to appear close to the event horizon of a black hole . one of the pair falls into the black hole while the other escapes . in order to preserve total energy , the particle that fell into the black hole must have had a negative energy ( with respect to an observer far away from the black hole ) . this causes the black hole to lose mass , and , to an outside observer , it would appear that the black hole has just emitted a particle . in another model , the process is a quantum tunnelling effect , whereby particle–antiparticle pairs will form from the vacuum , and one will tunnel outside the event horizon . an important difference between the black hole radiation as computed by hawking and thermal radiation emitted from a black body is that the latter is statistical in nature , and only its average satisfies what is known as planck 's law of black-body radiation , while the former fits the data better . thus thermal radiation contains information about the body that emitted it , while hawking radiation seems to contain no such information , and depends only on the mass , angular momentum , and charge of the black hole ( the no-hair theorem ) . this leads to the black hole information paradox . however , according to the conjectured gauge-gravity duality ( also known as the ads/cft correspondence ) , black holes in certain cases ( and perhaps in general ) are equivalent to solutions of quantum field theory at a non-zero temperature . this means that no information loss is expected in black holes ( since the theory permits no such loss ) and the radiation emitted by a black hole is probably the usual thermal radiation . if this is correct , then hawking 's original calculation should be corrected , though it is not known how ( see below ) . a black hole of one solar mass has a temperature of only 60 & nbsp ; nanokelvins ( 60 nano- of a kelvin ) ; in fact , such a black hole would absorb far more cosmic microwave background radiation than it emits . a black hole of ( about the mass of the moon , or about across ) would be in equilibrium at 2.7 & nbsp ; k , absorbing as much radiation as it emits . discovery . hawking 's discovery followed a visit to moscow in 1973 where the soviet scientists yakov zel'dovich and alexei starobinsky convinced him that rotating black holes ought to create and emit particles . when hawking did the calculation , he found to his surprise that even non-rotating black holes produce radiation . in parallel , in 1972 , jacob bekenstein conjectured that the black holes should have an entropy , where by the same year , he proposed no hair theorems . bekenstein 's discovery and results are commended by stephen hawking which also led him to think about radiation due to this formalism . emission process . hawking radiation is required by unruh effect and the equivalence principle applied to black hole horizons . close to the event horizon of a black hole , a local observer must accelerate to keep from falling in . an accelerating observer sees a thermal bath of particles that pop out of the local acceleration horizon , turn around , and free-fall back in . the condition of local thermal equilibrium implies that the consistent extension of this local thermal bath has a finite temperature at infinity , which implies that some of these particles emitted by the horizon are not reabsorbed and become outgoing hawking radiation . a schwarzschild black hole has a metric : : \left ( \mathrm . external links . hawking radiation calculator tool the case for mini black holes a . barrau & j . grain explain how the hawking radiation could be detected at colliders