Mauno Koivisto

early life . koivisto was born in turku as the second son of juho koivisto , a carpenter at crichton-vulcan shipyard , and hymni sofia eskola , who died when he was 10 . after attending primary school , koivisto worked a number of jobs , and at the beginning of the winter war in 1939 joined a field firefighting unit at the age of 16 . during the continuation war , koivisto served in the infantry detachment törni led by lauri törni , which was a reconnaissance detachment operating behind enemy lines . this detachment was only open to selected volunteers . during the war he received the order of the cross of liberty ( 2nd class ) and was promoted to the rank of corporal . while reflecting on his wartime experiences later in life , he said '' when you have taken part in a game in which your own life is at stake , all other games are small after that '' . mauno koivisto , in the national biography of finland , english translation . after the war , he earned a living as a carpenter and became active in politics , joining the social democratic party . during his early years , koivisto was also influenced by anarchism and anarchosyndicalism . in 1948 he found work at the port of turku . in december 1948 , he was appointed the manager of the harbour labour office of turku , a post he held until 1951 . in 1949 communism trade unions attempted to topple karl-august fagerholm fagerholm i cabinet , and the social democratic leadership of the finnish confederation of trade unions ( sak ) declared the port of hanko an '' open site '' , urging port workers who supported legality to go there . koivisto went to hanko to take charge of the harbour-master 's office and recruit workers to break the strike , the government having banned strike action . the communist newspapers branded koivisto as their number one enemy due to his status as a major figure in the struggle for control of the trade unions . banker and politician . in addition to his political engagements and ongoing career , koivisto continued with his education , passing his intermediate examination in 1947 and his university entrance examination in 1949 . in 1951 he became a primary school teacher . on 22 june 1952 , he married tellervo kankaanranta ( born 2 january 1929 ) . together they had a daughter , assi koivisto ( born 20 may 1957 ) , who was later voted to the electoral college during the 1982 presidential election . koivisto graduated from the university of turku with a master of arts degree and a licentiate in 1953 , and had plans to become a sociology . three years later he completed his doctoral thesis , which examined social relations in the turku dockyards . koivisto also served as a vocational counselor for the city of turku , and as a member of the turku city council . in 1957 , he started working for the helsinki workers ' savings bank and served as its general manager from 1959 to 1968 . in 1968 he was appointed the chairman of the board of the bank of finland , a position he held until 1982 . during the 1960s , he witnessed a number of internal schisms within the social democratic party , and made efforts to improve the party 's relationships with both the communists and with president urho kekkonen . the 1966 parliamentary election 's social democratic victory saw the formation of a government under prime minister rafael paasio , with koivisto , the party 's expert on economic policy , assuming the role of the minister of finance . by the beginning of 1968 , many sdp members had become disillusioned with paasio 's leadership style , and koivisto emerged as the chief candidate to succeed paasio as prime minister . koivisto became the prime minister of his first government , the koivisto i cabinet , on 22 march 1968 . he served as prime minister for two years until the 1970 parliamentary election , which saw the other parties in the coalition government – centre , skdl , spp , and tpsl – suffer heavy losses , bringing about koivisto 's resignation . in the 1970s , president kekkonen started to regard koivisto as a potential rival . to counter this , he threw his weight behind koivisto 's social democratic colleague , kalevi sorsa . for most of the decade , koivisto concentrated on his work as the chairman of the bank of finland . the 1979 election saw him return as prime minister , forming koivisto ii cabinet between the sdp , centre , spp , and skdl . by this point there was increasing dissatisfaction with the aging president kekkonen , whose failing health was becoming difficult to conceal , and also a perceived lack of change . as prime minister and chairman of the bank of finland who enjoyed high ratings in opinion polls , koivisto began to be seen as a likely future candidate for the presidency . in early 1981 , president kekkonen began to regret koivisto 's appointment as prime minister and started to offer support to those who wanted to get rid of him . in the spring of 1981 , members of centre , which was serving as part of the government coalition , launched a behind-the-scenes attempt to bring down the government through a parliamentary motion of no confidence , so that koivisto would not be able to conduct a presidential election campaign from the position of prime minister . at the critical moment koivisto managed to gain the support of the skdl . he was thus able to call kekkonen 's bluff by refusing to tender his resignation , reminding kekkonen that the prime minister and cabinet were responsible to parliament , not the president . this would have been unthinkable for most of kekkonen 's quarter-century in office , but by then kekkonen no longer had the energy to topple the government . finnish historians , political scientists , and journalists still debate whether kekkonen really wanted to dismiss koivisto or whether kekkonen simply wanted to speed up koivisto 's slow and ponderous decision-making . some question whether this government crisis was just a part of the ruthless '' presidential game '' that top politicians such as koivisto and social democratic chairman sorsa were playing with one another . by october 1981 , it became apparent that kekkonen was too ill to carry out his duties , and he announced he would not run again . koivisto became the acting president and was able to launch his presidential election campaign from the position . during the campaign , koivisto was questioned particularly thoroughly on two issues : the nature of his socialism and his relations to the soviet union . describing the nature of his socialism , he referred to eduard bernstein , a revisionist social democrat , saying : '' the important thing is the movement , not the goal . '' to a journalist 's question , intended to be a difficult one , on the issue of relations with the soviet union , koivisto replied that they were nothing to boast about ; this answer increased his popularity . koivisto did not want to be elected with the support of the soviet union . the voter turnout in the presidential elections was nearly 90 % . koivisto 's wife and daughter were among the members of the electoral college . koivisto won 167 of the 301 votes of the electoral college in the first round ; his closest competitor , ncp candidate harri holkeri , received 58 . as a result , koivisto became finland 's first socialist president . his victory completed a long process of integrating the social democrats into finland 's political life , dating back to the civil war . presidency . as president , koivisto kept a low profile and used less authoritarian leadership tactics than kekkonen had employed , refraining from using some of his presidential powers and initiating a new era of parliamentarianism in finland . on the other hand , he had an occasionally difficult relationship with journalists , which he famously called '' lemmings '' . one practical problem that quite a few reporters had with koivisto 's statements was their deeply pondering and philosophical nature . those statements were not often easy to interpret , unlike kekkonen 's blunt and sometimes harsh statements ( see , for example , '' the republic 's president 1956-1982 '' /tasavallan presidentti 1956–1982 , published in finland in 1993–94 ; '' the republic 's president 1982-1994 '' /tasavallan presidentti 1982–1994 , published in finland in 1993–94 ; mauno koivisto , '' two terms i : memories and notes , 1982-1994 '' /kaksi kautta i . muistikuvia ja merkintöjä 1982–1994 , helsinki : kirjayhtymä publishing ltd . , 1994 ) . as the leader of finland 's foreign policies he initially continued kekkonen 's line until the collapse of the soviet union . he also continued the established practice of returning soviet defectors to the soviet union , a custom now prohibited as a human rights violation by the finnish constitution . koivisto created close contacts with mikhail gorbachev , george h . w . bush , and ronald reagan . he carried on private correspondence with gorbachev and bush . his ties to the other nordic countries and nordic colleagues were very close and trustworthy . he spoke fluent russian , swedish , english , and german . in the critical moments during which the soviet union was collapsing , and the baltic countries , particularly estonia , were declaring themselves independent , koivisto referred to the policy of neutrality and avoided publicly supporting the baltic independence movement , but its members were allowed to work from finland . koivisto 's finland recognized the new estonian government only after the major powers had done so . koivisto did however covertly sent money to estonia to assist their independence movement . koivisto made two bold unilateral diplomatic moves that significantly changed the finnish political position . in 1990 , after the reunification of germany , koivisto unilaterally renounced the terms of the paris peace treaties which limited the strength and armament of the finnish defence forces . the rationale was that after germany had been given its full rights as a sovereign state , finland could not remain bound by the antiquated treaty . the renunciation caused no official protest from soviet union or great britain . the other major move was the renunciation of the finno-soviet treaty in 1991 , concurrently with the fall of soviet union . the treaty , the military article of which had shaped finnish foreign policy for decades , was substituted with a new treaty without military obligations in the next year . in 1990 , partly motivated by nationalism , partly by the fear of the declining work force , koivisto proposed that any soviet citizen with either finnish or ingrian ancestry be enabled to immigrate to finland as a returnee . koivisto , '' two terms i '' . in '' what where when - citizen 's yearbook 1991 '' / '' mitä missä milloin - kansalaisen vuosikirja 1991 '' '' what where when - citizen 's yearbook 1992 '' / '' mitä missä milloin - kansalaisen vuosikirja 1992 '' the proposal resulted in a modification of immigration laws to this end during the year . after the soviet union was collapsed , koivisto was against returning karelian old finnish parts back to finland . koivisto halusi vaientaa kokonaan keskustelun karjalan palauttamisesta , verkkouutiset 23.1 . 1998 raimo viirret . karjala oli kaupan 1991 . kainuun sanomat 15.8.2007 . in the 1988 presidential election , koivisto was re-elected with 189 out of 301 votes in the electoral college during the second round . after the collapse of the soviet union , he supported more radical ideals like joining the european union . in 1992 , koivisto initiated the process of finnish accession to the european community . the final terms of the membership agreement were finalised on the day of koivisto 's departure from the presidency . he was succeeded by president martti ahtisaari , who was also a supporter of eu membership . koivisto 's popularity sharply declined during finland 's economic depression of the early 1990s , because many unemployed or otherwise impoverished citizens believed that he could have forced aho cabinet of esko aho to stimulate the economy and grant unemployed people temporary public sector jobs . koivisto , '' two terms i '' . in '' what where when - citizen 's yearbook 1992 , 1993 , 1994 '' / mitä missä milloin - kansalaisen vuosikirja 1992 , 1993 , 1994 '' koivisto 's term ended in 1994 . henceforth he published his memoirs in four volumes and continued as a commentator on economics and both domestic and international politics . post-presidency . subsequent to his precedency , koivisto occasionally continued to represent finland officially abroad , most notably at the funerals of queen ingrid of denmark in 2000 , queen elizabeth the queen mother in 2002 and ronald reagan in 2004 . in 2009 , koivisto declined to apologize to estonia that his administration did not support the country 's independence movement . finland 's koivisto rejects nato membership and estonia apology calls on 3 march 2010 , he was hospitalized for cardiac dysrhythmia but was released less than a week later . hobby . volleyball was koivisto 's long - standing hobby , the volleyball hobby began when he was in his twenties and continued until retirement . death . koivisto 's health deteriorated in december 2016 due to alzheimer 's disease and his wife tellervo started as his caregiver . in january 2017 , koivisto fell badly at his home and broke his hand , after which he moved to a nursing home . in may 2017 , koivisto was put in end-of-life care . koivisto died on 12 may 2017 , aged 93 . his state funeral was held on 25 may 2017 . mauno koivisto laid to rest in helsinki , yle uutiset 25 may 2017 . accessed on 9 march 2020 . koivisto is buried in the hietaniemi cemetery in helsinki . bibliography . sosiaaliset suhteet turun satamassa : sosiologinen tutkimus , 1956 , thesis linjan vetoa , 1968 väärää politiikkaa , 1978 tästä lähtien , 1981 linjaviitat : ulkopoliittisia kannanottoja , 1983 politiikkaa ja politikointia 1978–81 , 1988 maantiede ja historiallinen kokemus : ulkopoliittisia kannanottoja , 1992 kaksi kautta , 1994 historian tekijät , 1995 liikkeen suunta , 1997 koulussa ja sodassa , 1998 venäjän idea , 2001 itsenäiseksi imperiumin kainalossa - mietteitä kansojen kohtaloista , 2004 . honours . awards and decorations . . national orders . : grand cross of the order of the white rose : grand cross of the order of the lion of finland : grand cross of the order of the cross of liberty : grand cross of the order of the holy lamb of the orthodox church of finland . foreign orders . : knight of the order of the seraphim ( 16 april 1982 ) : grand cross of the order of st . olav ( 1983 ) : knight of the order of the elephant ( 20 april 1983 ) persondetaljer , hans excellence , mauno henrik koivisto , fhv . præsident for republikken finland ( 20.4.1983 ) coat of arms in the chappel of frederiksborg castle : grand cross with collar of the order of the falcon & wife : grand cross ( 20 october 1982 ) icelandic presidency website ( icelandic ) , order of the falcon , mauno & tellervo koivisto , 20 october 1982 , grand cross with collar & grand cross respectively : 1st class cross of the order of the cross of terra mariana ( 20 november 2001 ) estonian state decorations , mauno henrik koivisto : order of merit of the federal republic of germany : order of the chrysanthemum : collar of the order of prince henry ( 22 april 1992 ) : knight grand cross with chain of the order of merit of the italian republic ( 14 september 1993 ) : legion of honour : national order of merit : order of lenin : order of isabella the catholic : order of the gold lion of the house of nassau britain : order of the british empire , people 's republic : order of merit of the republic of poland , republic : order of the white eagle : decoration of honour for services to the republic of austria : order of stara planina : order of ojaswi rajanya : order of al-hussein bin ali , people 's republic : order of flag of the people 's republic of hungary , republic : order of merit of hungary : order of the netherlands lion : order of the yugoslav star : order of the white lion : order of san marinus : star of people 's friendship : order of san carlos . honorary degrees . : university of helsinki 1990 : university of helsinki 1988 : charles university in prague 1987 : university of tampere 1985 : university of toulouse 1983 : åbo akademi 1978 : university of turku 1977 . references . external links . mauno koivisto in the presidents of finland