Dragonlance

publication history . creation . hickman developed his world creation technique by writing and self-publishing with his wife laura the adventure modules rahasia ( 1979 ) and pharaoh ( 1980 ) , and writing tsr 's ravenloft module ( 1983 ) . he was unemployed in 1982 , and tsr offered him a job based on his submission of several modules . that year , while driving from utah to wisconsin to start a job with tsr , hickman and his wife created the dragonlance universe concept . during the trip , hickman and his wife discussed two ideas they had had for several years : an entire world used to support a storyline , and a world dominated by dragons . their ideas were well received by tsr , whose marketing department felt they had enough dungeons , but not enough dragons . hickman suggested a series of twelve modules , each featuring a different dragon . tsr employee harold johnson suggested that hickman should try to get additional support from other tsr staff members and , after a period of months , hickman had the support of jeff grubb , larry elmore , roger moore , doug niles , michael williams , and others with whom they discussed ideas for the project . meanwhile , weis was editing and writing various endless quest books for tsr . the dragonlance group decided that novels should accompany the game modules ; tsr reluctantly agreed and hired a writer . hickman became the design coordinator for project overlord , the cover name for what would later be known as the dragonlance saga . tsr decided to create a franchise , including modules , board games , lead figures , and & mdash ; for the first time & mdash ; novels . weis had been hired as an editor ; with hickman , she began working with the author hired to write the novels . they were n't satisfied with the author , and decided they should be the ones to write the books . they collaborated over a weekend , writing the prologue for the first five chapters of the first novel , dragons of autumn twilight , based on the module dragons of despair . tsr liked their treatment and gave them the assignment , firing the author . after two years of development , tsr released dragons of autumn twilight as a supplement to the dungeons & dragons game . tsr had doubts about the finished novel 's sales potential , and attempted to order thirty thousand copies , ultimately ordering the minimum print run of fifty thousand . the success of the novel prompted tsr to publish more copies to meet demand . dragonlance eventually received ancillary products such as novels , calendars , computer games , and books of artwork . . further development . in the mid to late 1980s , a rift developed between tsr and the authors . weis and hickman were feeling under-appreciated and , when tsr turned down their darksword series of novels , they went to bantam books . bantam made them an offer , which they accepted , and they stopped writing dragonlance novels for tsr . they returned to write dragons of summer flame for tsr in 1995 , thinking it would be their final dragonlance novel . at the time , dragonlance gaming had been converted to the saga system , with limited success , and that , combined with tsr 's general financial troubles , put the setting 's future in doubt . wizards of the coast bought the troubled tsr in 1997 , and weis and hickman then proposed the war of souls trilogy , which was published in 2000 & ndash ; 2002 . all three novels made the new york times bestseller list , and the setting was commercially revitalized . by 1998 , the original dragonlance trilogy had sold well over three million copies worldwide and spawned dozens of sequels . the central books of the dragonlance series were written by the authoring team of weis and hickman ; however , many other writers have made contributions , including richard a . knaak , douglas niles , roger e . moore , don perrin , jean rabe , paul b . thompson , tonya c . cook , michael williams , nancy varian berberick , and chris pierson . in 2001 , wizards of the coast licensed sovereign press to publish further dragonlance game materials . this began with the newly revised dragonlance campaign setting in 2003 , which used the new dungeons & dragons 3rd edition rules . on april 23 , 2007 , weis announced wizards of the coast had not renewed sovereign 's license , and that dragonlance rpg game supplements and accessories would only be released through the end of the year . in october 2020 , weis and hickman filed suit against wizards of the coast for breaching a licensing deal with weis and hickman for a new dragonlance novel trilogy . boing boing reported that '' according to the lawsuit , weis and hickman agreed with wizards of the coast to produce the new novels in 2017 , capping off the series and giving fans a final sendoff . but the company pulled the plug in august 2020 '' . in december 2020 , weis and hickman filed to voluntarily dismiss without prejudice their lawsuit , and '' the filing noted that wizards of the coast had not formally answered their lawsuit , nor had they filed for a summary judgement '' . weis and hickman 's publishing agent affirmed a few weeks following this that a new trilogy of dragonlance novels is in the works with plans for publication in 2021 . . media . novels . the main storyline of the original dragonlance series has been written by margaret weis and tracy hickman , with multiple books written by other authors , covering years between and sometimes during the main events . the chronicles trilogy relates the events since the meeting of the companions until the end of the war of the lance and the defeat of the dragon armies of ansalon . the legends trilogy covers the blue lady 's war , as well as the past adventures of raistlin and caramon majere , culminating in raistlin 's attempt to achieve godhood . the books feature time travel , and focus on events in istar before the cataclysm , as well as the ensuing dwarfgate wars . the second generation is a single compilation book which picks the most important tales from the tales series and details the children of the companions , all of whom become players in the later story . this book is considered to be part of the main storyline , as it must be read to understand the events that happened between the war of the lance and the chaos war . this novel develops characters that would later be seen in the war of souls trilogy . dragons of summer flame covers the chaos war , also known as the second cataclysm . the gods and mortals join forces to defeat chaos in his attempt to destroy krynn . the war ends with the withdrawal of chaos and the gods of krynn in a divine agreement to keep the world safe . dragons of a new age describes the rise of the dragon overlords and introduces the fifth age of dragonlance . it leads into the war of souls trilogy . the war of souls trilogy begins as a strange storm courses through krynn , heralding the war of souls . the end of the war brings the return of the gods , takhisis 's death , and the departure of paladine as head of the good gods in order to maintain the balance between good and evil . the dark disciple trilogy follows the death of takhisis and the departure of paladine , when the lesser gods strive to maintain dominance . the lost chronicles trilogy is a companion to the original chronicles . each book of the trilogy fills in sections of the story previously left untold . it tells the story surrounding the recovery of the hammer of kharas , how the companions retrieve the dragon orb from ice wall , how kitiara uth matar and lord soth became allies , and how raistlin majere took the black robes in neraka . campaign setting . tsr created dragonlance as a campaign setting for the dungeons & dragons ( ad & d ) roleplaying game in 1982 , publishing the first of a series of modules , dragons of despair , in march 1984 . they published the first world-spanning sourcebook , dragonlance adventures , in 1987 . when ad & d was updated to the 2nd edition in 1989 , the dragonlance campaign setting was updated as well . however , in 1996 , dragonlance was converted to use the new saga system , which uses cards to determine the effects of actions , with the publication of the dragonlance : fifth age roleplaying game . when the 3rd edition of dungeons & dragons was released , dragonlance was again updated with a new sourcebook ( dragonlance campaign setting ) , although no new adventures were published by wizards of the coast . wizards of the coast also turned over all responsibility for maintaining the dragonlance setting in the 3rd edition to margaret weis 's home company , sovereign press . other . eight video games are set in the dragonlance world . apart from those , the mush game dragonlance is based on krynn during the final stage of the war of the lance . the series has inspired mention in music as well , including '' wishmaster '' , a song by nightwish based partially on the master and apprentice relationship between raistlin majere and dalamar . the swedish metal band lake of tears also recorded a song called '' raistlin and the rose '' on their 1997 album crimson cosmos , while the german group blind guardian wrote '' the soulforged '' , another song inspired by raistlin 's story , which appeared on the band 's 2002 album a night at the opera . also danish/american band pyramaze recorded in their 2008 album immortal song '' caramon 's poem '' . another german metal band , evertale , released the chronicles chapter i ep in 2008 and the full album of dragons and elves in 2013 - both releases were composed entirely of songs inspired by and relating to dragonlance . in 2008 , dragonlance : dragons of autumn twilight , an animated movie based on the first dragonlance book of the same name , was released direct-to-video . the animation was produced by toonz india ltd , and featured the voices of lucy lawless , kiefer sutherland , michael rosenbaum , and michelle trachtenberg . in late 2011 , holysoft studios ltd . released the first part of a german audio adaption of the chronicles trilogy , with subsequent releases of the later trilogies being announced . in comics , krynn has been represented on the 1988 dragonlance series by dc comics and tsr . more recently , devil 's due publishing and wizards of the coast have also produced a number of comic book series : the legend of huma ( 2003 ) , chronicles ( 2005 ) and legends ( 2008 ) . . world . the dragonlance world is described in dozens of books and novels . the setting contains numerous characters , an extensive timeline , and a detailed geography . setting . dragonlance is set on the world of krynn . the majority of the novels take place in the various regions of ansalon , a small continent , though some have taken place on the continent of taladas , located northeast of ansalon . the world 's major gods are the high god and his children : good paladine , neutral gilean , and evil takhisis . the gods are opposed by chaos , who seeks to destroy krynn . depending on the time period , the evil chromatic and the good metallic dragons are rare or plentiful . humans are krynn 's most common humanoid race , but elves , dwarves , kender , gnomes , and minotaurs occupy the world as well . clerics derive magical powers from their gods , and wizards derive their power from the three moon gods , good solinari , neutral lunitari , and evil nuitari . hickman had previously served as a mormon missionary in java for two years , and uses indonesian in dragonlance spells . during krynn 's various wars , armies of draconians are used as troops . draconians are created by corrupting a dragon egg , thereby creating a reptilian humanoid . any dragon egg can be used to make a draconian , although the ones most commonly used are good dragon eggs because the evil kings want more evil dragons to hatch . other gods of the setting include the gods of good branchala , habbakuk , kiri-jolith , majere , and mishakal ; the gods of neutrality chislev , reorx , shinare , sirrion , and zivilyn ; and the gods of evil , chemosh , hiddukel , morgion , sargonnas , and zeboim . fictional history . the history of the world of krynn , and thus the settings for both the novels and gaming supplements , is roughly split into five separate ages . the first age is the time of creation , when the gods are born and krynn is formed . the age of dreams , the second age , is marked by the rapid growth of the world 's first great civilizations and the appearance of myriad new races . this era is also marked by three great wars between dragons and their minions . following the third dragon war , in the age of might , the cataclysm obliterates the great empire of istar and changes almost the entire surface of krynn . a three-hundred year depression follows this event , in what is called the age of despair . this period also marks the war of the lance . when dragonlance was first introduced to dungeons & dragons , events such as the lost wars happened during the age of despair . later age of mortals novels and game supplements took krynn into the fifth age ( the age of mortals ) . . dragonlances . dragonlances are weapons first created in the third dragon war , designed with the purpose of killing evil dragons , and are the only weapons with which mortals who can not use magic can kill dragons . dragonlances have this power because of the way in which they are created , which requires the use of '' two god-blessed artifacts '' . dragonlances are rare and not commonly traded . there are lesser dragonlances , which are made when only one of the artifacts is used to create them , and greater dragonlances , which are made when both artifacts are used to make them . greater dragonlances are blessed with the power of good , unlike lesser dragonlances . there are two sizes of dragonlance . the smaller footman 's dragonlance is around eight feet long and functions as a pole weapon , while the larger mounted dragonlance is around sixteen feet long and most commonly used when mounted on a dragon . . characters . the heroes of the lance are the protagonists of the chronicles trilogy , the first series of dragonlance books . they were created by weis and hickman , then fleshed out as player characters in gaming sessions of dungeons & dragons at hickman 's apartment . one player at this initial gaming session was game designer terry phillips , who was playing as raistlin . according to hickman in the foreword to the soulforge , '' we were just settling in to the game when i turned to my good friend terry phillips and asked what his character was doing . terry spoke.and the world of krynn was forever changed . his rasping voice , his sarcasm and bitterness all masking an arrogance and power that never needed to be stated suddenly were real . everyone in the room was both transfixed and terrified . to this day margaret weis swears that terry wore the black robes to the party that night . '' in a '' traveling road show '' put on to publicize the novels , the heroes of the lance were played by various people . authors gary and janet pack played the half-elf tanis half-elven and the kender tasslehoff burrfoot , respectively . author douglas niles played the dwarf flint fireforge . tsr employee harold johnson played the solamnic knight sturm brightblade . the rest of the heroes are the barbarians goldmoon and riverwind , elf laurana kanan , and humans caramon majere ( raistlin 's brother ) and tika waylan . weis played fizban the fabulous . in the beginning , margaret weis had problems depicting tanis half-elven in the novels . tracy hickman finally told her '' he 's james t . kirk of the starship enterprise . '' after that explanation , margaret had no more difficulty writing about tanis . other noteworthy antagonists , and sometimes protagonists , are the death knight lord soth and kitiara uth matar , the half-sister of raistlin and caramon , and leader of one of the dragonarmies of ansalon . according to hickman , lord soth is the most unpredictable character to write about , saying '' every time that character made an appearance in one of our books he would try to run off with the story . '' . locations . the world of dragonlance is set on the planet of krynn , with most of the action taking place on the continent of ansalon . some of the key countries and areas on ansalon are the plains of dust , the blood sea isles , the empire of ergoth , istar , and sancrist , as well as thorbardin . important cities and towns and other locations include solace ( location of the inn of the last home , and sad town ) , the high clerist 's tower , kendermore , port balifor ( location of the pig and whistle tavern ) , and the various towers of high sorcery . races . like in many dungeons & dragons campaign settings , the fictional world of the dragonlance campaign is shaped by the division by race , with white humans as central focus , but also including elves , goblins and many others . with the species in many cases clearly assigned towards '' good '' and '' evil '' , some critics have suggested that the setting had the potential to raise racist expectations . the authors take an active stance against racist ideology by thematizing wars , and ensure that a '' fascistic genocidal campaign to wipe-out species that are considered 'impure ' '' have catastrophic consequences . in contrast , the need of tolerance and cooperation between the races is emphasized . . reception . dragonlance is one of the most popular shared worlds , worlds in which writers other than those that created them place adventures . the first dragonlance trilogy , chronicles , launched the dungeons & dragons line of novels , with many of its characters spun off into other novels . along with forgotten realms , dragonlance is tsr 's most popular series of novels . according to the 1990s by marc oxoby , what is most notable about the series is that '' what may at one time been considered disposable , escapist literature '' found '' unprecedented popularity '' in the 1990s . all of the dragonlance novels remained in print during the decade , turning weis and hickman into literary stars and boosting sales of their non-dragonlance novels . although the series was initially published in paperback , its success led to hardcover printings . the hardcover version of dragons of summer flame had an '' impressive '' first printing of 200,000 books . every dragonlance novel by weis and hickman since 1995 has been released in hardcover , and some previous novels have been re-released in hardcover collector 's editions . dragonlance made tsr one of the most successful publishers of science fiction and fantasy in the 1990s . by 2008 , there were more than 190 novels in the dragonlance franchise . weis and hickman 's dragonlance novels have made over twenty bestseller lists , with sales in excess of 22 & nbsp ; million . the pair 's novels have been translated into german , japanese , danish , finnish , spanish , french , italian , hebrew , portuguese , greek and turkish and have sold well in the united states , britain , and australia . not all critics have praised dragonlance and its creators . according to author stephen hunt , wendy bradley of interzone magazine does not think highly of their work . hunt feels that it is unusual for authors to receive such loathing among '' fantasy 's literary mafia '' , saying , '' behind every critic 's scorn laden insult , there that unsaid thought at the end : 'but i could have written that ! ' '' visions of wonder , edited by david g . hartwell and milton t . wolf , and published by the science fiction research association , argues that dragonlance is published under the '' omnivore theory '' of publishing . in this theory , the readership is made up of teenagers , and completely replaces itself every three to five years . this allows publishers to release subpar novels and still reach a small yet profitable audience .