Richard III (play)

characters . house of york king edward iv – king of england richard iii of england – edward iv 's brother ; later king richard iii george , duke of clarence – edward iv 's brother duchess of york – edward , richard and george 's mother edward v of england – edward iv 's eldest son ; later king edward v ( never crowned ) richard , duke of york – edward iv 's younger son boy – george 's son girl – george 's daughter house of lancaster queen margaret – widow of king henry vi ghost of king henry vi ghost of edward of westminster , prince of wales – henry vi 's son lady anne neville – widow of edward of westminster ; later wife of tressel and berkeley – lady anne 's attendants ( non-speaking roles ) woodville family queen elizabeth – wife of king edward iv earl rivers – elizabeth 's brother marquis of dorset – elizabeth 's son ( from a previous marriage ) richard grey – elizabeth 's son ( from a previous marriage ) sir thomas vaughan – ally of rivers and grey richard iii 's group duke of buckingham william catesby duke of norfolk earl of surrey – norfolk 's son richard ratcliffe james tyrrell – assassin lord lovel two murderers richard 's page earl of richmond 's group henry vii of england – henry vi 's nephew ; later king henry vii lord stanley , earl of derby – richmond 's stepfather earl of oxford sir walter herbert james blount sir william brandon – richmond 's standard-bearer ( non-speaking role ) clergy archbishop of canterbury thomas rotherham bishop of ely sir christopher – chaplain of stanley 's household john – priest other characters lord hastings – lord chamberlain under edward iv sir robert brackenbury – constable of the tower edmund shaa scrivener keeper of the tower three citizens hastings – pursuivant henry long ( 1435 ) ghosts of clarence , rivers , grey , vaughan , edward ( prince of wales ) , richard ( duke of york ) , hastings , lady anne and buckingham lords , messengers , soldiers etc . other although they do not appear in the text of the play , many productions include as on-stage characters jane shore ( edward iv 's mistress ) , elizabeth of york ( edward iv 's daughter , later queen consort to richmond henry vii ) , and george stanley ( lord stanley 's son , who is held hostage by richard prior to the battle of bosworth field ) . synopsis . the play begins with richard ( gloucester ) describing the re-accession to the throne of his brother , king edward & nbsp ; iv of england , eldest son of the late richard , duke of york ( implying the year is 1471 ) : richard is an ugly kyphosis , '' rudely stamp 'd '' , '' deformed , unfinish 'd '' , can not '' strut before a wanton ambling nymph '' , and says he is '' determined to prove a villain / and hate the idle pleasures of these days . '' through a prophecy , that '' g of edward 's heirs the murderer shall be '' , he has contrived to have his brother clarence conducted to the tower of london ( the king interpreted the prophecy as g eorge of clarence ) . speaking to clarence en route , richard blames the queen and says that he will himself try to help clarence . richard continues plotting : . editions of richard iii . jonathan bate and rasmussen , eric ( eds . ) richard iii ( the rsc shakespeare ; london : macmillan , 2008 ) davison , peter ( ed . ) the first quarto of king richard iii ( the new cambridge shakespeare ; cambridge : cambridge university press , 1996 ) de somogyi , nick ( ed . ) richard iii : the tragedy of richard the third ( the shakespeare folios ; london : nick hern books , 2002 ) j . dover wilson ( ed . ) richard iii ( the new shakespeare ; cambridge : cambridge university press , 1954 ; revised edition 1961 ) eccles , mark ( ed . ) the tragedy of king richard iii ( signet classic shakespeare ; new york : signet , 1964 ; revised edition , 1988 ; 2nd revised edition 1998 ) g . blakemore evans ( ed . ) richard iii ( the pelican shakespeare ; london : penguin , 1959 ; revised edition 1969 ) ——— . riverside shakespeare ( boston : houghton mifflin , 1974 ; 2nd edn . , 1997 ) stephen greenblatt ; cohen , walter ; howard , jean e . and maus , katharine eisaman ( eds . ) the norton shakespeare : based on the oxford shakespeare ( london : norton , 1997 ) w . w . greg ( ed . ) richard iii , 1597 ( oxford : oxford university press , 1959 ) hammond , anthony ( ed . ) king richard iii ( the arden shakespeare , 2nd series ; london : arden , 1981 ) holland , peter ( ed . ) richard iii ( the pelican shakespeare , 2nd edition ; london : penguin , 2000 ) honigmann , e.a.j . ( ed . ) richard iii ( the new penguin shakespeare ; london : penguin , 1968 ; revised edition , 1995 ) jowett , john ( ed . ) richard iii ( the oxford shakespeare ; oxford : oxford university press , 2000 ) lull , janis ( ed . ) king richard iii ( the new cambridge shakespeare ; cambridge : cambridge university press , 1999 ; 2nd edition 2009 ) siemon , james r . ( ed . ) king richard iii ( the arden shakespeare , 3rd series ; london : arden , 2009 ) taylor , michael ( ed . ) richard iii ( the new penguin shakespeare , 2nd edition ; london : penguin , 2005 ) thompson , a . hamilton ( ed . ) the tragedy of king richard the third ( the arden shakespeare , 1st series ; london : arden , 1907 ) stanley wells ; taylor , gary ; jowett , john and montgomery , william ( eds . ) the oxford shakespeare : the complete works ( oxford : oxford university press , 1986 ; 2nd edn . , 2005 ) werstine , paul and mowat , barbara a . ( eds . ) richard iii ( folger shakespeare library ; washington : simon & schuster , 2004 ) . external links . richard iii at the british library william shakespeare , the tragedy of king richard the third ( london : andrew wise , 1597 ) – html version of the first edition . '' now is the winter of our discontent '' soliloquy translated into modern english an interactive interview with sir ian mckellen . he discusses the opening speech , richard iii and shakespeare . bbc two confirmed that benedict cumberbatch will be playing richard iii in the second part of mini-series the hollow crown on its twitter account , saying '' we 're delighted to be able to confirm that benedict cumberbatch will play richard iii in our second series of shakespeare 's history plays ''