ATP synthase

nomenclature . the f 1 fraction derives its name from the term '' fraction 1 '' and f o ( written as a subscript letter '' o '' , not '' zero '' ) derives its name from being the binding fraction for oligomycin , a type of naturally derived antibiotic that is able to inhibit the f o unit of atp synthase . . binding model . in the 1960s through the 1970s , paul boyer , a ucla professor , developed the binding change , or flip-flop , mechanism theory , which postulated that atp synthesis is dependent on a conformational change in atp synthase generated by rotation of the gamma subunit . the research group of john e . walker , then at the laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge , crystallized the f 1 catalytic-domain of atp synthase . the structure , at the time the largest asymmetric protein structure known , indicated that boyer 's rotary-catalysis model was , in essence , correct . for elucidating this , boyer and walker shared half of the 1997 nobel prize in chemistry . the crystal structure of the f 1 showed alternating alpha and beta subunits ( 3 of each ) , arranged like segments of an orange around a rotating asymmetrical gamma subunit . according to the current model of atp synthesis ( known as the alternating catalytic model ) , the transmembrane potential created by ( h+ ) proton cations supplied by the electron transport chain , drives the ( h+ ) proton cations from the intermembrane space through the membrane via the f o region of atp synthase . a portion of the f o ( the ring of c-subunits ) rotates as the protons pass through the membrane . the c-ring is tightly attached to the asymmetric central stalk ( consisting primarily of the gamma subunit ) , causing it to rotate within the alpha 3 beta 3 of f 1 causing the 3 catalytic nucleotide binding sites to go through a series of conformational changes that lead to atp synthesis . the major f 1 subunits are prevented from rotating in sympathy with the central stalk rotor by a peripheral stalk that joins the alpha 3 beta 3 to the non-rotating portion of f o . the structure of the intact atp synthase is currently known at low-resolution from electron cryo-microscopy ( cryo-em ) studies of the complex . the cryo-em model of atp synthase suggests that the peripheral stalk is a flexible structure that wraps around the complex as it joins f 1 to f o . under the right conditions , the enzyme reaction can also be carried out in reverse , with atp hydrolysis driving proton pump across the membrane . the binding change mechanism involves the active site of a β subunit 's cycling between three states . in the '' loose '' state , adp and phosphate enter the active site ; in the adjacent diagram , this is shown in pink . the enzyme then undergoes a change in shape and forces these molecules together , with the active site in the resulting '' tight '' state ( shown in red ) binding the newly produced atp molecule with very high affinity . finally , the active site cycles back to the open state ( orange ) , releasing atp and binding more adp and phosphate , ready for the next cycle of atp production . . physiological role . like other enzymes , the activity of f 1 f o atp synthase is reversible . large-enough quantities of atp cause it to create a transmembrane proton gradient , this is used by fermenting bacteria that do not have an electron transport chain , but rather hydrolyze atp to make a proton gradient , which they use to drive flagella and the transport of nutrients into the cell . in respiring bacteria under physiological conditions , atp synthase , in general , runs in the opposite direction , creating atp while using the proton motive force created by the electron transfer chain as a source of energy . the overall process of creating energy in this fashion is termed oxidative phosphorylation . the same process takes place in the mitochondria , where atp synthase is located in the inner mitochondrial membrane and the f 1 -part projects into the mitochondrial matrix . the consumption of atp by atp-synthase pumps proton cations into the matrix . evolution . the evolution of atp synthase is thought to have been modular whereby two functionally independent subunits became associated and gained new functionality . this association appears to have occurred early in evolutionary history , because essentially the same structure and activity of atp synthase enzymes are present in all kingdoms of life . the f-atp synthase displays high functional and mechanistic similarity to the v-atpase . however , whereas the f-atp synthase generates atp by utilising a proton gradient , the v-atpase generates a proton gradient at the expense of atp , generating ph values of as low as 1 . the f 1 region also shows significant similarity to hexameric dna helicases ( especially the rho factor ) , and the entire enzyme region shows some similarity to -powered t3ss or flagellum complexes . the α 3 β 3 hexamer of the f 1 region shows significant structural similarity to hexameric dna helicases ; both form a ring with 3-fold rotational symmetry with a central pore . both have roles dependent on the relative rotation of a macromolecule within the pore ; the dna helicases use the helical shape of dna to drive their motion along the dna molecule and to detect supercoiling , whereas the α 3 β 3 hexamer uses the conformational changes through the rotation of the γ subunit to drive an enzymatic reaction . the motor of the f o particle shows great functional similarity to the motors that drive flagella . both feature a ring of many small alpha-helical proteins that rotate relative to nearby stationary proteins , using a potential gradient as an energy source . this link is tenuous , however , as the overall structure of flagellar motors is far more complex than that of the f o particle and the ring with about 30 rotating proteins is far larger than the 10 , 11 , or 14 helical proteins in the f o complex . more recent structural data do however show that the ring and the stalk are structurally similar to the f 1 particle . the modular evolution theory for the origin of atp synthase suggests that two subunits with independent function , a dna helicase with atpase activity and a motor , were able to bind , and the rotation of the motor drove the atpase activity of the helicase in reverse . this complex then evolved greater efficiency and eventually developed into today 's intricate atp synthases . alternatively , the dna helicase/ motor complex may have had pump activity with the atpase activity of the helicase driving the motor in reverse . this may have evolved to carry out the reverse reaction and act as an atp synthase . . inhibitors . a variety of natural and synthetic inhibitors of atp synthase have been discovered . these have been used to probe the structure and mechanism of atp synthase . some may be of therapeutic use . there are several classes of atp synthase inhibitors , including peptide inhibitors , polyphenolic phytochemicals , polyketides , organotin compounds , polyenic α-pyrone derivatives , cationic inhibitors , substrate analogs , amino acid modifiers , and other miscellaneous chemicals . some of the most commonly used atp synthase inhibitors are oligomycin and dccd . in different organisms . bacteria . atp synthase is the simplest known form of atp synthase , with 8 different subunit types . bacterial f-atpases can occasionally operate in reverse , turning them into an atpase . some bacteria have no f-atpase , using an a/v-type atpase bidirectionally . . yeast . yeast atp synthase is one of the best-studied eukaryotic atp synthases ; and five f 1 , eight f o subunits , and seven associated proteins have been identified . most of these proteins have homologues in other eukaryotes . . plant . in plants , atp synthase is also present in chloroplasts ( cf 1 f o -atp synthase ) . the enzyme is integrated into thylakoid membrane ; the cf 1 -part sticks into stroma , where dark reactions of photosynthesis ( also called the light-independent reactions or the calvin cycle ) and atp synthesis take place . the overall structure and the catalytic mechanism of the chloroplast atp synthase are almost the same as those of the bacterial enzyme . however , in chloroplasts , the proton motive force is generated not by respiratory electron transport chain but by primary photosynthetic proteins . the synthase has a 40-aa insert in the gamma-subunit to inhibit wasteful activity when dark . . mammal . the atp synthase isolated from bovine ( bos taurus ) heart mitochondria is , in terms of biochemistry and structure , the best-characterized atp synthase . beef heart is used as a source for the enzyme because of the high concentration of mitochondria in cardiac muscle . their genes have close homology to human atp synthases . human genes that encode components of atp synthases : atp5a1 atp5b atp5c1 , atp5d , atp5e , atp5f1 , atp5g1 , atp5g2 , atp5g3 , atp5h , atp5i , atp5j , atp5j2 , atp5l , atp5o mt-atp6 , mt-atp8 . other eukaryotes . eukaryotes belonging to some divergent lineages have very special organizations of the atp synthase . a euglenozoa atp synthase forms a dimer with a boomerang-shaped f 1 head like other mitochondrial atp synthases , but the f o subcomplex has many unique subunits . it uses cardiolipin . the inhibitory if 1 also binds differently , in a way shared with trypanosomatida . . archaea . archaea do not generally have an f-atpase . instead , they synthesize atp using the a-atpase/synthase , a rotary machine structually similar to the v-atpase but mainly functioning as an atp synthase . like the bacteria f-atpase , it is believed to also function as an atpase .