United Daughters of the Confederacy

memoirs . the udc encouraged women to publish their experiences in the war , beginning with biographies of major southern figures , such as varina davis 's of her husband jefferson davis , president of the confederacy . later , women began adding more of their own experiences to the '' public discourse about the war , '' in the form of memoirs , such as those published in the early 1900s by sara pryor , virginia clopton , louise wright and others . they also recommended structures for the memoirs . by the turn of the twentieth century , a dozen memoirs by southern women were published . these memoirs were part of the growing public memory about the antebellum years and the lost cause narrative , which critics have described as white supremacist , as they vigorously defended the confederacy and its founding principles ( which included the enslavement of african-americans ) . southern cross of honor . the southern cross of honor was a commemorative medal established by the united daughters of the confederacy for members of the united confederate veterans . it was proposed at a meeting in 1898 , with 78,761 crosses issued by 1913 . the medal was never authorized to be worn on the united states army , navy , or marine corps uniform . . scholarships . during the first decades of their existence , the udc focused on caring for confederate soldiers and their widows . when the numbers of confederate veterans began to dwindle , they focused on their remaining objectives . & nbsp ; education of the descendants of those who served the confederacy became one of the key interests of the organization . some state divisions within the udc built dormitories and sponsored scholarships , but there was no coordinated support for education by the national organization . & nbsp ; the divisions were responsible for scholarships and building dormitories for women . & nbsp ; at the 1907 general convention , caroline meriwether goodlett spoke of the shift in the udc 's focus . & nbsp ; as monuments were erected , she '' sat by . thinking that the monument fever would abate . '' she believed that '' the most thoughtful and best educated women '' in the organization should have realized that the '' grandest monument ( they ) could build in the south would be an educated motherhood . '' the udc combined education with support of the military during world war ii by establishing a nurses ' training fund . each scholarship provided approximately 100 per year for a three-year nursing program . & nbsp ; when a scholarship was offered , local chapters were encouraged to contact local schools to locate students who needed assistance to fund their education . in addition , the udc sponsors essay and poetry compositions , in which the participants are not to use the phrase '' civil war , '' '' war between the states '' being the preferred term . . children of the confederacy . the children of the confederacy , also known as the cofc , is an auxiliary organization to the udc . the official name is children of the confederacy of the united daughters of the confederacy . it comprises children from birth through the time of the children of the confederacy annual general convention following their 18th birthday . all children of the confederacy chapters are sponsored by udc chapters . children are taught lyon gardiner tyler 's '' catechism on the history of the confederate states of america , 1861–1865 , '' which says that northerners did away with slavery because the climate was unsuitable , that they had no intention of ever paying the south for its slaves after abolition , that slaves in the south were faithful to their owners , who were caring and gentle people : cruel slave owners existed only in the north . before 2015 , the '' creed '' of the cofc read : the phrase '' nor was its underlying cause to sustain slavery '' was deleted by the udc general convention of 2015 . meredith college history professor and former cofc member daniel l . fountain states that organisations like the udc have deeply '' implanted the lost cause ’ s falsified version of history '' in the south . '' rallying behind powerful women such as mildred lewis rutherford , the udc relentlessly lobbied legislatures for public school textbooks that presented a pro-confederate version of regional history and successfully blacklisted '' other books . '' by targeting the region ’ s middle- to upper-class children , they ensured an army of future teachers and leaders would carry forward and defend their message for decades to come . embedding their version of confederate history into the sacred spaces of southern society ( the home , cemeteries , churches , city squares , street names , colleges and schools ) made erasing it physically difficult and personally painful . '' . george floyd protests . during the early morning hours of may 31 , 2020 , the memorial to the women of the confederacy headquarters building in richmond was vandalized with graffiti and set ablaze during a chain of protests across the city in the wake of the killing of george floyd . the richmond fire department extinguished the fire using nine fire trucks . the president-general of the udc reported that the building 's windows had been broken and fire was set to the curtains hanging in the building 's caroline meriwether goodlett library . the fire was largely contained to the library , but there was extensive smoke and water damage throughout the building and charring on the building 's georgia marble façade . staff reported that all the books in the building 's library had incurred some damage and that library shelving had been destroyed . . lost cause and neo-confederate views . during the period 1880–1910 , the udc was one of many groups that celebrated lost cause mythology and presented '' a romanticized view of the slavery era '' in the united states . the udc promoted white southern solidarity , allowing white southerners to refer to a mythical past in order to legitimize racial segregation and white supremacy . the udc worked to '' define southern identity around images from an old south that portrayed slavery as benign and slaves as happy and a reconstruction that portrayed blacks as savage and immoral . '' in 1919 their lost cause narrative was codified in mildred rutherford 's '' measuring rod to test text books and reference books , '' which the udc endorsed and successfully used in debates over history textbooks across the south . more recently , historian james m . mcpherson has said that the udc promotes a white supremacist and neo-confederate agenda , angela esco elder , '' united daughters of the confederacy '' in new georgia encyclopedia ( georgia humanities council/university of georgia press : original entry july 23 , 2010 ; last updated october 12 , 2016 ) . i think i agree a hundred percent with ed sebesta , though , about the motives or the hidden agenda not too deeply hidden i think of such groups as the united daughters of the confederacy and the sons of confederate veterans . they are dedicated to celebrating the confederacy and rather thinly veiled support for white supremacy . and i think that also is the again not very deeply hidden agenda of the confederate flag issue in several southern states . kirk savage , monument wars : washington , d.c . , the national mall , and the transformation of the memorial landscape , ( university of california press , 2011 ) . savage wrote in when should the removal of confederate monuments stop ? , in the 1890s , with the rise of openly white supremacist state and local governments , the united daughters of the confederacy ( udc ) among others embarked on a systematic campaign of commemoration that extended from monument building to rewriting school textbooks and sponsoring rituals for white schoolchildren . while much of the overt indoctrination is now gone , the material traces of this campaign still permeate cities and small towns . -- > the southern poverty law center considers the udc as part of the neo-confederate movement that began in the early 1890s , which the center states is '' a reactionary conservative ideology that has made inroads into the republican party from the political right , and overlaps with the views of white nationalists and other more radical extremist groups . '' in august 2018 , its website still stated that '' slaves , for the most part , were faithful and devoted . most slaves were usually ready and willing to serve their masters . '' . ku klux klan . according to lawyer greg huffman , writing in facing south , '' perhaps nothing illuminates the udc 's true nature more than its relationship with the ku klux klan . many commentators have said the udc simply supported the klan . that is not true . the udc during jim crow venerated the klan and elevated it to a nearly mythical status . it dealt in and preserved klan artifacts and symbology . it even served as a sort of public relations agency for the terrorist group . '' at its 1913 annual national convention , the udc unanimously endorsed the ku klux klan , or the invisible empire , a book written by udc historian laura martin rose , then president of the udc 's mississippi division , which alleged that the klan had rescued the south from carpetbagger-inspired racial violence . published near the height of the udc 's confederate statue-installation and textbook-vetting efforts , the book became a supplementary reader for southern school children . a local chapter of the udc funded a now-vanished memorial to the klan erected in 1926 near concord , north carolina . as late as 1936 , the udc 's official publication featured an article which lauded the role of the ku klux klan . . notable members . florence anderson clark ( 1835–1918 ) , author , newspaper editor , librarian , university dean virginia clay-clopton ( 1825–1915 ) , a political hostess and activist in alabama and washington , dc . una b . herrick ( 1863-1950 ) , american educator , the first dean of women at montana state college . caroline meriwether goodlett ( 1833–1914 ) , founding president of the udc adele briscoe looscan ( 1848–1935 ) , president of the texas state historical association ( 19151925 ) . anna davenport raines ( 1853–1915 ) , founding vice-president of the udc florence sillers ogden ( 1891–1971 ) , newspaper columnist , the clarion-ledger , pro-segregation activist . elizabeth fry page ( ? –1943 ) , author , editor edith d . pope ( 1869-1947 ) , second editor of the confederate veteran ; president of the nashville no . 1 chapter of the udc from 1927 to 1930 . panthea twitty ( 1912–1977 ) , photographer , ceramicist , and historian . kitty o'brien joyner ( 1916–1993 ) , electrical engineer and the first woman engineer at naca , the predecessor to nasa . vernettie o . ivy ( 1876-1967 ) , 6 year member of the arizona house of representatives . see also . list of monuments erected by the united daughters of the confederacy list of women 's organizations