Bayard Rustin

1990s and 2000s . in july 2007 , with the permission of the estate of bayard rustin , a group of san francisco bay area african-american lgbt community leaders officially formed the bayard rustin lgbt coalition ( brc ) , to promote greater participation in the electoral process , advance civil and human rights issues , and promote the legacy of rustin . in addition , the bayard rustin center for lgbtqa activism , awareness , and reconciliation is located at guilford college , a quaker school . formerly the queer and allied resource center , the center was rededicated in march 2011 with the permission of the estate of bayard rustin and featured a keynote address by social justice activist mandy carter . a 1998 anthology movie , out of the past , featured letters and archive footage of rustin . a pennsylvania state historical marker is placed at lincoln and montgomery avenues , west chester , pennsylvania ; the marker commemorating his accomplishments lies on the grounds of henderson high school , which he attended . in 2006 , bayard rustin high school opened in west chester , pennsylvania . bayard rustin was a 1932 graduate of west chester high school . . 2010s . in 2012 , rustin was inducted into the legacy walk , an outdoor public display which celebrates lgbtq history and people . he was posthumously awarded honorary membership into delta phi upsilon , a fraternity for gay , bisexual , and progressive men . in 2013 , rustin was selected as an honoree in the labor hall of honor . on august 8 , 2013 , president barack obama awarded rustin the presidential medal of freedom , the highest award in the united states . the citation in the press release stated : bayard rustin was an unyielding activist for civil rights , dignity , and equality for all . an advisor to the reverend dr . martin luther king , jr . , he promoted nonviolent resistance , participated in one of the first freedom rides , organized the 1963 march on washington for jobs and freedom , and fought tirelessly for marginalized communities at home and abroad . as an openly gay african american , mr . rustin stood at the intersection of several of the fights for equal rights . at the white house ceremony on november 20 , 2013 , president obama presented rustin 's award to walter naegle , his partner of ten years at the time of rustin 's death . in 2014 rustin was one of the inaugural honorees in the rainbow honor walk , a walk of fame in san francisco ’ s castro neighborhood noting lgbtq people who have '' made significant contributions in their fields . '' in 2016 , the greensboro mural project , created a mural in honor of rustin located at new garden friends meeting in greensboro , north carolina . john hunter designed the mural , their first , honoring the legacy of rustin . in april 2018 , the montgomery county board of education in maryland voted to name the bayard rustin elementary school after rustin . canadian writer steven elliott jackson wrote a play that stages an imaginary meeting and one-night-stand between rustin and walter jenkins of the johnson administration called the seat next to the king . the play won the award for best play at the 2017 toronto fringe festival . in june 2019 , rustin was one of the inaugural fifty american “ pioneers , trailblazers , and heroes ” inducted on the national lgbtq wall of honor within the stonewall national monument ( snm ) in new york city ’ s stonewall inn . the snm is the first u.s . national monument dedicated to lgbtq rights and history , and the wall ’ s unveiling was timed to take place during the 50th anniversary of the stonewall riots . in 2019 , the bayard rustin center for social justice ( brcsj ) opened its doors with the rustin estate , and rustin 's partner walter naegle joining as community liaison . the brcsj is a community activist center , and safe space for lgbtq kids , intersectional families , and marginalized people . 2020s . in january 2020 , california state senator scott wiener , chair of the california legislative lgbt caucus , and assemblywoman shirley weber , chair of the california legislative black caucus , called for governor gavin newsom to issue a pardon for rustin ’ s arrest for having sex with men , citing rustin 's legacy as a civil rights icon . newsom issued the pardon on 5 february while also announcing a new process for fast-tracking pardons for those convicted under historical laws making homosexuality illegal . . publications . interracial primer , new york : fellowship of reconciliation , 1943 interracial workshop : progress report , new york : sponsored by congress of racial equality and fellowship of reconciliation , 1947 journey of reconciliation : report , new york : fellowship of reconciliation , congress of racial equality , 1947 we challenged jim crow ! a report on the journey of reconciliation , april 9–23 , 1947 , new york : fellowship of reconciliation , congress of racial equality , 1947 '' in apprehension how like a god ! '' , philadelphia : young friends movement 1948 the revolution in the south '' , cambridge , massachusetts . : peace education section , american friends service committee , 1950s report on montgomery , alabama new york : war resisters league , 1956 a report and action suggestions on non-violence in the south new york : war resisters league , 1957 civil rights : the true frontier , new york : donald press , 1963 from protest to politics : the future of the civil rights movement , new york : league for industrial democracy , 1965 the city in crisis , ( introduction ) new york : a . philip randolph educational fund , 1965 '' black power '' and coalition politics , new york , american jewish committee 1966 which way ? ( with daniel patrick moynihan ) , new york : american press , 1966 the watts '' manifesto '' & the mccone report . , new york , league for industrial democracy 1966 fear , frustration , backlash : the new crisis in civil rights , new york , jewish labor committee 1966 the lessons of the long hot summer , new york , american jewish committee 1967 the negro community : frustration politics , sociology and economics detroit : uaw citizenship-legislative department , 1967 a way out of the exploding ghetto , new york : league for industrial democracy , 1967 the alienated : the young rebels today and why they 're different , washington , d.c . : international labor press association , 1967 '' right to work '' laws ; a trap for america 's minorities . , new york : a . phillip randolph institute 1967 civil rights : the movement re-examined ( contributor ) , new york : a . philip randolph educational fund , 1967 separatism or integration , which way for america ? : a dialogue ( with robert browne ) , new york , a . philip randolph educational fund , 1968 the report of the national advisory commission on civil disorders , an analysis , new york , american jewish committee 1968 the labor-negro coalition , a new beginning , washington ? d.c . : american federationist ? , 1968 the anatomy of frustration , new york : anti-defamation league of b'nai b'rith , 1968 morals concerning minorities , mental health and identity , new york : a . philip randolph institute , 1969 black studies : myths & realities , ( contributor ) new york : a . philip randolph educational fund , 1969 conflict or coalition ? : the civil rights struggle and the trade union movement today , new york : a . philip randolph institute , 1969 three essays , new york : a . philip randolph institute , 1969 black rage , white fear : the full employment answer : an address , washington , d.c . : bricklayers , masons & plasterers international union 1970 a word to black students , new york : a . philip randolph institute , 1970 the failure of black separatism , new york : a . philip randolph institute , 1970 the blacks and the unions ( contributor ) , new york : a . philip randolph educational fund , 1971 down the line ; the collected writings of bayard rustin , chicago : quadrangle books , 1971 affirmative action in an economy of scarcity ( with norman hill ) , new york : a . philip randolph institute , 1974 seniority and racial progress ( with norman hill ) , new york : a . philip randolph institute , 1975 have we reached the end of the second reconstruction ? , bloomington , indiana : the poynter center , 1976 strategies for freedom : the changing patterns of black protest , new york : columbia university press 1976 africa , soviet imperialism and the retreat of american power , new york : social democrats , usa ( reprint ) , 1978 south africa : is peaceful change possible ? a report ( contributor ) , new york : new york friends group , 1984 time on two crosses : the collected writings of bayard rustin , san francisco : cleis press , 2003 i must resist : bayard rustin 's life in letters : city lights , 2012 . see also . civil resistance list of civil rights leaders nonviolent resistance timeline of the civil rights movement . references . notes . . bibliography . anderson , jervis . bayard rustin : troubles i 've seen ( new york : harpercollins publishers , 1997 ) . bennett , scott h . radical pacifism : the war resisters league and gandhian nonviolence in america , 1915–1963 ( syracuse univ . press , 2003 ) . branch , taylor . parting the waters : america in the king years , 1954–63 ( new york : touchstone , 1989 ) . carbado , devon w . and donald weise , editors . time on two crosses : the collected writings of bayard rustin ( san francisco : cleis press , 2003 ) . d ’ emilio , john . lost prophet : bayard rustin and the quest for peace and justice in america ( new york : the free press , 2003 ) . d'emilio , john . lost prophet : the life and times of bayard rustin ( chicago : the university of chicago press , 2004 ) . frazier , nishani ( 2017 ) . harambee city : congress of racial equality in cleveland and the rise of black power populism . university of arkansas press . haskins , james . bayard rustin : behind the scenes of the civil rights movement ( new york : hyperion , 1997 ) . hirschfelder , nicole . oppression as process : the case of bayard rustin ( heidelberg : universitätsverlag winter , 2014 ) . kates , nancy and bennett singer ( dirs . ) brother outsider : the life of bayard rustin ( 2003 ) king , martin luther jr . ; carson , clayborne ; luker , ralph & penny a . russell the papers of martin luther king , jr . : volume iv : symbol of the movement , january 1957 & nbsp ; – december 1958 . university of california press , 2000 . le blanc , paul and michael yates , a freedom budget for all americans : recapturing the promise of the civil rights movement in the struggle for economic justice today ( new york : monthly review press , 2013 ) . podair , jerald e . '' bayard rustin : american dreamer '' ( lanham , md : rowman & littlefield pub . , 2009 ) . lewis , david l . king : a biography . ( university of illinois press , 1978 ) . rustin , bayard . down the line : the collected writings of bayard rustin ( chicago : quadrangle books , 1971 ) . . external links . sncc digital gateway : bayard rustin , documentary website created by the sncc legacy project and duke university , telling the story of the student nonviolent coordinating committee & grassroots organizing from the inside-out bayard rustin & nbsp ; – who is this man ? bayard rustin fb memorial page fbi file on bayard rustin bayard rustin , civil rights leader , from quakerinfo.org brother outsider , a documentary on rustin randall kennedy , '' from protest to patronage . '' the nation biography on bayard rustin high school 's website guide to the papers of bayard rustin at the american jewish historical society . bayard rustin collected papers finding aid at the swarthmore college peace collection