Thomas Linacre

life . he was born at brampton , chesterfield , in derbyshire , descended from an ancient family recorded in the domesday book . he received his early education at the canterbury cathedral school , under the direction of william tilly of selling , who became prior of canterbury in 1472 . it was from selling that linacre must have received his first incentive to the study of classics . linacre entered oxford in about 1480 , and in 1484 was elected a fellow of all souls college . shortly afterwards he visited italy in the train of selling , who was sent by king henry vii as an envoy to the papal court . linacre accompanied his patron as far as bologna . there he became the pupil of angelo poliziano , and shared the instruction which poliziano imparted at florence to the sons of lorenzo de medici . the younger of these princes became pope leo x , and later remembered his old companionship with linacre . among his other teachers and friends in italy were demetrius chalcondylas , ermolao barbaro , aldus romanus the printer of venice ( of whose new academy linacre was a member ) , and niccolò leoniceno of vicenza . linacre took the degree of doctor of medicine with great distinction at padua . on his return to oxford , full of the learning and imbued with the spirit of the italian renaissance , he formed one of the brilliant circle of oxford scholars , including john colet , william grocyn and william latimer , who are mentioned in the letters of erasmus . linacre does not appear to have practised or taught medicine in oxford . in about 1501 , he was called to court as tutor of the young arthur , prince of wales . on the accession of henry viii in 1509 , he was appointed the king 's physician , an office at that time of considerable influence and importance , and practised medicine in london , having among his patients most of the great statesmen and prelates of the time , including thomas wolsey , archbishop william warham and bishop fox . after some years of professional activity , linacre devoted himself to the study of theology and the duties of the priesthood . around 1509 , he received priest 's orders as the rector of merstham , kent . numerous ecclesiastical positions followed , finalising with him obtaining the rectorship of wigan in 1520 , which he held until his death in 1524 . his clerical benefices , included the precentorship of york minster . his ordination was connected with his retirement from active life . literary labours , and the cares of the foundation which owed its existence chiefly to him , the royal college of physicians , occupied linacre 's remaining years . the most important service linacre conferred upon his own profession and science was the foundation by royal charter of the college of physicians in london , and he was the first president of the new college , which he further aided by bequeathing to it his own house and library . shortly before his death , linacre obtained from the king letters patent for the establishment of readerships in medicine at oxford and cambridge , and placed valuable estates in the hands of trustees for their endowment . two readerships were founded at merton college , oxford , and a lecture st john 's college , cambridge . the oxford foundation was revived by the university commissioners in 1856 in the form of the linacre chair of zoology . at st john 's college the funds are still in use today ; since 1989 the college has hosted an annual '' linacre lecture '' on a subject in medicine , delivered by a leading research scientist in their field . linacre is listed on a modern monument in the crypt of st paul 's cathedral in london as one of the important graves lost in the great fire of london in 1666 . '' memorials of st paul 's cathedral '' sinclair , w . p99 : london ; chapman & hall , ltd ; 1909 . works . linacre 's literary activity was displayed both in pure scholarship and in translation from greek . in the domain of scholarship he was known by the rudiments of ( latin ) grammar , composed in english , a revised version of which was made for the use of the princess mary , and afterwards translated into latin by george buchanan . he also wrote a work on latin composition , ( '' on the pure and correct structure of latin prose '' ) , which was published in london in 1524 and many times reprinted on the continent of europe . linacre 's only medical works were his translations . he desired to make the works of galen ( and indeed those of aristotle also ) accessible to all readers of latin . what he effected in the case of the first , though not trifling in itself , is inconsiderable as compared with the whole mass of galen 's writings ; and of his translations from aristotle , some of which are known to have been completed , nothing has survived . the following are the works of galen translated by linacre : de sanitate tuenda , ( paris , 1517 ) methodus medendi ( paris , 1519 ) de temperamentis et de inaequali intemperie ( cambridge , 1521 ) de naturalibus facultatibus ( london , 1523 ) de symptomatum differentiis et causis ( london , 1524 ) de pulsuum usu ( london , without date ) . he also translated for the use of prince arthur an astronomical treatise of proclus , , which was printed at venice by aldus in 1499 . the accuracy of these translations and their elegance of style were universally admitted . they were generally accepted as the standard versions of those parts of galen 's writings , and frequently reprinted , either as a part of the collected works or separately . linacre 's intellectual fastidiousness and minute accuracy were , as erasmus suggested , the chief cause why he left no more permanent literary memorials . it is difficult to justify by any extant work the extremely high reputation which he enjoyed among the scholars of his time . his latin style was greatly admired by erasmus , who also praised linacre 's critical judgment ( '' '' ) . according to others it was hard to say whether he was more distinguished as a grammarian or a rhetorician . of greek he was regarded as a consummate master ; and he was equally eminent as a '' philosopher '' , that is , as learned in the works of the ancient philosophers and naturalists . in this there may have been some exaggeration ; but all have acknowledged the elevation of linacre 's character , and the fine moral qualities summed up in the epitaph written by john caius : '' '' . authorities . the materials for linacre 's biography are to a large extent contained in the older biographical collections of george lily ( in paulus jovius , descriptio britanniae ) , john bale , john leland and pits , in anthony wood 's athenae oxonienses and in the biographia britannica . all are completely collected in the life of thomas linacre , by noble johnson ( london , 1835 ) . see also william munk 's roll of the royal college of physicians ( 2nd ed . , london , 1878 ) ; and the introduction , by joseph frank payne , to a facsimile eproduction of linacre 's version of galen de temperamentis ( cambridge , 1881 ) . see also . list of erasmus 's correspondents linacre quarterly list of roman catholic scientist-clerics . notes . references . . further reading . wikisource : the history of the church and manor of wigan/thomas lynacre . external links .