Banaadir

overview . the banaadir region is bordered by the middle shebelle ( shabeellaha dhexe ) and lower shebelle ( shabeellaha hoose ) , as well as the indian ocean . '' benaadir '' is derived from the somali banaadir , which means '' coast '' , in reference to the southern somali coastal cities of mogadishu , merka and barawa . the place name reflects the region 's medieval position as a key trade center with persia , arabian peninsula and the swahili coast . its capital is mogadishu known as xamar , although the administrative region itself is coextensive with the city . benaadir is much smaller than the historical region of benadir , which covers most of the country 's central and southern seaboard opposite the indian ocean and up to the juba river , including mogadishu . thabit m . abdi was appointed mayor of mogadishu and governor of banaadir in 2017 , succeeding yusuf hussein jimale who held that post since november 2015 . . population . the 1,650,227 residents of benaadir are 50.7 % female and come from 303,021 households . it has the highest percentage of residents who are internally displaced persons among the regions of somalia , because of its relative safety , economic opportunities and availability of resources . . history . political . tradition and old records assert that southern somalia , including the mogadishu area , was historically inhabited by hunter-gatherers . these were later joined by cushitic-speaking populations , who would go on to establish local aristocracies . during its medieval golden age , mogadishu was ruled by the muzaffar dynasty , and later by the ajuran sultanate . this is found mainly in banaadiri oral tradition , who are considered the native population . it subsequently fell under the control of an assortment of local sultanates and polities , most notably the sultanate of the geledi . the sultanate of the geledi were in an alliance with the zanzibar dynasty . the city later became the capital of italian somaliland ( 1889–1936 ) in the colonial period . when the italians arrived in mogadishu the city had two towns only . these towns were xamar weyne and shingaani . the people who lived in these towns were known as '' reer xamar '' who were the original population and the people that lived outside these towns , what is modern day hodan , boondhere and all the districts were known as xamar daye . these tribes mainly included reer mataan sub tribes . the xamar daye , being nomadic people used their lands as grazing lands and used them for things such as camel herding . they sold their cattle in bulk to the reer xamar merchants , who were urban dwellers and seafarers ; they in turn traded these items throughout the indian ocean and brought back luxury goods such as ivory . after the somali republic became independent in 1960 , mogadishu became known and promoted as the white pearl of the indian ocean . after the ousting of the siad barre regime in 1991 and the ensuing somali civil war , various militias fought for control of the city , later to be replaced by the islamic courts union in the mid-2000s . the icu thereafter splintered into more radical groups , notably the al-shabaab , which fought the transitional federal government ( 2004–2012 ) and its african union mission to somalia allies . with a change in administration in late 2010 , government troops and their military partners had succeeded in forcing out al-shabaab by august 2011 . mogadishu has then subsequently experienced a period of intense reconstruction . economic . in 694 ad the benadir towns of mogadishu , merka , brava and kismayo sprang into historical existence thanks to the enterprise of abdul malik bin muriami . he placed one of his own followers as governor in each town and declared himself the sultan . these towns on the benadir coast of the indian ocean share , to a great extent , the characteristics of the swahili culture further south . the trading centres , welcoming arab , persian and other immigrants , evolved into distinctive amalgams , both of people groups and languages , with tangible forms of settled government and the presence of islam as the main religion . the famous explorer ibn battuta gave us the best description of the city of mogadishu and its society in the horn of africa during the tenth century . from the tenth century , settlers in the region , of arab and persian origin settled and mixed with the local populations . shamsud-din abu abdalla muhammed known as ibn battuta during his visit to the area in 1331 ad noted that arabic , swahili and somali was the language of commercial and literary people on the benadir coast and islands . mogadishu , was the center of a thriving weaving industry known as toob benadir ( specialized for the markets in egypt and syria ) , gujarat and the trade of east africa p . 35 together with merca and barawa also served as transit stops for swahili merchants from mombasa and malindi and for the gold trade from kilwa . the return of cosmopolitan capital : globalization , the state and war p . 22 jewish merchants from the hormuz brought indian textiles and fruits to the somali coast in exchange for grain and wood . the arabian seas : the indian ocean world of the seventeenth century by r . j . barendse the portuguese reached benadir by the end of the fourteenth century . barawa ( brava ) was sacked for three days in 1499 and burnt . in 1516 , the portuguese duarte defined mogadishu as a city of black inhabitants named magadoxo that was ruled by a sultan . the portuguese wanted to occupy the coast of benadir , but never succeeded . the portuguese finally left the region after 1698 ad . successive somali sultanates dominated the regional trade of benadir , including the ajuran empire , the adal sultanate , the warsangali sultanate , and the geledi sultanate . in the xvii century the entire benadir coast was controlled by the omani sultan and when this sultanate was divided into the sultanate of muscat and the sultanate of zanzibar , benadir went under the jurisdiction of zanzibar . in 1861 , zanzibar and oman were divided into two separate principalities : sayyid majid bin said al-busaid became the sultan of zanzibar , while sayyid thuwaini bin said al-said , became the sultan of oman . the sultan of zanzibar controlled a large portion of the african great lakes coast , known as zanj , as well as trading routes extending much further across the continent , as far as kindu on the congo river , and reaching the benadir . the kingdom of italy of the benadir coast of somalia began in 1885 by a commercial company ( called '' compagnia del benadir '' ) which leased the sultan 's territory of obbia . the territory embraced between 4 degrees latitude north of the juba river , which bordered british east africa , was also administered by a private company . the main river was the ueli xebeli ( wadi shebeli ) and the major cities were mogadishu , merka , brava ( barawa ) and warseij . the benadir colony was renamed on 16 march 1905 and became italian somaliland with the italian administration directly in control of benadir , and with the protected sultanates of obbia ( hobyo ) and majertenia ( majeerteen ) . in 1926 the territory of benadir was between the '' basso uebi-scebeli '' , mogadishu and the '' alto-uebu scebeli '' . the italians settled in huge numbers and named the city as mogadiscio ( known as the '' white pearl of indian ocean '' and was practically a fully italianised city with over 40 % of inhabitants being italians or descendants of italians ) and the 3 main cities in the shebelle river farm area ( villabruzzi with 3000 colonists , genale with 700 and vittorio with 400 ) . but little communities of italian colonists existed also in the benadir cities of merca ( 250 italians ) , brava ( 150 ) , chisimaio ( 120 ) , baidoa ( 300 ) and itala ( 50 ) . in the 1930s , the benadir section inside the '' triangle mogadiscio-merca-villabruzzi '' was the most developed area of '' somali italiana '' , with a 114 & nbsp ; km railway and many paved roads with the petrella airport and the mogadiscio port . most of the italian somalians lived in this area . in 1951 the '' basso uebi-scebeli '' and mogadishu were united in the district of benadir , and as such , integrated into the republic of somalia after oobtaining independence in 1960 . the district existed until 1982 when it was renamed as the banadir region . districts . the banaadir region consists of seventeen districts . districts of somalia warta nabada district was previously known as wardhigley district until it was officially renamed in 2012 . somali president renames mogadishu district to foster peace , sabahionline.com , 10 april 2012 . accessed on 23 october 2016 . kadha district was formed in 2013 and is still absent from most maps . see : '' somali voices '' radio program connects families , fosters dialogue on tough issues , internews , 27 february 2014 . accessed on 7 october 2015 . abdiaziz district bondhere district daynile district dharkenley district hamar-jajab district hamar-weyne district hodan district howl-wadag district huriwa district kaxda district : so : kaxda karan district shangani district shibis district waberi district wadajir district warta nabada district yaqshid district . references . external links . administrative map of banaadir