Harlech Castle

15th–17th centuries . in 1400 a revolt broke out in north wales against english rule , led by owain glyndŵr . by 1403 only a handful of castles , including harlech , still stood against the rebels , but the castle was under-equipped and under-staffed to withstand a siege , the garrison having just three shields , eight helmets , six lances , ten pairs of gloves , and four guns . ; at the end of 1404 , the castle fell to glyndŵr . harlech became his residence , family home and military headquarters for four years ; he held his second parliament in harlech in august 1405 . in 1408 english forces under the command of the future henry v placed harlech and its commander , edmund mortimer , under siege , conducting a bombardment with cannon , probably destroying the south and east parts of the outer walls . when this failed to take the castle , henry left john talbot in charge of the siege and moved on to deal with aberystwyth castle . supplies finally ran short , mortimer and many of his men died of exhaustion , and harlech fell in february 1409 . ; in the 15th century , harlech was involved in the series of civil wars known as the wars of the roses that broke out between the rival factions of the house of lancaster and york . in 1460 , following the battle of northampton , queen margaret of anjou fled to the castle and between 1461–68 it was held by her lancastrian supporters , under the command of dafydd ap ieuan , against the yorkist edward iv . thanks to its natural defences and the supply route by sea , harlech held out and as other fortresses fell , eventually became the last major stronghold still under lancastrian control . the castle became a base for their operations across the region : there were planned operations in 1464 , sir richard tunstall mounted attacks from harlech in 1466 and jasper tudor landed there with french reinforcements in 1468 , before then raiding the town of denbigh . tudor 's arrival caused edward iv to order william herbert to mobilise an army , possibly up to 10,000 strong , to finally seize the castle . ; after a month 's siege , the small garrison surrendered on 14 august . this siege is credited with inspiring the song men of harlech . ; the english civil war broke out in 1642 between the royalist supporters of charles i and the roundheads . harlech apparently had not been repaired following the 1468 siege , and had become completely dilapidated , with the exception of the gatehouse , which was used for the local assizes . in 1644 prince rupert appointed a local royalist , colonel william owen , as the castle 's constable , and owen was entrusted with repairing the fortifications . a long siege ensued from june 1646 until 15 march 1647 , when the garrison of 44 men surrendered to major-general thomas mytton . the castle was the last mainland royal fortress to surrender in the war , and the date marked the end of the first phase of the war . the castle was no longer required for the security of north wales and , to prevent any further use by the royalists , parliament ordered its slighting , or destruction . the orders were only partially carried out , however , and the gatehouse staircases were destroyed and the castle rendered generally unusable , but it was not totally demolished . ; stone from the castle was reused to build houses in the local town . . 18th–21st centuries . in the late-18th and 19th centuries , the picturesque ruins of harlech began to attract visits from prominent artists , including john cotman , henry gastineau , paul sandby , j . m . w . turner and john varley . in 1914 it was transferred from the merioneth crown estate to the control of the office of works , who commenced a major restoration project after the end of world war i . in 1969 the castle was transferred to the welsh office and then to cadw , who manage the property in the 21st century as a tourist attraction . harlech was declared part of the castles and town walls of king edward in gwynedd world heritage site in 1986 , unesco considering harlech one of '' the finest examples of late 13th century and early 14th century military architecture in europe '' . ; . architecture . harlech castle rests upon part of the rhinogydd , a spur of rock almost high ; the land falls away sharply on the north and west , and a ditch cut into the rock protects the remaining approaches to the castle . the castle has a concentric castle , with one line of defences enclosed by another , forming an inner and outer ward ; the outer wall was originally somewhat taller than today . harlech is built from local grey-green sandstone , with large , regular blocks used for the towers and irregular material , possibly taken from the ditch , used for the walls . a softer yellow sandstone is used for the decorative work in the castle , possibly quarried from around egryn abbey near barmouth . the main entrance to the castle would have involved crossing a stone bridge between the two easterly ditch bridge towers and the main gatehouse ; little remains of the bridge towers today and a timber entrance way to the gatehouse replaces the bridge . a water gate overlooks a protected stairway of 127 steps that runs down to the foot of the cliffs . in the 13th century , the sea came up close to the stairway , allowing resupply by sea , but today the sea has retreated significantly , making it more difficult to envisage the concept in its original setting . the gatehouse follows the design , sometimes termed the tonbridge-style , that became popular during the 13th century , with two massive '' d-shaped '' defensive towers flanking the entrance . ; the passage into the castle was guarded by three portcullises and at least two heavy doors . the gatehouse has two upper floors , broken up into various rooms . each floor has three large windows overlooking the inner ward ; the second floor has two additional grand windows on the sides of the gatehouse ; the gatehouse was fitted with fireplaces and would originally have had prominent chimneys . the use of these rooms has been the subject of academic debate : historian arnold taylor argued that the first floor of the gatehouse was used by the constable as living accommodation , with the second floor used by senior visitors ; jeremy ashbee has since challenged this interpretation , suggesting the high status accommodation may instead have been in the inner ward , and the gatehouse used for other purposes . ; the inner ward is guarded by four large circular towers . over time these acquired various names : in 1343 , clockwise from the north-east , they were called le prisontour , turris ultra gardinium , le wedercoktour and le chapeltour , but by 1564 they had been renamed the debtors ' , mortimer , bronwen and armourer 's towers respectively . le prisontour incorporated a dungeon and the le chapeltour may have contained an artillery workshop in the 16th century . several ranges of buildings were built around the inner ward , including a chapel , kitchen , service buildings , a granary and a great hall . the battlements may originally have been built with triple finials in a similar fashion to conwy , although little remains of these in the modern era . the architecture of harlech has close links to that found in the kingdom of savoy in the same period . these include semi-circular door arches , window styles , corbelled towers and positioning of putlog holes , and are usually ascribed to the influence of the savoy architect master james . the links between the harlech and savoy are not straightforward , however , as in some cases the relevant savoy structures were built after james had left the region . the similarity in architectural details may , therefore , be the result of the wider role played by savoy craftsmen and engineers on the harlech project . . see also . castles in great britain and ireland list of castles in wales . notes . references . bibliography . . external links . official cadw page for harlech castle