Shame

definition . shame is a discrete , basic emotion , described as a moral or social emotion that drives people to hide or deny their wrongdoings . shein , l . ( 2018 ) . the evolution of shame and guilt . plosone , 13 ( 7 ) , 1-11 . the focus of shame is on the self or the individual with respect to a perceived audience . empirical research demonstrates that it is dysfunctional for the individual and group level . tangney , june price , and ronda l . dearing . shame and guilt . guilford press , 2003 . shame can also be described as an unpleasant self-conscious emotion that involves negative evaluation of the self . parsa , s . ( 2018 ) . psychological construction of shame in disordered eating . new psychology bulletin , 15 ( 1 ) , 11-19 . shame can be a painful emotion that is seen as a '' . comparison of the self 's action with the self 's standards . '' but may equally stem from comparison of the self 's state of being with the ideal social context 's standard . some scales measure shame to assess emotional states , whereas other shame scales are used to assess emotional traits or dispositions- shame proneness . schalkwijk , f . , stams , g . j . , dekker , j . , & elison , j . ( 2016 ) . measuring shame regulations : validation of the compass of shame scale . social behavior and personality , 44 ( 11 ) , 1775-1791 . '' to shame '' generally means to actively assign or communicate a state of shame to another person . behaviors designed to '' uncover '' or '' expose '' others are sometimes used to place shame on the other person . whereas , having shame means to maintain a sense of restraint against offending others ( as with modesty , humility , and deference ) . in contrast to having shame is to have no shame ; behave without the restraint to offend others , similar to other emotions like pride or hubris . identification and self-evaluation . nineteenth-century scientist charles darwin described shame affect in the physical form of blushing , confusion of mind , downward cast eyes , slack posture , and lowered head ; darwin noted these observations of shame affect in human populations worldwide , as mentioned in his book '' the expression of the emotions in man and animals '' . darwin also mentions how the sense of warmth or heat , associated with the vasodilation of the face and skin , can result in an even more sense of shame . more commonly , the act of crying can be associated with shame . when people feel shame , the focus of their evaluation is on the self or identity . shame is a self-punishing acknowledgment of something gone wrong . niedenthal , p . m . , krauth-gruber , s . & ric , f . ( 2017 ) . psychology of emotion : self-conscious emotions . new york , ny : taylor & francis group . it is associated with '' mental undoing '' . studies of shame showed that when ashamed people feel that their entire self is worthless , powerless , and small , they also feel exposed to an audience—real or imagined—that exists purely for the purpose of confirming that the self is worthless . shame and the sense of self is stigmatized , or treated unfairly , like being overtly rejected by parents in favor of siblings ' needs , and is assigned externally by others regardless of one 's own experience or awareness . an individual who is in a state of shame will assign the shame internally from being a victim of the environment , and the same is assigned externally , or assigned by others regardless of one 's own experience or awareness . a '' sense of shame '' is the feeling known as guilt but '' consciousness '' or awareness of '' shame as a state '' or condition defines core/toxic shame ( lewis , 1971 ; tangney , 1998 ) . the person experiencing shame might not be able to , or perhaps simply will not , identify their emotional state as shame , and there is an intrinsic connection between shame and the mechanism of denial . '' the key emotion in all forms of shame is contempt ( miller , 1984 ; tomkins , 1967 ) . two realms in which shame is expressed are the consciousness of self as bad and self as inadequate . people employ negative coping responses to counter deep rooted , associated sense of '' shameworthiness '' . the shame cognition may occur as a result of the experience of shame affect or , more generally , in any situation of embarrassment , dishonor , disgrace , inadequacy , humiliation , or chagrin . shame , devaluation and their interrelationship are similar across cultures , prompting some researchers to suggest that there is a universal human psychology of cultural valuation and devaluation . sznycer , daniel , dimitris xygalatas , elizabeth agey , sarah alami , xiao-fen an , kristina i . ananyeva , quentin d . atkinson et al . '' cross-cultural invariances in the architecture of shame . '' proceedings of the national academy of sciences 115 , no . 39 ( 2018 ) : 9702-9707 . . behavioural expression . the shame code was developed to capture behavior as it unfolds in real time during the socially stressful and potentially shaming spontaneous speech task and was coded into the following categories : ( 1 ) body tension , ( 2 ) facial tension , ( 3 ) stillness , ( 4 ) fidgeting , ( 5 ) nervous positive affect , ( 6 ) hiding and avoiding , ( 7 ) verbal flow and uncertainty , and ( 8 ) silence . de france , k . , lanteigne , d . , glozman , j . & hollenstain , t . ( 2017 ) . a new measure of the expression of shame : the shame code . journal of child & family studies , 26 ( 3 ) , 769-780 . shame proneness was associated with more fidgeting and less freezing , but both stillness and fidgeting are social cues that communicate distress to observers , and may elicit less harsh responses . thus , both may be an attempt to diminish further shaming experiences . shame involves global , self-focused negative attributions based on the anticipated , imagined , or real negative evaluations of others and is accompanied by a powerful urge to hide , withdraw , or escape from the source of these evaluations . these negative evaluations arise from transgressions of standards , rules , or goals and cause the individual to feel separate from the group for which these standards , rules , or goals exist , resulting in one of the most powerful , painful , and potentially destructive experiences known to humans . . comparison with other emotions . comparison with guilt . the boundaries between concepts of shame , guilt , and embarrassment are not easily delineated . according to cultural anthropologist ruth benedict , shame arises from a violation of cultural or social values while guilt feelings arise from violations of one 's internal values . thus shame arises when one 's 'defects ' are exposed to others , and results from the negative evaluation ( whether real or imagined ) of others ; guilt , on the other hand , comes from one 's own negative evaluation of oneself , for instance , when one acts contrary to one 's values or idea of one 's self . '' cultural models of shame and guilt '' thus , it might be possible to feel ashamed of thought or behavior that no one actually knows about since one fears their discovery and conversely , to feel guilty about actions that gain the approval of others . psychoanalyst helen b . lewis argued that , '' the experience of shame is directly about the self , which is the focus of evaluation . in guilt , the self is not the central object of negative evaluation , but rather the thing done is the focus . '' similarly , fossum and mason say in their book facing shame that '' while guilt is a painful feeling of regret and responsibility for one 's actions , shame is a painful feeling about oneself as a person . '' following this line of reasoning , psychiatrist judith lewis herman concludes that '' shame is an acutely self-conscious state in which the self is 'split , ' imagining the self in the eyes of the other ; by contrast , in guilt the self is unified . '' clinical psychologist gershen kaufman 's view of shame is derived from that of affect theory , namely that shame is one of a set of instinctual , short-duration physiological reactions to stimulation . in this view , guilt is considered to be a learned behavior consisting essentially of self-directed blame or contempt , with shame occurring consequent to such behaviors making up a part of the overall experience of guilt . here , self-blame and self-contempt mean the application , towards ( a part of ) one 's self , of exactly the same dynamic that blaming of , and contempt for , others represents when it is applied interpersonally . kaufman saw that mechanisms such as blame or contempt may be used as a defending strategy against the experience of shame and that someone who has a pattern of applying them to himself may well attempt to defend against a shame experience by applying self-blame or self-contempt . this , however , can lead to an internalized , self-reinforcing sequence of shame events for which kaufman coined the term '' shame spiral '' . shame can also be used as a strategy when feeling guilt , in particular when there is the hope to avoid punishment by inspiring pity . one view of difference between shame and embarrassment says that shame does not necessarily involve public humiliation while embarrassment does ; that is , one can feel shame for an act known only to oneself but in order to be embarrassed one 's actions must be revealed to others . in the field of ethics ( moral psychology , in particular ) , however , there is debate as to whether or not shame is a heteronomous emotion , i.e . whether or not shame does involve recognition on the part of the ashamed that they have been judged negatively by others . another view of the dividing line between shame and embarrassment holds that the difference is one of intensity . in this view embarrassment is simply a less intense experience of shame . it is adaptive and functional . extreme or toxic shame is a much more intense experience and one that is not functional . in fact on this view toxic shame can be debilitating . the dividing line then is between functional and dysfunctional shame . this includes the idea that shame has a function or benefit for the organism . immanuel kant and his followers held that shame is heteronomous ( comes from others ) ; bernard williams and others have argued that shame can be autonomous ( comes from oneself ) . williams , bernard : shame and necessity hutchinson , phil : chapter four of shame and philosophy shame may carry the connotation of a response to something that is morally wrong whereas embarrassment is the response to something that is morally neutral but socially unacceptable . another view of shame and guilt is that shame is a focus on self , while guilt is a focus on behavior . simply put : a person who feels guilt is saying '' i did something bad . '' , while someone who feels shame is saying '' i am bad '' . . comparison with embarrassment . embarrassment has occasionally been viewed in the literature as a less severe or intense form of shame , but it is distinct from shame in that it involves a focus on the self-presented to an audience rather than the entire self , and that it is experienced as a sense of fluster and slight mortification resulting from a social awkwardness that leads to a loss of esteem in the eyes of others . we have characterized embarrassment as a sudden-onset sense of fluster and mortification that results when the self is evaluated negatively because one has committed , or anticipates committing , a gaffe or awkward performance before an audience . so , because shame is focused on the entire self , those who become embarrassed apologize for their mistake , and then begin to repair things and this repair involves redressing harm done to the presented self . niedenthal , p . m . , krauth-gruber , s . & ric , f . ( 2017 ) . psychology of emotion : self-conscious emotions . new york , ny : taylor & francis group . one view of difference between shame and embarrassment says that shame does not necessarily involve public humiliation while embarrassment does ; that is , one can feel shame for an act known only to oneself but in order to be embarrassed one 's actions must be revealed to others . therefore shame can only be experienced in private and embarrassment can never be experienced in private . in the field of ethics ( moral psychology , in particular ) , however , there is debate as to whether or not shame is a heteronomous emotion , i.e . whether or not shame does involve recognition on the part of the ashamed that they have been judged negatively by others . this is a mature heteronomous type of shame where the agent does not judge herself negatively , but , due to the negative judgments of others , suspects that she may deserve negative judgment , and feel shame on this basis . turnbull , d . j . ( 2012 ) . shame : in defense of an essential moral emotion . phd thesis , birkbeck , university of london . therefore , shame may carry the connotation of a response to something that is morally wrong whereas embarrassment is the response to something that is morally neutral but socially unacceptable . four subtypes . there are many different reasons that people might feel shame . according to joseph burgo , there are four different aspects of shame . he calls these aspects of shame paradigms . in his first subdivision of shame he looks into is unrequited love ; which is when you love someone but your partner does not reciprocate , or one is rejected by somebody that they like ; this can be mortifying and shaming . unrequited love can be shown in other ways as well . for example , the way a mother treats her new born baby . an experiment was done where a mother showed her baby love and talked to the baby for a set period of time . she then went a few minutes without talking to the baby . this resulted with the baby making different expressions to get the mother 's attention . when the mother stopped giving the baby attention , the baby felt shame . the second type of shame is unwanted exposure . this would take place if you were called out in front of a whole class for doing something wrong or if someone saw you doing something you did n't want them to see . this is what you would normally think of when you hear the word shame . disappointed expectation would be your third type of shame according to burgo . this could be not passing a class , having a friendship go wrong , or not getting a big promotion in a job that you thought you would get . the fourth and final type of shame according to burgo is exclusion which also means being left out . many people will do anything to just fit in or want to belong in today 's society . this happens all the time at school , work , friendships , relationships , everywhere . people will do anything to prove that they belong . shame causes a lot of stress on people daily , but it also teaches people a lot of lessons . without having shame people would never be able to learn a lesson and never be able to grow from their mistakes . subtypes . genuine shame : is associated with genuine dishonor , disgrace , or condemnation . false shame : is associated with false condemnation as in the double bind form of false shaming ; '' he brought what we did to him upon himself '' . author and tv personality john bradshaw calls shame the '' emotion that lets us know we are finite '' . secret shame : describes the idea of being ashamed to be ashamed , so causing ashamed people to keep their shame a secret . gilligan , james ( 1997 ) violence : reflections on a national epidemic vintage books , new york toxic shame : describes false , pathological shame , and bradshaw states that toxic shame is induced , inside children , by all forms of child abuse . incest and other forms of child sexual abuse can cause particularly severe toxic shame . toxic shame often induces what is known as complex trauma in children who can not cope with toxic shaming as it occurs and who dissociate the shame until it is possible to cope with . bradshaw , john ( 2005 ) healing the shame that binds you ( 2nd edition ) health communications , deerfield beach , florida , page 101 , vicarious shame : refers to the experience of shame on behalf of another person . individuals vary in their tendency to experience vicarious shame , which is related to neurosis and to the tendency to experience personal shame . extremely shame-prone people might even experience vicarious shame even to an increased degree , in other words : shame on behalf of another person who is already feeling shame on behalf of a third party ( or possibly on behalf of the individual proper ) . the dutch term for this feeling is 'plaatsvervangende schaamte ' , the german term is die fremdscham and in the spanish language it is referred to as vergüenza ajena . paulus , f.m . , müller-pinzler , l . , jansen , a . , gazzola , v . and krach , s . , 2014 . mentalizing and the role of the posterior superior temporal sulcus in sharing others ' embarrassment . cerebral cortex , 25 ( 8 ) , pp.2065-2075 . . shame and mental illness . narcissistic personality disorder . it has been suggested that narcissism in adults is related to defenses against shame wurmser l , shame , the veiled companion of narcissism , in the many faces of shame , edited by nathanson dl . new york , guilford , 1987 , pp . 64–92 . and that narcissistic personality disorder is connected to shame as well . gabbard go , subtypes of narcissistic personality disorder . bull menninger clin 1989 ; 53:527–532 . young , klosko , weishaar : schema therapy – a practitioner 's guide , 2003 , p . 375 . according to psychiatrist glen gabbard , npd can be broken down into two subtypes , a grandiose , arrogant , thick-skinned '' oblivious '' subtype and an easily hurt , oversensitive , ashamed '' hypervigilant '' subtype . the oblivious subtype presents for admiration , envy , and appreciation a grandiose self that is the antithesis of a weak internalized self which hides in shame , while the hypervigilant subtype neutralizes devaluation by seeing others as unjust abusers . . social aspects . according to the anthropologist ruth benedict , cultures may be classified by their emphasis on the use of either shame ( a shame society ) or guilt to regulate the social activities of individuals . stephen pattison , shame : theory , therapy and theology . cambridge university press . 2000 . 54 . shame may be used by those people who commit relational aggression and may occur in the workplace as a form of overt social control or aggression . shaming is used in some societies as a type of punishment , shunning , or ostracism . in this sense , '' the real purpose of shaming is not to punish crimes but to create the kind of people who do n't commit them '' . roger scruton , bring back stigma , in modern sex : liberation and its discontents , chicago 2001 , p . 186 . . stigma . in 1963 , erving goffman published stigma : notes on the management of spoiled identity . for goffman , the condition when a particular person is excluded from full societal reception or is greatly discrediting . this negative evaluation may be '' felt '' or '' enacted '' . thus , stigma can occur when society labels someone as tainted , less desirable , or handicapped.when felt , it refers to the shame associated with having a condition and the fear of being discriminated against . when enacted it refers to actual discrimination of this kind . chapple , a . , ziebland , s . & mcpherson , a . ( 2004 ) . stigma , shame , and blame experienced by patients with lung cancer : qualitative study . british medical journal , 328 ( 7454 ) , 1470-1473 . shame in relation to stigma studies have most often come from the sense and mental consequences that young adolescents find themselves trapped in when they are deciding to use a condom in std or hiv protection . the other use of stigma and shame is when someone has a disease , such as cancer , where people look to blame something for their feelings of shame and circumstance of sickness . jessica m . sales et al . researched young adolescents ages 15–21 on whether they had used protection in the 14 days prior to coming in for the study . the answers showed implications of shame and stigma , which received an accommodating score . the scores , prior history of stds , demographics , and psychosocial variables were put into a hierarchical regression model to determine probability of an adolescents chances of using protected sex in the future . the study found that the higher sense of shame and stigma the higher chance the adolescent would use protection in the future . this means that if a person is more aware of consequences , is more in-tune with themselves and the stigma ( stereotypes , disgrace , etc . ) , they will be more likely to protect themselves . the study shows that placing more shame and stigma in the mind of people can be more prone to protecting themselves from the consequences that follow the action of unprotected sex . sales , j . m . , diclemente , r . j . , rose , e . s . , wingood , g . m . , klein , j . d . & woods , e . r . ( 2007 ) . relationship of std-related shame and stigma to female adolescents ' condom-protected intercourse . journal of adolescent health , 40 , 573 . hiv-related stigma from those who are born with hiv due to their maternal genetics have a proneness to shame and avoidant coping . david s . bennett et al . studied the ages 12–24 of self-reported measures of potential risk factors and three domains of internalizing factors : depression , anxiety , and ptsd . the findings suggested that those who had more shame-proneness and more awareness of hiv-stigma had a greater amount of depressive and ptsd symptoms . this means that those who have high hiv-stigma and shame do not seek help from interventions . rather , they avoid the situation that could cause them to find themselves in a predicament of other mental health issues . older age was related to greater hiv-related stigma and the female gender was more related to stigma and internalizing symptoms ( depression , anxiety , ptsd ) . stigma was also associated with greater shame-proneness . bennett , d . s . , hersh , j . , herres , j . & foster , j . ( 2016 ) . hiv-related stigma , shame , and avoidant coping : risk factors for internalizing symptoms among youth living with hiv ? child psychology & human development , 47 ( 4 ) , 657-664 . chapple et al . researched people with lung cancer in regards to the shame and stigma that comes from the disease . the stigma that accompanies lung cancer is most commonly caused by smoking . however , there are many ways to contract lung cancer , therefore those who did not receive lung cancer from smoking often feel shame ; blaming themselves for something they did not do . the stigma effects their opinions of themselves , while shame is found to blame other cancer causing factors ( tobacco products/anti-tobacco products ) or ignoring the disease in avoidant coping altogether . the stigma associated with lung cancer effected relationships of patients with their family members , peers , and physicians who were attempting to provide comfort because the patients felt shame and victimized themselves . . shame campaign . a shame campaign is a tactic in which particular individuals are singled out because of their behavior or suspected crimes , often by marking them publicly , such as hester prynne in nathaniel hawthorne 's the scarlet letter . in the philippines , alfredo lim popularized such tactics during his term as mayor of manila . on july 1 , 1997 , he began a controversial '' spray paint shame campaign '' in an effort to stop drug use . he and his team sprayed bright red paint on two hundred squatter houses whose residents had been charged , but not yet convicted , of selling prohibited substances . officials of other municipalities followed suit . former senator rene a . saguisag condemned lim 's policy . pulta , benjamin b . '' spray campaign debate heats up . '' sun.star manila . june 26 , 2003 . communists in the 20th century used struggle sessions to handle corruption and other problems . public humiliation , historically expressed by confinement in stocks and in other public punishments may occur in social media through viral phenomena . . research . psychologists and other researchers who study shame use validated psychometric testing instruments to determine whether or how much a person feels shame . some of these tools include the guilt and shame proneness ( gasp ) scale , the shame and stigma scale ( sss ) , the experience of shame scale , and the internalized shame scale . some scales are specific to the person 's situation , such as the weight- and body-related shame and guilt scale ( web-sg ) , the hiv stigma scale for people living with hiv and the cataldo lung cancer stigma scale ( clcss ) for people with lung cancer . others are more general , such as the emotional reactions and thoughts scale , which deals with anxiety , depression , and guilt as well as shame . treatments for shame . . empathy . brene brown explains that shame ( using a metaphor of a petri-dish ) only needs 3 things to grow : secrecy , silence , and judgement . shame can not grow or thrive , in the context ( or supportive environment ) of empathy . it is important , however , that when we reach out for a supportative/empathetic person ( i.e . when we reach out to share our story/experience ) : that we choose the people who have earned the right to hear our story ( i.e . someone you can trust ) ; share with people with whom we have a relationship that can bear the weight of the story .