Harness racing

breeds . in north america , harness races are restricted to standardbred horses , although european racehorses may also be french trotters or russian trotters , or have mixed ancestry with lineages from multiple breeds . orlov trotters race separately in russia . the horse temperament coldblood trotters and finnhorses race separately in finland , norway and sweden . standardbreds are so named because in the early years of the standardbred stud book , only horses who could trot or pace a mile in a standard time ( or whose progeny could do so ) of no more than 2 minutes , 30 seconds were admitted to the book . the horses have proportionally shorter legs than thoroughbreds , and longer bodies . standardbreds generally have a more placid disposition , due to the admixture of non-thoroughbred blood in the breed . the founding sire of today 's standardbred horse was messenger , a gray thoroughbred brought to america in 1788 and purchased by henry astor , brother of john jacob astor . from messenger came a great-grandson , hambletonian 10 ( 1849–1876 ) , who gained a wide following for his racing prowess . however , it is his breed line for which he is most remembered . the lineage of virtually all north american standardbred race horses can be traced from four of hambletonian 10 sons . as of january 1 , 2019 , foiled again is the richest standardbred horse in the world . foiled again retired on january 1 , 2019 , but the then 15-year-old gelding left an indelible mark in harness racing annals . he compiled a 331/109–70–46 record and earned an all-time record us 7,635,588 in purse money . in one of his last races at rosecroft raceway , he beat the then 10 year old career winner of over 600,000 , real flight . i 'm themightyquinn ( foaled 2004 ) is an australasian champion standardbred notable for being a three time australian harness horse of the year and three-time winner of the inter dominion ( 2011 - 2013 ) . i 'm themightyquinn won over aud 4.5 million in its career . races . thumb races can be conducted in two differing gaits : trotting and pacing . the difference is that a trotter moves its legs forward in diagonal pairs ( right front and left hind , then left front and right hind striking the ground simultaneously ) , whereas a pacer moves its legs laterally ( right front and right hind together , then left front and left hind ) . in continental europe , races are conducted exclusively among trotters , whereas in australia , canada , new zealand , the united kingdom and the united states races are also held for pacers . pacing races constitute 80 % to 90 % of the harness races conducted in north america - while the clear majority of harness racing in australia and new zealand are also now for pacers , even though the sport is colloquially still known as 'the trots . ' pacing horses are faster and ( most important to the bettor ) less likely to break stride ( a horse which starts to gallop must be slowed down and taken to the outside until it resumes trotting or pacing ) . one of the reasons pacers are less likely to break stride is that they often wear hobbles ( straps connecting the legs on each of the horse 's sides ) . the belief that hobbles are used to create this gait is a common misunderstanding . the pace is a natural gait for many horses , and hobbles are an aid in supporting the gait at top speed ; trotting hobbles ( which employ a different design , due to the difference in the gait ) are becoming increasingly popular for the same reason . most harness races start from behind a motorized starting gate , also known as the mobile barrier . the horses commence pacing or trotting and line up behind a hinged gate mounted on a moving motor vehicle , which then leads them to the starting line . at the line , the wings of the gate are folded up and the vehicle accelerates away from the horses . another kind of start is a standing start , where there are tapes or imaginary lines across the track behind which the horses either stand stationary or trot in circles in pairs in a specific pattern to hit the starting line as a group . this enables handicaps to be placed on horses ( according to class ) with several tapes , usually with 10 or 20 meters between tapes . many european – and some australian and new zealand – races use a standing start , although this increases the chance of a 'false start ' where one or a number of horses commence 'off-stride ' and gallop . the race must then be brought back to the starting line for a restart which can cause delays in programming and disrupts betting . the sulky ( informally known as a '' bike '' , and also known as a spider ) is a light , two-wheeled cart equipped with bicycle wheels . the driver ( not a '' jockey '' , as in thoroughbred racing ) carries a light whip chiefly used to signal the horse by tapping and to make noise by striking the sulky shaft . there are strict rules as to how and how much the whip may be used ; in some jurisdictions ( like norway ) , whips are forbidden . for exercising or training , the drivers use what is known as a '' jog cart , '' which is a sulky that is heavier and bulkier than a racing unit . racing . france . the prix d'amérique is considered to be the number-one trotting race in the world . it is held annually at the gigantic vincennes hippodrome in eastern paris late in january . the purse for the race in 2016 was 1 million euros , with approximately half of that to the winner . the horses are entered in the race based on life-time earnings , unless they have qualified by performing well in the preceding six qualifying races . scandinavia and finland . sweden is '' the locomotive '' of harness racing in scandinavia . it is a professional all-year event , even at very high latitudes during the winter . in sweden there are 33 racing tracks , and in finland 43 . for comparison there are only three thoroughbred racetracks in sweden . one of them ( jägersro ) is a combined thoroughbred and standardbred track , while another is only used once every year . so the only '' pure '' thoroughbred track in sweden is bro park . at solvalla in the suburbs of stockholm the premier standardbred mile race is held in late may every year , elitloppet ( the elite race ) . other important annual races are svenskt travkriterium , a race restricted to three-year-olds , also hosted at solvalla and swedish trotting derby ( open for the best four-year-old horses ) hosted in september at jägersro in malmö . the latter race track also hosts the hugo åbergs memorial , which is an international race open for all horses . other important harness racing arenas in scandinavia are åby outside gothenburg , mantorp , axevalla , bergsåker , boden ( almost at the polar circle ) and charlottenlund in danish capital copenhagen . a betting game called v75 is the number one game to bet on . the winner of seven ( pre-decided ) races ( with 12 or 15 horses ) is to be picked . one single '' row '' is very cheap to play , but people usually play large systems , picking the winner in one or two of the races and several horses in the other races . the price for a system grows rapidly if many horses are picked in a race . price for one '' row '' is 1/2 sek ( approximately 0,05 euro ) but if , for instance , betting on 2 , 5 , 1 , 7 , 7 , 1 and 4 horses in the seven races the price multiplies as 0.5 × 2 × 5 × 1 × 7 × 7 × 1 × 4 980 sek ( approximately 92 euro ) . the bettors win money if they get all seven , six or five horses right within the system . but the difference between picking all 7 winners and just five is huge , in terms of money to win . v75 races are of distances 1640 & nbsp ; m ( '' short '' ) , 2140 & nbsp ; m ( '' normal '' ) , 2640 & nbsp ; m ( '' long '' ) and rarely 3140 & nbsp ; m ( '' extra long '' ) . the race track 's length most usually is 1000 meters ( inner track ) with two long sides and two curves . horses run counterclockwise . the horses are classified by how much prize money they have gained through the entire career of the horse . the classifications are from the lowest and upwards : class iii class ii class i bronze division silver division gold division there is also a seventh class , for mares only . but mares also belong to one of the other six classifications . stallions ( and castrated geldings ) are considered a little better in general . in pure mare horse races , horses from higher classification get 20 , 40 or up to 60 meter extra to run . distance addition occurs also in races between classes . an example of such a race could be silver division against class ii . in such case the silver division horses must run 60 & nbsp ; m behind the less experienced class ii horses . some races use the mobile starting gate as seen in the united states . other races ( for up to 16 horses ) use a circular starting system . horses with post positions 1 to 5 are in the first wave , 6-12 or 15 are in the second wave . in volt start good starting numbers ( which automatically turn in to certain positions ) are 1 , 3 and 5 ( slightly better than 2 and 4 ) . but numbers 6 and 7 ( who start in the second volt together with number 8 and higher ) may get up a better speed after the turn-around but before the starting whistle sounds . horses may have different initial speed , but must not exceed the starting line before the start signal sounds . horses number 6 and 7 can both get a better speed at the starting line , and there are no horses in front of them . due to this number 6 and number 7 are known as '' running tracks '' at volt starting . horses 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 and 13 , 14 , 15 have all horses in front of them . but to get advantage of the '' running tracks '' the horse must be '' a fast starter '' . the start of the races and the starting position ( which equals a certain number as explained previously ) are indeed important , independent of the start method . a very good horse in a race with weak opponents but with a bad start number ( like 12 or higher ) may not become the prime favorite due to the bad starting position , especially at short distance . after the start the drivers fight to get a good running position . how well this succeeds depends on the horse , the starting position and how the opponents drive their horses . due to the sulky width and the oval race track overtaking is a far more difficult manoeuver to achieve , in comparison with gallop racing . the '' running position fight '' during start and the beginning of the race usually ends in the first turn . after the initial fight for good running position , the horses usually form two rows or tracks . good running positions are the leading position of the inner track or the second ( or third ) place in the outer track . this is explained with the fact that the outer track is close to 15 meter longer per lap , front running is always heavier compared with just follow behind ( just like in cycling ) . positions in the inner track behind the leader may appear the best . but as described before , overtaking is not an easy manoeuver . and horses in the inner track may very well be trapped all the way to the finish , due to the horses and sulkies in the outer track . on the other hand , if an opening in the outer track appears close to the finish line , such a horse have had '' an easy ride '' with much strength left to give . the leading position of the outer track , also known as the position of '' death '' , is a very hard position to run and only very strong horses can win from this position . if a horse completes the race from the '' death '' position , commentators often point that out when announcing the km pace of the horse . on short distance ( 1640 meter ) , the horse that gets the leading position of the inner track has a very good chance to be the winner . at longer races ( with rather even competitors ) running positions like second or third in the outer track have good chances , especially if the inner track horses get trapped behind a weakening front horse . though all kind of trot betting in terms of money , is the most popular type of betting in sweden , attendances at the races do n't correspond to this . even when '' the v75 circuit comes to town '' attendance rarely exceeds 5000 people . larger crowds only gather at the biggest races . trot racing as a sport is often considered dull , but when combined with betting it can rapidly get interesting . the huge popularity of trot betting in sweden '' spills over '' to the neighboring norway ( 11 racing tracks ) , finland ( 43 ) and denmark ( 9 ) . other countries in europe . trotting sport and betting also exist in austria , belgium , germany , hungary , italy , the netherlands , malta , russia and ireland . in italy '' trotto '' is as popular as '' galoppo '' . north america . almost all north american races are at a distance of one mile ( 1,609 & nbsp ; m ) . most races are run on tracks constructed solely for harness racing ( some with banked turns ) , but a few tracks conduct both harness and thoroughbred flat racing . north american harness horses earn a '' mark '' ( a record ) , which is their fastest winning time at that distance . harness races involve a good deal of strategy . though the vast majority of races are one mile , races are contested on several different size tracks . the most common are 1/2 mile , 5/8 mile , and 1 mile tracks . certain horses are better on the smaller tracks and others are better on the 1 mile tracks because there are fewer turns . also , on the shorter tracks early speed is important , while the longer stretch run of a mile track favors horses with late speed for come-from-behind wins . usually , several drivers will contend for the lead away from the gate . they then try to avoid getting '' boxed in '' as the horses form into two lines – one on the rail and the other outside – in the second quarter-mile . they may decide to go to the front ; to race on the front on the outside ( '' first over '' , a difficult position ) ; or to race with '' cover '' on the outside . on the rail behind the leader is a choice spot , known as the '' pocket '' , and a horse in that position is said to have a '' garden trip '' . third on the rail is an undesirable spot , known on small tracks as the '' death hole '' . as the race nears the three-quarter mile mark , the drivers implement their tactics for advancing their positions – going to the lead early ; circling the field ; moving up an open rail ; advancing behind a horse expected to tire and so on . harness horses accelerate during the final quarter-mile of a race . the finish of a harness race is exciting , and often extremely close . the judges have a photo-finish camera to help them determine the order of finish if needed . until the 1990s harness tracks featured a rail on the inside , much like the one at thoroughbred tracks . this '' hub rail '' was replaced with a row of short pylons ( usually of a flexible material ) , which mark the inside boundary of the course . this change was mainly for safety reasons ; it allows a driver to pull off to the inside of the course if necessary , such as when their horse breaks stride but they can not move to the outside due to being boxed in , thus avoiding injury to himself , his horse , and other competitors . this change allowed another innovation , '' open-stretch racing '' . ( as of 2011 open-lane racing is not universal . ) . an additional lane is available to the inside of where the rail would have been . if the race leader is positioned on the rail at the top of the homestretch , that leader is required by rule to maintain that line ( or move further out ) , while horses behind the leader can move into the open lane with room to pass the leader if possible . this solves a common problem , in which trailing horses are '' boxed in '' ( behind the leader , with another horse outside ) . it makes races more wide-open , with potentially higher payoffs — and more attractive to bettors . australia and new zealand . australian racing differs from north american racing in that metric distances are used , generally above the equivalent of one mile and horses are classed by how many wins they have . another large difference is that in australian racing the leader does not have to hand up the lead to any horse that challenges , often leaving a horse parked outside the leader in the '' death seat '' or simply '' the death '' ( known as '' facing the breeze '' in new zealand ) , as this horse covers more ground than the leader . australian racing generally has more horses in each race ; a field of 12 or 13 is not uncommon . this generally means that with the smaller tracks a '' three wide train '' starts as the field gets the bell at signal their final lap . new zealand racing is quite similar to that of australia . many horses are able to easily '' cross the tasman '' and compete as well on either side of the sea that separates australia and new zealand . in both new zealand and australia the same system of an 'open lane ' operates , although in australia it is called a 'sprint lane ' and in new zealand a 'passing lane ' . these lanes do not operate on all tracks and have been a point of argument between many industry participants . modern starting gates used in australia now include auto start . this innovation allows the starter to concentrate on the actual horse 's positioning during the '' score up '' . the modern starting gates use only a driver for steering the vehicle and a starter in the rear to observe the race and call a false start if required . the start speed , acceleration , score up distance , and gate closing are controlled via a computer system , which takes control of the vehicle and provides a printout at the end of the score up . some harness racing clubs have been granted additional funds for the installation of the ava computerised mobile barriers . in australia and new zealand , harness racing is conducted both on smaller rural tracks and at major city venues , creating the opportunity for even the hobby-trainer to make it into the big-time if they have an exceptional horse . the major tracks include gloucester park ( perth ) , globe derby park ( adelaide ) albion park ( brisbane ) , menangle ( sydney ) , melton ( melbourne ) , alexandra park ( auckland ) and addington ( christchurch ) . the breeding and racing of standardbred horses is both a dedicated pastime and profession for participants in the industry . the premier events can now have prizemoney exceeding aud 1 million and recent upgrades to some venues has created world-class facilities for harness racing . betting revenues have come under pressure from both thoroughbred racing and from expanding opportunities in greyhound racing - however 'the trots ' still has a dedicated following and a rich history to enjoy . friday night is generally regarded as the premier trotting night although key events will enjoy broader weekend billing . important races . united states and canada . important annual races include the hambletonian for 3-year-old trotters , the little brown jug for 3-year-old pacers , and the breeders crown series of twelve races covering each of the traditional categories of age , gait and sex . the hambletonian is part of the triple crown of harness racing for trotters and the little brown jug is part of the triple crown of harness racing for pacers . important canadian races include the gold cup and saucer at charlottetown driving park , north america cup ( for pacers ) , the canadian pacing derby , and the maple leaf trot . the harness racing industry conducts an annual grand circuit , which includes many of the most prestigious races for both pacers and trotters . founded in 1871 and first conducted in 1873 at four tracks , the grand circuit now visits 17 tracks as of the upcoming 2012 season . the most notable harness tracks in north america are the meadowlands racetrack in new jersey , yonkers raceway in yonkers , new york , the red mile in kentucky and mohawk raceway in ontario . since 1947 , the '' united states harness writers '' association annually votes for the '' harness horse of the year . '' since inception , a pacer has received the honor 31 times and a trotter 26 times . australia and new zealand . the marquee event of australasian racing is the inter dominion series , which includes a pacing series and a trotting series . the series is held yearly and rotated around the australian state controlling bodies and once every four years the inter dominion championships are held in new zealand . the major events for open age pacers in australia are the miracle mile pace , a.g . hunter cup , victoria cup and the australian pacing championship . the most prestigious events for three year olds including the victoria derby , the new south wales derby and the australian derby . for the younger horses there are series that stem from yearling sales including the australian pacing gold and an australasian breeders crown . in new zealand the major races include the auckland cup and the new zealand cup as well as the noel j taylor memorial mile and the new zealand messenger championship for four-year-olds . there are also the new zealand derby and the great northern derby for three year olds , and the dominion handicap and rowe cup for trotters . the harness jewels raceday ( the end-of year championships for two- , three- and four-year-olds ) takes place in late may/early june . europe . the leading harness racing nations in europe are france , italy and sweden , and the sport is fairly popular in most northern european countries . practically all races in europe are trotting races . the prix d'amérique at vincennes hippodrome near paris , france is widely considered to be the most prestigious event of the european racing year . other notable races include the elitloppet one-mile race in solvalla track near stockholm , sweden and gran premio lotteria in naples , italy . a yearly grand circuit tour for the top trotters includes a number of prestigious european races . all notable racing nations also host their own highly regarded premier events for young horses . monté ( races to saddle ) have recently been introduced in larger scale in sweden and norway , to increase interest and recruitment to the sport . saddled events are also commonplace in france and though less frequent , they are not considered exceptional in other european trotting nations . see also . älgen stolta canadian horse racing hall of fame chariot racing harness racing museum & hall of fame harness racing in australia harness racing in new zealand harness racing in sweden