Debt

etymology . the english term '' debt '' was first used in the late 13th century . the term '' debt '' comes from '' dette , from old french dete , from latin debitum '' thing owed , '' neuter past participle of debere '' to owe , '' originally , '' keep something away from someone , '' from de- '' away '' ( see de- ) + habere '' to have '' ( see habit ( n . ) ) . restored spelling was used after c . 1400 . the related term '' debtor '' was first used in english also in the early 13th century ; the terms '' dettur , dettour , came from old french detour , from latin debitor '' a debter , '' from past participle stem of debere ; . the -b- was restored in later french , and in english c . 1560-c . 1660 . '' in the king james bible , only one spelling , '' debtor '' , is used . the word '' debtor '' appears four times and '' debtors '' appears five times in the kjv bible . ( searches for the previous erroneous claim that the words detter , debter and debtour are all used in the kjv bible each resulted in 0 words found . ) . principal . principal is the amount of money originally invested or loaned , on which basis interest and returns are calculated . . repayment . there are three main ways repayment may be structured : the entire principal balance may be due at the maturity of the loan ; the entire principal balance may be amortized over the term of the loan ; or the loan may be partially amortized during its term , with the remaining principal due as a '' balloon payment '' at maturity . amortization structures are common in mortgages and credit cards . default provisions . debtors of every type default on their debt from time to time , with various consequences depending on the terms of the debt and the law governing default in the relevant jurisdiction . if the debt was secured by specific collateral , such as a car or home , the creditor may seek to repossess the collateral . in more serious circumstances , individuals and companies may go into bankruptcy . types of borrowers . individuals . common types of debt owed by individuals and households include mortgage loans , car loans , credit card debt , and income taxes . for individuals , debt is a means of using anticipated income and future purchasing power in the present before it has actually been earned . commonly , people in industrialized nations use consumer debt to purchase houses , cars and other things too expensive to buy with cash on hand . people are more likely to spend more and get into debt when they use credit cards vs . cash for buying products and services . chatterjee , p . , & rose , r . l . ( 2012 ) . do payment mechanisms change the way consumers perceive products ? journal of consumer research , 38 ( 6 ) , 1129–1139 . pettit , n . c . , & sivanathan , n . ( 2011 ) . the plastic trap . social psychological and personality science , 2 ( 2 ) , 146-153 . prelec , d . & loewenstein , g . ( 1998 ) . the red and the black : mental accounting of savings and debt . marketing science , 17 ( 1 ) , 4-28 . raghubir , p . & srivastava , j . ( 2008 ) , monopoly money : the effect of payment coupling and form on spending behavior . journal of experimental psychology : applied , 14 ( 3 ) , 213–25 . this is primarily because of the transparency effect and consumer 's '' pain of paying . '' soman , d . ( 2003 ) . the effect of payment transparency on consumption : quasi experiments from the field . marketing letters , 14 , 173–183 . the transparency effect refers to the fact that the further you are from cash ( as in a credit card or another form of payment ) , the less transparent it is and the less you remember how much you spent . the less transparent or further away from cash , the form of payment employed is , the less an individual feels the “ pain of paying ” and thus is likely to spend more . furthermore , the differing physical appearance/form that credit cards have from cash may cause them to be viewed as “ monopoly ” money vs . real money , luring individuals to spend more money than they would if they only had cash available . chatterjee , p . , & rose , r . l . ( 2012 ) . do payment mechanisms change the way consumers perceive products ? journal of consumer research , 38 ( 6 ) , 1129–1139 . besides these more formal debts , private individuals also lend informally to other people , mostly relatives or friends . one reason for such informal debts is that many people , in particular those who are poor , have no access to affordable credit . such debts can cause problems when they are not paid back according to expectations of the lending household . in 2011 , 8 percent of people in the european union reported their households has been in arrears , that is , unable to pay as scheduled '' payments related to informal loans from friends or relatives not living in your household '' . . businesses . a company may use various kinds of debt to finance its operations as a part of its overall corporate finance strategy . a term loan is the simplest form of corporate debt . it consists of an agreement to lend a fixed amount of money , called the principal sum or principal , for a fixed period of time , with this amount to be repaid by a certain date . in commercial loans interest , calculated as a percentage of the principal sum per year , will also have to be paid by that date , or may be paid periodically in the interval , such as annually or monthly . such loans are also colloquially called '' bullet loans '' , particularly if there is only a single payment at the end – the '' bullet '' – without a '' stream '' of interest payments during the life of the loan . a revenue-based financing loan comes with a fixed repayment target that is reached over a period of several years . this type of loan generally comes with a repayment amount of 1.5 to 2.5 times the principle loan . repayment periods are flexible ; businesses can pay back the agreed-upon amount sooner , if possible , or later . in addition , business owners do not sell equity or relinquish control when using revenue-based financing . lenders that provide revenue-based financing work more closely with businesses than bank lenders , but take a more hands-off approach than private equity investors . a syndicated loan is a loan that is granted to companies that wish to borrow more money than any single lender is prepared to risk in a single loan . a syndicated loan is provided by a group of lenders and is structured , arranged , and administered by one or several commercial banks or investment banks known as arrangers . loan syndication is a risk management tool that allows the lead banks underwriting the debt to reduce their risk and free up lending capacity . a company may also issue bonds , which are debt securities . bonds have a fixed lifetime , usually a number of years ; with long-term bonds , lasting over 30 years , being less common . at the end of the bond 's life the money should be repaid in full . interest may be added to the end payment , or can be paid in regular installments ( known as coupons ) during the life of the bond . a letter of credit or lc can also be the source of payment for a transaction , meaning that redeeming the letter of credit will pay an exporter . letters of credit are used primarily in international trade transactions of significant value , for deals between a supplier in one country and a customer in another . they are also used in the land development process to ensure that approved public facilities ( streets , sidewalks , stormwater ponds , etc . ) will be built . the parties to a letter of credit are usually a beneficiary who is to receive the money , the issuing bank of whom the applicant is a client , and the advising bank of whom the beneficiary is a client . almost all letters of credit are irrevocable , i.e . , can not be amended or canceled without prior agreement of the beneficiary , the issuing bank and the confirming bank , if any . in executing a transaction , letters of credit incorporate functions common to giros and traveler 's cheque . typically , the documents a beneficiary has to present in order to receive payment include a commercial invoice , bill of lading , and a document proving the shipment was insured against loss or damage in transit . however , the list and form of documents is open to imagination and negotiation and might contain requirements to present documents issued by a neutral third party evidencing the quality of the goods shipped , or their place of origin . companies also use debt in many ways to leverage the investment made in their assets , '' leveraging '' the return on their stock . this leverage , the proportion of debt to equity , is considered important in determining the riskiness of an investment ; the more debt per equity , the riskier . governments . governments issue debt to pay for ongoing expenses as well as major capital projects . government debt may be issued by sovereign states as well as by local governments , sometimes known as municipalities . debt issued by the government of the united states , called treasuries , serves as a reference point for all other debt . there are deep , transparent , liquid , and open capital markets for treasuries . lew , jacob ( 2016 ) , america and the global economy , foreign affairs , may/june 2016 . furthermore , treasuries are issued in a wide variety of maturities , from one day to thirty years , which facilitates comparing the interest rates on other debt to a security of comparable maturity . in finance , the theoretical '' risk-free interest rate '' is often approximated by practitioners by using the current yield a treasury of the same duration . the overall level of indebtedness by a government is typically shown as a ratio of debt-to-gdp . this ratio helps to assess the speed of changes in government indebtedness and the size of the debt due . the united nations sustainable development goal 17 , an integral part of the 2030 agenda has a target to address the external debt of highly indebted poor countries to reduce debt distress . during 2004 . history . according to historian paul johnson , the lending of '' food money '' was commonplace in middle eastern civilizations as early as 5000 bc . religions like judaism and christianity for example , demand that debt be forgiven on a regular basis , in order to prevent systemic inequities between groups in society , or anyone becoming a specialist in holding debt and coercing repayment . an example is the biblical jubilee year , described in the book of leviticus . similarly , in deuteronomy chapter 15 and verse 1 states that debts be forgiven after seven years . this is because biblically debt is seen as both the creditor and debtor responsibility .