Green-Wood Cemetery

design . green-wood 's site is characterized by varied topography created by moraine , particularly the harbor hill moraine . battle hill ( also known as gowan 's heights ) , the highest point in brooklyn , is on cemetery grounds , rising approximately above sea level . it was the site of an important action during the battle of long island on august 27 , 1776 . a revolutionary war monument by frederick ruckstull , altar to liberty : minerva , was erected there in 1920 . from this height , the bronze minerva statue gazes towards the statue of liberty across new york harbor . green-wood was less inspired by père lachaise cemetery in paris , which at the time retained the primarily axial formality of alexandre théodore brongniart 's original design , plan of père lachaise in 1824 than by mount auburn cemetery in cambridge , massachusetts , where a cemetery in a naturalistic park-like landscape in the english manner was first established . moylan , richard j . '' green-wood cemetery '' in , pp . 557-558 it has been called '' brooklyn 's first public park by default long before prospect park was created . '' the architecture critic paul goldberger , quoting the new york times from 1866 , observed that '' it is the ambition of the new yorker to live upon the fifth avenue , to take his airings in central park the central park , and to sleep with his fathers in green-wood '' . green-wood cemetery contains 600,000 graves and 7,000 trees spread out over . the rolling hills and dales , several ponds , and an on-site chapel provide an environment that still draws visitors . in 2017 it received 280,000 visitors . though at one point there were numerous gravediggers at green-wood , there were just a few gravediggers due to a decrease in the number of burials , as well as the limited amount of space for new burials . because of this shortage of space , some plots are composed of '' stacked '' graves in which several family members may be buried atop each other . several wooden shelters were also built , including one in a gothic revival style , one resembling an italian villa , and another resembling a swiss chalet . a descendant colony of monk parakeets that are believed to have escaped their containers while in transit now nests in the spires of the gate , as well as other areas in brooklyn . the article presents information concerning the year-round tours led by steve baldwin in brooklyn , new york to the nests of parrots . baldwin volunteers to lead walking tours to the nests of an extended family of wild quaker parrots that escaped from a shipping crate at jfk international airport in the late 1960s . in 2008 , green-wood started to acquire a collection of art pertaining to those buried in the cemetery . . landscaping and circulation . green-wood cemetery contains numerous landscape features , which in turn are named after terms that evoke a naturalistic scene . these names include camellia path , halcyon lake , oaken bluff , sylvan cliff , and vista hill . david bates douglass , green-wood 's landscape architect , mostly kept the cemetery 's natural landscaping intact . much of douglass 's plan is still in place with its original plantings and curving-road systems . the original street names and original cast-iron perimeter fence have been retained , but many of the roads have been paved . the cemetery has been expanded several times . most of these regions have been landscaped to resemble the original plot , except the area near fort hamilton avenue to the north , which is flatter because it was acquired last . monuments . there are several famous monuments and mausoleums located there , designed in several architectural styles including the classical , egyptian , gothic , and romanesque styles . in addition , many tombs contain ornate sculptural decoration . the national register of historic places designation subdivides these monuments into four primary categories : those honoring events or professions ; those with architectural significance ; those whose graves contain people of historical significance ; and '' monuments of sculptural interest '' . among the first monuments was a statue of dewitt clinton , built in 1853 . there is also a memorial erected by james brown , president of brown brothers bank and the collins line , to the six members of his family lost in the disaster of 1854 . this incorporates a sculpture of the ship , half-submerged by the waves , as well as a civil war memorial . during the american civil war , green-wood cemetery created the '' soldiers ' lot '' for free veterans ' burials ; this lot included less than of land . in 1868-1876 , after the war ended , the civil war soldiers ' monument was erected at the highest point in green-wood . other monuments of note include the pilot 's monument and the sea captain 's monument , each dedicated to a notable person in these respective professions . j . marion sims , a monument of gynecologist j . marion sims by ferdinand freiherr von miller , is also planned to be installed in green-wood ; the statue was formerly in bryant park and central park but was removed from the latter in 2017 . some elaborate monuments honor notable figures , such as william niblo 's grand gothic mausoleum , the steinway & sons family 's classical mausoleum , abiel abbot low 's tomb , and the lispenard family 's norman-style mausoleum . numerous other monuments to notable figures exist but are extremely simple in design , such as the tombs of samuel morse , william m . tweed , lola montez , henry ward beecher , and currier and ives . on the other hand , several monuments commemorate less well-known figures , including a gothic memorial for 17-year-old charlotte canda , and a high victorian pier designed by william or edward potter for their relatives . gates . the gates were designed by richard upjohn in gothic revival style . there are four gates in total . two are city landmarks : the main gate at 25th street to the northwest , which is closest to south slope/greenwood heights , and fort hamilton parkway to the south , which is in kensington . two additional gates exist . one of these , at 20th street and ninth avenue , provides access from the northeast and is in windsor terrace . the other , at 34th street and fourth avenue , provides access from the southwest and is located next to sunset park and the 36th street station of the new york city subway , serving the . these gates were developed from the 1840s to the 1860s . a fifth gate at ninth avenue and 37th street no longer exists . 25th street gate . the main entrance to the cemetery , a double-gate located at 25th street and fifth avenue near its northwestern corner , was built in 1861–65 , though the entrance itself opened in 1862 . it is composed of belleville , new jersey brownstone . the sculptured groups on nova scotia limestone panels depicting biblical scenes of death and resurrection from the new testament including lazarus , the widow 's son , and jesus ' resurrection over the gateways are the work of sculptor john m . moffitt . in between the two gateways is a clocktower in the flamboyant style . a cemetery office is located to one side of the gate , while the chapel and reception room are located on opposite side . a designated landmarks of new york plaque was erected on it in 1958 by the new york community trust , and it was designated an official new york city landmark in 1966 . . fort hamilton gate . the fort hamilton gate is located at fort hamilton parkway and macieli place . similar to the 25th street gate , it is made of a double gateway made of brownstone . it is also flanked by two structures , a visitor 's lounge and the gatekeeper 's residence . the gate was built in 1876 and completed the next year ; it was designated as an official new york city landmark in 2016 . to the east of the entrance is the visitor 's lounge , a brownstone building . it is a -story structure with an entrance located inside a center bay on the west side of the building . the visitor 's lounge contains two side bays , each with a porch , as well as restrooms for men and women . the hip roof is made of slate with metal ornamentation along the ridge at the top . the roof slopes down toward the perimeter walls of the building , though each of the four sides of the roof is punctuated by dormers with small windows . the corner porches feature stone banisters , and contain four yellow sandstone bas-reliefs sculpted by moffitt . the west side of the entrance , also a brownstone structure , contains the gatekeeper 's residence , a -story structure that is similar in design to the visitor 's lounge . only the center section is stories , while the two pavilions to the west and east are stories . the residence 's main entrance is through the eastern pavilion , while there is another pavilion on the western facade . both pavilions have hip roofs of gray slate , and the second floor contains dormers with windows that project from the hip roof . the central '' tower '' section contains entrances to both the north and south , as well as windows on the second , third , and attic floors that face north and south . the roof of the central tower contains a stone chimney . chapel . the green-wood cemetery chapel is located near the 25th street gate . '' chapel services '' green-wood cemetery website built in 1911–1913 by warren and wetmore , the chapel is located on the site of one of green-wood 's original ponds . though it is generally designed in the late gothic style , its massing is in the beaux-arts style . it is made of limestone , and consists of multiple towers , including a central octagonal tower and four octagonal turrets , one at each corner . the chapel contains three levels : ground level , clerestory level , and the second story in the central tower . it is a reduced version of the upper sections of christopher wren 's tom tower at christ church , oxford in oxford . plans for the green-wood chapel date to shortly after the chapel 's establishment , when a '' chapel hill '' was set aside within the cemetery . though richard upjohn submitted plans for such a chapel in 1855 , green-wood initially voted against such a chapel . a new location was selected near arbor water in the first decade of the 20th century , and plans were solicited from three firms in 1909 . after warren and wetmore were selected , work started in 1911 , and the chapel was officially opened in june 1913 . the chapel was made a city landmark in 2016 . . history . founding and construction . following the founding of mount auburn cemetery in massachusetts in 1831 , leaders of the cities of new york and brooklyn began discussing locations to build a cemetery of their own . at the time , over 10,000 people were being buried per year in the two cities . the cemetery was the idea of henry evelyn pierrepont , a brooklyn social leader . as early as 1832 , pierrepont was considering constructing such a cemetery on a hilly area to the east of gowanus bay . acts of incorporation for '' the greenwood cemetery '' were passed on april 18 , 1838 , entitling the corporation to a capital of 300,000 and the right to of land . on april 11 , 1839 , a modification to that act was enacted , changing the corporation to a nonprofit organization . construction started in may 1839 and the first interment was performed on september 5 , 1840 . at that point , the cemetery commissioners decided to enclose the site with a long picket fence ( later replaced with a metal fence in 1860 ) . david bates douglass , green-wood 's landscape architect , mostly kept the cemetery 's natural landscaping intact , but worked on the cemetery until he resigned in 1841 . douglass modeled his two subsequently designed garden cemeteries upon green-wood : albany rural cemetery ( 1845–1846 ) , located in menands , new york , and mount hermon cemetery ( 1848 ) , in quebec city . initially some of roads were paved inside green-wood to showcase its natural scenery . the earliest map dating from 1846 indicates that there were originally three ponds in green-wood : sylvan water , green-isle water , and arbor water , all on the western side of the modern cemetery . initially there were very few burials per year ; by 1843 , there had been 352 burials total , though the number of burials doubled just in the next year . throughout the 1840s , several churches were allocated plots in green-wood cemetery these included the presbyterian , unitarian , and german lutheran churches of brooklyn . by the 1850s , various fauna were being introduced to the cemetery . after the initial opening of green-wood cemetery , it was expanded multiple times . originally 175 acres were enclosed , stretching between 21st and 37th streets from 5th to 9th avenue . the first additional acquisition in 1847 was for at the southwest corner of the cemetery , adjacent to the contemporary border of the city of brooklyn . another to the east was acquired in 1852 through the annexation of land in the then-separate village of flatbush . finally , in 1858 another was acquired at the southeastern corner of the cemetery grounds . a plot at the southeast corner of the cemetery was purchased in 1863 , allowing the commissioners to straighten out that border . this era was also associated with the construction of other structures . a receiving tomb was installed in 1853 , and around the same time , the ponds were cleaned and landscaped . in addition , several gates to the cemetery were added . the main gate at 5th avenue and 25th street was built in 1861-65 , followed by other entrances near the cemetery 's service yard ; at 9th avenue and 20th street ; and at 9th avenue and 37th street ( later removed ) . in addition , a gatekeeper 's house was installed at the original southern entrance in 1848 , the '' thirty vaults '' catacombs in 1854 , and a well house in 1855 . furthermore , the paths were paved in the 1860s to allow for easier transport within the cemetery . several additional ponds were carved out through the 1870s , including border water , dell water , crescent water , dale water , and meadow water . . growing popularity . at first , lots were being sold for 100 apiece , and it soon became a frequent place for burials , with 7,000 annual burials and 100,000 graves by the 1860s . to accommodate those who came to the cemetery , a ferry service to the cemetery was established in 1846 . green-wood became more popular after former governor dewitt clinton was disinterred from a cemetery in albany , the new york state capital , and moved to green-wood , where a monument to him was erected in 1853 . by the early 1860s it was drawing annual crowds second in size only to niagara falls . at the same time , prospect park was being constructed and public streetcar and elevated lines were established across brooklyn . in particular , the opening of the fifth avenue elevated station at 25th street , near the main entrance , proved to be a benefit to lot owners in green-wood cemetery . as a result , in 1876 , green-wood built the fort hamilton gate to accommodate the anticipated extra crowds . by the end of the 19th century , several florists , greenhouses , and monument sellers had opened shops near each of the gates . one such structure was the weir greenhouse , located across from the 25th street entrance ; that building is now both a national register of historic places listing and a city landmark . improvements also continued throughout the late 19th century . in 1871 , border water was partially eliminated to make extra burial space , and in 1874 , the cemetery was slightly expanded to . also , an underground drainage system , extra roads , and a permanent stone fence were built through the late 1870s . the cemetery was enlarged again in 1884 to via the acquisition of land on the northern border . to prevent the view being marred by the construction of tenements , green-wood also purchased lots on the southwest corner . by the 1890s , a reservoir was added atop mt . washington , the highest point in the cemetery , while two ponds had been removed . at the turn of the century , an old engine house , stables , and several enclosures were being removed , while waiting rooms and restrooms were added at the southern entrance . during this period , thousands of trees were planted , and roads continued to be graded . most famous new yorkers who died during the second half of the 19th century were buried at green-wood . starting in 1862 , free interments were offered to the families of new york soldiers who died in war . in 1868 , work started on the installation of the civil war soldiers ' monument at the highest point in green-wood to commemorate hundreds of thousands of new yorkers who fought in the war . the monument was not dedicated until 1876 . on december 5 , 1876 , the brooklyn theater fire claimed the lives of at least 278 individuals , with some accounts reporting over 300 dead . out of that total , 103 unidentified victims were interred in a common grave at green-wood cemetery . an obelisk near the main entrance marks the burial site . . 20th century . green-wood has remained non-sectarian , but was generally considered a christian burial place for white anglo-saxon protestants of good repute . one early regulation was that no one executed for a crime , or even dying in jail , could be buried there . however , the family of infamous political leader '' boss '' tweed managed to circumvent this rule even though he died in the ludlow street jail . the irish of green-wood cemetery , michael burke , irish america magazine the cemetery 's chapel was completed in 1913 by warren and wetmore , on the site of arbor water . by 1916 , the cemetery had 325,000 burials . modifications to green-wood 's landscape continued through the 20th century . in 1915 , the entrance at 20th street was realigned to connect with 9th avenue/prospect park west ( the entrance there being completed in 1926 ) , and another pond was drained . the landscape was in decline by the late 1910s , but this was followed shortly after by dead-tree removals in the 1920s and a five-year road repaving project began in 1924 . road reconstructions continued through the mid-1930s and demolition of enclosures continued . notably , the clock tower at the 34th street entrance was demolished in 1941 , and iron fences were removed during world war ii for the war effort . the old main entrance was demolished in 1951 , and four years later , the first new crematorium in new york city in a half-century was built at green-wood , with a columbarium . by the end of the 1950s , another reservoir had been filled for new lots . more than 1,000 enclosures were removed from 1950 to 1961 , the same year that work on a new crematorium began . the columbarium was expanded from 1975 to 1977 . however , through the 1970s , vandalism was common at green-wood cemetery . the cemetery was also affected by strike action among the gravediggers in 1966 , 1973 , and 1982 . the cemetery also continued to add new structures : the garden mausoleum and community mausoleum were finished in the late 1980s , and the hillside mausoleum was expanded . in addition , in 1994 , the north gate was restored and new offices were built . this was followed by the restoration of the chapel in the late 1990s , and it reopened in 2000 after having been closed for four decades . 21st century . in 1999 , the green-wood historic fund , a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) not-for-profit institution , was created to continue preservation , beautification , educational programs and community outreach as the current '' working cemetery '' evolves into a brooklyn cultural institution . the historic fund 's civil war project , an effort to identify and remember civil war veterans buried at green-wood , was created following the rededication ceremony of the civil war soldiers ' monument . these early graves had either sunk into the soil , been damaged , or had their markers erased before the monument was restored between 2000 and 2002 . further , construction of the last phase of the hillside mausoleum began in 2001 , and the same year 50 victims of the september 11 attacks were buried there . by 2009 , there was little space for new interments at green-wood cemetery . in december 2010 , a memorial was unveiled for the 134 victims of the 1960 new york mid-air collision ; the cemetery contains the common grave in which were placed the remains of unidentified victims . on october 13 , 2012 , another angel of music was installed to replace the one vandalized in 1959 , this one made by sculptors giancarlo biagi and jill burkee , was unveiled to memorialize louis moreau gottschalk . two weeks later , hurricane sandy toppled or damaged at least 292 of the mature trees , 210 gravestones , and 2 mausoleums in the cemetery . the damage was estimated at 500,000 . in december 2012 the statue civic virtue by frederick macmonnies was moved to green-wood . in august 2013 , in partnership with the connecticut society of the cincinnati , signage in the battle hill area of the cemetery was updated to reflect new research on battle hill 's importance in the battle of brooklyn . . notable burials . among the burials at the cemetery are six british commonwealth service personnel whose graves are registered by the commonwealth war graves commission , three from world war i and three from world war ii . cwgc cemetery report . breakdown obtained from casualty record . . landmark designations . the gates of the cemetery were designated a new york city landmark in 1966 , , p . 250 and the weir greenhouse , used as a visitor 's center , was designated as such in 1982 . the cemetery was listed on the national register of historic places in 1997 and was granted national historic landmark status in 2006 by the u.s . department of the interior . the fort hamilton parkway gate and the cemetery 's chapel were designated as official new york city landmarks in 2016 . . gallery . file : monument of miss charlotte canda , battle avenue , by e . & h.t . anthony ( firm ) 4 crop.jpg monument to miss charlotte canda , battle avenue by e . & h . t . anthony file : green-wood cemetery by david shankbone.jpg vista from the hillside mausoleum file : green-wood sylvan water jeh.jpg sylvan water , a decorative pond file : green-wood cemetery.jpg annual battle of long island commemoration inside the main gothic arch entrance in green-wood cemetery file : european beech tree and mausoleums at green-wood cemetery , brooklyn , ny - september 19 , 2015.jpg european beech tree and mausoleums file : largest tulip tree at green-wood cemetery , brooklyn , ny - september 19 , 2015.jpg largest tulip tree in the cemetery file : ginkgo tree , green-wood cemetery , brooklyn , ny - september 19 , 2015.jpg large ginkgo tree file : camperdown elm tree , green-wood cemetery , brooklyn , ny - september 19 , 2015.jpg camperdown elm tree file : two old sassafras trees , green-wood cemetery , brooklyn , ny - september 19 , 2015.jpg two old sassafras trees