Assize of Clarendon

problems addressed by the assize . in 1154 , henry ii inherited the throne of a troubled england . in full swing were the crusades , a military endeavour that kept noble landowners away from their castles for years at a time . unoccupied and unclaimed land invited squatters ; since there was no central recording office for real property in england at the time , and sorting out who owned what fief was entrusted to human memory , disputes arose when aristocrats returned , or died thousands of miles from home . another , even more serious was the aftermath of the anarchy , a disastrous civil war between king stephen and the empress matilda . the two factions had hired mercenary soldiers , and when there was no one left to pay them , many resorted to robbery and other forms of violence as a profession . crime followed the breakdown of local authority . the quarrel between the king and the empress created more property troubles ; as communities were divided , both factions were happy to reward their supporters with the lands of the local opponents . finally , there was the long-standing difficulty involving the catholic church , which culminated in the murder of thomas becket , the archbishop of canterbury . the problem for the king was that the church acted like an imperium in imperio , a '' kingdom within a kingdom '' , only partially , if at all , subject to henry 's laws . the church operated its own court system , which answered not to henry but to the pope ; it was a large landowner and a powerful vested interest . henry wished to establish a system of justice that would enlarge the power of the crown at the expense of the clergy . the assizes . henry therefore promulgated various assizes ( i.e . courts that convened in a town periodically , rather than being permanently established ) . the primary and most general one , the assize of clarendon was issued in 1166 . others , the '' petty '' assizes known respectively as the assize of novel disseisin , of mort d'ancestor , and of darrein presentment gave more specific relief . stephenson , c . & marcham , f . eds , sources of english constitutional history , ( ny : harper & row , 1937 ) , pp 76-81 . the most popular one became the assize of novel disseisin , which in law french meant something close to the '' assize of recent dispossession '' . those who had been recently put out of their lands could recover the beneficial use of them by resort to this assize , which led to a then innovative method of trial . twelve '' of the more lawful men '' of the locality were summoned by the king 's sheriff to determine , upon their own knowledge , who was entitled to the property . this innovative method of proceeding , the origin of the civil petit jury at common law , was aimed at the chaos introduced into property rights by crusade and civil war . henry 's true measure of cleverness , though , is on display in his innovations in criminal justice . henry appointed '' justice in eyre , '' the counterpart of circuit judges , to travel from town to town . when they arrived , they too called upon the sheriff to summon twelve free men from the surrounding areas . these twelve free men were a prototype of a grand jury . they were called to report under oath any accusations of crime they were aware of in the community . in theory , then as ( in the united states and liberia ) now , the grand jury only brought accusations ; it did not find guilt or innocence . the crimes to be investigated were specified in the assize of clarendon to be robbery , murder or theft or anyone who had harboured a robber , murderer , or thief . to these the assize of northampton ( 1176 ) added counterfeiting , forgery , and arson . minor crimes were specifically excepted so the new assizes concerned themselves with what would later be labeled '' felonies '' . this new assize did away with the old form of trial known as '' compurgation '' in accusations brought by the grand jury . under compurgation , an accused person who swore he did not commit the crime , and who found a sufficient number of his neighbours to swear that they believed him , was acquitted . compurgation was no longer available in charges brought by the grand jury . the only trial available to the defendant remained the traditional trial by ordeal , specifically in the assize of clarendon , '' the ordeal of water . '' nevertheless , henry did not put much faith in the results of the ordeal . the unfortunate felon who was convicted through the ordeal was typically executed . however , the assize of northampton ( 1176 ) provided that the loss of the right hand shall be added to a previous punishment of the loss of one foot for those who failed the ordeal . this implies that execution was not the inevitable result of conviction . but even if the indicted culprit was acquitted in the ordeal , he was banished from the kingdom . in other words , the proceedings by the grand jury were the actual trial ; everyone it accused was punished in some way , and the community was rid of the malefactor , one way or another , as adjudicated '' by the oath of twelve knights of the hundred & mdash ; or , should knights not be present , by the oath of twelve lawful freemen . '' . effects of the assize . these proceedings did much to transfer power out of the hands of local barons and into the hands of the royal court and its judges . in 1215 , moreover , the fourth lateran council forbade clergymen from participating in trial by ordeal . after this date , trials after indictment by the grand jury were conducted by juries as well . the large changes wrought in the english system of justice did not go unchallenged . the dispute over jurisdiction over the one-sixth of the population of england who were clergy was the chief grievance between the king and becket . disgruntled peers attempted to undo henry 's reforms by the magna carta forced on king john , but by that time the reforms had progressed too far—and their superiority over the system they had replaced was too obvious—for the forces of reaction to gain much ground . henry ii 's reforms laid the groundwork for the system of trials in common law . references . . bibliography . roger of hoveden howden , chronics maiora w r stubbs ( ed . ) , select charters and illustrations of english constitutional history from the earliest times to the reign of edward i , clarendon press , ( 1870 ) , p.143 , 150 . further reading . . external links . avalon project , assize of clarendon text