Food coloring

purpose of food coloring . people associate certain colors with certain flavors , and the color of food can influence the perceived flavor in anything from candy to wine . sometimes the aim is to simulate a color that is perceived by the consumer as natural , such as adding red coloring to candied fruit ( which would otherwise be beige ) , but sometimes it is for effect , like the green ketchup that heinz launched in 1999 . color additives are used in foods for many reasons including : to make food more attractive , appealing , appetizing , and informative offset color loss due to exposure to light , air , temperature extremes , moisture and storage conditions correct natural variations in color enhance colors that occur naturally provide color to colorless and '' fun '' foods allow consumers to identify products on sight , like candy flavors or medicine dosages . history of artificial food colorants . the addition of colorants to foods is thought to have occurred in egyptian cities as early as 1500 bc , when candy makers added natural extracts and wine to improve the products ' appearance . during the middle ages , the economy in the european countries was based on agriculture , and the peasants were accustomed to producing their own food locally or trading within the village communities . under feudalism , aesthetic aspects were not considered , at least not by the vast majority of the generally very poor population . this situation changed with urbanization at the beginning of the modern age , when trade emerged—especially the import of precious spices and colors . one of the first food laws , created in augsburg , germany , in 1531 , concerned spices or colorants and required saffron counterfeiters to be burned . with the onset of the industrial revolution , people became dependent on foods produced by others . these new urban dwellers demanded food at low cost . analytical chemistry was still primitive and regulations few . the adulterated food flourished . heavy metal and other inorganic element-containing compounds turned out to be cheap and suitable to '' restore '' the color of watered-down milk and other foodstuffs , some more lurid examples being : red lead ( pb 3 o 4 ) and cinnabar ( hgs ) were routinely used to color cheese and confectionery . copper arsenite ( cuhaso 3 ) was used to recolor used tea leaves for resale . it also caused two deaths when used to color a dessert in 1860 . sellers at the time offered more than 80 artificial coloring agents , some invented for dyeing textiles , not foods . . global harmonization . since the beginning of the 1960s , jecfa has promoted the development of international standards for food additives , not only by its toxicological assessments , which are continuously published by the who in a '' technical report series '' , but furthermore by elaborating appropriate purity criteria , which are laid down in the two volumes of the '' compendium of food additive specifications '' and their supplements . these specifications are not legally binding but very often serve as a guiding principle , especially in countries where no scientific expert committees have been established . in order to further regulate the use of these evaluated additives , in 1962 the who and fao created an international commission , the codex alimentarius , which is composed of authorities , food industry associations and consumer groups from all over the world . within the codex organization , the codex committee for food additives and contaminants is responsible for working out recommendations for the application of food additives , the general standard for food additives . in the light of the world trade organizations general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , the codex standard , although not legally binding , influences food color regulations all over the world . . natural food dyes . carotenoids ( e160 , e161 , e164 ) , chlorophyllin ( e140 , e141 ) , anthocyanins ( e163 ) , and betanin ( e162 ) comprise four main categories of plant pigments grown to color food products . other colorants or specialized derivatives of these core groups include : annatto ( e160b ) , a reddish-orange dye made from the seed of the achiote caramel coloring ( e150a-d ) , made from caramelized sugar carmine ( e120 ) , a red dye derived from the cochineal insect , dactylopius coccus elderberry juice ( e163 ) lycopene ( e160d ) paprika ( e160c ) turmeric/curcumin ( e100 ) blue colors are especially rare . one feasible blue dye currently in use is derived from spirulina . some recent research has explored associating anthocyanins with other phenolics or aluminium ions to develop blue colours . however , the inherent problems posed by the nature of the food matrix , and the need for long‐term stability , makes this a very difficult objective . the pigment genipin , present in the fruit of gardenia jasminoides , can be treated with amino acids to produce the blue pigment gardenia blue , which is approved for use in japan but not the eu or the usa . to ensure reproducibility , the colored components of these substances are often provided in highly purified form . for stability and convenience , they can be formulated in suitable carrier materials ( solid and liquids ) . hexane , acetone , and other solvents break down cell walls in the fruit and vegetables and allow for maximum extraction of the coloring . traces of these may still remain in the finished colorant , but they do not need to be declared on the product label . these solvents are known as carry-over ingredients . criticism and health implications . widespread public belief that artificial food coloring causes adhd-like hyperactivity in children originated from benjamin feingold , a pediatric allergist from california , who proposed in 1973 that salicylates , artificial colors , and artificial flavors cause hyperactivity in children ; however , there is no evidence to support broad claims that food coloring causes food intolerance and adhd-like behavior in children . tomaska ld and brooke-taylor , s . food additives - general pp 449-454 in encyclopedia of food safety , vol 2 : hazards and diseases . eds , motarjemi y et al . academic press , 2013 . it is possible that certain food colorings may act as a trigger in those who are genetically predisposed , but the evidence is weak . despite concerns expressed that food colorings may cause adhd-like behavior in children , fda . background document for the food advisory committee : certified color additives in food and possible association with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children : march 30-31 , 2011 the collective evidence does not support this assertion . the us fda and other food safety authorities regularly review the scientific literature , and led the uk food standards agency ( fsa ) to commission a study by researchers at southampton university of the effect of a mixture of six food dyes ( tartrazine , allura red , ponceau 4r , quinoline yellow ws , sunset yellow and carmoisine ( dubbed the '' southampton 6 '' ) ) on children in the general population . these colorants are found in beverages . sarah chapman of chapman technologies on behalf of food standards agency in scotland . march 2011 guidelines on approaches to the replacement of tartrazine , allura red , ponceau 4r , quinoline yellow , sunset yellow and carmoisine in food and beverages the study found '' a possible link between the consumption of these artificial colours and a sodium benzoate preservative and increased hyperactivity '' in the children ; the advisory committee to the fsa that evaluated the study also determined that because of study limitations , the results could not be extrapolated to the general population , and further testing was recommended . the u.s . fda did not make changes following the publication of the southampton study . following a citizen petition filed by the center for science in the public interest in 2008 , requesting the fda ban several food additives , the fda reviewed the available evidence , and still made no changes . the european regulatory community , with an emphasis on the precautionary principle , required labelling and temporarily reduced the acceptable daily intake ( adi ) for the food colorings ; the uk fsa called for voluntary withdrawal of the colorings by food manufacturers . however , in 2009 the efsa re-evaluated the data at hand and determined that '' the available scientific evidence does not substantiate a link between the color additives and behavioral effects '' for any of the dyes . efsa panel on food additives and nutrient sources added to food ( ans ) 091113 efsa.europa.eu scientific opinion on the re-evaluation of ponceau 4r ( e 124 ) as a food additive efsa journal 2009 ; 7 ( 11 ) :1328 . chemical structures of representative colorants . file : betanin.png betanin , a magenta dye , mainly produced from beets . file : anthocyanidine.svg anthocyanin , a red to blue dye depending on functional groups and ph . file : beta-carotin.svg beta-carotene , a yellow to orange colorant . file : indigo carmine.svg indigo carmine , which is blue . file : allura red ac structural formula v1.png allura red ac , which is red . file : quinoline yellow ws.svg quinoline yellow ws , which is yellow . . see also . azo compound acid dye e number federal food , drug , and cosmetic act food additive . references . external links . fda/cfsan food color facts natural food colors ( food-info ) report on the certification of color additives by us fda natcol : what are natural food colours ? cspi : food dyes pose rainbow of risks