Portnoy's Complaint

structure and themes . structurally , portnoy 's complaint is a continuous monologue by narrator alexander portnoy to his psychoanalyst , dr . spielvogel ; roth later explained that the artistic choice to frame the story as a psychoanalytic session was motivated by '' the permissive conventions of the patient-analyst situation , '' which would '' permit me to bring into my fiction the sort of intimate , shameful detail , and coarse , abusive language that . in another fictional environment would have struck me as pornographic , exhibitionistic , and nothing but obscene . '' saxton ( 1974 ) brauner ( 2005 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 43–47 the novel is set primarily in new jersey from the 1940s to the 1960s . portnoy is '' a lust-ridden , mother-addicted young jewish bachelor '' , and the narration weaves through time describing scenes from each stage of his life ; every recollection in some way touches upon his central dilemma : his inability to enjoy the fruits of his sexual adventures even as his extreme libidinal urges force him to seek release in ever more creative ( and , in his mind , degrading and shameful ) acts of eroticism ; also , much of his dilemma is that '' his sense of himself , his past , and his ridiculous destiny is so fixed . '' roth is not subtle about defining this as the main theme of his book . on the first page of the novel , one finds this clinical definition of '' portnoy 's complaint '' , as if taken from a manual on sexual dysfunction : the title also alludes to the common literary form of complaint , such as '' a lover 's complaint '' , which typically presents the speaker 's comments on being a spurned lover . other topics touched on in the book include the assimilation experiences of american jews , their relationship to the jews of israel , and the pleasures and perils the narrator sees as inherent in being the son of a jewish family . portnoy 's complaint is also emblematic of the times during which it was published . most obviously , the book 's sexual frankness was both a product of and a reflection on the sexual revolution that was in full swing during the late 1960s . and the book 's narrative style , a huge departure from the stately , semi-jamesian prose of roth 's earlier novels , has often been likened to the stand-up performances of 1960s comedian lenny bruce . the novel is notable for its explicit and candid treatment of sexuality , including detailed depictions of masturbation using various props including a piece of liver which portnoy 's mother later serves for dinner . . writing . roth had begun work on portnoy 's complaint in 1967 , before publication of his novel when she was good that year . the piece had its genesis in a satirical monologue roth had written to accompany a slide show proposed for inclusion in the risqué revue oh ! calcutta ! that would focus on the sexual organs of the rich and famous . while the slide show would never come to fruition , roth found part of the accompanying monologue about masturbation salvageable . roth re-fashioned the material for the novel and sold a chapter of the book , entitled '' whacking off '' , to partisan review . progress on the novel was slow because roth was suffering from writer 's block relating to his ex-wife , margaret martinson , and the unpleasant notion that any royalties generated by the novel would have to be split equally with her . in may 1968 , martinson was killed in a car crash in central park . roth 's writer 's block lifted and , following martinson 's funeral , he traveled to the yaddo literary retreat to complete the manuscript . hofler , pp . & nbsp ; 48-56 . responses , reviews and attacks . the publication of the novel caused a major controversy in american public discourse . the two aspects that evoked such outrage were its explicit and candid treatment of sexuality and obscenities , including detailed depictions of masturbation , which was revolutionary in the late 1960s , and the irreverent portrait of jewish identity . it sparked an uproar in the jewish community , even among new york intellectuals such as irving howe and diana trilling . comedian neal brennan has acknowledged the book by saying '' it 's the best . '' . censorship . in 1969 the book was declared a '' prohibited import '' in australia . the australian publisher , penguin books , circumvented the importation ban by having copies printed in sydney in secret and stored in fleets of moving trucks to avoid seizure under state obscenity laws . a 1967 agreement between the commonwealth of australia and its states had put in place a uniform censorship effort against books on the federal banned books list . according to this agreement , books that were imported into the country would be handled by the commonwealth , while the states would police local publication and distribution , using state laws to prosecute . however , south australia bucked the system when it came to portnoy 's complaint , declaring that it would not prosecute sales of the work made to an adult who made a direct enquiry of the vendor , provided the books were kept behind the counter . attempts to prosecute penguin and any bookseller carrying the book were successful in victoria and queensland , but failed in western australia ( where '' works of recognised artistic , scientific or literary merit '' were immune under the local statute , notwithstanding that they may have been obscene ) and new south wales , where prosecutors gave up after two trials resulted in hung juries . the book was removed from the federal banned list for importation in june 1971 , the federal government recognising the absurdity that local publications could be sold legally in three states and the australian capital territory . the portnoy matter was a watershed in australian censorship law , marking the last occasion on which the censorship of a literary publication came before the courts . many libraries in the united states banned the book because of its detailed discussion of masturbation and its explicit language . . film adaptation . in 1972 , the novel was adapted into a film written and directed by ernest lehman , and starring richard benjamin and karen black . notes . references . hofler , robert ( 2014 ) . sexplosion : from andy warhol to a clockwork orange - how a generation of pop rebels broke all the taboos . new york : itbooks , an imprint of harpercollins publishers . budgie . ( 1972 london weekend television ) series 2 . episode 4-the jump boys- portnoy ’ s complaint is referenced by charlie endell ( played by iain cuthbertson ) when he tells detective constable leadbetter ( played by jack shepherd ) that when he looks at erotic books in endell ’ s sex shop that he is suffering from a similar complaint . further reading . brauner , david ( 1969 ) getting in your retaliation first : narrative strategies in portnoy 's complaint in royal , derek parker ( 2005 ) philip roth : new perspectives on an american author , chapter 3 saxton , martha ( 1974 ) philip roth talks about his own work literary guild june 1974 , n.2 . also published in philip roth , george john searles ( 1992 ) conversations with philip roth p . & nbsp ; 78 budgie series 2 episode 4 “ the jump up boys ” portnoy ’ s complaint is referenced by charlie endell ( iain cuthbertson ) 1972 london weekend television . external links . portnoy 's complaint 52 on the modern library 's 100 best novels of the 20th century