Halva

etymology . the word halva entered the english language between 1840 and 1850 from the romanian , which came from the , itself ultimately derived from the , a sweet confection . halvah , random house dictionary , 2009 the root in , means '' sweet '' . . history . a reference to halvah appeared in the 7th century , referring to a mixture of mashed dates with milk . by the 9th century , the term was applied to numerous kinds of sweets , including the now-familiar sweetened cooked semolina or flour paste . many of the earlier persian recipes were documented in the 13th century arabic book kitab al-tabikh ( the book of dishes ) , as well as an anonymous cookbook from 13th-century moorish spain . halva was adopted and expanded by the ottoman turks , including a sesame-based version , and spread throughout their empire . . types . most types of halva are relatively dense confections sweetened with sugar or honey . their textures , however , vary . for example , semolina-based halva is gelatinous and translucent , while sesame-based halva is drier and more crumbly . flour-based . flour based halva is made by frying flour ( such as semolina ) in oil , mixing it into a roux , and then cooking it with a sugary syrup . semolina . this variety of halva is usually made with wheat semolina , sugar or honey , and butter or vegetable oil . raisins , dates , other dried fruits , or nuts such as almonds or walnuts are often added to semolina halva . the halva is very sweet , with a gelatinous texture similar to polenta ; the added butter gives it a rich mouthfeel . in india , halva recipes use flour , melted butter or ghee , sugar and optionally acacia gum ( gum arabic ) . it comes in various colors like orange , brown , green and white ; in a translucent appearance studded with raisins , cashew nuts , pistachios , almonds , etc . technically- the term halva is used in native recipes throughout india . a prominent south indian version of halva ( or alvaa in tamil ) is from tirunelveli , a city in the state of tamil nadu . another semolina preparation widely enjoyed throughout south india called kesari or kesari-bath originates from the state of karnataka . alternative vegetable-based halva recipes popular in india and pakistan use beetroots , potatoes , yams , and most commonly carrots ( for gajar halwa ) , mung beans ( for moong dal halwa ) , or bottle gourds ( for doodi halwa ) instead of semolina . prepared with condensed milk and ghee , without semolina to bind it together , the end result has a moist , yet flaky , texture when freshly prepared . other examples include the famous agra petha , easily available at taj mahal , agra . cornstarch . cornstarch-gelatinous halva is popular in greece and has many variations . . rice flour . this rice flour and coconut milk halva is common fare on the streets of zanzibar . a dairy-based rice flour halva , known as pathein halawa , is considered a burmese delicacy native to pathein . nut butter-based . this type of halva is made by grinding oily seeds , such as sesame or sunflower seeds , to a paste , and then mixing with hot sugar syrup cooked to hard-crack stage . this type is popular in the mediterranean region , the balkans , the middle east , central asia , and eastern europe . sesame . sesame halva is popular in the balkans , poland , middle east , and other areas surrounding the mediterranean sea . the primary ingredients in this confection are sesame butter or paste ( tahini ) , and sugar , glucose or honey . soapwort halva ethnological museum of thrace ( called ‘ erq al halaweh in arabic ; çöven in turkish ) , egg white , or althaea ( plant ) are added in some recipes to stabilize the oils in the mixture or create a distinctive texture for the resulting confection . a version of sesame halva , called sesame crumble candy ( 芝麻酥糖 ) in china uses ground sesame and sugar , cooked to the hard ball stage because it is made crispier than other halvas . other ingredients and flavorings , such as pistachio nuts , cocoa powder , orange juice , vanilla , or chocolate are often added to the basic tahini and sugar base . . sunflower . sunflower halva is popular in the post-soviet states , but also in bulgaria , romania , serbia , and other balkan countries . comparison of three sunflower halva assortments from romanian market it is made of roasted ground sunflower seeds instead of sesame . it may include other ingredients , such as nuts , cocoa powder , or vanilla . . other . . floss halva . pişmaniye ( turkish ) or floss halva is a traditional sweet , prepared in i̇zmit , turkey , made by flossing thin strands of halva into a light confection . made primarily of wheat flour and sugar , the strands are continuously wrapped into a ball shape and then compressed . the result is a halva with a light consistency , similar to cotton candy . floss halva can be found in regular and pistachio flavors , and there are brands with halal or kosher certifications . a similar pistachio-based version of floss halva is popular in north india . it tends to be slightly denser and is often referred to as patisa or sohan papdi . in chinese cuisine , a floss-like candy similar to pismaniye or pashmak halva , known as dragon beard candy , is eaten as a snack or dessert . a raw version of halva also has become popular among proponents of raw food diets . in this version , a mixture of raw sesame tahini , raw almonds , raw agave nectar and salt are blended together and frozen to firm . . cultural use . halva can be a snack or served as part of a meal . . azerbaijan . one regional variant is from sheki where sheki halva halva refers to a layered bakhlava style pastry filled with spiced-nut mix and topped by crisscrossed patterns of a red syrup made from saffron , dried carrot and beetroot . how to make sheki halva , and its folk history sheki halva recipe ( in azerbaijani ) . greece . halva is a traditional fasting food among greek orthodox who traditionally have food restrictions , especially from meat , on wednesdays and fridays throughout the year , for all of great lent and other fasting periods . . indian subcontinent . india has many types of halva , some unique to particular regions of the country . it is one of the popular sweets of india usually made from semolina . it is speculated that halva ( or halwa ) is associated with muslims in india , but written records of sweets from manasollasa indicate that semolina halvas , the most popular form of halvas in india , were already known in india , for instance , it mentions a sweet called shali-anna which is a semolina based sweet today known as kesari in south india . various types of halva from indian subcontinent are distinguished by the region and the ingredients from which they are prepared . in northern india , the most famous include sooji ( or suji ) halva ( semolina ) , aate ka halva ( wheat ) , moong dal halwa ( mung bean halva ) , gajar halva ( carrot ) which traditionally belongs to punjab and is referred to as gajrela , dudhi halva , chana daal halwa ( chickpeas ) , and satyanarayan halwa ( variation of suji halwa , with the addition of detectable traces of banana ) , and kaju halva ( cashew nut ) . kashi halva , made from winter melon or ash gourd , is a famous and traditional sweet of karnataka , and mainly makes a regular appearance in traditional brahmin weddings . sooji halwa is sold in many eateries in karnataka as kesari bhath , usually alongside pineapple . '' aate ka halva '' usually being served every day as '' prashad '' after reciting hymes in sikh gurudwaras . tirunelveli in tamil nadu is known for its wheat halwa . its preparation is a laborious process that '' is slowly seeing this sweet disappear . '' unlike other sweets , the extra ghee is not drained out but forms an outer layer . this increases the shelf life of the halwa . the unique taste of the halwa is attributed to the perennial thamirabranai . the history of kozhikode in kerala could trace back to zamorin era . zamorin invited chefs from gujarat to prepare halwa for their royal feast . they were also granted places to stay beside royal kitchen . this settlement later evolved as sweet sellers street , nowadays known as s . m . street or s . m . street . kozhikode halwa is made of pure coconut oil , not from ghee . significant arab and middle eastern influence in kerala contributed to the karutha haluwa ( black haluwa ) , made from rice , is very popular . kozhikode halwa also builds religious harmony , ayyappa devotees from neighboring states karnataka , andhra pradesh are buying halwa and chips like prasadam ( sacred food ) . they distribute them among their neighbors and friends , who consume them with a religious zeal . . iran . in iran , halva usually refers to a related confection made from wheat flour and butter and flavored with rose water . recipe the final product has a dark brown color . the halva is spread thin on a plate till it dries into a paste . halva usually is served at funerals and other formal ceremonies , often with almonds or coconut shavings on the top . halva ardeh is the iranian term for tahini-based halva , and may or may not include whole pistachios . ardeh is processed sesame in the form of paste , usually sweetened with syrup . . israel . tahini halvah is very popular in israel and among jewish people throughout the diaspora . ha'aretz online : four stops for halva spelled '' halvah '' in english , it usually comes in slabs , nearly-cylindrical cakes ( illustrated ) , or small packages , and is available in a wide variety of flavours , chocolate and vanilla being very common . the halvah is almost always parve . israeli halvah will usually not contain wheat flour or semolina , but will contain sesame tahini , glucose , sugar , vanilla and saponaria officinalis root extracts ( soapwort ) , which are not usually found in other recipes . it is often served as a breakfast component at israeli hotels , though it is not usually part of an israeli breakfast , and it is even used in specialty ice-cream . ha'aretz online : the ice man cometh . russia . halva ( халва ) can be made from either ground sunflower seeds or peanuts , and then shaped into a small bar . in russia , halva is mainly produced by the russian companies red october and rot front , and is a very popular snack . it can either be produced as is , or covered in a slight chocolate glaze . ukraine . halva ( халва ) is made from a paste of ground sunflower seeds and sunflower oil , laid out in a sheet and cut into brick form ; it tends to be less sweet than other halvas . the sunflower is one of the symbols of ukraine and sunflowers carry a very special meaning in ukrainian culture , making halvah a popular snack . standard flavors include vanilla , raisin and chocolate . united states . halva can be found in ethnic indian , jewish , arab , persian , greek , and turkish community stores and delicatessens . it is increasingly offered by upscale restaurants in some areas . besides being imported , it is manufactured in the united states , with the largest producer being brooklyn-originated joyva . . cultural references . in afghanistan , turkey and iran , after the burial ceremony , on the seventh and fortieth day following the death of a muslim , and also on the first anniversary , semolina halva or flour halva is cooked and offered to visitors and neighbours by relatives of the deceased . to commemorate the anniversary of death . for this reason , flour ( un ) halva is also called in turkish ölü helvası , meaning '' halva of the dead '' . the expression roasting the halva of someone suggests the person referred to died some time ago . in episode 46 of the turkish tv series winter sun ( kış güneşi ) , i̇smail tells a joke : : '' why do we always eat halva after a meal of fish ? : . '' so the fish knows it is dead and gone ! '' . see also . barfi fudge halwai indian cuisine krówki list of desserts mahim halwa marzipan nougat paçoca tablet ( confectionery ) toffee turrón . references .