Henan

culture . most of henan speaks dialects of the mandarin group of dialects spoken in northern and southwestern china . linguists put these dialects into the category of '' zhongyuan mandarin '' . the northwestern corner of henan is an exception , where people speak jin dialects instead . the dialects of henan are collectively called '' the henan dialect '' in popular usage , with easily identifiable stereotypical features . yu opera ( yuju ) is the local form of chinese opera ; it is also well-known and popular across the rest of china . henan quju and henan yuediao are also important local opera forms . henan cuisine is the local cuisine , with traditions such as the water banquet ( luoyang '' water table '' , consisting entirely of various soups , etc . ) ; xinyang duncai ( xinyang brewed vegetables ) , and the traditional kaifeng cuisine . important traditional art and craft products include : junci , a type of porcelain originating in yuzhou noted for its unpredictable colour patterns ; the jade carvings of zhenping ; and luoyang 's tangsancai ( '' tang three colours '' ) , which are earthenware figurines made in the traditional style of the tang dynasty . tourism . henan is located in the yellow river valley where ancient people lived . intricate pottery , writing and musical instruments of the peiligang culture and yangshao culture arose during neolithic times . three of the seven ancient capitals of china are in henan : luoyang , kaifeng and anyang . 16 historical sites in henan are protected at the national level and 267 more at the provincial level . mount jigong , on the southern border . mount song , near dengfeng , one of the five sacred mountains of china . shaolin temple , on mount song . gaocheng astronomical observatory in dengfeng , the oldest astronomical observatory in china . longmen grottoes , near luoyang , a unesco world heritage site since 2000 . songyue pagoda yinxu in anyang , a unesco world heritage site . youguo temple with the iron pagoda white horse temple in luoyang baligou in xinxiang mount mangdang in shangqiu yuntai mountain in jiaozuo . colleges and universities . zhengzhou university henan university of economics and law henan university henan agricultural university henan polytechnic university henan university of science and technology henan normal university north china institute of water conservancy and hydroelectric power zhongyuan institute of technology zhengzhou university of light industry henan university of technology zhengzhou institute of aeronautical industry management henan medical university henan college of traditional chinese medicine xinxiang college huanghe science and technology university nanyang institute of technology sias university shangqiu college shangqiu normal college anyang institute of technology zhengzhou grain college zhengzhou university of technology zhengzhou textile institute luoyang institute of technology pingdingshan normal college xinxiang medical university nanyang teachers college . notable individuals . sun tiantian ( born 12 october 1981 ) , tennis player zhao ziyang ( 17 october 1919 − 17 january 2005 ) , former premier and ccp secretary deng yaping ( born 5 february 1973 ) , four-time olympic gold medalist . du wei ( born 9 february 1982 ) , professional football player ge xin'ai ( born 30 june 1953 ) table tennis world champion ( 1975 , 1977 , 1979 ) chen zhong , olympic gold medalist in taekwondo liu guoliang , member of the chinese ping pong team su zhibo , the first chinese gold medalist in the asian games shang tang , the first ruling king of the shang dynasty hui shi ( 380 & nbsp ; bc− ? ) , philosopher xu shen ( c.58−c . 147 ) , editor of the shuowen jiezi ruan ji ( 210–263 ) , poet du fu ( 712–770 ) , considered one of the greatest of chinese poets han yu ( 768–824 ) , one of china 's best known prose writers and poets li shangyin ( 813–858 ) , poet cheng hao ( 1032–1085 ) and brother cheng yi ( 1033–1107 ) , neo-confucian philosophers li tang ( c . 1080−c . 1130 ) , painter yuan shikai ( 1859–1916 ) , second president of the republic of china feng youlan ( 1895–1990 ) , philosopher lao zi ( lao tzu : dates uncertain ) , founder of daoism chuang tzu ( born 369 & nbsp ; bc ) , daoist philosopher gao yaojie , medical doctor mozi , founder of mohism lie yukou ( c . 4th century bc ) , daoist philosopher li pei yun , member of henan professional wushu team and winner of the gold medal every year from 1977 through 1982 in the henan province kung-fu competition in four different events ; nan quan style ( empty hand form ) , sword , pairs and long stick . ding jia , member of henan professional wushu team and nine ( 9 ) time consecutive chen style tai chi chinese national champion . su qin han fei ( c . 280–233 & nbsp ; bc ) , legalist philosopher chen sheng , ( known in some sources as chen she ) and wu guang ( both died 209 & nbsp ; bc or 208 & nbsp ; bc ) , leaders of the first rebellion against qin dynasty jia yi , a chinese poet and statesman of the han dynasty zhang heng , an astronomer , mathematician , inventor , geographer , artist , poet , statesman , and literary scholar of the eastern han dynasty feng yi , a general of the eastern han dynasty zhang ji ( style-named zhang zhongjing ) ( 150–219 ) , an eastern han physician , the author of the shanghan zabing lun xu shu one of liu bei 's advisors during the three kingdoms period of china . sima yi ( 179–251 ) , a general , military strategist , and politician of cao wei during the three kingdoms period xun yu ( styled-named wenruo ) , an advisor to cao cao during the three kingdoms period xun you an advisor to cao cao during the three kingdoms period deng ai ( ? −264 ) , an officer of cao wei during the three kingdoms period fan zhen ( c . 450–515 ) , a chinese philosopher of the southern qi dynasty , remembered today for the treatise shen mie lun ( on the annihilation of the soul ) yue fei ( 1103–1142 ) , a noted chinese patriot and general who fought for the southern song dynasty against the jurchen zhong you ( 151–230 ) , a politician and calligrapher in wei dynasty of san guo zhu ting , sixteenth captain of china national women 's volleyball team wei rui , sanshou fighter and professional kickboxer jia aoqi , sanshou fighter and professional kickboxer zhang zhilei , professional heavyweight boxer kong hongxing , sanshou fighter . sports teams . professional sports teams in henan include ; chinese basketball association henan dragons chinese football association jia league henan jianye f.c . see also . list of major national historical and cultural sites in henan . references . economic profile for henan at hktdc . works cited . . external links . henan government website