Amphiprioninae

distribution and habitats . anemonefish are endemic to the warmer waters of the indian ocean , including the red sea and pacific oceans , the great barrier reef , southeast asia , japan , and the indo-malaysian region . while most species have restricted distributions , others are widespread . anemonefish typically live at the bottom of shallow seas in sheltered reefs or in shallow lagoons . no anemonefish are found in the atlantic . . diet . anemonefish are omnivore and can feed on undigested food from their host anemones , and the feces matter from the anemonefish provides nutrients to the sea anemone . anemonefish primarily feed on small zooplankton from the water column , such as copepods and tunicate larvae , with a small portion of their diet coming from algae , with the exception of pink skunk clownfish , which primarily feeds on algae . they may also consume the tentacles of their host anemone . . symbiosis and mutualism . anemonefish and sea anemones have a symbiosis relationship , each providing many benefits to the other . the individual species are generally highly host specific , and especially the genera heteractis and stichodactyla , and the species bubble-tip anemone are frequent anemonefish partners . the sea anemone protects the anemonefish from predators , as well as providing food through the scraps left from the anemone 's meals and occasional dead anemone tentacles and functions as a safe nest site . in return , the anemonefish defends the anemone from its predators and parasites . dead link the anemone also picks up nutrients from the anemonefish 's excrement . holbrook , s . j . and schmitt , r . j . growth , reproduction and survival of a tropical sea anemone ( actiniaria ) : benefits of hosting anemonefish , 2005 , cited in blogspot.com the nitrogen excreted from anemonefish increases the number of algae incorporated into the tissue of their hosts , which aids the anemone in tissue growth and regeneration . the activity of the anemonefish results in greater water circulation around the sea anemone , and it has been suggested that their bright coloring might lure small fish to the anemone , which then catches them . studies on anemonefish have found that they alter the flow of water around sea anemone tentacles by certain behaviors and movements such as '' wedging '' and '' switching '' . aeration of the host anemone tentacles allows for benefits to the metabolism of both partners , mainly by increasing anemone body size and both anemonefish and anemone respiration . bleaching of the host anemone can occur when warm temperatures cause a reduction in algal symbionts within the anemone . bleaching of the host can cause a short-term increase in the metabolic rate of resident anemonefish , probably as a result of acute stress . over time , however , there appears to be a down-regulation of metabolism and a reduced growth rate for fish associated with bleached anemones . these effects may stem from reduced food availability ( e.g . anemone waste products , symbiotic algae ) for the anemonefish . several theories are given about how they can survive the sea anemone poison : the mucus coating of the fish may be based on sugars rather than proteins . this would mean that anemones fail to recognize the fish as a potential food source and do not fire their cnidocytes , or sting organelles . the coevolution of certain species of anemonefish with specific anemone host species may have allowed the fish to evolve an immunity to the nematocysts and toxins of their hosts . orange clownfish may develop resistance to the toxin from heteractis magnifica , but it is not totally protected since it was shown experimentally to die when its skin , devoid of mucus , was exposed to the nematocysts of its host . anemonefish are the best known example of fish that are able to live among the venomous sea anemone tentacles , but several others occur , including juvenile threespot dascyllus , certain cardinalfish ( such as banggai cardinalfish ) , gobius incognitus , and juvenile painted greenling . lieske , e . ; and r . myers ( 1999 ) . coral reef fishes . fretwell , k . ; and b . starzomski ( 2014 ) . painted greenling . biodiversity of the central coast . retrieved 29 january 2015 . . reproduction . in a group of anemonefish , a strict dominance hierarchy exists . the largest and most aggressive female is found at the top . only two anemonefish , a male and a female , in a group reproduce – through external fertilization . anemonefish are sequential hermaphrodites , meaning they develop into males first , and when they mature , they become females . if the female anemonefish is removed from the group , such as by death , one of the largest and most dominant males becomes a female . the remaining males move up a rank in the hierarchy . anemonefish lay eggs on any flat surface close to their host anemones . in the wild , anemonefish spawn around the time of the full moon . depending on the species , they can lay hundreds or thousands of eggs . the male parent guards the eggs until they hatch about 6–10 days later , typically two hours after dusk . clownfish breeding for beginners by jeff hesketh of mad hatter 's reef . parental investment . anemonefish colonies usually consist of the reproductive male and female and a few male juveniles , which help tend the colony . although multiple males cohabit an environment with a single female , polygamy does not occur and only the adult pair exhibits reproductive behavior . however , if the female dies , the social hierarchy shifts with the breeding male exhibiting protandrous sex reversal to become the breeding female . the largest juvenile then becomes the new breeding male after a period of rapid growth . the existence of protandry in anemonefish may rest on the case that nonbreeders modulate their phenotype in a way that causes breeders to tolerate them . this strategy prevents conflict by reducing competition between males for one female . for example , by purposefully modifying their growth rate to remain small and submissive , the juveniles in a colony present no threat to the fitness of the adult male , thereby protecting themselves from being evicted by the dominant fish . the reproductive cycle of anemonefish is often correlated with the lunar cycle . rates of spawning for anemonefish peak around the first and third quarters of the moon . the timing of this spawn means that the eggs hatch around the full moon or new moon periods . one explanation for this lunar clock is that spring tides produce the highest tides during full or new moons . nocturnal hatching during high tide may reduce predation by allowing for a greater capacity for escape . namely , the stronger currents and greater water volume during high tide protect the hatchlings by effectively sweeping them to safety . before spawning , anemonefish exhibit increased rates of anemone and substrate biting , which help prepare and clean the nest for the spawn . in terms of parental care , male anemonefish are often the caretakers of eggs . before making the clutch , the parents often clear an oval-shaped clutch varying in diameter for the spawn . fecundity , or reproductive rate , of the females , usually ranges from 600 to 1500 eggs depending on her size . in contrast to most animal species , the female-only occasionally takes responsibility for the eggs , with males expending most of the time and effort . male anemonefish care for their eggs by fanning and guarding them for 6 to 10 days until they hatch . in general , eggs develop more rapidly in a clutch when males fan properly , and fanning represents a crucial mechanism of successfully developing eggs . this suggests that males can control the success of hatching an egg clutch by investing different amounts of time and energy towards the eggs . for example , a male could choose to fan less in times of scarcity or fan more in times of abundance . furthermore , males display increased alertness when guarding more valuable broods , or eggs in which paternity was guaranteed . females , though , display generally less preference for parental behavior than males . all these suggest that males have increased parental investment towards the eggs compared to females . . taxonomy . historically , anemonefish have been identified by morphological features and color pattern in the field , while in a laboratory , other features such as scalation of the head , tooth shape , and body proportions are used . these features have been used to group species into six complexes , clownfish , tomato , skunk , clarkii , saddleback , and maroon . as can be seen from the gallery , each of the fish in these complexes has a similar appearance . genetic analysis has shown that these complexes are not monophylys , particularly the 11 species in the a . clarkii group , where only a . clarkii and a . tricintus are in the same clade , with six species , a . allardi a . bicinctus , a . chagosensis , a . chrosgaster , a . fuscocaudatus , a . latifasciatus , and a . omanensis being in an indian clade , a . chrysopterus having monospecific lineage , and a . akindynos in the australian clade with a . mccullochi . other significant differences are that a . latezonatus also has monospecific lineage , and a . nigripes is in the indian clade rather than with a . akallopisos , the skunk anemonefish . a . latezonatus is more closely related to a . percula and premnas biaculeatus than to the saddleback fish with which it was previously grouped . obligate mutualism was thought to be the key innovation that allowed anemonefish to radiate rapidly , with rapid and convergent morphological changes correlated with the ecological niches offered by the host anemones . the complexity of mitochondrial dna structure shown by genetic analysis of the australian clade suggested evolutionary connectivity among samples of a . akindynos and a . mccullochi that the authors theorize was the result of historical hybridization and introgression in the evolutionary past . the two evolutionary groups had individuals of both species detected , thus the species lacked reciprocal monophyly . no shared haplotypes were found between species . phylogenetic relationships . . further reading . . external links . clownfish species profiles on aquariumdomain . photo gallery of amphiprion ocellaris and their eggs monterey bay aquarium : video and information clown fish underwater photography gallery aquaticcommunity.com tolweb.org