Abdullah el-Faisal

early life . el-faisal was born in saint james parish to an evangelical christian family which belonged to the salvation army church , a christian denomination . he grew up in the small farming village of point , about from the city of montego bay , in upper st . james , jamaica . he attended springfield all-age , then maldon primary and junior high . at age 16 , he converted to islam , postcolonial melancholia , p . 130 , paul gilroy , columbia university press , 2005 , . retrieved 9 january 2010 . after being introduced to the religion by a teacher at maldon high school . he began using the name abdullah el-faisal shortly after graduating maldon in 1980 , and changed it legally in 1983 . in 1981 , in trinidad , he took a six-week course in islamic and arabic studies sponsored by the saudi arabian government . he left jamaica in 1983 for guyana where he studied arabic and islam for a year . starting in 1984 , el-faisal studied islam for seven years on a saudi government scholarship at the imam muhammad ibn saud islamic university in riyadh , saudi arabia . he then moved to the uk later in the 1980s . . england : 1991–2003 . el-faisal was sent to the united kingdom to preach by sheikh raji . he returned to the uk in 1991 , became the imam at the salafi brixton mosque in south london , began preaching to crowds of up to 500 people at the mosque and at brixton town hall . he married his second wife , pakistani-british biology graduate zubeida khan whom he met months after his arrival , in 1992 , thereby acquiring rights of residence . lister , sam , '' bloodcurdling brand of hatred taken on tour of britain , '' the times , 25 february 2003 . retrieved 24 january 2010 this meant he had two wives , as his first marriage was still extant . in 1993 , el-faisal was ejected by brixton mosque 's administration who objected to his radical preaching . afterward , he gave a lecture he called the devil 's deception of the saudi salafis , where he attacked the brixton mosque management on the basis of their alleged subservience to the corrupt rulers of saudi arabia . he opened a study center in tower hamlets , east london . referred to as '' sheikh '' by his followers , el-faisal travelled and lectured to audiences in mosques in birmingham , london , and dewsbury in west yorkshire , and in manchester , worthing , bournemouth , cardiff , swansea , coventry , maidenhead , tipton , beeston , and venues in scotland and wales . '' british imam praises london tube bombers '' , the sunday times , 12 february 2006 . retrieved 24 january 2010 . waldman , amy , '' a nation challenged : muslims ; how in a little english town jihad found young converts , '' the new york times , 24 april 2003 . retrieved 24 january 2010 . some of his lectures were taped and sold at islamic bookshops . he also called on muslim mothers to raise their children to be jihad soldiers by the age of 15 . the content of those taped lectures served as the basis for his later trial and conviction . in february 2002 , el-faisal 's tapes were purchased by an undercover police officer at an islamic bookshop at 62 brick lane in london and seized under a search warrant at zam zam bookshop at 388 green street in east ham and at his home at 104 albert square in stratford . he was arrested on 18 february 2002 . el-faisal is an associate of abu hamza al-masri , the egyptian ousted from the finsbury park mosque who is known for preaching against non-muslims , and who is currently incarcerated in the united states for various offenses . el-faisal is reportedly a former supporter of osama bin laden , and has been linked to al-qaeda members . . conviction and imprisonment : 2003–07 . ; conviction after a four-week trial at the old bailey , el-faisal was found guilty by a jury of six men and six women on 24 february 2003 of : ( a ) three charges of soliciting to murder of jews , americans , hindus , and christians ; and ( b ) two charges of using threatening words to stir up racial hatred , in tapes of speeches to his followers . he was the first muslim cleric to be tried in the uk . ; taped lectures in tapes of lectures he had given , he exhorted muslim women to buy toy guns for their children , to train them for jihad . el-faisal tried to recruit british schoolboys for jihad training camps , promising them '' seventy-two virgins in paradise '' if they died fighting a holy war . el-faisal said '' those who want to go to jannah paradise , it 's easy , just kill a kaffar unbeliever . by killing that kaffar you have purchased your ticket to paradise . '' he suggested killing non-muslims like '' cockroaches . '' johnston , philip , '' 7 july preacher abdullah el-faisal deported , '' the telegraph , 25 may 2007 . retrieved 21 january 2010 . on one tape , titled '' jihad '' , he said : '' our methodology is the bullet , not the ballot . '' in a tape called '' rules of jihad '' , thought to have been made before the 9/11 attacks , he said : '' you have to learn how to shoot . you have to learn how to fly planes , drive tanks , and you have to learn how to load your guns and to use missiles . you are only allowed to use nuclear weapons in that country which is 100 % unbelievers . '' he encouraged the use of '' anything , even chemical weapons , '' to '' exterminate non-believers . '' a picture of the burning world trade center was on the cover of one recording . he lectured : '' you can go to india , and if you see a hindu walking down the road you are allowed to kill him and take his money , is that clear , because there is no peace treaty between us . '' he also suggested that power plants could use the dead bodies of hindus as fuel . attewill , fred , '' race hate preacher faisal deported , '' the guardian , 25 may 2007 . retrieved 6 january 2009 '' jews , '' el-faisal said , '' should be killed . as by hitler . '' he said : '' people with british passports , if you fly into israel , it is easy . fly into israel and do whatever you can . if you die , you are up in paradise . how do you fight a jew ? you kill a jew . in the case of hindus , by bombing their businesses . '' during the trial , he denied he had intended to incite people to violence . he also testified that he had held osama bin laden in '' great respect , '' but that bin laden had '' lost the path '' since 11 september . ; sentencing and appeal el-faisal was sentenced on 7 march 2003 to nine years in prison . globalized islam : the search for a new ummah , p . 235 , olivier roy , columbia university press , 2006 , . retrieved 9 january 2010 . he received seven years for soliciting murder , 12 months to run concurrently for using threatening words with intent to stir up racial hatred , and a further two years ( to run consecutively ) for distributing threatening recordings with intent to stir up racial hatred . old bailey judge peter beaumont delivered the sentence . he said el-faisal had '' fanned the flames of hostility '' , and told him : '' as the jury found , you not only preached hate , but the words you uttered in those meetings were recorded to reach a wider audience . you urged those who listened and watched to kill those who did not share your faith . '' the judge suggested that el-faisal serve at least half his sentence , and then be deported . on 17 february 2004 , el-faisal lost an appeal of his conviction . while in prison , he attempted to improve conditions , saying : '' if you 're a cleric , you have to set an example for other muslim prisoners to follow , and you 're not supposed to crack under pressure . '' he ended up serving four years . followers : 9/11 plotter , richard reid , 7/7 and flight 253 bombers . prosecutors said he preached to 2001 shoe bomber richard reid and 9/11 plotter zacarias moussaoui . in addition , two of the four accused 2005 7/7 suicide bombers , muhammad sidique khan , responsible for the edgware road blast that killed 6 people , and jamaican-born briton germaine lindsay , responsible for the blast that killed 26 people at king 's cross tube station , were followers of el-faisal . in an interview with the bbc in june 2008 , he admitted knowing germaine lindsay but insisted he had not radicalized him . in a may 2005 online posting under the name '' farouk1986 , '' umar farouk abdulmutallab , the suspected christmas day 2009 flight 253 bomber , referred to el-faisal , writing : '' i thought once they are arrested , no one hears about them for life and the keys to their prison wards are thrown away . that 's what i heard sheikh faisal of uk say ( he has also been arrested i heard ) . '' schmitt , eric , and lipton , eric , '' focus on internet imams as al qaeda recruiters , '' the new york times , 31 december 2009 . retrieved 4 january 2010 . deportations from the uk , botswana , and kenya : may 2007–present . upon being eligible for parole , el-faisal was released from prison , deported to jamaica , and permanently banned from the uk on 25 may 2007 . he remained on an international watch list . andrew dismore , a labour member of parliament , noted that deportation might not adequately address the risks posed by el-faisal , saying : '' once he 's deported to jamaica , what restrictions will there be to prevent him spreading his message of hate over the internet ? '' he is said to preach extremists views online at paltalk chat rooms and associated with the authentic tawheed website . on his arrival in jamaica , the islamic council of jamaica refused him permission to preach in its mosques . he began to again give lectures , conduct q & a sessions via online chats , and established himself at the pulpit of a mosque in spanish town , just west of kingston , jamaica . the content of his sermons remained the same as that which was submitted at his trial . '' ( backgrounder ) abdullah al-faisal : extremist ideologue with influence in the west '' , the nefa foundation , october 2009 . retrieved 22 january 2010 in june 2008 , he was preaching in south africa . he reportedly traveled by road through various countries in africa including nigeria , angola , malawi , swaziland , mozambique , botswana , and tanzania before entering kenya . along the way , botswana had deported him as a prohibited immigrant . ; kenya el-faisal was allowed entry to kenya on 24 december 2009 , due to a computer error . he was arrested by anti-terror police in mombasa on new year 's eve 2009 . attempts by kenya to deport him were initially unsuccessful because of his involvement in terrorist activities . he was unable to reach jamaica , which had said it would accept him , because south africa , the u.k . , the u.s . , and tanzania all declined to issue him transit visas that would allow him to connect to flights to jamaica . he was deported from kenya on 7 january 2010 to the west african nation of gambia , which agreed to accept el-faisal at his request . pictures : sheikh abdullah al-faisal , the daily nation , published and retrieved 7 january 2009 but as he was being transported through nigeria , nigerian authorities refused to grant him a transit visa and instead sent him back to kenya on 10 january 2010 . kyama , reuben , '' airlines refuse to transport radical cleric '' , the new york times , 10 january 2010 . retrieved 11 january 2010 the gambian government also indicated it would not grant him entry . several hundred people demonstrated on 8 january 2010 , protesting the '' unfair '' treatment of el-faisal . on 15 january , police in nairobi were summoned to block a protest march by several hundred people , some of whom were waving the flag of al shabaab . some angry residents threw stones at the marchers . the following day at least five people died in demonstrations after friday prayers at jami ' a mosque . ; jamaica he was deported from kenya on a private plane ( at a cost in excess of 523,000 ) , and on 22 january 2010 arrived back in jamaica . there , he was questioned by special branch investigators who made it clear that he had not broken any laws in jamaica , but that the police wanted to make sure they knew where and how to find him '' because of the international attention he has received . '' the islamic council of jamaica banned him from preaching at any of its 12 mosques , but he is permitted to worship there . in 2017 he continued releasing public statements in support of the islamic state . in his book ticking time bomb : counter-terrorism lessons from the u.s . government 's failure to prevent the fort hood attack ( 2011 ) , former u.s . senator joe lieberman described australian muslim preacher feiz mohammad , american-yemeni imam anwar al-awlaki , el-faisal , and pakistani-american samir khan as '' virtual spiritual sanctioners '' who use the internet to offer religious justification for terrorism . on 25 august 2017 , he was arrested in jamaica after us officers caught him allegedly trying to recruit jihadis in an undercover sting operation . according to the manhattan district attorney , he offered to help an undercover officer travel to the middle east and join isil and was taken into custody in jamaica to await extradition to the usa . in july 2020 , jamaica 's court of appeal ruled the extradition to the usa could proceed , faisal was extradited on 13 august 2020 . the new york city district attorney assumed prosecution of the case , with five charges of terrorism and his trial has yet to occur . additional reporting , including a video of the extradition . . see also . undercover mosque . references . further reading . al-ashanti , abdulhaq and as-salafi , abu ameenah abdurrahman . ( 2011 ) abdullah el-faisal al-jamayki : a critical study of his statements , errors and extremism in takfeer . london : jamiah media , 2011 . external links . devil 's deception of '' shaikh '' faisal '' royal court of justice – judgment in appeal of crown v . el-faisal , supreme court of judicature , court of appeal '' ; 4 march 2004 '' interview with 'hate ' preacher , '' bbc , 20 june 2008 jamaican cleric uses web to spread jihad message – audio report by npr