1962 in literature

events . january 7 – in an article in the new york times book review , gore vidal calls evelyn waugh '' our time 's first satirist '' . '' the satiric world of evelyn waugh '' . retrieved 18 april 2013 . february 17 – arthur miller marries the photographer inge morath . obituary , retrieved 27 december 2019 . february 28 – f . r . leavis delivers the richmond lecture two cultures ? the significance of c . p . snow at downing college , cambridge , which arouses controversy . published in the spectator ( london ) march 9 . may 11 – the finnish ministry of education forbids the import and distribution of eight children 's books ( including alice 's adventures in wonderland ) , published by kynäbaari , because of the poor quality and clandestine abridgement of the translations . ennakkoratkaisu kko 1967-ii-10 . ( a retrospective abstract of the whole process by the supreme court of finland , february 6 , 1967 . in finnish . ) may – joe orton and kenneth halliwell are prosecuted and jailed for defacing library books in london . june 30 – the works of pierre teilhard de chardin are denounced by the roman catholic church . july – the general law amendment act in south africa denies freedom of speech to opposition activists and writers . september – ted hughes and sylvia plath separate . from the beginning of the following month , plath experiences a burst of creativity , writing in the last few months of her life most of the poems on which her reputation will rest . they include many that will appear in ariel and winter trees . in december she moves to a london flat in a house where w . b . yeats lived as a boy . november – aleksandr solzhenitsyn 's novella one day in the life of ivan denisovich , odin den ' ivana denisovicha ) , the author 's semi-autobiographical account of life in the gulag , is published in novy mir in an unprecedented acknowledgement of the soviet union 's stalinist past . december – l . frank baum 's short story '' the tiger 's eye '' appears for the first time nearly 60 after it was written . december 4 – a tape-recorded conversation on science fiction takes place between kingsley amis , c . s . lewis and brian aldiss in lewis 's rooms at cambridge . unknown dates richard booth opens a second-hand bookshop at the old fire station in the future '' bookshop town '' of hay-on-wye in wales . lynne reid banks goes to live in a kibbutz in israel . george oppen publishes his first collection of poetry since discrete series in 1934 , breaking a 28-year silence . he goes on to win the pulitzer prize in 1969 . a parallel text edition of george bernard shaw 's play androcles and the lion is published posthumously by penguin books in the uk , as the first published work in the phonetic shavian alphabet devised by ronald kingsley read . new books . fiction . h . g . adler – eine reise ( a journey ) nelson algren ( editor ) – nelson algren 's own book of lonesome monsters : 13 masterpieces of black humor ( anthology ) isaac asimov , editor – the hugo winners james baldwin – another country j . g . ballard – the drowned world william barrett – lilies of the field giorgio bassani – the garden of the finzi-continis ( il giardino dei finzi-contini ) thomas berger – reinhart in love jorge luis borges – ficciones ( the garden of forking paths and artifices translated by anthony bonner ) ray bradbury r is for rocket something wicked this way comes john braine – life at the top john brunner secret agent of terra the super barbarians eugene burdick and harvey wheeler – fail-safe anthony burgess a clockwork orange the wanting seed william s . burroughs – the ticket that exploded taylor caldwell – a prologue to love alejo carpentier – el siglo de las luces ( age of enlightenment , translated as explosion in a cathedral ) john dickson carr – the demoniacs rosario castellanos – oficio de tinieblas ( the book of lamentations ) agatha christie – the mirror crack 'd from side to side james clavell – king rat lionel davidson – the rose of tibet len deighton – the ipcress file august derleth lonesome places the trail of cthulhu august derleth , editor – dark mind , dark heart philip k . dick – the man in the high castle tonke dragt – de brief voor de koning ( the letter for the king ) allen drury – a shade of difference richard gordon – doctor in the swim william faulkner – the reivers gabriel fielding – the birthday king ian fleming – the spy who loved me c . s . forester – hornblower and the hotspur carlos fuentes aura the death of artemio cruz aldous huxley – island hammond innes – atlantic fury shirley jackson – we have always lived in the castle james jones – the thin red line william melvin kelley – a different drummer jack kerouac – big sur ken kesey – one flew over the cuckoo 's nest fletcher knebel and charles w . bailey ii – seven days in may james krüss – timm thaler manuel mujica láinez – bomarzo anna langfus – les bagages de sable ( bags of sand ) john le carré – a murder of quality doris lessing – the golden notebook anne morrow lindbergh – dearly beloved h . p . lovecraft – dreams and fancies alistair maclean – the satan bug gabriel garcia marquez – in evil hour ( la mala hora ) eloise mcgraw – the golden goblet marcel moreau – quintes penelope mortimer – the pumpkin eater vladimir nabokov – pale fire m . t . vasudevan nair – asuravithu katherine anne porter – ship of fools zofia posmysz – passenger ( pasażerka ) anthony powell – the kindly ones otfried preußler – der räuber hotzenplotz ( the robber hotzenplotz ) reynolds price – a long and happy life mary renault – the bull from the sea mercè rodoreda – the time of the doves ( la plaça del diamant ) sankar – chowringhee isaac bashevis singer – the slave aleksandr solzhenitsyn – one day in the life of ivan denisovich richard stark ( donald e . westlake ) – the hunter mary stewart – the moon-spinners rex stout gambit homicide trinity noel streatfeild – travelling shoes ( first published as apple bough ) zaim topčić – black snows kurt vonnegut – mother night irving wallace – the prize elie wiesel – day david wilkerson – the cross and the switchblade herman wouk – youngblood hawke . children and young people . joan aiken – the wolves of willoughby chase ingri and edgar parin d'aulaire – book of greek myths tonke dragt – de brief voor de koning ( the letter for the king ) madeleine l'engle – a wrinkle in time penelope farmer – the summer birds ezra jack keats – the snowy day ( picture book ) jean little – mine for keeps eloise jarvis mcgraw – the golden goblet ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat bill peet – smokey otfried preußler – the robber hotzenplotz barbara sleigh – no one must know ivan southall – hills end bernard waber – the house on east 88th street ( first in the lyle the crocodile series ) . drama . edward albee – who 's afraid of virginia woolf ? wilberto cantón – nosotros somos dios ( we are god ) friedrich dürrenmatt – die physiker ( the physicists ) witold gombrowicz – historia spike milligan and john antrobus – the bed-sitting room david rudkin – afore night come peter shaffer – the private ear/the public eye ( double bill ) david turner – semi-detached . poetry . bella akhmadulina – struna ( the string ) george oppen – the materials al purdy – poems for all the annettes william carlos williams – pictures from brueghel and other poems . non-fiction . philippe ariès – l'enfant et la vie familiale sous l'ancien régime ( children and family life under the ancien régime , translated as centuries of childhood , 1962 ) w . h . auden – the dyer 's hand helen gurley brown – sex and the single girl rachel carson – silent spring thomas b . costain – the last plantagenets ( last book in the pageant of england series ) l . sprague de camp – energy and power august derleth – 100 books by august derleth milovan đilas – conversations with stalin milton friedman – capitalism and freedom thomas kuhn – the structure of scientific revolutions dumas malone – jefferson and his time w . somerset maugham – looking back v . s . naipaul – the middle passage ( book ) louis nizer – my life in court russell page – the education of a gardener anthony sampson – anatomy of britain john steinbeck – travels with charley : in search of america percy thrower – percy thrower 's encyclopaedia of gardening barbara tuchman – the guns of august . births . january 17 – sebastian junger , american novelist , journalist and documentary film-maker january 29 – olga tokarczuk , polish fiction writer and poet february 8 – malorie blackman , english writer for young adults and children february 21 chuck palahniuk , american novelist and journalist david foster wallace , american novelist and essayist ( died 2008 ) march 27 – john o'farrell , english writer of fiction and non-fiction , comedy scriptwriter and political campaigner march 30 – yōko ogawa ( 小川 洋子 ) , japanese novelist and essayist march 31 – michal viewegh , czech fiction writer april 2 – mark shulman , american children 's author april 6 – javier cercas , spanish novelist and academic april 13 – chris riddell , south african-born english children 's book illustrator april 22 – b . jeyamohan , tamil novelist may 11 - amir hamed , uruguayan writer , essayist and translator ( died 2017 ) may 12 – yang hongying ( 楊紅櫻 ) , chinese children 's author may 17 – lise lyng falkenberg , danish novelist and biographer may 19 – jonathan dee , american novelist june 12 – jordan peterson , canadian clinical psychologist and writer july 30 – lavinia greenlaw , english poet and novelist august 3 – abdo khal , saudi arabian writer august 10 – suzanne collins , american novelist and television writer august 16 – christian cameron , american-born canadian writer august 27 – sjón ( sigurjón birgir sigurðsson ) , icelandic novelist and poet september 22 - nuzo onoh , british-nigerian writer october 11 – anne enright , irish novelist october 19 – tracy chevalier , american historical novelist october 28 – mark haddon , english novelist and poet november 12 neal shusterman , american children 's author and poet naomi wolf , american writer and activist december 17 – jan bondeson , swedish non-fiction writer . deaths . january 17 – gerrit achterberg , dutch poet ( heart attack , born 1905 ) january 20 – robinson jeffers , american poet ( born 1887 ) january 24 – ahmet hamdi tanpınar , turkish novelist and essayist ( born 1901 ) february 16 – frank prewett , canadian poet ( born 1893 ) february 24 – hu shih ( 胡適 ) , chinese nobel prize-winning philosopher and language reformer ( born 1891 ) march 3 – pierre benoit , french novelist ( born 1886 ) march 20 – c . wright mills , american sociologist ( born 1916 ) april or may – constantin gane , romanian biographer and historical novelist ( born 1885 ) april 24 – emilio prados , spanish poet and editor ( born 1899 ) may 24 – e . m . w . tillyard , english literary scholar ( born 1889 ) may 26 – wilfrid wilson gibson , english poet ( born 1878 ) june 2 – vita sackville-west , english poet and gardener ( born 1892 ) june 27 – paul viiding , estonian poet and critic ( born 1904 ) july 6 – william faulkner , american novelist and nobel laureate ( born 1897 ) july 8 – georges bataille , french writer ( cerebral arteriosclerosis , born 1897 ) july 21 – g . m . trevelyan , english historian ( born 1876 ) july 27 – richard aldington , english poet and novelist ( born 1892 ) august 9 – hermann hesse , german-born swiss novelist , poet and painter ( born 1877 ) september 3 – e . e . cummings , american poet ( born 1894 ) september 21 – ouyang yuqian ( 欧阳予倩 ) , chinese dramatist ( born 1889 ) september 22 – jean-rené huguenin , french novelist and literary critic ( born in 1936 ) september 23 – patrick hamilton , english dramatist ( liver and kidney failure , born 1904 ) november 17 – sandu tudor , romanian poet , journalist and theologian ( stroke and possibly torture , born 1896 ) december 3 – dame mary gilmore , australian poet and journalist ( born 1865 ) december 12 – felix aderca , romanian novelist , critic , poet and journalist ( cancer , born 1891 ) december 18 – garrett mattingly , american historian ( born 1900 ) december – ethel carnie holdsworth , english working class novelist and campaigner ( born 1886 ) . awards . american academy of arts and letters gold medal for fiction : william faulkner carnegie medal for children 's literature : pauline clarke , the twelve and the genii eric gregory award : donald thomas , james simmons , brian johnson , jenny joseph james tait black memorial prize for fiction : ronald hardy , act of destruction james tait black memorial prize for biography : meriol trevor , newman : the pillar and the cloud and newman : light in winter miles franklin award : thea astley , the well dressed explorer and george turner , the cupboard under the stairs newbery medal for children 's literature : elizabeth george speare , the bronze bow newdigate prize : stanley johnson nobel prize for literature : john steinbeck premio nadal : josé maría mendiola , muerte por fusilamiento pulitzer prize for drama : frank loesser , abe burrows , how to succeed in business without really trying pulitzer prize for fiction : edwin o'connor , the edge of sadness pulitzer prize for poetry : alan dugan , poems queen 's gold medal for poetry : christopher fry . references .