Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton

history . prior to world war ii . in 1769 , a spanish expedition led by captain gaspar de portolá explored northward from loreto , baja california sur , seeking to reach monterey bay , something never before done overland by europeans . on july 20 of that year , the expedition arrived in the area now known as camp pendleton , and as it was the holy day of st . margaret , they christened the land in the name of santa margarita . the expedition went on to establish military outposts and franciscan missions at san diego and monterey . during the next 30 years , 21 missions were established , the most productive one being mission san luis rey , just south of the present-day camp pendleton . at that time , san luis rey mission had control over the santa margarita area . after 1821 , following the mexican war of independence from spain , some of the former members of the portolà expedition who had stayed on ( mostly garrison soldiers ) were awarded large land grants ( ranchos ) by mexican governors . the retired soldiers were joined as rancheros by prominent businessmen , officials , and military leaders . they and their children , the californios , became the landed gentry of alta california . in 1841 , two brothers , pio pico and andrés pico , became the first private owners of rancho santa margarita . more land was later added to the grant , giving it the name of rancho santa margarita y las flores , which stayed with the ranch until the marine corps acquired it in 1942 . the design of the ranch 's cattle brand is seen in the base 's logo today . in 1863 , an englishman named john ( don juan ) forster ( pio pico 's brother-in-law ) paid off pico 's gambling debts in return for the deed to the ranch . during his tenure as owner of the ranch , he expanded the ranch house , which was first built in 1827 , and developed the rancho into a thriving cattle industry . forster 's heirs , however , were forced to sell the ranch in 1882 because of a string of bad luck , which included a series of droughts and a fence law that forced forster to construct fencing around the extensive rancho lands . it was purchased by wealthy cattleman james clair flood and managed by irishman richard o'neill , who was eventually rewarded for his faithful service with half ownership . under the guidance of o'neill 's son , jerome , the ranch began to net a profit of nearly half a million dollars annually , and the house was modernized and furnished to its present form . world war ii . in the early 1940s , both the army and the marine corps were looking for land for a large training base . the army lost interest in the project , but in february 1942 it was announced that the of rancho santa margarita y las & nbsp ; flores was about to be transformed into the largest marine corps base in the country . it was named for major general joseph henry pendleton who had long advocated the establishment of a west coast training base . construction began in april but the base was considered a temporary facility so it was built to minimum standards of wood frame construction . after five months of furious building activity , the 9th marine regiment , under then colonel lemuel c . shepherd jr . , marched from camp elliott in san diego to camp pendleton to be the first troops to occupy the new base . on september 25 , 1942 , president franklin d . roosevelt officially dedicated the base . wartime training facilities at the base included landing craft school , amphibious tractor school , beach battalion school , amphibious communications school , and a medical field service school at the naval hospital at santa margarita ranch . this facility was also used as a base for discharging soldiers returning from europe and asia after world war ii ended in 1945 , and for the processing of their discharge documents for same . . post-world war ii . during the korean war , 20 & nbsp ; million helped expand and upgrade existing facilities , including the construction of camp horno . when camp pendleton trained the country 's fighting force for the korean and vietnam wars , approximately 200,000 marines passed through the base on their way to the far east . beginning in 1954 , camp pendleton has hosted a variation of basic training familiarization for teenagers age 14 to 17 . this training , called '' devil pups '' , promotes physical fitness , instills discipline and promotes love of country and the marine corps . '' devil pups , youth program for america '' , devil pups inc , 2008 . the camp 's stables display a plaque and statue commemorating a horse , sergeant reckless , which served with the marine corps in korea . in 1975 camp pendleton was the first military base in the u.s . to provide accommodations for vietnamese evacuees in operation new arrivals ; over 50,000 refugees came to the base in the largest humanitarian airlift in history . vietnamese refugee camp exhibit coming to pendleton ( orange county register , april 7 , 2010 ) pendleton once home for 50,000 war refugees ( orange county register , april 8 , 2010 ) camp pendleton has continued to grow through renovations , replacing its original tent city with more than 2,626 buildings and over 500 & nbsp ; miles of roads . efforts today continue to preserve the heritage of camp pendleton 's founders and the marine corps ' history . the original ranch house has been declared a national historic site as well as the las flores adobe . 21st century . the base 's diverse geography , spanning over , plays host to year-round training for marines in addition to all other branches of the u.s . military . amphibious and sea-to-shore training takes place at several key points along the base 's of coastline . the main base is in the mainside complex , at the southeastern end of the base , and the remote northern interior is an impact area . daytime population is around 100,000 . recruits from nearby marine corps recruit depot , san diego spend four weeks at pendleton 's edson range receiving field training ; after graduating from recruit training , newly-minted marines return to the base 's school of infantry for further training . camp pendleton remains the last major undeveloped portion of the california coastline south of santa barbara , save for a few relatively small state parks . in 2015 the site was proposed for a large civilian airport . since august 2004 , camp pendleton has been one of five locations in the department of defense to operate the standard terminal automation replacement system ( stars ) air radar . the stars radar allows the facility to simulate air traffic for training purposes . camp pendleton 's five-man color guard has participated in many sporting events in san diego and at the 1996 republican national convention , accompanying national anthem performers . among the more famous performers who were accompanied by the camp pendleton color guard have been frankie laine , herb alpert , wilson phillips , jewel , trisha yearwood and the dixie chicks , all of whom had performed the national anthem at either a world series game , super bowl , or , in wilson phillips ' case , a major league baseball all-star game that was played at what is now sdccu stadium . in a 2002 letter to the united states environmental protection agency , marine corps commandant j.l . jones stated to the transportation corridor agencies ( tca ) , who operates the toll roads in orange county , “ frankly , my preference is that the proposed toll road not be constructed on or near camp pendleton . this construction is one more encroachment venture that will hinder our ability to prepare for war . it will also result in additional losses of natural areas that support endangered species , thus placing an even greater burden on camp pendleton to protect the region ’ s biodiversity . ” the foothill-south toll road : fact vs . fiction in 2008 , after the rejection of the proposed toll road extension of sr 241 through san onofre state beach for environmental reasons , the tca filed for permission to build on the northwestern portion of the base . a spokesman for camp pendleton denied the request in 2010 , stating that they could only allow the toll road to run through the san onofre state beach park because their training missions could not be completed without the proposed land . in fact , the california gnatcatcher , an endangered species , resides on the northwestern portion of the base . they did n't pave paradise . the top 10 reasons why the foothill south toll road extension failed the tca funded a study in 2013 to remove the california gnatcatcher from the endangered species list , which would have made it easier to negotiate the construction and planning of the 241 's extension through the san onofre state beach park . this tiny bird scored a win for science toll road must not interfere with base mission . areas of camp pendleton . areas 11-16 are collectively known as '' mainside . '' 11 area : serra mesa housing , paige field house 12 area : combat logistics battalion 1 , combat logistics battalion 13 13 area : 1st marine logistics group ; 9th communications battalion ; 1st dental battalion ; marine corps installations west headquarters ; naval hospital camp pendleton 14 area : combat logistics regiment 1 ; combat logistics regiment 17 ; 7th engineer support battalion 15 area : security & emergency services battalion , marine corps police department 16 area : 1st radio battalion ; 1st intelligence battalion ; 1st eod company ; 1st topographic platoon 17 area : san luis rey housing 18 area : marine memorial golf course 20 area : mcx , commissary , naval hospital camp pendleton , pacific views event center 21 area ( camp del mar ) : i marine expeditionary force headquarters ; 3rd assault amphibian battalion ; combat logistics battalion 5 ; amphibious vehicle test branch ; field medical training battalion , 11th marine expeditionary unit , 13th marine expeditionary unit and 15th marine expeditionary unit 22 area ( camp chappo ) : 1st supply battalion ; 1st medical battalion 23 area ( mcas camp pendleton ) : marine aircraft group 39 24 area ( camp pico ) : marine aircraft group 39 barracks ; base brig 25 area ( camp vado del rio ) : marine wing support squadron 372 26 area : lake o'neill , deluz housing 27 area ( naval hospital ) : mental health clinic , american red cross , naval hospital barracks 31a area ( edson range ) : weapons & field training battalion 31b area : marine corps tactical systems support activity 31c area : assault craft unit 5 32 area : marine air support squadron 3 , 3rd low altitude air defense battalion , marine air control squadron 1 det a 33 area ( camp margarita ) : 1st marine division headquarters battalion , marine corps training information management system training facility , 1st marine division band 41 area ( camp las flores ) : 1st light armored reconnaissance battalion ; 1st reconnaissance battalion ; 4th light armored reconnaissance battalion , air naval gunfire liaison company , 1st marine raider battalion , 4th tank battalion 43 area ( camp las pulgas ) : 1st marine division headquarters , 11th marine regiment ; 1st maintenance battalion 51 area ( camp san onofre ) : san onofre housing 52 area ( school of infantry ) : united states marine corps school of infantry 53 area ( camp horno ) : 1st marine regiment 62 area ( camp san mateo ) : 5th marine regiment ; 1st combat engineer battalion 63 area ( camp christianitos ) : naval expeditionary medical training institute , la christianita historic site 64 area ( camp talega ) : deployment processing command / reserve support unit ( west ) ; vmu-4 . ecology . camp pendleton was built on a wide swath of coastal land that once supported an estuary at the mouth of the santa margarita river and extensive salt marsh habitat . ecology of the santa margarita river outlying land within the base is made up of floodplain , oak woodlands , dune and bluffs , coastal sage scrub , chaparral , and several types of wetlands , including ephemeral wetlands such as vernal pools . integrated natural resources management plan . usmc . wildfire is not uncommon . research in ecology takes place in undeveloped areas of base , which contain examples of rare and endangered california habitat types . the department of defense has issued management plans for various ecosystems on this territory . land within the base still includes breeding habitat for birds such as the western snowy plover and california gnatcatcher . wirtz , w . o , et al . ( 1995 ) . effects of fire on the ecology of the california gnatcatcher , polioptila californica , in california sage scrub communities . proceedings - fire effects . conference . the coastal bluffs have many of the few existing specimens of the eryngium pendletonense , which was named for the base . california native plant society : e . pendletonensis rare mammals on the base include the pacific pocket mouse and stephens 's kangaroo rat . non-native american bison were introduced in the 1970s and are known to roam throughout the base . . see also . camp pendleton north and camp pendleton south – two census-designated places ( cdp ) at the base caruso memorial chapel list of united states marine corps installations marine corps air station camp pendleton wwii/korea lvt museum at camp del mar . references . further reading . . external links . camp pendleton ( official site ) camp pendleton ( globalsecurity.org ) marine corps community services at camp pendleton historical society camp pendleton personnel/vets locator camp pendleton base overview & pcs information ( marinecorpsusa.org ) image of a vietnamese mother and children in a tent at a refugee camp at camp pendleton , california , 1975 . los angeles times photographic archive ( collection 1429 ) . ucla library special collections , charles e . young research library , university of california , los angeles .