South African Communist Party

history . the communist party of south africa was founded in 1921 by the joining together of the international socialist league and others under the leadership of willam h . andrews . it first came to prominence during the rand revolt , a strike by white miners in 1922 . the large mining concerns , facing labour shortages and wage pressures , had announced their intention of engaging blacks in semi-skilled and some higher level jobs at low wage rates , compared to their white counterparts who enjoyed the monopoly of higher and well-paying occupations . the cpsa supported the strike as the struggle between the working class and the capitalist class but it distanced itself from racist slogans associated with the strike . '' public statement on the strike , '' issued by the cpsa on the occasion of the strike in 1922 . south african communists speak ( inkululeko , 1981 ) contains this and other documents from the history of the south african communist party , 1915-1980 . the party said in the statement a white south africa was impossible , and that workers had to organise and unite regardless of their race to fight for a non-racial south africa and better conditions for all workers . in 1928 , the communist international adopted a resolution for the sacp to adopt the '' native republic '' thesis which stipulated that south africa was a country belonging to the natives , that is , the indigenous black population . the resolution was influenced by a delegation from south africa . james la guma , the party chairperson from cape town , had met with the leadership of the communist international . dr . raymond van diemel . '' i have seen the new jerusalem '' : revisiting and re-conceptualising josiah t . gumede and jimmy la guma 's ussr visit of 1927 ( 2001 ) the party thus reoriented itself at its 1924 party congress towards organising black workers and '' africanising '' the party . by 1928 , 1,600 of the party 's 1,750 members were black . contemporary scholars have argued that the party dismissed competing attempts at multiracial revolutionary organisations during this period , especially multiracial union organising by the syndicalism , and used revisionist history to claim that the party and its native republic policy was the only viable route to african liberation . despite this , in 1929 the party adopted a '' strategic line '' which held that , '' the most direct line of advance to socialism runs through the mass struggle for majority rule '' . by 1948 , the communist party had officially abandoned the native republic policy . in 1946 , the cpsa along with the african national congress participated in the general strike that was started by the african mine workers ' strike in 1946 . many party members , such as bram fischer , were arrested . apartheid . aware that the national party , elected to government in 1948 , was about to ban the communist party , the sacp decided by a majority to dissolve itself . a minority felt that the party should organise underground , but the majority apparently argued that this would be unnecessary , believing that support should be given to the african national congress ( anc ) in the drive to majority rule . after its voluntary dissolution , the cpsa was declared illegal in 1950 . in 1953 , a group of former cpsa members launched the south african communist party that remained — as had been the sacp — aligned with the soviet union . the ban on the party was lifted in 1990 when the anc and other anti-apartheid organisations and individuals were also unbanned , and african national congress leader nelson mandela was released from prison . the cpsa/sacp was a particular target of the governing national party . the suppression of communism act was used against all those dedicated to ending apartheid , but was obviously particularly targeted at the communists . following the dissolution and subsequent banning of the cpsa , former party members and , after 1953 , members of the sacp adopted a policy of primarily working within the anc in order to reorient that organisation 's programme from a nationalist policy akin to the cpsa 's former native republic policy towards a non-racial programme which declared that all ethnic groups residing in south africa had equal rights to the country . while black members of the sacp were encouraged to join the anc and seek leadership positions within that organisation , many of its white leading members formed the congress of democrats which in turn allied itself with the african national congress and other '' non-racial '' congresses in the congress alliance on the basis of multi-racialism . the congress alliance committed itself to a democratic , non-racial south africa where the '' people shall govern '' through the freedom charter . the freedom charter was adopted by the anc , the sacp and other partners in the alliance in accordance with its evolution . the charter has since remained the cornerstone of the alliance , as its basic , shared programme to advance a national democratic revolution , both a process of struggle and transformation to achieve a non-racial , non-sexist , democratic and prosperous south africa . the sacp played a role in the development of the freedom charter through its cadres who were openly active in the congress alliance and in the party 's underground organisation . in the same vein the party played an important role in the evolution of the alliance and the development of the liberation movement in south africa . as the national party increased repression in response to increased black pressure and radicalism throughout the 1950s , the anc , previously committed to non-violence , turned towards the question of force . a new generation of leaders , led by nelson mandela and walter sisulu recognised that the nationalists were certain to ban the anc and so make peaceful protest all but impossible . they allied themselves with the communists to form umkhonto we sizwe ( '' spear of the nation '' ) which began a campaign of economic bombing or 'armed propaganda ' . however the leaders of umkhonto were soon arrested and jailed and the liberation movement was left weak and with an exiled leadership . communist joe slovo was chief of staff of umkhonto ; his wife and fellow sacp cadre ruth first was perhaps the leading theoretician of the revolutionary struggle the anc were engaged in . the anc itself , though , remained broadly social democracy in outlook . in exile , communist nations provided the anc with funding and firearms . gradual work by the anc slowly rebuilt the organisation inside south africa , and the anc was able to capitalise on the wave of anger amongst young south africans during and after the soweto uprising of 1976 . eventually external pressures and internal ferment made even many strong supporters of apartheid recognise that change had to come and a long process of negotiations began which resulted , in 1994 , in the defeat of the national party after forty-six years of rule . post-apartheid . with victory a number of communists occupied prominent positions on the anc benches in parliament . most prominently , nelson mandela appointed joe slovo as minister for housing . this period also brought new strains in the anc-sacp alliance when the anc 's programme did not threaten the existence of capitalism in south africa and was heavily reliant on foreign investment and tourism . however , the freedom charter had been considered only as a blueprint for a future democratic and free south africa . joe slovo believed socialism had failed in eastern europe and could not be regarded as a model for the sacp . in his autobiography long walk to freedom , nelson mandela famously remarked : '' the cynical have always suggested that the communists were using us . but who is to say that we were not using them ? '' after mandela 's death in 2013 , the anc confirmed that he had been a member of the sacp and served on its central committee . the passing of cde nelson rolihlahla mandela , anc , 5 december 2013 . through the tripartite alliance and the sitting of many sacp members on the anc 's nec , the sacp has wielded influence from within the anc , often serving as an ideological opposition against the presidency and socio-economic policies of thabo mbeki ( 1999–2008 ) ; this became most apparent with the ouster of mbeki from the presidencies of both the party ( 2007 , by vote ) and the government ( 2008 , by anc party recall ) and his eventual replacement in both offices with jacob zuma , who was widely seen as being more conciliatory to the ideological demands of both the sacp and cosatu . initially , the party did not contest elections under its own name . however , in december 2017 , the party contested a number of local council by-elections in metsimahalo in the free state , failing to win any first-past-the-post ward seats , but gaining three proportional representation seats . in total the sacp received 3,270 votes ( 6,3 % ) . . general secretaries . :1921 : william h . andrews :1925 : jimmy shields :1929 : douglas wolton les switzer , south africa 's alternative press : voices of protest and resistance , 1880-1960 , pp.334 :1929 : albert nzula mia roth , the communist party in south africa : racism , eurocentricity and moscow :1932 : j . b . marks :1933 : moses kotane :1936 : edwin thabo mofutsanyana :1938 : moses kotane :1978 : moses mabhida :1984 : joe slovo :1991 : chris hani :1993 : charles nqakula :1998 : blade nzimande . chairs . :1921 : william h . andrews :1925 : sydney bunting :1931 : douglas wolton :1933 : lazar bach :1935 : issie wolfson :1939 : william h . andrews :1953 : bram fischer . prominent members of the central committee of the sacp . jeremy cronin ruth first bram fischer chris hani ronnie kasrils mac maharaj nelson mandela govan mbeki thabo mbeki raymond mhlaba joe slovo yusuf dadoo . veterans ' category . sydney mufamadi charles nqakula essop pahad david niddrie