Municipalities of Sweden

foundation . the local government act of 1991 specifies several responsibilities for the municipalities , and provides outlines for local government , such as the process for electing the municipal assembly . it also regulates a process ( laglighetsprövning , '' legality trial '' ) through which any citizen can appeal the decisions of a local government to a county court . municipal government in sweden is similar to city commission government and cabinet-style council . a legislative municipal assembly ( kommunfullmäktige ) of between 31 and 101 members ( always an odd number ) is elected from party-list proportional representation at municipal elections , held every four years in conjunction with the national general elections . the assembly in turn appoints a municipal executive committee ( kommunstyrelse ) from its members . the executive committee is headed by its chairman , . swedish municipalities generally employ one or more politicians as municipal commissioners , one of which is usually the chairman of the executive committee . the government of the stockholm municipality is partially based on its own , separate municipal government law . history . the first local government acts were implemented on january 1 , 1863 . there were two acts , one for the cities and one for the countryside . the total number of municipalities was about 2,500 . the rural municipality were based on the country-side socken or administrative parishes ( socknar ) , often formed in the middleage around a church , and the then 89 cities/towns ( städer ) ( which is the same in swedish ) that were based on the old chartered cities . there was also a third type , köping or market town . the status of these was somewhere between the rural municipalities and the cities . there were only eight of them in 1863 , rising to a peak of 96 in 1959 . up until 1930 , when the total number of municipalities reached its peak ( 2,532 entities ) , there were more partitions than amalgamations . in 1943 more than 500 of sweden 's municipalities had fewer than 500 inhabitants , and the 1943 års kommunindelningskommitté ( '' municipal subdivision commission of 1943 '' ) proposed that the number of rural municipalities should be drastically reduced . after years of preparations the first of the two nationwide municipal reforms of the 20th century was implemented in 1952 . the number of rural municipalities was reduced from 2,281 to 816 . the cities ( by then 133 ) were not affected . rather soon it was established that the reform of 1952 was not radical enough . a new commission , 1959 års indelningssakkunniga ( '' subdivision experts of 1959 '' ) concluded that the next municipal reform should create new larger mixed rural/urban municipalities . the riksdag decided in 1962 that the new reform should be implemented on a voluntary basis . the process started in january 1964 , when all municipalities were grouped in 282 kommunblock ( '' municipal blocks '' ) . the co-operation within the blocks should ultimately lead to amalgamations . the target year was 1971 , when all municipalities should be of uniform type and all the remaining formal differences in government and privileges between cities and rural municipalities should be abolished . the amalgamations within the '' blocks '' started in 1965 and more were accomplished in 1967 and 1969 , when the number of municipalities dropped from 1006 to 848 . the riksdag , however , found the amalgamation process too slow , and decided to speed it up by ending the voluntary aspect . in 1971 the unitary municipality ( kommun ) was introduced and the number of entities went down to 464 ; three years later it was 278 . in one case ( svedala municipality ) the process was not accomplished until 1977 . most of the municipalities were soon consolidated , but in some cases the antagonism within the new unities was so strong that it led to '' divorces '' . the total number of municipalities has today risen to 290 . the question of whether a new municipality will be created is at the discretion of the central swedish government . it is recommended that the lower limit of a new municipality shall be 5,000 inhabitants . some municipalities still use the term '' city '' ( swedish : stad ) when referring to themselves , a practice adopted by the largest and most urban municipalities stockholm , gothenburg and malmö . 13 municipalities altogether , some of them including considerable rural areas , have made this choice , which is unofficial and has no effect on the administrative status of the municipality . the practice can , however , create some confusion as the term stad nowadays normally refers to a larger built-up area and not to an administrative entity . geographical boundaries . the municipalities in sweden cover the entire territory of the nation . unlike the united states or canada , there are no unincorporated areas . the municipalities in the north cover large areas of sparsely populated land . kiruna , at 19 446 & nbsp ; km 2 , is sometimes held to be the world 's largest '' city '' by area , although places like la tuque , quebec ( 28 421 & nbsp ; km 2 , official style ville ) , the city of kalgoorlie-boulder in western australia ( 95 & nbsp ; 575.1 & nbsp ; km 2 and the altamira in northern brazil ( 159 533 & nbsp ; km 2 ) are larger . ( by comparison , the total area of the state of lebanon is 10 452 & nbsp ; km 2 . ) at any rate , several northern municipalities are larger than many counties in the more densely populated southern part of the country . sub-division . the municipalities are also divided into a total of 2,512 parishes , or församlingar ( 2000 ) . these have traditionally been a subdivision of the church of sweden , but still have importance as districts for census and elections . many of the parishes still correspond to the original socknar , but there have been a lot of partitions and amalgamations throughout the years . duties . according to law , the municipalities are responsible for : childcare and pre-school primary and secondary schools social service elderly care support to people with disability health and environmental issues emergency services ( not policing , which is the responsibility of the central government ) urban planning sanitation ( waste , sewage ) many municipalities in addition have services like leisure activities for youths and housing services to make them attractive in getting residents . . see also . list of municipalities of sweden list of former municipalities of sweden list of swedish municipalities by wealth local federation , when two or more municipalities form a joint organ to which they transfer some of their responsibilities , like a joint powers authority . references . external links . swedish association of local authorities and regions the local government act in english translation swedish governmentofficial site