Geography of Ireland

natural resources . bogs . ireland has 12,000 & nbsp ; km 2 ( about 4,600 & nbsp ; sq miles ) of bogland , consisting of two distinct types : blanket bogs and raised bogs . blanket bogs are the more widespread of the two types . they are essentially a product of human activity aided by the moist irish climate . blanket bogs formed on sites where neolithic farmers cleared trees for farming . as the land so cleared fell into disuse , the soil began to leach and become more acidic , producing a suitable environment for the growth of calluna and rushes . the debris from these plants accumulated and a layer of peat formed . one of the largest expanses of atlantic blanket bog in ireland is to be found in county mayo . raised bogs are most common in the shannon basin . they formed when depressions left behind after the last ice age filled with water to form lakes . debris from reeds in these lakes formed a layer at the bottom of the water to form fens . dead plant matter , preserved by the water , eventually filled the lake , covering this alkaline base . this led to the growth of plants that could survive in a wet low-nutrient acidic medium , the plants kept growing and dying , increasingly well preserved by the acidic conditions and they piled up raising the surface of the bog above the surrounding land , forming raised bogs . since the 17th century , peat has been cut for fuel for domestic heating and cooking , and it is called turf when so used . the process accelerated as commercial exploitation of bogs grew . in the 1940s , machines for cutting turf were introduced and larger-scale harvesting became possible . in the republic , this became the responsibility of a semi-state company called bord na móna . in addition to domestic uses , commercially extracted turf is used in a number of industries , producing peat briquettes for domestic fuel and milled peat for electricity generation . more recently peat is being combined with biomass for dual-firing electricity generation . in recent years , the destruction of bogs has raised environmental concerns . the issue is particularly acute for raised bogs which were more widely mined as they yield a higher-grade fuel than blanket bogs . plans are now in place in both the republic and northern ireland to conserve most of the remaining raised bogs on the island . . marine resources . ireland has major marine resources , with a significant fishing industry in the atlantic ocean . the exclusive economic zone of the republic of ireland is . oil , natural gas and minerals . offshore exploration for natural gas began in 1970 . shannon , corcoran & haughton ( 2001 ) , the petroleum exploration of ireland 's offshore basins : introduction , geological society , london lyell collection—special publications , p 2 the first major discovery was the kinsale head gas field in 1971 . next were the smaller ballycotton gas field in 1989 , and the corrib gas field in 1996 . exploitation of the corrib project has yet to get off the ground because the corrib gas controversy to refine the gas onshore , rather than at sea , has been met with shell to sea . gas from these fields is pumped ashore and used for both domestic and industrial purposes . the helvick oil field , estimated to contain over of oil , was discovered in 2000 . ireland is the largest european producer of zinc , with three operating zinc-lead mines at navan , galmoy and lisheen . other mineral deposits with actual or potential commercial value include gold , silver , gypsum , talc , calcite , dolomite , roofing slate , limestone aggregate , building stone , sand and gravel . in may 2007 the department of communications , marine and natural resources ( now replaced by the department of communications , energy and natural resources ) reported that there may be volumes over of petroleum and of natural gas in irish waters – worth trillions of euro , if true . the minimum confirmed amount of oil in the irish atlantic waters is , worth over €450 billion . there are also areas of petroleum and natural gas on shore , for example the lough allen basin , with of gas and of oil , valued at €74.4 billion . already some fields are being exploited , such as the spanish point field , with of gas and of oil , valued at €19.6 billion . the corrib basin is also quite large , worth anything up to €87 billion , while the dunquin gas field , initially estimated to have of natural gas and of petroleum but 2012 revised estimates suggest only of natural gas and barrels of oil condensate . in march 2012 the first commercial oil well was drilled 70 & nbsp ; km off the cork coast by providence resources . the barryroe oil well is yielding 3500 barrels per day ; at current oil prices of 120 a barrel barryroe oil well is worth in excess of €2.14bn annually . . see also . extreme points of ireland gravity anomalies of britain and ireland coastal landforms of ireland geographical centre of ireland . references . bibliography . print . mitchell , frank and ryan , michael . reading the irish landscape ( 1998 ) . whittow , j . b . geography and scenery in ireland ( penguin books 1974 ) holland , charles , h and sanders , ian s . the geology of ireland 2nd ed . ( 2009 ) . place-names , diarmuid o murchadha and kevin murray , in the heritage of ireland , ed . n . buttimer et al . , the collins press , cork , 2000 , pp . & nbsp ; 146–155 . a paper landscape : the ordnance survey in nineteenth-century ireland , j.h . andrews , london , 1975 monasticon hibernicum , m . archdall , 1786 etymological aetiology in irish tradition , r . baumgarten , eiru 41 , pp . & nbsp ; 115–122 , 1990 the origin and history of irish names of places , patrick weston joyce , three volumes , dublin , 1869 , 1875 , 1913 . irish place names , d . flanagan and l . flanagan , dublin , 1994 census of ireland : general alphabetical index to the townlands and towns , parishes and paronies of ireland , dublin , 1861 the placenames of westmeath , paul walsh , 1957 the placenames of decies , p . power , cork , 1952 the place-names of county wicklow , liam price , seven volumes , dublin , 1945–67 . online . abbot , patrick . ireland 's peat bogs . retrieved on 23 january 2008 . ireland – the world factbook . central intelligence agency . retrieved on 23 january 2008 . onlineweather.com – climate details for ireland . retrieved 2011-01-12 . external links . osi faq – lists of the longest , highest and other statistics a discussion on rté radio 1 's science show quantum leap about the quality of gps mapping in ireland is available here ( archived link ) . the discussion starts 8mins 17sec into the show . it was aired on 18 jan 2007 ( archived link ) . requires realplayer .