1953 in literature

events . january 5 – waiting for godot , a play by the irish writer samuel beckett , has its first public stage performance , in french as en attendant godot , at the théâtre de babylone in paris . beckett 's novel the unnamable is also published in french this year . january 22 – the crucible , a historical drama by arthur miller written as an allegory of mccarthyism , opens on broadway at the martin beck theatre . february 19 – the state of georgia approves the first literature censorship board in the united states . april 13 – the face of popular literature changes with the publication of ian fleming 's novel casino royale , introducing the british spy character james bond . may – the semi-autobiographical go tell it on the mountain by james baldwin is published . in 2001 , it will be named as one of the 100 best english-language novels of the 20th century by the editors of the american modern library . june 17 – bertolt brecht continues uninterrupted with rehearsals for the first production of erwin strittmatter 's katzgraben : szenen aus dem bauernleben , with the berliner ensemble during the uprising of 1953 in east germany . the incident inspires günter grass 's die plebejer proben den aufstand ( '' the plebeians rehearse the uprising '' , 1966 ) . july 13 – the first stratford shakespeare festival opens in stratford , ontario . septemberfrench journalist jean borel 's article '' zola a-t-il été assassiné ? '' in the september-october edition of libération suggests that émile zola 's death in 1902 was not accidental . september 9 – the supreme court decision in rumely v . united states affirms that indirect lobbying in the united states by distribution of books intended to influence opinion is a public good and not subject to regulation by congress . 345 u.s . 41 ( 1953 ) . october – the literary magazine encounter begins publication in london under the editorship of the american political journalist irving kristol and the english poet stephen spender , with covert sponsorship by the central intelligence agency . october 21 – shortly after being knighted , the english actor sir john gielgud is convicted of '' persistently importuning male persons for an immoral purpose '' ( cottaging ) in chelsea , london . november 5 – dylan thomas , on a poetry reading tour of the united states , is admitted to st . vincent 's hospital , manhattan in a coma , which continues until his death on november 9 . early versions of his play for voices under milk wood have been given in the united states this year , but it is not broadcast in its final form until 1954 . december – the american novelist howard fast is awarded the lenin peace prize . unknown dates ronald harwood joins sir donald wolfit 's theatre company , and becomes his dresser . john dickson carr 's final sir henry merrivale mystery novel , writing as carter dickson , is published . after five years as an english teacher , frederick buechner moves to new york city to become a full-time writer . federico garcía lorca 's obras completas ( complete works ) are published in spain as a prohibition on his work is lifted there . brian o'nolan is obliged to retire from a senior post in the civil service of the republic of ireland on grounds of alcoholism and impoliteness to senior politicians . city lights bookstore is established in san francisco by lawrence ferlinghetti and peter d . martin . new books . fiction . ilse aichinger – der gefesselte ( the bound man , short stories ) sholom aleichem – adventures of mottel the cantor 's son ( translation ) phyllis shand allfrey – the orchid house mulk raj anand – the private life of an indian prince isaac asimov – second foundation nigel balchin – sundry creditors james baldwin – go tell it on the mountain saul bellow – the adventures of augie march ( published in september ) alfred bester – the demolished man john bingham – five roundabouts to heaven zealia bishop – the curse of yig heinrich böll – and never said a word ( und sagte kein einziges wort ) ray bradbury fahrenheit 451 ( published in october ) the golden apples of the sun gwendolyn brooks – maud martha william s . burroughs ( as william lee ) – junkie john dickson carr ( as carter dickson ) – the cavalier 's cup raymond chandler – the long goodbye agatha christie after the funeral a pocket full of rye arthur c . clarke against the fall of night childhood 's end beverly cleary – otis spofford ivy compton-burnett – the present and the past a . j . cronin – beyond this place roald dahl – someone like you ( short stories , including '' nunc dimittis '' ) l . sprague de camp the continent makers and other tales of the viagens sprague de camp 's new anthology of science fiction the tritonian ring and other pusadian tales l . sprague de camp and fletcher pratt – tales from gavagan 's bar lloyd c . douglas – the robe ( originally published in 1942 ) islwyn ffowc elis – cysgod y cryman ( shadow of the sickle ) ian fleming – casino royale c . s . forester – hornblower and the atropos ernest k . gann – the high and the mighty richard gordon – doctor at sea davis grubb – the night of the hunter mark harris – the southpaw l . p . hartley – the go-between james hilton – time and time again shirley jackson – life among the savages david karp – one wolfgang koeppen – das treibhaus ( the hothouse ) camara laye – l'enfant noir ira levin – a kiss before dying audrey erskine lindop – the singer not the song virgilio rodríguez macal – carazamba angus macvicar – the lost planet james a . michener – the bridges at toko-ri roger nimier – nothing to make a fuss about flannery o'connor – '' a good man is hard to find '' ( short story ) zoe b . oldenbourg – the cornerstone alan paton – too late the phalarope mervyn peake – mr pye barbara pym – jane and prudence ellery queen – the scarlet letters marjorie kinnan rawlings – the sojourner mary renault – the charioteer karl ristikivi – hingede öö ( the night of souls ) alain robbe-grillet – les gommes ( the erasers ) juan rulfo – el llano en llamas ( the burning plain , short stories ) j . d . salinger – nine stories samuel shellabarger – lord vanity wilmar h . shiras – children of the atom howard spring – a sunset touch rex stout – the golden spiders theodore sturgeon – more than human jim thompson – savage night leon uris – battle cry boris vian – heartsnatcher a . e . van vogt – the universe maker john wain – hurry on down evelyn waugh – love among the ruins ben ames williams – the unconquered john wyndham – the kraken wakes . children and young people . viola bayley – white holiday bruce carter – speed six ! roger lancelyn green – king arthur and his knights of the round table c . s . lewis – the silver chair ( fourth in the chronicles of narnia series of seven books ) elinor lyon – run away home joan phipson – good luck to the rider joan g . robinson – teddy robinson miriam schlein – when will the world be mine ? ( non-fiction ) geoffrey willans ( illustrated by ronald searle ) – down with skool ! a guide to school life for tiny pupils and their parents ( first in the nigel molesworth series of four books ) . drama . arthur adamov – professor taranne ( le professeur taranne ) robert anderson – tea and sympathy samuel beckett – waiting for godot ( en attendant godot ) ugo betti – the fugitive ( la fuggitiva , premiered posthumously ) agatha christie – witness for the prosecution max frisch – the fire raisers ( biedermann und die brandstifter , originally for radio ) witold gombrowicz – the marriage ( ślub , polish version published ) n.c . hunter – a day by the sea william inge - picnic arthur miller – the crucible erwin strittmatter – katzgraben vernon sylvaine – as long as they 're happy emlyn williams – someone waiting . poetry . the faber book of twentieth century verse edited by john heath-stubbs and david wright . non-fiction . george dangerfield – the era of good feelings ( bancroft prize ) l . sprague de camp – science-fiction handbook gerald durrell – the overloaded ark lawrence durrell – reflections on a marine venus geoffrey elton – the tudor revolution in government heinrich harrer – seven years in tibet clarence c . hulley – alaska 1741-1953 nancy mitford – madame de pompadour roger peyrefitte – les clés de saint pierre ( the keys of st peter ) k . m . panikkar – asia and western dominance sebastian snow – my amazon adventure r . w . southern – the making of the middle ages john summerson – architecture in britain : 1530–1830 ludwig wittgenstein – philosophical investigations . births . january 7 – dionne brand , canadian poet february 5 – giannina braschi , puerto rican-born poet and novelist february 10 – john shirley , american science fiction and horror writer february 18 – peter robinson , english poet march 12 – carl hiaasen , american journalist and novelist march 25 – john tierney , american journalist march 26 – george dyson , american science historian april 3 pieter aspe ( pierre aspelag ) , belgian crime writer sandra boynton , american humorist and children 's writer april 20 – sebastian faulks , english novelist april 23 – roberto bolaño , chilean-born fiction writer ( died 2003 ) may 10 – christopher paul curtis , american children 's writer may 12 – neil astley , english author , poet and academic may 19 – victoria wood , english comedian and writer ( died 2016 ) july 29 – frank mcguinness , irish dramatist , poet and novelist august 1 – howard kurtz , american journalist and author august 10 – mark doty , american poet and memoirist august 17 – korrie layun rampan , indonesian writer ( died 2015 ) september 5 – herman koch , dutch fiction writer and actor september 10 – pat cadigan , american science fiction author september 23 – nicholas witchell , english television journalist november 5 – joyce maynard , american memoirist and fiction writer november 18 – alan moore , english comic-book and graphic-novel scriptwriter december 15 – doug lucie , english dramatist unknown date – gary taylor , american shakespearean scholar . deaths . april 4 – rachilde ( marguerite vallette-eymery ) , french author ( born 1860 ) april 6 – idris davies , welsh poet in welsh and english ( abdominal cancer , born 1905 ) april 9 – c . e . m . joad , english philosopher and broadcaster ( born 1891 ) april 10 – gordon hall gerould , american philologist ( born 1877 ) april 13 – alice milligan , irish poet ( born 1865 ) april 24 – alfred vierkandt , german sociologist ( born 1867 ) june 5 – moelona , welsh-language novelist and translator ( born 1877 ) june 25 – richard jebb , english journalist ( born 1874 ) june 30 – elsa beskow , swedish children 's author and illustrator ( born 1874 ) july 6 – julia de burgos , puerto rican poet in spanish ( pneumonia , born 1914 ) july 16 – hilaire belloc , english humorous poet , essayist and travel writer ( born 1870 ) august 12 – j . h . m . abbott , australian novelist and poet ( born 1874 ) august 30 – maurice nicoll , english psychiatrist and writer on psychology ( born 1884 ) september 19 – eirik vandvik , norwegian classicist and translator ( born 1904 ) november 8 ivan bunin , russian-born writer and nobel laureate ( born 1870 ) john van melle , south african author ( born 1887 ) november 9 – dylan thomas , welsh poet and author ( pneumonia , born 1914 ) november 27 eugene o'neill , american playwright ( born 1888 ) t . f . powys , english novelist ( born 1875 ) november 30 – francis picabia , french poet and painter 1879 ) december 8 – claude scudamore jarvis , english colonial governor , writer , arabist and naturalist ( born 1879 ) probable – tan khoen swie , indonesian publisher . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : edward osmond , a valley grows up christopher award : marie killilea , karen governor general 's award for poetry or drama : douglas lepan , the net and the sword '' cumulative list of winners of the governor general 's literary awards '' , canada council . web , february 10 , 2011 james tait black memorial prize for fiction : margaret kennedy , troy chimneys james tait black memorial prize for biography : carola oman , sir john moore national book award for fiction : ralph ellison , invisible man newbery medal for children 's literature : ann nolan clark , secret of the andes nobel prize for literature : winston churchill premio nadal : luisa forrellad , siempre en capilla pulitzer prize for drama : william inge , picnic pulitzer prize for fiction : ernest hemingway , the old man and the sea pulitzer prize for poetry : archibald macleish , collected poems 1917-1952 queen 's gold medal for poetry : arthur waley . references .