Nickelodeon (movie theater)

history . the name '' nickelodeon '' was first used in 1888 by colonel william austin for his austin 's nickelodeon , a dime museum located in boston , massachusetts . the term was popularized by harry davis and john p . harris , who opened a small storefront theater with the name on smithfield street in pittsburgh , pennsylvania , on june 19 , 1905 . although it was not the first theater to show films , in 1919 a news article stated that it was the first theater in the world '' devoted exclusively to exhibition of moving picture spectacles '' . davis and harris found such great success with their operation that their concept of a five-cent theater showing movies continuously was soon imitated by hundreds of ambitious entrepreneurs , as was the name of the theater itself . statistics at the time show that the number of nickelodeons in the united states doubled between 1907 and 1908 to around 8,000 , and it was estimated that by 1910 as many as 26 million americans visited these theaters weekly . nickelodeons that were in converted storefronts typically seated fewer than 200 – the patrons often sat on hard wooden chairs , with the screen hung on the back wall . a piano ( and maybe a drum set ) would be placed to the side of , or below the screen . larger nickelodeons sometimes had the capacity for well over 1,000 people . louis b . mayer came of age just as the popularity of the nickelodeon was beginning to rise ; he renovated the gem theater in haverhill , massachusetts , converting it into a nickelodeon , which he opened in 1907 as the orpheum theater , announcing that it would be '' the home of refined entertainment devoted to miles brothers moving pictures and illustrated songs '' . other well-known nickelodeon owners were the skouras brothers of st . louis . changes in film distribution and exhibition . nickelodeons radically changed the modes of distribution and the types of films being made . around 1903 , longer multi-shot films became more prevalent , and this shift brought about important innovations in the distribution of films with the establishment of '' film exchanges '' . film exchanges would buy films from manufacturers and then rent them out to exhibitors . with a steady supply of different films , exhibitors finally had the possibility to open venues where films were the central attraction . they did not have to worry about finding new audiences because the same audience would return again and again to watch different films . exhibition practices greatly varied and programs lasted anywhere from ten minutes to an hour and a half or more in length . often , programs ran continuously and patrons would join a program already in progress when they arrived and stay as long as they liked . while some nickelodeons only showed films , others offered shows that combined films with vaudeville acts or illustrated songs . the desirability of longer films , which enabled nickelodeons to grow as they would , was the result of many factors . economic competition between film production companies put pressure on them to create more elaborate , and often longer , films , to differentiate one film from another . longer films were also more attractive , as the price paid by exhibitors depended on a film 's length and the longer a film , the more profit there was to be made . some exhibitors found longer films more desirable since it made programming easier , faster , and possibly cheaper , as they no longer had to organize their own programs by editing together a variety of short films . directors had a great desire to make longer films because it meant greater artistic innovation as they tried to find new ways to engage audiences . the popularity of longer films also meant an increase in production of fictional films as actualities decreased . one of the possible reasons for this shift is that fiction films were often easier to plan and cheaper to film than actualities which were subject to various location-related difficulties . fiction films quickly became standardized , and the popularity of longer films meant they outperformed actualities , which were usually short . audience . early writers on american cinema history assumed that audiences at nickelodeons were primarily working-class people who could not afford a higher ticket price . more recent historians argue the rise of the middle class audiences throughout the nickelodeon era and into the later 1910s belief to expand the business . at the heart of the image of nickelodeons in traditional histories is the belief that movies were a simple amusement for the working class , and that the middle-class stayed away until after world war i . this idea is reflected in lewis jacobs ' 1939 survey , where he writes : '' concentrated largely in poorer shopping districts and slum neighborhoods , nickelodeons were disdained by the well-to-do . but , the workmen and their families who patronized the movies did not mind the crowded , unsanitary , and hazardous accommodations most of the nickelodeons offered . '' in recent studies , robert c . allen debated whether movies attracted a middle-class audience as illustrated by the location of earlier movie theaters in traditional entertainment districts . allen writes ; '' in terms of social class , more nickelodeons were located in or near middle-class neighborhoods than in the lower east side ghetto . '' . manhattan nickelodeons . the nickelodeon boom in manhattan between 1905 and 1907 has often functioned as historical shorthand for the rise of the movies in general . ben singer writes in his analysis of manhattan nickelodeons ; '' for most people . the image of cramped , dingy nickelodeons in manhattan 's lower east side ghetto stands as a symbol for the cinema 's emergence in america . '' nickelodeons consistently appeared in the densest areas of the city in terms of residential concentration and the amount of pedestrian traffic . areas such as union square , herald square , 23rd street , and 125th street were typical locations and the larger movie theaters were set up there . neighborhood nickelodeons , which were the majority of movie theaters in manhattan , were almost always located in neighborhoods with high residential densities and spread over a substantial number of blocks . types of nickelodeon programs . nickelodeons usually showed films about ten to fifteen minutes in length , and in a variety of styles and subjects , such as short narratives , '' scenics '' ( views of the world from moving trains ) , '' actualities '' ( precursors of later documentary films ) , illustrated songs , local or touring song and dance acts , comedy , melodramas , problem plays , pixilation , sporting events and other features which allowed them to compete with vaudeville houses . the titles of a few of the films released in 1907 and distributed to nickelodeons by the miles brothers ( herbert , harry and earl c . ) partially illustrate this diversity . these are taken from a 1907 article published in the saturday evening post : catch the kid ( directed by alf collins ; comedy ) the coroner 's mistake ( comic ghost story ) the fatal hand ( directed by j . h . martin ; drama ) johnny 's run ( directed by frank mottershaw ; comedy ) knight-errant ( directed by j . h . martin ; old historical drama ) a mother 's sin ( directed by j . h . martin ; drama ) the romany 's revenge ( directed by frank mottershaw ; drama ) roof to cellar ( comedy ) sailor 's return ( drama ) village fire brigade ( directed by james williamson ; comedy ) wizard 's world ( comedy ) other 1907 films also distributed to nickelodeons by the miles brothers : anarchist 's mother-in-law boss away , choppers play boat race cheekiest man on earth female wrestlers great lion hunt indian basket weavers international contest for the heavyweight championship : squires vs . burns jim jeffries on his california ranch life and customs in india the naval nursery the petticoat regiment shriners ' conclave at los angeles squires , australian champion , in his training quarters that awful tooth the white slave a woman 's duel . decline . thumb though strong throughout the years from 1905 to 1913 , nickelodeons became victims of their own success as attendance grew rapidly , necessitating larger auditoriums . nickelodeons further declined with the advent of the feature film , and as cities grew and industry consolidation led to larger , more comfortable , better-appointed movie theaters . longer films caused ticket prices to double from five cents to ten cents . the nickelodeon 's history , essortment.com although their heyday was relatively brief , nickelodeons played an important part in creating a specialized spectator , '' the moviegoer '' , who could now integrate going to the movies into their life in a way that was impossible before . miriam hansen has noted that the term '' spectator '' had become common by 1910 . the nickelodeon explosion also increased the demand for new films , as thousands of theaters needed new product . the growth of longer films , which nickelodeons played a large part in stimulating , also led to the development of intertitles , which appeared in 1903 and helped make actions and scenes clearer as storylines became more complicated . a side-effect of this change was that it minimized the role of exhibitors , since they no longer had the editorial control of organizing single-shot films into programs , and now their narrative responsibility ( some exhibitors would talk and help explain narratives as they unfolded ) was also minimized by this '' internal narration '' in the film . see also . nickelodeon , a 1976 film about the early days of the silent movie business . the museum of science and industry in chicago has an exhibit , yesterday 's main street , which includes a working mock-up of a nickelodeon . nickelodeon , an american basic cable and satellite television network airing children 's programs . references .