George Antheil

early life . antheil was born george johann carl antheil , and grew up in a family of german immigrants in trenton , new jersey . his father owned a local shoe store in the city . antheil got his education in the trenton public schools . he was raised bilingually , writing music , prose , and poetry from an early age , and never formally graduated from high school or college , flunking out of trenton central high school in 1918 . livingston , guy . '' george antheil 's childhood in trenton '' , neue zeitschrift für musik , september 2001 . accessed august 1 , 2019 . '' in the winter of 1918 , george flunked out of trenton central high school in the midst of his senior year . '' according to antheil 's autobiography , the bad boy of music ( 1945 ) , he was '' so crazy about music '' , that his mother sent him to the countryside where no pianos were available . undeterred , george simply arranged for a local music store to deliver a piano . guy livingston , '' george antheil 's childhood in trenton '' , english text of article originally published in german as '' der mann hinter dem mythos : george antheils amerikanische kindheit '' , trans . esther dubielzig . neue zeitschrift für musik 162 , no . 5 ( september–october 2001 ) : 18–21 . his somewhat unreliable memoir mythologized his origins as a futurist , and emphasized his upbringing near a noisy machine shop and an ominous prison . george 's younger brother was henry w . antheil jr . ; he became a diplomatic courier and died on june 14 , 1940 , when his plane was shot down over the baltic sea . henry w . antheil , jr . 's , us embassies , state department antheil started studying the piano at the age of six . in 1916 , he traveled regularly to philadelphia to study under constantine von sternberg , a former pupil of franz liszt . from sternberg , he received formal composition training in the european tradition , but his trips to the city also exposed him to conceptual art , including dadaism . in 1919 , he began to work with the more progressive ernest bloch in new york . linda whitesitt , charles amirkhanian , and susan c . cook , '' antheil , george georg ( carl johann ) '' , the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , second edition , edited by stanley sadie and john tyrrell ( london : macmillan publishers ; new york : grove 's dictionaries of music , 2001 ) initially , bloch had been skeptical and had rejected him , describing antheil 's compositions as '' empty '' and '' pretentious '' ; however , the teacher was won over by antheil 's enthusiasm and energy , and helped him financially as he attempted to complete an aborted first symphony . antheil 's trips to new york also permitted him to meet important figures of the modernist movement , including the musicians leo ornstein and paul rosenfeld , the painter john marin , photographer alfred stieglitz , and margaret anderson , editor of the little review . at age 19 , antheil was invited to spend the weekend with anderson and a group of friends ; he stayed six months , and the close-knit group , who included georgette leblanc , former companion of maurice maeterlinck , were to become influential in antheil 's career . anderson described antheil as short with an oddly shaped nose , who played '' a compelling mechanical music '' , and used '' the piano exclusively as an instrument of percussion , making it sound like a xylophone or a cymballo . '' intensely engaged in his music , during this period , antheil worked on songs , a piano concerto , and a work that came to be known as '' the mechanisms '' . around this time , von sternberg introduced antheil to his patron of the next two decades : mary louise curtis bok , later the founder of the curtis institute of music . assured by von sternberg of antheil 's genius and good character , bok gave him a monthly stipend of 150 , and arranged for him to study at the settlement music school . though she came to disapprove of his behavior and his work , for the next 20 years , she continued to respond favorably to his letters . as her financial support enabled antheil to maintain a degree of independence in his work , many observers believed he should have given her more credit in his autobiography for the length and extent of her contribution to his career . antheil continued his piano studies , and the study of modernist compositions , such as those by igor stravinsky and members of the les six group of french composers . in 1921 , he wrote his first in a series of technology-based works , the solo piano second sonata , '' the airplane '' . other works in the group included the sonata sauvage ( 1922–23 ) and subsequently third sonata , '' death of machines '' ( 1923 ) , '' mechanisms '' ( circa 1923 ) , both composed in europe . he also worked on his first symphony , managing to attract leopold stokowski to premiere it . before the performance could take place , antheil left for europe to pursue his career . this may have diminished his chances for success in his native country . . berlin and paris . on may 30 , 1922 , at the age of 21 , antheil sailed for europe to make his name as '' a new ultra-modern pianist composer '' and a '' futurist terrible '' . he had engaged leo ornstein 's manager , and opened his european career with a concert at wigmore hall . the concert featured works by claude debussy and stravinsky , as well as his own compositions . he spent a year in berlin , planning to work with artur schnabel , and gave concerts in budapest , vienna , and at the donaueschingen festival . as he had desired , he achieved notoriety , but often had to pay the concert expenses out of his own pocket . his financial situation was not helped by mrs . bok 's reduction of his stipend by half , though she often responded to requests to fund specific aspects of his concerts . he met boski markus , a hungarian and niece of the austrian playwright arthur schnitzler , who became his companion and whom he married in 1925 . in the fall of 1922 , antheil took advantage of a chance meeting to introduce himself to his idol stravinsky in berlin . they established a warm intimacy and the more established composer encouraged antheil to move to paris . he went as far as arranging a concert to launch antheil 's career in the french capital , but the younger man failed to show up , preferring to travel to poland with markus . the antheils finally arrived in paris in june 1923 , in time to attend the premiere of stravinsky 's ballet les noces , but the relationship with stravinsky did not survive for long . stravinsky snubbed the younger man , having discovered that antheil had boasted that '' stravinsky admired his work '' . the breach devastated antheil , and was not ultimately repaired until 1941 , when stravinsky sent the family tickets to a concert he was giving in hollywood . despite the inauspicious beginning , antheil found paris , at the time , a center of musical and artistic innovation , to be a '' green tender morning '' compared to the '' black night '' of berlin . the couple lived in a one bedroom apartment above sylvia beach 's bookshop shakespeare and company . beach described him '' as fellow with bangs , a squished nose and a big mouth with a grin in it . a regular american high school boy . '' she was very supportive , and introduced antheil to her circle of friends and customers including erik satie , ezra pound , james joyce , virgil thomson , and ernest hemingway . joyce and pound were soon talking of an opera collaboration . pound , in particular , was to become an extravagant supporter and promoter of antheil and his work , comparing him variously to stravinsky and james cagney , and describing him as breaking down music to its '' musical atom '' . pound introduced antheil to jean cocteau , who in turn helped launch antheil into the musical salons of paris ; pound also commissioned antheil to write three violin sonatas for his mistress , olga rudge . in 1924 , pound published antheil and the treatise on harmony , as part of his campaign to boost antheil 's reputation . the book may have done antheil more harm than good , and the composer was to distance himself from it in his memoir . natalie barney helped produce some original works , including the first string quartet in 1925 . suzanne rodriguez wild heart : a life : natalie clifford barney and the decadence of literary paris ( new york : harpercollins , 2002 ) : 249 . antheil was asked to make his paris debut at the opening of the ballets suédois , an important paris social event . he programmed several recent compositions , including the '' airplane sonata '' , the '' sonata sauvage '' , and '' mechanism '' . halfway through his performance , a riot broke out , much to antheil 's delight . according to antheil , '' people were fighting in the aisles , yelling , clapping , hooting ! pandemonium ! . the police entered , and any number of surrealists , society personages , and people of all descriptions were arrested.paris had n't had such a good time since the premiere of stravinsky 's the rite of spring . the riot was filmed and may in fact have been engineered , as the marcel l'herbier movie l'inhumaine needed a riot scene set in a concert hall . in the audience were erik satie , darius milhaud , man ray , pablo picasso , jean cocteau , and francis picabia . antheil was delighted when satie and milhaud praised his music . reactions to his first performances were cool at best . his technique was loud , brazen , and percussive . critics wrote that he hit the piano rather than played it , and indeed he often injured himself by doing so . as part of his '' bad boy '' behavior , antheil provocatively pulled a revolver from his jacket and laid it on the piano . . ballet mécanique and later work in europe . antheil 's best-known composition is ballet mécanique . the '' ballet '' was originally conceived to be accompanied by ballet mecanique by experimental filmmakers fernand léger and dudley murphy ( with cinematography by man ray ) , although the nature of the collaboration is mysterious . the first productions of antheil 's work in 1925 and 1926 did not include the film , which turned out to last around 19 minutes , only half as long as antheil 's score . antheil described his '' first big work '' as '' scored for countless numbers of player pianos . all percussive . like machines . all efficiency . no love . written without sympathy . written cold as an army operates . revolutionary as nothing has been revolutionary . '' antheil 's original conception was scored for 16 specially synchronized player pianos , two grand pianos , electronic bells , xylophones , bass drums , a siren and three airplane propellers , but difficulties with the synchronization resulted in a rewrite for a single pianola and multiple human pianists . the piece consisted of periods of music and interludes of silence set against the roar of the airplane propellers . antheil described as '' by far my most radical work . it is the rhythm of machinery , presented as beautifully as an artist knows how . '' the léger-murphy film and antheil 's score were finally performed together at the museum of modern art , new york , in 1935 . antheil assiduously promoted the work , and even engineered his supposed '' disappearance '' while on a visit to africa , so as to get media attention for a preview concert . the official paris première in june 1926 was sponsored by an american patroness who at the end of the concert was tossed in a blanket by three baronesses and a duke . the work enraged some of the concert-goers , whose objections were drowned out by the cacophonous music , while others vocally supported the work , and the concert ended with a riot in the streets . on april 10 , 1927 , antheil rented new york 's carnegie hall to present an entire concert devoted to his works , including the american debut of ballet mécanique in a scaled-down version . he commissioned elaborate backdrops of skyscrapers and machines , and engaged an african american orchestra to premiere his a jazz symphony . the concert started well , but according to the concert 's promoter and producer , when the wind machine was turned on , '' all hell , in a minor way , broke loose . '' during the gale , audience members clutched their programs and their hats , one '' tied a handkerchief to his cane and waved it wildly in the air in a sign of surrender . '' much to the amusement of the audience , the untested siren failed to sound on cue , despite frantic cranking and reached its climax only after the end of the performance , as the audience was clapping and leaving the hall . american critics were hostile , calling the concert '' a bitter disappointment '' and dismissing the ballet mécanique as '' boring , artless , and naive '' and antheil 's hoped-for riots failed to materialize . the failure of the ballet mécanique affected him deeply , and he never fully recovered his reputation during his lifetime , though his interest in the mechanical was emulated by other prominent composers such as arthur honegger , sergei prokofiev , and erik satie . in 1954 , antheil created a modified version of the work for percussion , four pianos , and a recording of an airplane motor . in the late 1920s , antheil moved to germany , where he worked as assistant musical director of the municipal theatre in berlin , and wrote music for the ballet and theatre . in 1930 , he premiered his first opera transatlantic . this work , which involved american politics , gangsters , a bathtub scene and a childs restaurant was a success at the frankfurt opera . in 1933 , the rise of the nazi party made antheil 's avant garde music unwelcome in germany , and at the height of the depression , he returned to the us and settled in new york city . he re-entered american life with enthusiasm , organizing concerts , working on committees with aaron copland and wallingford riegger , and writing piano , ballet , and film scores , as well as an opera helen retires about helen of troy ; the latter proved a flop . his music had moved away from more extreme aspects of modernism , and more tonal , neoromantic aspects were by now discernible in his work . . hollywood . in 1936 , antheil travelled to hollywood , where he became a sought-after film composer , writing more than 30 scores for such directors as cecil b . demille and nicholas ray , including the scoundrel ( 1935 ) and the plainsman ( 1936 ) . the antheils ' only child , a son named peter , was born in 1937 . antheil found the industry hostile to modern music , complaining that it was a '' closed proposition '' , and describing most background scores as '' unmitigated tripe '' . he became increasingly dependent on more independent producers such as ben hecht to give him work , such as angels over broadway ( 1940 ) and specter of the rose ( 1946 ) . he also wrote the score for the independent film dementia ( 1955 ) and in a lonely place ( 1950 ) starring humphrey bogart . antheil was confident in the ability of his music to save a weak film . '' if i say so myself , i 've saved a couple of sure flops , '' he said . besides writing scores for movies , he continued to compose other music , including for ballet and six symphonies ; his later works were in a more romantic style and influenced by prokofiev and shostakovich , as well as american music including jazz . works such as serenade no . 1 , piano sonata no . 4 , songs of experience and eight fragments from shelley , written in 1948 showed a self-described desire '' to disassociate myself from the passé modern schools of the last half-century , and to create a music for myself and those around me which has no fear of developed melody , real development itself , tonality , or other understandable forms . '' his 1953 opera volpone was premiered in new york in 1953 to mixed reviews , while a visit to spain in the 1950s influenced some of his last works , including the film score for the pride and the passion ( 1957 ) . he also accepted a commission from the cbs television network to compose a theme for their newsreel and documentary film series the twentieth century ( 1957–1966 ) , narrated by walter cronkite . other interests . apart from music , antheil had many other pursuits . in 1930 , as stacey bishop , he wrote a murder mystery called death in the dark with a character based on ezra pound . he was the film music reporter and critic for the magazine modern music from 1936 to 1940 , writing columns considered lively and thoughtful , noting the comings and goings of musicians and composers during an era when the industry was flirting with more '' modern '' scores for films . he was disappointed , however , and wrote that '' hollywood , after a grand splurge with new composers and new ideas , has settled back into its old grind of producing easy and sure-fire scores . '' before world war ii , he participated in the hollywood anti-nazi league , putting on exhibits of artworks banned in nazi germany such as those by käthe kollwitz . he also published a book of war predictions , entitled the shape of the war to come . in 1945 , he published a memoir called bad boy of music , which became a bestseller . antheil wrote a nationally syndicated newspaper relationship advice column , as well as regular columns in magazines such as esquire and coronet . he considered himself an expert on female endocrinology , and wrote a series of articles about how to determine the availability of women based on glandular effects on their appearance , with titles such as '' the glandbook for the questing male '' . another book of '' glandular criminology '' was titled every man his own detective . frequency-hopping spread-spectrum invention . antheil 's interest in this area brought him into contact with the actress hedy lamarr , who sought his advice about how she might enhance her upper torso . he suggested glandular extracts , but their conversation then moved on to torpedoes . during world war ii lamarr , who was fiercely pro-american , realized that a single radio-controlled torpedo could severely damage or sink enemy ships causing irreparable damage . however these radio-controlled torpedoes could easily be detected and jammed , by broadcasting interference at the frequency of the control signal , thereby causing the torpedo to go off course . using knowledge of torpedoes gained from her first husband – munitions manufacturer friedrich mandl – antheil and lamarr developed the idea of using frequency hopping : in this case using a piano roll to randomly change the signal sent between the control center and torpedo at short bursts within a range of 88 frequencies on the spectrum ( 88 black and white keys are on a piano keyboard ) . the specific code for the sequence of frequencies would be held identically by the controlling ship and in the torpedo . this basically encrypted the signal , as it was impossible for the enemy to scan and jam all 88 frequencies because this would have required too much power . antheil would control the frequency-hopping sequence using a player-piano mechanism , which he had earlier used to score his ballet mécanique . on 11 august 1942 , was granted to antheil and '' hedy kiesler markey '' , lamarr 's married name at the time . this early version of frequency hopping , though novel , soon met with opposition from the u.s . navy and was not adopted . the idea was not implemented in the usa until 1962 , when it was used by u.s . military ships during a blockade of cuba after the patent had expired . perhaps owing to this lag in development , the patent was little known until 1997 , when the electronic frontier foundation gave lamarr a belated award for her contributions . in 1998 , an ottawa wireless technology developer , wi-lan inc . , acquired a 49 % claim to the long expired patent from lamarr for an undisclosed amount of stock . ( eliza schmidkunz , inside gnss ) . lamarr and antheil 's frequency-hopping scheme shares some concepts with modern spread-spectrum communication technology , such as bluetooth , cofdm used in wi-fi network connections , and cdma used in some cordless and wireless telephones . blackwell , martin , and vernam 's 1920 patent secrecy communication system ( 1598673 ) seems to lay the communications groundwork for kiesler and antheil 's patent , which employed the techniques in the autonomous control of torpedoes . later life . antheil died of a heart attack in the new york city borough of manhattan . his legacy included three accomplished students , henry brant , benjamin lees , and ruth white . he is buried in riverview cemetery , in trenton , new jersey . charles amirkhanian , director of the other minds festival , is the executor of the antheil estate . . selected works . opera . transatlantic ( 1930 ) helen retires ( 1934 ) volpone ( 1949–1952 ) venus in africa ( 1954 ) the wish ( 1954 ) the brothers ( 1954 ) . orchestral . ballet mécanique ( 1923–25 , revised 1952–53 ) , suite ( ca . 1955 ) decatur at algiers ( 1943 ) dreams , ballet score for george balanchine ( 1935 ) hot-time dance ( 1948 ) a jazz symphony ( 1925 , revised 1955 ) mckonkey 's ferry , a concert overture ( 1948 ) piano concerto no . 1 ( 1922 ; had its world premiere as late as 2001 , with the pianist michael rische ) piano concerto no . 2 ( 1926 ) serenade for strings no . 1 ( 1948 ) serenade no . 2 ( 1949 ) symphony no . 1 '' zingareska '' ( 1920–22 , rev . 1923 ) symphony in f ( 1925–26 ) symphony no . 2 ( 1931–38 , rev . 1943 ) symphony no . 3 '' american '' ( 1936–39 , rev . 1946 ) symphony no . 4 '' 1942 '' ( 1942 ) tragic symphony ( 1945–46 ) symphony no . 5 '' joyous '' ( 1947–48 ) symphony no . 6 '' after delacroix '' ( 1947–48 ) tom sawyer – california overture ( 1949 ) violin concerto ( 1946 ) . chamber and instrumental . concert for chamber orchestra ( wind octet ) ( 1932 ) concertino for flute , bassoon , and piano ( 1930 ) lithuanian night for string quartet ( 1922 ) six little pieces for string quartet ( 1931 ) sonata for flute and piano ( 1951 ) sonata for trumpet and piano ( 1951 ) sonata for violin solo ( for olga rudge ) unfinished ( 1927 ) sonata no . 1 for violin and piano ( for olga rudge ) ( 1923 ) sonata no . 2 for violin and piano ( for ezra pound ) ( 1923 ) sonata no . 3 for violin and piano ( 1924 ) sonata no . 4 for violin and piano , a.k.a . '' new second violin sonata '' ( 1947–48 ) sonatina for violin and piano ( 1945 ) string quartet no . 1 ( 1924 ) string quartet no . 2 ( 1927 ) string quartet no . 3 ( 1948 ) suite for piano four-hands ( 1922 rev . 1939 ) symphony for 5 instruments ( 1922–23 , second version 1923 ) . solo piano music . sonate sauvage ( first piano sonata ) ( 1923 ) airplane sonata ( second piano sonata ) ( 1922 ) third piano sonata '' death of machines '' ( 1923 ) jazz sonata ( fourth piano sonata ) ( 1923 ) fifth piano sonata für lieber juri ( 1923 ) woman sonata ( 1923 ) piano sonatina for radio ( 1929 ) ( new ) piano sonata no . 3 ( 1947 ) ( new ) piano sonata no . 4 ( 1948 ) ( new ) piano sonata no . 5 ( 1950 ) la femme 100 têtes ( after max ernst ) for solo piano ( 1933 ) valentine waltzes for solo piano ( 1949 ) . film . of his many film scores , dementia ( 1955 ) , contains no dialogue , only music . the young do n't cry ( 1957 ) the pride and the passion ( 1957 ) air power ( 1956 ) tv series ( unknown episodes ) dementia ( 1955 ) not as a stranger ( 1955 ) hunters of the deep ( 1954 ) the juggler ( 1953 ) target hong kong ( 1953 ) actor 's and sin ( 1952 ) ( uncredited ) the sniper ( 1952 ) sirocco ( 1951 ) in a lonely place ( 1950 ) house by the river ( 1950 ) tokyo joe ( 1949 ) the fighting kentuckian ( 1949 ) we were strangers ( 1949 ) knock on any door ( 1949 ) along the oregon trail ( 1947 ) repeat performance ( 1947 ) that brennan girl ( 1946 ) ( score music ) plainsman and the lady ( 1946 ) specter of the rose ( 1946 ) angels over broadway ( 1940 ) adventure in diamonds ( 1940 ) the buccaneer ( 1938 ) make way for tomorrow ( 1937 ) the plainsman ( 1936 ) once in a blue moon ( 1935 ) the scoundrel ( 1935 ) . written works . death in the dark , a crime novel edited and published by t . s . eliot ( 1930 ) every man his own detective : a study of glandular criminology , new york city : stackpole sons ( 1937 ) '' the shape of the war to come '' , a pamphlet ( 1940 ) bad boy of music , garden city , new york : doubleday ( 1945 ; various reprints and languages ) . references . notes sources . further reading . . external links . the original american in paris – text of a programme written for bbcr3 by michael maxwell steer in 1988 website devoted to antheil by paul lehrman article in wired magazine about george antheil and a modern-day performance of ballet mécanique antheil and futurpiano at ltm antheil 's life and works curated by les amis de george antheil ( paris ) guy livingston talks about the ballet mécanique broadcast by concertzender radio , utrecht marcel quillévéré broadcast in five episodes life , works , and context of george antheil on radio suisse romande ( 2015 ) hearing antheil 's 'lost sonatas ' again npr interview with pianist and musicologist guy livingston . 23 may 2014 bad boy of music : the rise and fall of george antheil abc broadcast . 24 february 2015 , george antheil interview by truman fisher ( kppc-fm radio ; 1958 ) . listening . art of the states : george antheil second sonata for violin ( 1923 ) and dreams ( 1934–35 ) piano music fourth sonata , sonate sauvage , woman sonata performed by guy livingston american mavericks : program 3 – oh to be popular three works performed by the san francisco symphony new music jukebox : george antheil three works performed by the american composers orchestra from other minds antheil plays antheil del sol quartet : george antheil the complete works for string quartet by del sol quartet , new jersey , , ,