Shahrbaraz

name . is actually a title , literally meaning '' the boar of the empire '' , attesting to his dexterity in military command and his warlike personality , as the boar was the animal associated with the zoroastrian izad vahram , the epitome of victory . shahrwarāz ( inscriptional pahlavi : štlwlʾc ) is a middle persian word , with shahr meaning '' country '' and warāz meaning '' boar '' . this word is rendered as shahrbarāz in new persian and as sarbaros ( greek : ; latin : in byzantine sources . ferdowsi has used the shortened form gurāz , literally '' boar '' ) , which is from middle persian warāz . according to al-tabari , his real name was farrukhān . the name is corrupted as khoream in armenian sources and farāyīn in ferdowsi 's shahnama . ferdowsi has split shahrbaraz 's character into two : farayin who was the usurper , and shahran-guraz who supported bahram chobin 's rebellion . armenian sources also use the title razmyozan ( also spelled razmiozan , erazmiozan , razmayuzan ) . the title is also mentioned as rasmiozdan , rasmiozan ( georgian ) , rsmysa , reading uncertain ) , rōmēzān , rūmīzān , rumbūzān ( al-tabari , tarikh ) . . early life . shahrbaraz belonged to the house of mihran , one of the seven parthian clans ; he was the son of a certain ardashir . during shahrbaraz 's later life , he joined the sasanian army , where he rose to high offices , and was appointed as spahbed of nēmrōz . he was married to the sister of the sasanian king khosrow ii , mirhran , with whom shahrbaraz had one boy named shapur-i shahrvaraz . shahrbaraz also had another son named niketas the persian , who may be from the same woman or from another . war against the byzantine empire . shahrbaraz is first mentioned when khosrow ii started the last and most devastating of the byzantine–sasanian wars , which was going to last 26 years . khosrow ii , along with shahrbaraz and his other best generals , conquered dara and edessa in 604 , and in the north , the byzantines were driven back to the old , pre-591 frontier before khosrow ii gave them most of sasanian armenia , parts of mesopotamia and western half of the kingdom of iberia . after reconquering lost territory , khosrow ii withdrew from the battlefield and handed military operations to his best generals . shahrbaraz was one of them . in 610 , heraclius , an armenian of probable arsacid descent , , '' sasanian dynasty '' revolted against the byzantine emperor phocas and killed him , crowning himself as emperor of the byzantine empire . olster 1993 , p . 133 . after becoming byzantine emperor , he prepared a major counter-attack against the sasanians outside antioch in 613 , but was decisively defeated by shahrbaraz , who inflicted heavy losses on the byzantine army and then captured the city , giving the sasanians naval access to the mediterranean sea . after the byzantine defeat outside antioch , heraclius and his brother theodore , along with general nicetas , combined their armies in syria , but were defeated by shahrbaraz and his forces who besieged damascus and captured it along with a large number of byzantine troops as prisoners . furthermore , shahrbaraz also defeated a byzantine army near daraa , which is mentioned in the quran . one of most important events during his career was when he led the sasanian army towards palaestina , and after a bloody siege captured jerusalem , a city sacred to the christians . after his conquest of jerusalem the true cross was carried away in triumph . in 618 , shahrbaraz was ordered by khosrow ii to invade egypt , and by 619 , alexandria , the capital of byzantine egypt , was in sasanian hands . after the fall of alexandria , shahrbaraz and his forces extended sasanian rule southwards along the nile . by 621 , the province was securely in sasanian hands , and a certain sahralanyozan was appointed as its governor . in 622 , heraclius counter-attacked against the sasanian empire in anatolia . shahrbaraz was sent over there to deal with him , but was eventually defeated by him . after heraclius ' victory , he marched towards caucasian albania and wintered there . shahrbaraz , along with shahin and shahraplakan were later sent by the orders of khosrow ii to trap the forces of heraclius . shahin managed to rout the byzantine army . due to jealousy between the sasanian commanders , shahrbaraz hurried with his army to take part in the glory of the victory . heraclius met them at tigranakert and routed the forces of shahraplakan and shahin one after the other . after this victory , heraclius crossed the araxes and camped in the plains on the other side . shahin , with the remnants of both his and shahraplakan 's armies joined shahrbaraz in the pursuit of heraclius , but marshes slowed them down . at aliovit , shahrbaraz split his forces , sending some 6,000 troops to ambush heraclius while the remainder of the troops stayed at aliovit . heraclius launched a surprise night attack on the sasanian main camp in february 625 , destroying it . shahrbaraz only barely escaped , naked and alone , having lost his harem , baggage , and men . heraclius spent the rest of winter to the north of lake van . in 625 , his forces attempted to push back towards the euphrates . in a mere seven days , he bypassed mount ararat and the 200 miles along the murat river to capture amida and martyropolis , important fortresses on the upper tigris . heraclius then carried on towards the euphrates , pursued by shahrbaraz . according to arab sources , he was stopped at the satidama or batman su river and defeated ; byzantine sources , however , do not mention this incident . another minor skirmish between heraclius and shahrbaraz took place at the sarus river near adana . shahrbaraz stationed his forces across the river from the byzantines . a bridge spanned the river , and the byzantines immediately charged across . shahrbaraz feigned retreat to lead the byzantines into an ambush , and the vanguard of heraclius ' army was destroyed within minutes . the sasanians , however , had neglected to cover the bridge , and heraclius charged across with the rearguard , unafraid of the arrows that the sasanians fired , turning the tide of battle against the sasanians . shahrbaraz expressed his admiration at heraclius to a renegade greek : '' see your emperor ! he fears these arrows and spears no more than would an anvil ! '' the battle of sarus was a successful retreat for the byzantines that panegyrists magnified . in the aftermath of the battle , the byzantine army wintered at trabzon . . siege of constantinople . shahrbaraz , along with a smaller army , later managed to slip through heraclius ' flanks and bee-lined for chalcedon , the sasanian base across the bosphorus from constantinople . khosrow ii coordinated with the khagan of the avars so as to launch a coordinated attack on constantinople from both european and asiatic sides . the army of shahrbaraz stationed themselves at chalcedon , while the avars placed themselves on the european side of constantinople and destroyed the valens aqueduct . because of the byzantine navy 's control of the bosphorus strait , however , the sasanians could not send troops to the european side to aid their ally . this reduced the effectiveness of the siege , because the sasanians were experts in siege warfare . furthermore , the sasanians and avars had difficulties communicating across the guarded bosphorus—though undoubtedly , there was some communication between the two forces . on 7 august , a fleet of sasanian rafts ferrying troops across the bosphorus was surrounded and destroyed by byzantine ships . the slavs under the avars attempted to attack the sea walls from across the golden horn , while the main avar host attacked the land walls . patrician bonus ' galleys rammed and destroyed the slavic boats ; the avar land assault from 6 to 7 august also failed . with the news that theodore had decisively triumphed over shahin ( supposedly leading shahin to die from depression ) , the avars retreated to the balkan hinterland within two days , never to threaten constantinople seriously again . even though the army of shahrbaraz was still encamped at chalcedon , the threat to constantinople was over . disappointed by shahrbaraz 's failure , khosrow ii sent a messenger bearing a letter to kardarigan , who was the second-in-command of the sasanian army . the letter said that kardarigan should kill shahrbaraz and take his army back to ctesiphon , but the bearers of the letter were intercepted in galatia by byzantine soldiers , who gave the letter to the future emperor constantine iii who in turn gave it to heraclius . after reading the letter , he offered to show the letter to shahrbaraz in a meeting at constantinople . shahrbaraz accepted his proposal and met heraclius at constantinople , where he read the letter and switched over to heraclius ' side . shahrbaraz then changed the contents of the letter , making it state that khosrow ii wanted 400 officers killed , ensuring that kardarigan and the rest of the army remained loyal to him . shahrbaraz then moved his army to northern syria , where he could easily decide to support either khosrow or heraclius at a moment 's notice . still , with the neutralization of khosrow 's most skilled general , heraclius deprived his enemy of some of his best and most experienced troops , while securing his flanks prior to his invasion of iran . . overthrow of khosrow ii . in 627 , khosrow sent shahrbaraz a letter , which said that he should send his army to ctesiphon . shahrbaraz , however , disobeyed , and moved to asuristan , where he set up a camp in ardashir khurrah . khosrow then sent farrukhzad to negotiate with him . however , farrukhzad made a secret conspiracy against khosrow and joined shahrbaraz . one year later , the feudal families of the sasanian empire , who were tired of war against the byzantines and khosrow 's oppressive policies , freed khosrow 's son sheroe , who had been imprisoned by his own father . the feudal families included : shahrbaraz himself , who represented the mihran family ; the house of ispahbudhan represented by spahbed farrukh hormizd and his two sons rostam farrokhzad and farrukhzad ; the armenian faction represented by varaztirots ii bagratuni ; and finally the kanarang kanadbak . in february , sheroe , along with aspad gushnasp , captured ctesiphon and imprisoned khosrow ii . sheroe then proclaimed himself as king of the sasanian empire on 25 february , assuming the regnal name of kavadh ii . with the aid of piruz khosrow , he executed all his brothers and half-brothers , including khosrow ii 's favorite son mardanshah . three days later , he ordered mihr hormozd to execute his father . with the agreement of the nobles of the sasanian empire , kavad ii then made peace with the byzantine emperor heraclius ; under the terms of this peace , the byzantines regained all their lost territories , their captured soldiers , a war indemnity , along with the true cross and other relics that were lost in jerusalem in 614 . following the loss of territory required for the peace treaty , the embittered aristocracy started forming independent states within the sasanian empire . this divided the resources of the country . furthermore , dams and canals became derelict , and a devastating plague erupted in the western provinces of iran , killing half of the population along with kavad ii , who was succeeded by ardashir iii . . usurping the throne . after the death of kavad ii , heraclius sent shahrbaraz a letter saying : on 27 april 630 shahrbaraz besieged ctesiphon with a force of 6,000 men . he was , however , unable to capture the city , and then made an alliance with piruz khosrow , the leader of the parsig ( persian ) faction , and the previous minister of the empire during the reign of ardashir 's father , kavad ii . he also made an alliance with namdar gushnasp , who had succeeded him as the spahbed of nēmrōz in 626 . shahrbaraz , with the aid of these two powerful figures , captured ctesiphon , and executed ardashir iii along with many sasanian nobles , including ardashir 's minister mah-adhur gushnasp . shahrbaraz then became the new shah ( king ) of the sasanian empire , and killed kardarigan , who opposed shahrbaraz after his usurpation of the sasanian throne . heraclius also acknowledged shahrbaraz 's christian son niketas , as his heir . an iranian christian as the heir of the sasanian empire opened the chances of the christianization of iran . after some time , shahrbaraz had shamta , the son of the former financial minister yazdin , crucified on a church in margha . the reason of this execution was reportedly because the latter had insulted shahrbaraz during the reign of khosrow ii . forty days later , 9 june 630 , during a ceremony , shahrbaraz was killed by a javelin thrown by farrukh hormizd , who then helped boran , the daughter of khosrow ii , to ascend the throne . . legacy . shahrbaraz had played an important role in the byzantine–sasanian war of 602–628 , and the events that occurred after the war ; his mutiny against khosrow ii caused the sasanian empire to fall into a civil war . after the death of shahrbaraz , his son shapur-i shahrvaraz deposed boran and became king of the sasanian empire . his reign , however , did not last long , and he was shortly deposed by the sasanian nobles . during the same period , niketas entered in the service of the byzantines , and would later appear as one of the byzantine generals at the battle of yarmouk during the arab–byzantine wars . a detailed saga of heroism and romance evolved around shahrbaraz later . in the islamic period , it was transferred into the legend of umar ibn al-numan and his sons which became included in the one thousand and one nights , itself influencing the late byzantine epic of digenes akritas .