History of Martinique

100–1450 . the island was originally inhabited by arawak and carib peoples . circa 130 ad , the first arawaks are believed to have arrived from south america . in 295 a.d , an eruption of mount pelée resulted in the decimation of the island 's population . around 400 a.d , the arawaks returned and repopulated the island . around 600 a.d , the caribs arrived . they exterminated the arawaks and proceeded to settle on the island over the next few centuries . 1450–1599 . christopher columbus charted the island in 1493 , making the region known to european interests , but it was not until june 15 , 1502 , on his fourth voyage , that he actually landed , leaving several pigs and goats on the island . however , the spaniards ignored the island as other parts of the new world were of greater interest to them . 17th century . in 1635 , cardinal richelieu created the compagnie des îles de l'amérique ( company of the isles of america , the successor to the compagnie de saint-christophe ) . the company contracted with messrs l'olive and duplessis to occupy and govern on its behalf the caribbean islands belonging to the french crown . this led on september 1 , 1635 , to pierre belain d'esnambuc landing on martinique with eighty to one hundred french settlers from saint cristophe . they met some resistance that they were able to dispatch quickly because of their far superior weaponry and armor . they settled in the northwestern region that later became known as st . pierre at the mouth of the roxelane river , where they built fort saint pierre . the first governor was jean dupont . the following year , d'esnambuc fell ill and passed the command of the settlement to his nephew , jacques dyel du parquet . at this time the colony 's population numbered some 700 men . the settlers cleared the land around st . pierre to grow crops . they grew manioc and potatoes to live on and rocou , indigo , tobacco , and later cacao and cotton , for export . french and foreign merchants frequently came to the island to buy these exotic products , transforming martinique into a modestly prosperous colony . the colonists also established another fort , fort saint louis in 1638 . this fort , like fort saint pierre , was little more than a wooden stockade . in 1640 , the fort was improved to include a ditch , high stone walls and 26 cannons . over the next quarter of a century the french established full control of the island . they systematically killed the fiercely resisting caribs as they expanded , forcing the survivors back to the caravelle peninsula in the cabesterre ( the leeward side of the island ) . thumb although labor-intensive , sugar was a lucrative product to trade , and cultivation on martinique soon focused only on growing and trading sugar . in 1685 , king louis xiv proclaimed '' le code noir '' , which aimed to provide a legal framework for the removal of africans from their homeland and their transport to work as slaves on the french sugar plantations . ever since , a strong theme of martiniquan culture has been creolization or interaction between the french colonial settlers , known locally as békés , and the africans they imported . for over two hundred years , slavery , and slave revolts , would be a major influence on the economy and politics of the island . the french colonial settlers were peasants attracted by propaganda promising fortune and a life under the sun . the '' volunteers '' were indentured servants who had to work for their master for three years , after which they were promised their own land . however , the tiring work and hot climate resulted in few of the workers surviving their three years , with the result that constant immigration was necessary for maintaining the workforce . still , under the directorship of du parquet , martinique 's economy developed as it exported products to france and the neighboring english and dutch colonies . in 1645 , the sovereign council was established with several powers , among them the right to grant titles of nobility to families in the islands . in 1648 , the company of the isles of america started to wind up its affairs and in 1650 du parquet bought the island . in 1650 father jacques du tetre built a still for converting the waste from the sugarcane mills into molasses , which became a major export industry . in 1654 , du parquet allowed 250 dutch jews , who were fleeing brazil following the portuguese taking back their territory in that colony , to settle martinique , where they engaged in the sugar trade . this was by far the most sought after product in europe and the crop soon became martinique 's biggest export . after the death of du parquet , his widow ruled on behalf of his children until 1658 , when louis xiv resumed sovereignty over the island , paying an indemnity of £120,000 to the du parquet children . at this time , martinique 's population numbered some 5,000 settlers and a few surviving carib indians . the caribs were eventually exterminated or exiled in 1660 . in 1658 , dominican order built an estate at fonds saint-jacques . from 1693 to 1705 , this was the home of père labat , the french dominican priest who improved the distillery . a colorful character , he was also an explorer , architect , engineer , and historian , and fought as a soldier against the english . in 1664 , louis transferred the island , this time to the newly established french west india company . the next year , during the second anglo-dutch war , a dutch fleet under admiral michiel de ruyter retired to martinique to refit after the fleet 's indecisive encounter with an english force off barbados . two years later a hurricane devastated martinique and guadelope , killing some 2,000 people . this was the first of several natural disasters that would devastate the population of martinique over the next few centuries . in 1666 and 1667 the english unsuccessfully attacked . the treaty of breda ( 1667 ) ended the second anglo-dutch war and hence the hostilities . in 1672 , louis xiv ordered the construction of a citadel , fort saint louis , at fort royal bay to defend martinique . the next year , the compagnie des indes occidentales decided to establish a town at fort royal , even though the location was a malarial swamp . the compagnie des indes occidentales failed in 1674 , and the colony reverted to the direct administration of the french crown . martinique 's administration was in the hands of council . the king appointed two members : the lieutenant-general and the administrator . they chose the other council members ( the governor , the attorney general and the ordinary judge ) . this organization lasted until 1685 . during the third anglo-dutch war , de ruyter returned to martinique in 1674 , this time with the intent to capture fort royal . calm winds and french booms prevented him from sailing his fleet of 30 warships , nine supply ships , and 15 transports into the harbor . the french repulsed his attempt to land his 3,400 troops , causing him to lose 143 men , at a cost of 15 french lives . in 1675 the first governor general of the west indies , jean-charles de baas-castelmore , arrived in martinique and served until 1677 . his successor was charles de la roche-courbon , comte de blénac , who served for the first time from 1677 to 1683 . he drew up a plan for the city of fort royal and improving the fortifications of fort saint louis . de blénac was responsible for the 10-year effort that resulted in the building of a 487-meter wall around the peninsula on which the fort stood , the wall being four meters high and two meters thick , and cutting a ditch that separated from the town . de blénac served as governor general again from june 1684 to february 1691 , and again from 24 nov 1691 until his death in 1696 . the growth of the town resulted in the progressive clearing and draining of the mangrove swamp . by 1681 , fort-royal was the administrative , military and political capital of martinique . still , saint pierre , with its better harbor , remained the commercial capital . in 1685 , in france king louis xiv promulgated the '' code noir '' ( literally , black code ) , a collection of law texts whose 60 articles would regulate slavery in the colonies , and which was partially inspired by jean-baptiste colbert . the code forbade some cruel acts , but institutionalized others and slavery itself , relegating the status of slaves to that of chattel . it also ordered the expulsion of the jews from all the french islands . these jews then moved to the dutch island of curaçao , where they prospered . in 1692 , charles de la roche-courbon , count of blénac , the governor and lieutenant general of the french colonies in america , named fort royal as the capital city of martinique . in 1693 the english again unsuccessfully attacked martinique . 1700–1788 . in 1720 , a french naval officer , gabriel de clieu , procured a coffee plant seedling from the jardin des plantes in paris and transported it to martinique . he transplanted it on the slopes of mount pelée and was able to harvest his first crop in 1726 , or shortly thereafter . see gabriel de clieu for more detail by 1736 , the number of slaves in martinique had risen to 60,000 people . in 1750 , saint pierre had about 15,000 inhabitants , and fort royal only about 4,000 . during the seven years ' war the british 76th regiment of foot under william rufane captured martinique in early 1762 . following britain 's victory in the war there was a strong possibility the island would be annexed by them . however , the sugar trade made the island so valuable to the royal french government that at the treaty of paris ( 1763 ) , which ended the seven years ' war , they gave up all of canada in order to regain martinique as well as the neighboring island of guadeloupe . during the british occupation , marie josèph rose tascher de la pagerie , the future empress joséphine was born to a noble family living on les trois-îlets across the bay from fort royal . also , 1762 saw a yellow fever epidemic and in 1763 the french established separate governments for martinique and guadeloupe . august 2 , 1766 saw the birth of saint-pierre de louis delgrès , a mixed-race free black who would serve in the french army and fight the british in 1794 , before becoming the leader of the unsuccessful resistance in guadeloupe against general richepance , whom napoleon had sent to restore slavery to that colony . on august 13 ( in either 1766 or 1767 ) a hurricane – apparently accompanied by an earthquake – struck the island ; 600–1600 were killed . 1995 : rappaport , edward n . and fernandez-partagas , jose ; '' the deadliest atlantic tropical cyclones , 1492–1994 '' , noaa technical memorandum nws nhc-47 , national hurricane center , 41 pp . monsieur de la pagerie , the father of the future empress , was almost ruined . at the time , there were some 450 sugar mills in martinique , and molasses was a major export . four years later an earthquake shook the island . by 1774 , when a decree ended indentured servitude for whites , there were some 18 to 19 million coffee trees on the island . in 1779 , the future joséphine de beauharnais , first empress of the french , sailed for france to meet her husband for the first time . in the following year the great hurricane of 1780 , one of the most damaging hurricanes in western history , struck the island , killing 9000 . over 100 french and dutch merchantmen were lost . in 1782 , admiral de grasse sailed from martinique to rendezvous with spanish forces in order to attack jamaica . the subsequent battle of the saintes resulted in a massive defeat for the french at the hands of the royal navy . french revolution . the french revolution ( 1789 ) also affected trinidad when martiniquan planters and their slaves emigrated there and started to grow sugar and cocoa . besson , gerard . 2000 . the 'land of beginnings ' . a historical digest , newsday , sunday august 27 , 2000 médéric louis élie moreau de saint-méry , the deputy to the national constituent assembly for martinique opposed representation for free people of color . on 4 april 1792 , the french legislative assembly extended citizenship to all men of color . donatien-marie-joseph de vimeur , vicomte de rochambeau was sent to martinique to apply this law . the constituent assembly of martinique agreed to promulgate this law . however they refused to allow rochambeau to disembark with his troops . in 1793 there was a small , unsuccessful slave rebellion in saint pierre . the french executed six of the ringleaders . on 4 february 1793 , louis-francois dubuc signed an accord in whitehall , london , putting martinique under british jurisdiction until the french monarchy could be re-established . in doing so he forestalled the spread of the french revolution to martinique by giving the english an excuse to intervene . notably , the accord guaranteed the continuation of slavery . in 1794 the french convention abolished slavery . however , before this decree could get to martinique and be implemented , the british attacked the island and captured it . a british force under admiral sir john jervis and charles grey , 1st earl grey captured fort royal and fort saint louis on 22 march and fort desaix two days later . at that point all resistance ceased . on 30 march 1794 , the british occupation reinstated the old regime , including the monarchy 's supreme council and the seneschal 's courts of trinité , le marin , and st pierre . the royalists regained possession of their properties and positions , slaves were returned to their masters , and emancipation was forbidden . the government also promulgated an ordinance banning all gatherings of blacks or meetings by slaves , and banned carnival . however , the british did require an oath of allegiance to the king of england . napoleonic wars . six years later , in 1800 , jean kina , an ex-slave from saint domingue and aide-de-camp to a british officer , fled to morne lemaître and called on free blacks and slaves to join him in a rebellion in support of the rights of the free blacks . when kina 's small force marched on fort-royal , british troops quickly responded and negotiated his surrender in return for amnesty . the british transported kina to england , where they held him in newgate prison . in 1802 , the british returned the island to the french with the treaty of amiens . when france regained control of martinique , napoleon reinstated slavery . two years later , he married martiniquan joséphine de beauharnais and crowned her empress of france . during the napoleonic wars , in 1804 the british established a fort at diamond rock , outside fort de france , and garrisoned it with some 120 sailors and five cannons . the royal navy commissioned the fort hms diamond rock and from there were able for 17 months to harass vessels coming into the port . the french eventually sent a fleet of sixteen vessels that retook the island after a fierce bombardment . the british again captured martinique in 1809 , and held it until 1814 . in 1813 , a hurricane killed 3,000 people in martinique . during napoleon 's 100 days in 1815 , he abolished the slave trade . at the same time the british briefly re-occupied martinique . the british , who had abolished the slave trade in their empire in 1807 , forced napoleon 's successor , louis xviii to retain the proscription , though it did not become truly effective until 1831 . 1815–1899 . a slave insurrection in 1822 resulted in two dead and seven injured . the government condemned 19 slaves to death , 10 to the galleys , six to whipping , and eight to helping with the executions . martinique has suffered from earthquakes as well as hurricanes . in 1839 , an earthquake believed to have measured 6.5 on the richter magnitude scale killed some 400 to 700 people , caused severe damage in saint pierre , and almost totally destroyed fort royal . fort royal was rebuilt in wood , reducing the risk from earthquakes , but increasing the risk from fire . that same year , there were 495 sugar producers in martinique , who produced some 25,900 tons of '' white gold '' . in february 1848 , françois perrinon became head of the committee of colonists of martinique . he was a member of the commission for the abolition of slavery , led by victor schœlcher . on april 27 , schœlcher obtained a decree abolishing slavery in the french empire . perrinon was appointed commissioner general of martinique , and charged with the task of abolishing slavery there . however , he and the decree did not arrive in martinique until june 3 , by which time governor claude rostoland had already abolished slavery . the imprisonment of a slave at le prêcheur had led to a slave revolt on may 20 ; two days later rostoland , under duress , had abolished slavery on the island to quell the revolt . that same year , following the establishment of the second republic , fort royal became fort-de-france . in 1981 , may 22 was declared a national holiday in celebration of emancipation . elisa bordin and anna scacchi ( eds ) , transatlantic memories of slavery : remembering the past , changing the future , cambria press , 2015 , p . 107 . in 1851 a law was passed authorizing the creation of two colonial banks with the authority to issue banknotes . this led to the founding of the bank of martinique in saint pierre , and the bank of guadeloupe . ( these banks would merge in 1967 to form the present-day bank of the french antilles ) . indentured laborers from india started to arrive in martinique in 1853 . plantation owners recruited the indians to replace the slaves , who once free , had fled the plantations . this led to the creation of the small but continuing indian community in martinique . this immigration repeated on a smaller scale the importation of indians to such british colonies as guyana and trinidad and tobago following the abolition of slavery in the british empire in 1833 . towards the end of the century , 1000 chinese also came as earlier they had come to cuba . the city government in 1857-58 cleared and filled the flood channel encircling fort de france . the channel had become an open sewer and hence a health hazard . the filled-in channel , la levee , marked the northern boundary of the city . martinique got its second enduring financial institution in 1863 when the crédit foncier colonial opened its doors in saint pierre . its objective was to make long-term loans for the construction or modernization of sugar factories . it replaced the crédit colonial , which had been established in 1860 , but seems hardly to have gotten going . in 1868 construction work on the radoub basin port facilities at fort de france finally was completed . the improvements to the port would enable fort de france better to compete in trade and commerce with saint pierre . in 1870 , rising racial tensions led to the short-lived insurrection in southern martinique and proclamation in fort-de-france of a martiniquan republic . the insurrection started with an altercation between a local béké ( white ) and a black tradesman . a crowd lynched the béke and during the insurrection many sugar factories were torched . the authorities restored order by temporarily imprisoning some 500 rebels in martinique 's forts . seventy-four were tried and found guilty , and the twelve principal leaders were shot to death . the authorities deported the rest to french guiana or new caledonia . by this time sugar cane fields covered some 57 % of martinique 's arable land . unfortunately , falling prices for sugar forced many small sugar works to merge . producers turned to rum production in an attempt to improve their fortunes . when france established the third republic in 1871 , the colonies , martinique among them , gained representation in the national assembly . in 1887 , after visiting panama , paul gauguin spent some months with his friend charles laval , also a painter , in a cabin some two kilometers south of saint pierre . during this period gauguin produced several paintings featuring martinique . there is now a small gauguin museum in le carbet that has reproductions of his martinique paintings . that same year harper 's weekly sent the author and translator lafcadio hearn to martinique for a short visit ; he ended up staying for some two years . after his return to the united states he would publish two books , one an account of his daily life in martinique and the other the story of a slave . by 1888 , the population of martinique had risen from about 163,000 people a decade earlier to 176,000 . at the same time , natural disasters continued to plague the island . much of fort de france was devastated by a fire in 1890 , and then the next year a hurricane killed some 400 people . in the 1880s , the paris architect pierre-henri picq built the schœlcher library , an iron and glass structure that was exhibited in the tuileries gardens during the 1889 paris exposition universelle , on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the french revolution . after the exposition the building was shipped to fort de france and reassembled there , the work being completed by 1893 . initially , the library contained the 10,000 books that victor schœlcher had donated to the island . today it houses over 250,000 and stands as a tribute to the man who led the movement to abolish slavery in martinique . in 1895 , picq also built the saint-louis cathedral in fort-de-france . 20th century . the abolition of slavery did not end racially charged labor strife . in 1900 , a strike at a sugar factory owned by a frenchman led to the police shooting dead 10 agricultural workers . mount pelée eruption . on may 8 , 1902 , a blast from the volcano mont pelée destroyed the town of st . pierre , killing almost all of its 29,000 inhabitants . the only survivors were a shoemaker and a prisoner who was saved by his position in a jail dungeon with only a single window . because saint pierre was the commercial capital of the island , there were four banks in the city—the banque de la martinique , banque transatlantique , a branch of the colonial bank of london , and the crédit foncier colonial . all were destroyed . the town had to be completely rebuilt and lost its status as the commercial capital , a title which shifted to fort-de-france . due to the eruption , refugees from martinique arrived in boats to the southern villages of dominica and some remained permanently on the island . return to normality . a hurricane in 1903 killed 31 people and damaged the sugar crop and a strong earthquake off saint lucia in 1906 caused further damage in martinique , but mercifully no deaths . as construction began on the panama canal , more than 5,000 martiniquans left to work on the project . resettlement of saint pierre began in 1908 . even so , two years later the city of saint pierre was removed from the map of france with jurisdiction over the ruins transferring to le carbet . elsewhere , political opponents assassinated the mayor of fort de france , antoine seger in 1908 . with war with germany looming , in 1913 france enacted compulsory military service in the colony , and called on martinique to send 1,100 men per year to france for training . when world war i finally came , 18,000 martiniquans took part , of whom 1,306 died . during the war , the french government requisitioned martinique 's rum production for the use of the french army . production doubled as sugar mills converted to distilleries , helping the recovery of the local economy . between the world wars . in 1923 saint pierre was reestablished as a municipality . two years later , in fort de france , the municipal council approved the mayor 's proposal to redevelop the slum district of terres sainvilles as a '' workers city '' . the council would sell the new housing to the residents for 40 semi-annual interest-free payments . with the collapse of the world market for sugar in 1921–22 , cultivators sought a new crop . in 1928 they introduced bananas . mont pelée became active in 1929 , forcing the temporary evacuation of saint pierre . the volcanological observatory there did not get its first seismometer until some three years later . in 1931 , the martiniquan aimé césaire moved to paris to attend the lycée louis-le-grand , the école normale supérieure , and finally the sorbonne . while in paris , césaire met léopold senghor , then a poet but later senegal 's first president . césaire , senghor , and léon damas , with whom césaire had gone to school in martinique at the lycée schœlcher , together formulated the concept of négritude , defined as an affirmation of pride in being black , and promoted it as a movement . in 1933 , andré aliker , the editor of justice , the communist newspaper , documented that a m . aubéry , the wealthy , white owner of the lareinty company , had bribed the judges of the court of appeal to dismiss charges of tax fraud against him . that same year , félix eboué became the acting governor of the island , and an american , frank perret , established le musée volcanologique at saint pierre . in 1934 , persons unknown kidnapped and murdered andré aliker ; his body washed up on the beach with his arms tied behind him . aimé césaire , senghor , damas , and others , founded l'etudiant , a black student review . in 1939 , the french cruiser jeanne d'arc arrived late in the year with admiral georges robert ( fr ) , high commissioner of the republic to the antilles and guiana . aimé césaire returned to martinique . he became a teacher at the lycée schœlcher in fort de france , where his students included frantz fanon and édouard glissant . world war ii . until mid-1943 , martinique was officially pro-vichy , with the us and great britain seeking to limit any effect of that stance on the war . the us did prepare plans for an invasion by an expeditionary force to capture the island , and at various times the us and britain established blockades . for instance , from july to november 1940 , the british cruisers and maintained a watch to ensure that the french aircraft carrier béarn and the other french naval vessels in martinique did not slip away to europe . in june 1940 , the french cruiser émile bertin arrived in martinique with 286 tons of gold from the bank of france . the original intent was that bank 's gold reserve go to canada for safekeeping , and a first shipment did go there . when france signed an armistice with germany , plans changed and the second shipment was rerouted to martinique . when it arrived in martinique , admiral robert arranged for the storage of the gold in fort desaix . the island was blockaded by the royal navy and the british used the gold as collateral for lend-lease facilities from the usa , on the basis it could be '' acquired '' at any time if needed . in late 1941 , admiral robert agreed to keep the french naval vessels , including the émile bertin immobilized , in return for the allies not bombarding and invading the french antilles . in mid-1943 , admiral robert returned to france via puerto rico and lisbon , and free french sympathizers took control of the gold at fort desaix and the french fleet . in 1944 , the american film director howard hawks directed humphrey bogart , lauren bacall , hoagy carmichael and walter brennan in the film to have and have not . hawks more-or-less based the film on a novel that ernest hemingway had written in 1937 . the essence of the plot is the conversion from neutrality to the free french side of an american fishing boat captain operating out of vichy-controlled fort de france in 1940 . in 1945 , aimé césaire succeeded in getting elected mayor of fort de france and deputy from martinique to the french national assembly as a member of the communist party . césaire remained mayor for 56 years . however , the communist suppression of the hungarian revolution of 1956 disillusioned him , causing him to quit the communist party . as a member of the assembly , he was one of the principal drafters of the 1946 law on departmentalizing former colonies , a role for which politicians favoring independence have often criticized him . in 1947 the high court of justice in versailles tried admiral robert for collaboration . he received a sentence of 100 years at hard labor and national degradation for life . the court released him from the hard labor after six months , and he received a pardon in 1957 . departmental era . in 1946 , the french national assembly voted unanimously to transform martinique from a colony of france into a department , known in french as a département d'outre-mer or dom . along with its fellow doms of guadeloupe , réunion , and french guiana , martinique was intended to be legally identical to any department in the metropole . however , in reality , several key differences remained , particularly within social security payments and unemployment benefits . french funding to the dom has somewhat made up for the social and economic devastation of the slave trade and sugar crop monoculture . with french funding to martinique , the island had one of the highest standards of living in the caribbean . however , it remained dependent upon french aid , as when measured by what martinique actually produced , it was one of the poorer islands in the region . sources and references . . external links . institutional history of martinique - official site of the french government ( translation by maryanne dassonville )