Eagle (automobile)

origin . following the introduction of general motors ' saturn brand automobile , chrysler promised a similar new brand designed to take saturn on with innovative design and building methods . in a press release by then chrysler chairman lee iacocca , it was indicated that chrysler was working on a car that would bow as the '' liberty '' . however , these plans never reached fruition . the name later was used for jeep liberty . the main objective of chrysler acquiring american motors was the long established jeep vehicles , but renault forced the company to take on the contractual obligations of the passenger car models as part of the deal . thus , '' eagle is a line of cars chrysler inherited from amc '' and the eagle marque was born . under new ownership , chrysler quickly discontinued the domestic-built front-wheel drive alliance and encore that were developed under renault , but continued to build the four-wheel drive amc eagle crossover . it was now called eagle wagon and marketed into the 1988 model year until production ended in december . this meant the brampton assembly ( amc ) manufacturing capacity could be used for making more jeeps . moreover , chrysler kept amc 's long established eagle brand by continuing to import the mid-sized renault 21 ( now named eagle medallion ) as well as starting production of the renault 25-based full-size sedan that was developed by amc ( now named eagle premier ) . . marketing . to consolidate the marketing and maintain distribution through amc dealerships following the 1987 acquisition , the jeep-eagle division of chrysler corporation was formed . chrysler 's initial problem was that unlike the big three , which had multiple brands under their corporate name , american motors had sold passenger cars under its corporate initials of '' amc '' since 1970 . thus , without having a separate brand from the now defunct company , chrysler looked to re-brand the legacy vehicles inherited through the purchase of amc under the eagle name instead of trying to fold those outside-designed products into chrysler 's existing branch structure . unlike chrysler , dodge , and plymouth branded automobiles , the eagle models lacked the chrysler corporation '' pentastar '' logo . instead , all models prominently featured the eagle head logo , seen at the top right . two of eagle 's first models , the eagle premier and the eagle medallion , were designed by amc in cooperation with its former corporate partner ( and 46.4 percent owner ) , renault . the remainder of the brand 's cars were simply rebadged versions of cars sold by other chrysler corporation divisions , as well as some captive imports produced by mitsubishi motors . throughout its history , the eagle brand suffered from a lack of product recognition although its premier was technically more advanced than anything offered by chrysler . most of eagle 's models were offered in chrysler-plymouth , dodge , and mitsubishi dealerships under different guises . chrysler was in the midst of financial difficulty at the end of the 1980s , and did not have the funds to spread to its new automotive division . moreover , jeep vehicles were quite popular and profitable , so most of the division 's marketing resources flowed to the jeep product range . since jeep 's products had better recognition and higher profit margins , many dealers placed greater emphasis on jeeps , and considered the eagle line of passenger cars to be a distraction to that business . their sales and service expertise was primarily in the four-wheel drive jeeps and amc 's eagle all-wheel-drive models . furthermore , following chrysler 's acquisition of amc , there was a realignment of the dealership network . some former amc/jeep dealers were consolidated with chrysler-plymouth franchises . up to this point , chrysler-plymouth outlets did not have a sport utility vehicle ( suv ) to sell , and adding the jeep line helped dealers offer customers a range of vehicles in a rapidly growing market segment . the merger may have helped the individual dealerships that signed on , but it caused the nascent eagle division and its largely derivative models to compete unfavorably for attention with chrysler 's and plymouth 's often similar , but longer-established and better-recognized , lines of passenger cars . phase out . the eagle brand was phased out in stages . in 1996 , chrysler discontinued the mitsubishi mirage-based eagle summit , having canceled the nearly identical dodge colt and plymouth colt models after the 1994 season . after a decade of slow sales , chrysler announced the discontinuation of the eagle brand in september 1997 , and the last 1998 eagle talon rolled off the line shortly thereafter . in 1997 , the eagle vision was discontinued at the end of its design cycle , though the similar dodge intrepid and chrysler concorde were redesigned for 1998 and continued through 2004 . only the mitsubishi eclipse-based eagle talon remained for 1998 , after which it , along with the eagle brand itself , was discontinued . chrysler had originally planned to redesign the eagle vision for 1999 . prototypes , called the vancuren eagle were even spotted wearing the eagle logo , and vision production continued into september 1997 to provide dealers with enough stock of the older car to carry them through to the new car 's introduction . however , chrysler executives decided to pull the plug on the eagle brand just a few months later . the car they were working on went on to be marketed as the chrysler 300m . the amc name disappeared with chrysler 's acquisition of the independent automaker , '' but the eagle name carried on , worn by various renault- and mitsubishi-sourced models through the ‘ 90s , when it was finally retired in 1998 . '' those eagle cars failed because the automaker did not have a coherent marketing strategy for the mix of models and they also lacked effective promotional efforts in the automotive marketplace . in the end , '' chrysler was n't fully committed to the nameplate and also left consumers confused about what an eagle was -- if they knew the name at all . '' . eagle cars marketed by chrysler . amc eagle ( 1988 ) the continuation of the amc eagle line after chrysler acquired amc in only the station wagon body style . production of the crossover vehicle ended december 14 , 1987 . according to the national automobile dealers association nada guide , chrysler 's '' eagle was spawned from the buyout of american motors and their amc eagle model . '' eagle medallion ( 1988–1989 ) also badged as the renault medallion in 1987 , this car was imported and was very similar to the renault 21 . eagle premier ( 1988–1992 ) designed by amc , the premier was briefly badged as the renault premier prior to launch . unusual ( for a fwd car ) in having a north-south engine mounting ( to accommodate a future awd version ) , it shared several parts with the renault 25 , and spawned a rebadged version named dodge monaco ( 1990–1992 ) ; this platform was the basis for the 1993 lh cars . eagle vista ( 1988–1992 ) two models were offered . the 3-door hatchback and 4-door sedan were rebadged mitsubishi mirages , and the station wagon ( badged as either an eagle vista , or a dodge/plymouth colt vista ) was a rebadged mitsubishi chariot . sold only in canada . eagle summit ( 1989–1996 ) coupe , sedan , and wagon models were available . the coupe and 1987-1991 sedans were rebadged mitsubishi mirages , while the wagon was a rebadged mitsubishi chariot . the 1991-1996 sedan was a rebadged dodge/plymouth colt . eagle talon ( 1990–1998 ) similar to the plymouth laser and the mitsubishi eclipse , the talon was eagle 's halo car and outsold its plymouth cousin . ( see also diamond star motors ) eagle 2000gtx ( 1991–1992 ) a rebadged mitsubishi galant , sold only in canada . eagle vision ( 1993–1997 ) one of chrysler 's three original lh-cars . sold in europe as the chrysler vision . concept car . the eagle optima was a 1990 concept car . it was a four-door sedan that used cab forward design and was powered by an experimental , 32-valve all-aluminum v8 engine with all-wheel drive . it was one of a series of concepts ( which included the 1987 lamborghini portofino and the 1989 chrysler millennium ) that lead up to the 1993 lh eagle vision and its siblings . the optima 's front fascia also inspired that of the 1995-1998 eagle talon . other uses . the name eagle was also used by dan gurney 's all american racers team for his racing cars . among the most notable are the eagle mk1 formula one car , which won the 1967 belgian grand prix ; the winning cars at the 1968 , 1973 , and 1975 indianapolis 500s ; and the toyota-eagle imsa gtps of the late 1980s/early 1990s . the name was also applied to commercial trucks made by international harvester , and subsequently by navistar international as part of its international truck product line . references .