Big cat

roaring . the ability to roar comes from an elongated and specially adapted larynx and hyoid bone . the larynx is attached to the hyoid bone that is hanging from a sequence of bones . this sequence of bones the hyoid hangs from are tympanhoyal , stylohal , epihyal , and ceratohyal ; these are located in the mandible and skull . in the larynx there are vocal folds that produce the structure needed to stretch the ligament to a length that creates the roar effect . this tissue is made of a thick collagen and elastic fiber that becomes denser as it approaches the epithelial mucosal lining . when this large pad folds it creates a low natural frequency , causing the cartilage walls of the larynx to vibrate . when it begins to vibrate the sound moves from a high to low air resistance which makes the roaring . the lion 's larynx is longest , giving it the most robust roar . the roar in good conditions can be heard 8 or even 10 & nbsp ; km away . all five extant members of the genus panthera contain this elongated hyoid but owing to differences in the larynx the snow leopard can not roar . unlike the roaring cats in their family , the snow leopard is distinguished by the lack of a large pad of fibro-elastic tissue that allows for a large vocal fold . threats . the principal threats to big cats vary by geographic location , but primarily are habitat destruction and poaching . in africa many big cats are hunted by pastoralism or government 'problem animal control ' officers . certain protected areas exist that shelter large and exceptionally visible populations of african leopards , lions and cheetahs , such as botswana 's chobe , kenya 's masai mara , and tanzania 's serengeti . rather , it is outside these conservation areas where hunting poses the dominant threat to large carnivores . in the united states , 19 states have banned ownership of big cats and other dangerous exotic animals as pets , and the captive wildlife safety act bans the interstate sale and transportation of these animals . the initial captive wildlife safety act ( cwsa ) was signed into law on december 19 , 2003 . u.s . fish and wildlife service to address problems associated with the increasing trade in certain big cat species , the cwsa regulations were strengthened by a law passed on september 17 , 2007 . federal register of the u.s . congress the big cat species addressed in these regulations are the lion , tiger , leopard , snow leopard , clouded leopard , cheetah , jaguar , cougar , and any hybrid of these species ( liger , tigon , etc . ) . private ownership is not prohibited , but the law makes it illegal to transport , sell , or purchase such animals in interstate or foreign commerce . although these regulations seem to provide a strong legal framework for controlling the commerce involving big cats , international organizations such as the world wildlife fund ( wwf ) have encouraged the u.s . to further strengthen these laws . the wwf is concerned that weaknesses in the existing u.s . regulations could be unintentionally helping to fuel the black market for tiger parts . america ’ s 5,000 backyard tigers a ticking time bomb , wwf says , david braun , national geographic , news watch , october 21 , 2010 . . conservation . an animal sanctuary provides a refuge for animals to live out their natural lives in a protected environment . usually these animal sanctuaries are the organizations which provide a home to big cats whose private owners are no longer able or willing to care for their big cats . however , use of the word sanctuary in an organization 's name is by itself no guarantee that it is a true animal sanctuary in the sense of a refuge . to be accepted by the united states fish and wildlife service ( fws ) as a bona fide animal sanctuary and to be eligible for an exemption from the prohibition of interstate movement of big cats under the captive wildlife safety act ( cwsa ) , organizations must meet the following criteria : captive wildlife safety act - what big cat owners need to know , u.s . fish and wildlife service , office of law enforcement . must be a non-profit entity that is tax exempt under section 501 ( a ) of the internal revenue code can not engage in commercial trade in big cat species , including their offspring , parts , and products made from them can not breed big cats can not allow direct contact between big cats and the public at their facilities must keep records of transactions involving covered cats must allow the service to inspect their facilities , records , and animals at reasonable hours . species . family felidae subfamily pantherinae genus panthera tiger , panthera tigris ( asia ) lion , panthera leo ( sub-saharan africa , gir forest in india ; extinct in former range of southeast europe , middle east , and much of asia ) jaguar , panthera onca ( the americas , from the southwestern united states to northern argentina ) leopard , panthera pardus ( asia , africa and european russia ) khorozyan , i . g . , gennady , f . , baryshnikov , g . f . and abramov , a . v . ( 2006 ) . taxonomic status of the leopard , panthera pardus ( carnivora , felidae ) in the caucasus and adjacent areas . russian journal of theriology 5 ( 1 ) : 41–52 . snow leopard , panthera uncia ( syn . uncia uncia - mountains of central and south asia ) subfamily felinae genus acinonyx cheetah , acinonyx jubatus ( sub-saharan africa and iran ; extirpated in much of its former range in eurasia ) genus puma cougar puma concolor ( north and south america ) . evolution . it is estimated that the ancestors of most big cats split away from the felinae about 6.37 million years ago . the felinae , on the other hand , comprises mostly small to medium-sized cats , including the domestic cats , but also some larger cats such as the cougar and cheetah . a 2010 study published in molecular phylogenetics and evolution has given insight into the exact evolutionary relationships of the big cats . the study reveals that the snow leopard and the tiger are sister species , while the lion , leopard , and jaguar are more closely related to each other . the tiger and snow leopard diverged from the ancestral big cats approximately 3.9 ma . the tiger then evolved into a unique species towards the end of the pliocene epoch , approximately 3.2 ma . the ancestor of the lion , leopard , and jaguar split from other big cats from 4.3–3.8 ma . between 3.6–2.5 ma the jaguar diverged from the ancestor of lions and leopards . lions and leopards split from one another approximately 2 ma . the earliest big cat fossil , panthera blytheae , dating to 4.1−5.95 ma , was discovered in southwest tibet . . weight range . the range of weights exhibited by the species is large . at the bottom , adult snow leopards usually weigh , with an exceptional specimen reaching , . male and female lions typically weigh and respectively , and male and female tigers and respectively . exceptionally heavy male lions and tigers have been recorded to exceed in the wilderness , and weigh around in captivity . the liger , a hybrid of a lion and tiger , can grow to be much larger than its parent species . in particular , a liger called 'nook ' is reported to have weighed over . . see also . megafauna list of largest cats apex predator big cat rescue panthera hybrid . references . further reading . . external links . people not poaching : the communities and iwt learning platform