Tupi people

history . the tupi people inhabited almost all of brazil 's coast when the portugal first arrived there . in 1500 , their population was estimated at 1 million people , nearly equal to the population of portugal at the time . they were divided into tribes , each tribe numbering from 300 to 2,000 people . some examples of these tribes are : tupiniquim , tupinambá , potiguara , tabajara , caetés , temiminó , tamoios . the tupi were adept agriculture ; they grew cassava , corn , sweet potatoes , beans , peanuts , tobacco , squash , cotton and many others . there was not a unified tupi identity despite the fact that they spoke a common language . european colonization . from the 16th century onward , the tupi , like other natives from the region , were assimilated , enslaved , or killed by diseases such as smallpox or by portuguese settlers and bandeirantes ( colonial brazil scouts ) , nearly leading to their complete annihilation , with the exception of a few isolated communities . the remnants of these tribes are today confined to indigenous territories or acculturated to some degree into the dominant society . . cannibalism . according to primary source accounts by primarily european writers , the tupi were divided into several tribes which would constantly engage in war with each other . in these wars the tupi would normally try to capture their enemies to later kill them in cannibalism rituals . darcy ribeiro – o povo brasileiro , vol . 07 , 1997 ( 1997 ) , pp . 28 to 33 ; 72 to 75 and 95 to 101 . '' the warriors captured from other tupi tribes were eaten as it was believed by them that this would lead to their strength being absorbed and digested ; thus , in fear of absorbing weakness , they chose only to sacrifice warriors perceived to be strong and brave . for the tupi warriors , even when prisoners , it was a great honor to die valiantly during battle or to display courage during the festivities leading to the sacrifice . the tupi have also been documented to eat the remains of dead relatives as a form of honoring them . agnolin , adone . o apetite da antropologia . são paulo , associação editorial humanitas , 2005 . p . 285 . the practice of cannibalism among the tupi was made famous in europe by hans staden , a german soldier , mariner , and mercenary , traveling to brazil to steal riches , who was captured by the tupi in 1552 . in his account published in 1557 , he tells that the tupi carried him to their village where it was claimed he was to be devoured at the next festivity . there , he allegedly won the friendship of a powerful chief , whom he cured of a disease , and his life was spared . staden , hans . duas viagens ao brasil : primeiros registros sobre o brasil . porto alegre : l & pm , 2011 , p . 51-52 cannibalistic rituals among tupi and other tribes in brazil decreased steadily after european contact and religious intervention . when cabeza de vaca , a spanish conquistador , arrived in santa catarina in 1541 , for instance , he attempted to ban cannibalistic practices in the name of the king of spain . because our understanding of tupi cannibalism relies solely on primary source accounts of primarily european writers , the very existence of cannibalism has been disputed by some in academic circles . william arens seeks to discredit staden 's and other writers ' accounts of cannibalism in his book the man-eating myth : anthropology & anthropophagy , where he claims that when concerning the tupinambá , '' rather than dealing with an instance of serial documentation of cannibalism , we are more likely confronting only one source of dubious testimony which has been incorporated almost verbatim into the written reports of others claiming to be eyewitnesses '' . ( new york : oxford university press , 1979 ; . race-mixing and cunhadismo . many indigenous peoples were important for the formation of the brazilian people , but the main group was the tupi . when the portuguese explorers arrived in brazil in the 16th century , the tupi were the first amerindian group to have contact with them . soon , a process of mixing between portuguese settlers and indigenous women started . the portuguese colonists rarely brought women , making the indian women the '' breeding matrix of the brazilian people '' . when the first europeans arrived , the phenomenon of '' cunhadismo '' ( from portuguese cunhado , '' brother in law '' ) began to spread by the colony . cunhadismo was an old indian tradition of incorporating strangers to their community . the indians offered the portuguese an indian girl as wife . once he agreed , he formed a bond of kinship with all the indians of the tribe . polygyny , a common practice among south american indians , was quickly adopted by european settlers . this way , a single european man could have dozens of indian wives ( temericós ) . image : albert eckhout mameluca woman circa 1641-1644.png thumb right 150px albert eckhout : a mixed-race ( mameluco ) woman ( circa 1641–1644 ) cunhadismo was used as recruitment of labour . the portuguese could have many temericós and thus a huge number of indian relatives who were induced to work for him , especially to cut pau-brasil and take it to the ships on the coast . in the process , a large mixed-race ( mameluco ) population was formed , which in fact occupied brazil . without the practice of cunhadismo , the portuguese colonization was impractical . the number of portuguese men in brazil was very small and portuguese women were even fewer in number . the proliferation of mixed-race people in the wombs of indian women provided for the occupation of the territory and the consolidation of the portuguese presence in the region . . influence in brazil . although the tupi population largely disappeared because of european diseases to which they had no resistance or because of slavery , a large population of maternal tupi ancestry occupied much of brazilian territory , taking the ancient traditions to several points of the country . darcy ribeiro wrote that the features of the first brazilians were much more tupi than portuguese , and even the language that they spoke was a tupi-based language , named nheengatu or língua geral , a lingua franca in brazil until the 18th century . the region of são paulo was the biggest in the proliferation of mamelucos , who in the 17th century under the name of bandeirantes , spread throughout the brazilian territory , from the amazon rainforest to the extreme south . they were responsible for the major expansion of the iberian culture in the interior of brazil . they acculturated the indian tribes who lived in isolation , and took the language of the colonizer , which was not portuguese yet , but nheengatu itself , to the most inhospitable corners of the colony . nheengatu is still spoken in certain regions of the amazon , although the tupi-speaking indians did not live there . the nheengatu language , as in other regions of the country , was introduced there by bandeirantes from são paulo in the 17th century . the way of life of the old paulistas could almost be confused with the indians . within the family , only nheengatu was spoken . agriculture , hunting , fishing and gathering of fruits were also based on indian traditions . what differentiated the old paulistas from the tupi was the use of clothes , salt , metal tools , weapons and other european items . image : cacique tupinikin 2007.jpg thumb 200px a tupiniquim chief ( cacique ) in brasília , 2007 when these areas of large tupi influence started to be integrated into the market economy , brazilian society gradually started to lose its tupi characteristics . the portuguese language became dominant and língua geral virtually disappeared . the rustic indian techniques of production were replaced by european ones , in order to elevate the capacity of exportation . brazilian portuguese absorbed many words from tupi . some examples of portuguese words that came from tupi are : mingau , mirim , soco , cutucar , tiquinho , perereca , tatu . the names of several local fauna & ndash ; such as arara ( '' macaw '' ) , jacaré ( '' south american alligator '' ) , tucano ( '' toucan '' ) & ndash ; and flora & ndash ; e.g . mandioca ( '' manioc '' ) and abacaxi ( '' pineapple '' ) & ndash ; are also derived from the tupi language . a number of places and cities in modern brazil are named in tupi ( itaquaquecetuba , pindamonhangaba , caruaru , ipanema ) . anthroponyms include ubirajara , ubiratã , moema , jussara , jurema , janaína . tupi surnames do exist , but they do not imply any real tupi ancestry ; rather they were adopted as a manner to display brazilian nationalism . the tupinambá tribe is fictitiously portrayed in nelson pereira dos santos ' satirical 1971 film how tasty was my little frenchman ( como era gostoso o meu francês ) . its name is also adapted by science : tupinambis is a genus of tegus , arguably the best-known lizards of brazil . the large offshore tupi oil field discovered off the coast of brazil in 2006 was named in honor of the tupi people . the guaraní are a different native group which inhabits southern brazil , uruguay , paraguay and northern argentina and speaks the distinct guaraní languages , but these are in the same language family as tupi . notable tupi people . catarina paraguaçu , 1528—1586 araribóia , founder of niterói , brazil . see also . de gestis meni de saa guaraní war josé de anchieta língua geral manuel da nóbrega tupian languages . references . external links . portugal in america