Doctorate

history . middle ages . the term doctor derives from latin , meaning '' teacher '' or '' instructor '' . the doctorate ( latin : doctoratus ) appeared in middle ages as a license to teach latin ( licentia docendi ) at a university . its roots can be traced to the early church in which the term doctor referred to the apostles , church fathers , and other christian authorities who taught and exegesis . the right to grant a licentia docendi ( i.e . the doctorate ) was originally reserved to the catholic church , which required the applicant to pass a test , to take an oath of allegiance and to pay a fee . the third council of the lateran of 1179 guaranteed access—at that time largely free of charge—to all able applicants . applicants were tested for aptitude . this right remained a bone of contention between the church authorities and the universities , which were slowly distancing themselves from the church . in 1213 the right was granted by the pope to the university of paris , where it became a universal license to teach ( licentia ubique docendi ) . however , while the licentia continued to hold a higher prestige than the bachelor 's degree ( baccalaureus ) , the latter was ultimately reduced to an intermediate step to the master 's degree ( magister ) and doctorate , both of which now became the accepted teaching qualifications . according to keith allan noble ( 1994 ) , the first doctoral degree was awarded in medieval paris around 1150 by the university of paris . keith allan noble , changing doctoral degrees : an international perspective , society for research into higher education , 1994 , p . 8 . george makdisi theorizes that the ijazah issued in early islamic madrasahs was the origin of the doctorate later issued in medieval european universities . alfred guillaume and syed farid al-attas agree that there is a resemblance between the ijazah and the licentia docendi . however , toby huff and others reject makdisi 's theory . rüegg , walter : '' foreword . the university as a european institution '' , in : a history of the university in europe , cambridge university press , 1992 , , pp . xix : '' no other european institution has spread over the entire world in the way in which the traditional form of the european university has done . the degrees awarded by european universities – the bachelor 's degree , the licentiate , the master 's degree , and the doctorate – have been adopted in the most diverse societies throughout the world . '' norman daniel : review of '' the rise of colleges . institutions of learning in islam and the west by george makdisi '' , journal of the american oriental society , vol . 104 , no . 3 ( jul . – sep . , 1984 ) , pp . 586–588 ( 587 ) devin j . stewart notes a difference in the granting authority ( individual professor for the ijzazah and a corporate entity in the case of the university doctorate ) . . 17th and 18th centuries . the doctorate of philosophy developed in germany in the 17th century ( likely c . 1652 ) . the term '' philosophy '' does not refer solely to the field or academic discipline of philosophy , but is used in a broader sense in accordance with its original greek meaning , which is '' love of wisdom '' . in most of europe , all fields ( history , philosophy , social sciences , mathematics , and natural philosophy/natural sciences ) sooyoung chang , academic genealogy of mathematicians , world scientific , 2010 , p . 183 . were traditionally known as philosophy , and in germany and elsewhere in europe the basic faculty of liberal arts was known as the '' faculty of philosophy '' . the doctorate of philosophy adheres to this historic convention , even though the degrees are not always for the study of philosophy . chris park explains that it was not until formal education and degree programs were standardized in the early 19th century that the doctorate of philosophy was reintroduced in germany as a research degree , park , c . ( 2007 ) , redefining the doctorate , york , uk : the higher education academy , p . 4 . abbreviated as dr . phil . ( similar to ph.d . in anglo-american countries ) . germany , however , differentiated then in more detail between doctorates in philosophy and doctorates in the natural sciences , abbreviated as dr . rer . nat . , and also doctorates in the social/political sciences , abbreviated as dr . rer . pol . , similar to the other traditional doctorates in medicine ( dr . med . ) and law ( dr . jur . ) . university doctoral training was a form of apprenticeship to a guild . the traditional term of study before new teachers were admitted to the guild of '' masters of arts '' was seven years , matching the apprenticeship term for other occupations . originally the terms '' master '' and '' doctor '' were synonymous , but over time the doctorate came to be regarded as a higher qualification than the master 's degree . university degrees , including doctorates , were originally restricted to men . the first women to be granted doctorates were juliana morell in 1608 at lyons or maybe avignog ( she '' defended theses '' in 1606 or 1607 , although claims that she received a doctorate in canon law in 1608 have been discredited ) , elena cornaro piscopia in 1678 at the university of padua , laura bassi in 1732 at bologna university , dorothea erxleben in 1754 at halle university and maría isidra de guzmán y de la cerda in 1785 at complutense university , madrid . . modern times . the use and meaning of the doctorate has changed over time , and is subject to regional variations . for instance , until the early 20th century few academic staff or professors in english-speaking universities held doctorates , except for very senior scholars and those in holy orders . after that time the german practice of requiring lecturers to have completed a research doctorate spread . universities ' shift to research-oriented education ( based upon the scientific method , inquiry , and observation ) increased the doctorate 's importance . today , a research doctorate ( phd ) or its equivalent ( as defined in the us by the nsf ) is generally a prerequisite for an academia career , although many recipients do not work in academia . professional doctorates developed in the united states from the 19th century onward . the first professional doctorate to be offered in the united states was the m.d . at kings college ( now columbia university ) after the medical school 's founding in 1767 , although this was not a professional doctorate in the modern american sense as it was awarded for further study after the qualifying bachelor of medicine ( m.b . ) rather than being a qualifying degree . the md became the standard first degree in medicine in the us during the 19th century , but as a three-year undergraduate degree ; it did not become established as a graduate degree until 1930 . the md , as the standard qualifying degree in medicine , gave that profession the ability ( through the american medical association , established in 1847 for this purpose ) to set and raise standards for entry into professional practice . the modern research degree , in the shape of the german-style phd , was first awarded in the us in 1861 , at yale university . this differed from the md in that the latter was a vocational '' professional degree '' that trained students to apply or practice knowledge , rather than generate it , similar to other students in vocational schools or institutes . in the uk , research doctorates initially took the form of higher doctorates in science and letters , first introduced at durham university in 1882 . the phd spread to the uk from the us via canada , and was instituted at all british universities from 1917 , with the first ( titled a dphil ) being awarded at the university of oxford . following the md , the next professional doctorate in the us , the juris doctor ( j.d . ) , was established by the university of chicago in 1902 . however it took a long time to be accepted , not replacing the bachelor of laws ( llb ) until the 1960s , by which time the llb was generally taken as a graduate degree . notably , the curriculum for the jd and llb were identical , with the degree being renamed as a doctorate , and it ( like the md ) was not equivalent to the phd , raising criticism that it was '' not a 'true doctorate . when professional doctorates were established in the uk in the late 1980s and early 1990s , they did not follow the us model but were instead set up as research degrees at the same level as phds but with some taught components and a professional focus for the research work . the older-style doctorates , now usually called higher doctorates in the united kingdom , take much longer to complete , since candidates must show themselves to be leading experts in their subjects . these doctorates are less common than the phd in some countries and are often awarded honoris causa . the habilitation is still used for academic recruitment purposes in many countries within the eu , and involves either a new long thesis ( a second book ) or a portfolio of research publications . the habilitation ( highest available degree ) demonstrates independent and thorough research , experience in teaching and lecturing , and , more recently , the ability to generate supportive funding . the habilitation follows the research doctorate , and in germany it can be a requirement for appointment as a privatdozent or professor . types . since the middle ages , the number and types of doctorates awarded by universities has proliferated throughout the world . practice varies from one country to another . while a doctorate usually entitles one to be addressed as '' doctor '' , use of the title varies widely , depending on the type and the associated occupation . research doctorate . research doctorates are awarded in recognition of academic research that is publishable , at least in principle , in a peer review academic journal . the best-known research degree title , in the english-speaking world , is doctor of philosophy ( abbreviated ph.d . , phd or , at some british universities , dphil ) awarded in many countries throughout the world . other research doctorates include the doctor of education ( ed.d . or edd ) , doctor of arts ( d.a . ) , doctor of juridical science ( j.s.d . or s.j.d . ) , doctor of musical arts ( d.m.a . ) , doctor of professional studies/professional doctorate ( profdoc or dprof ) , doctor of public health ( dr.p.h . ) , doctor of social science ( d.s.sc . or dsocsci ) , doctor of management ( d.m . or d.mgt . ) , doctor of business administration ( d.b.a . or dba ) , the uk doctor of management ( dman ) , various doctorates in engineering , such as the us doctor of engineering ( d.eng . , d.e.sc . or d.e.s . , also awarded in japan and south korea ) , the uk engineering doctorate ( engd ) , the german engineering doctorate doktoringenieur ( dr.-ing . ) the german natural science doctorate doctor rerum naturalium ( dr . rer . nat . ) and the economics and social science doctorate doctor rerum politicarum ( dr . rer . pol . ) . the uk doctor of medicine ( md or md ( res ) ) and doctor of dental surgery ( dds ) are research doctorates . the doctor of theology ( th.d . , d.th . or thd ) , doctor of practical theology ( dpt ) and the doctor of sacred theology ( s.t.d . , or d.s.th . ) are research doctorates in theology . criteria for research doctorates vary , but typically require completion of a substantial body of original research , which may be presented as a single thesis or dissertation , or as a portfolio of shorter project reports ( thesis by publication ) . the submitted dissertation is assessed by a committee of examiners , and is then typically defended by the candidate during an oral examination ( viva in the uk and india ) by the committee . candidates may also be required to complete graduate-level courses in their field , as well as study research methodology . criteria for admission to doctoral programs varies . in the u.s . and the u.k . , students may be admitted with a bachelor 's degree , while elsewhere , e.g . in finland , a master 's degree is required . the time required to complete a research doctorate varies from three years , excluding undergraduate study , to six years or more . licentiate . and miur decree . . japan . . dissertation-only . until the 1990s , most natural science and engineering doctorates in japan were earned by industrial researchers in japanese companies . these degrees were awarded by the employees ' former university , usually after years of research in industrial laboratories . the only requirement is submission of a dissertation , along with articles published in well-known journals . this program is called . it produced the majority of engineering doctoral degrees from national universities . university-based doctoral programs called , are gradually replacing these degrees . by 1994 , more doctoral engineering degrees were earned for research within university laboratories ( 53 % ) than industrial research laboratories ( 47 % ) . the science and technology resources of japan : a comparison with the united states nsf.gov ( 2004-11-10 ) . retrieved on 2010-10-26 . since 1978 , japan society for the promotion of science ( jsps ) has provided tutorial and financial support for promising researchers in asia and africa . the program is called jsps ronpaku . ronpaku ( dissertation phd ) program . jsps . retrieved on 2010-10-26 . . professional degree . the only professional doctorate in japan is the juris doctor , known as hōmu hakushi ( 法務博士 ) the justice system reform council ( 2001 ) . for a justice system to support japan in the 21st century . the program generally lasts two or three years . this curriculum is professionally oriented , yokohama national university law school . program introduction and dean 's message . retrieved april 7 , 2008 . but unlike in the us the program does not provide education sufficient for a law license . all candidates for a bar license must pass the bar exam ( shihou shiken ) , attend the legal training and research institute and pass the practical exam ( nikai shiken or shihou shushusei koushi ) . foote , d . ( 2005 ) . justice system reform in japan . annual meeting of the research committee of sociology of law , paris . european network on law and society . . netherlands and flanders . the traditional academic system of the netherlands provided basic academic diploma : propaedeuse and three academic degrees : kandidaat ( the lowest degree ) , depending on gender doctorandus or doctoranda ( drs . ) ( with equivalent degrees in engineering – ir . and law – mr . ) and doctor ( dr . ) . after successful completion of the first year of university , the student was awarded the propaedeutic diploma ( not a degree ) . in some fields , this diploma was abolished in the 1980s . in physics and mathematics , the student could directly obtain a kandidaats ( candidate ) diploma in two years . the candidate diploma was all but abolished by 1989 . it used to be attained after completion of the majority of courses of the academic study ( usually after completion of course requirements of the third year in the program ) , after which the student was allowed to begin work on their doctorandus thesis . the successful completion of this thesis conveyed the doctorandus title , implying that the student 's initial studies were finished . in addition to these 'general ' degrees , specific titles equivalent to the doctorandus degree were awarded for law : meester ( master ) ( mr . ) , and for engineering : ingenieur ( engineer ) ( ir . ) . following the bologna protocol the dutch adopted the anglo-saxon system of academic degrees . the old candidate 's degree was revived to become the bachelor 's degree and the doctorandus ' ( mr and ir degree ) were replaced by master 's degrees . dutch university programmes tend to include advanced subject matter that e.g . , at harvard is taught in ph.d.-courses ( for instance advanced quantum mechanics or general relativity in a dutch course for the master 's degree in theoretical physics ) . students can only enroll in a doctorate system after completing a research university level master 's degree ; although dispensation can be granted on a case-by-case basis after scrutiny of the individual 's portfolio . the most common way to conduct doctoral studies is to work as promovendus/assistant in opleiding ( aio ) /onderzoeker in opleiding ( oio ) ( research assistant with additional courses and supervision ) , perform extensive research and write a dissertation consisting of published articles ( over a period of four or more years , averaging about 5.5 to 6 ) . research can also be conducted without official research assistant status , for example through a business-sponsored research laboratory . every ph.d . thesis has to be promoted by a full university professor who has the role of principal advisor . the promotor ( professor ) determines whether the thesis quality suffices and can be submitted to the committee of experts . a committee of experts in the field review the thesis . failures at this stage are rare because supervisors withhold inadequate work . the supervisors and promotor lose prestige among their colleagues should they allow a substandard thesis to be submitted . after reviewer approval , the candidate publishes the thesis ( generally more than 100 copies ) and sends it to colleagues , friends and family with an invitation to the public defense . the degree is awarded in a formal , public , defense session , in which the thesis is defended against critical questions of the '' opposition '' ( the review committee ) . failure during this session is possible , but rare . before the defense there may or may not be a public presentation , lasting 10 minutes ( e.g . eindhoven university ) to exactly half hour ( e.g . delft university ) . the actual defense lasts exactly the assigned time slot ( 45 minutes to 1 hour exactly depending on the university ) after which the defense is stopped by the bedel who closes the process . the doctor 's title is the highest academic degree in the netherlands . in research doctorates the degree is always ph.d . with no distinction between disciplines . three dutch universities of technology ( eindhoven university of technology , delft university of technology , and university of twente ) also award a ( lower ranked ) professional doctorate in engineering ( pdeng ) . although the title doctor is informally called ph.d . , legally no ph.d . degree exists . all other university titles ( b.sc./b.ba./ll.b./b.a . m.sc./m.b.a./ll.m./m.a . ) are protected by law , while ph.d . is not . any person thus can adopt the ph.d . title , but not the doctor title , which is protected . those who obtained a degree in a foreign country can only use the dutch title drs . mr . ir . or dr . if approved by the dienst uitvoering onderwijs though according to the opportunity principle , little effort monitors such frauds . dutch doctors may use the letter d behind their name instead of the uncapitalized shortcut dr . before their name . those who have multiple doctor ( dr . ) titles may use the title dr.mult . those who have received honoris causa doctorates may use dr.h.c . before their own name . in belgium 's flemish community the doctorandus title was only used by those who actually started their doctoral work . doctorandus is still used as a synonym for a ph.d . student . the licentiaat ( licensee ) title was in use for a regular graduate until the bologna reform changed the licentiaat degree to the master 's degree ( the bologna reform abolished the two-year kandidaat degree and introduced a three-year academic bachelor 's degree instead ) . sciences '' ( the literal translation means '' candidate of sciences '' , ) ( for instance , kandidat of medical sciences , of chemical sciences , of philological sciences etc . ) . the kandidat of sciences degree is usually recognised as an equivalent of the doctor of philosophy ( ph.d . ) degree and requires at least ( and typically more than ) three , four or five years of post-graduate research which is finished by defence of dissertation or rarely—thesis . additionally , a seeker of the degree has to pass three examinations ( a so-called '' kandidate 's minimum '' ) : in his/her special field , in a foreign language , and in the history and philosophy of science , which originates from the course of communist ideology named similar in soviet times . after additional certification by the corresponding experts , the kandidat degree may be recognized internationally as an equivalent of the ph.d . ( an unconditional ph.d . equivalence has been recognized before the dissolution of the soviet union , and the additional certification in many countries has become a requirement following the steep increased flow of post-soviet emigration . ) the second stage , doktor nauk , '' doctor of sciences '' , requires many years of research experience , and writing of a second dissertation . obtaining doktor nauk degree is usually associated with approval for a professorial position in russian universities , while holders of kandidat degree are rarely allowed to hold this administrative post . the degrees of kandidat and doktor of sciences are only awarded by the special governmental agency ( higher attestation commission ) ; only the university or scientific institute where the thesis was defended can recommend the award of this degree to candidates . -- -- > . russia . in the russian empire the academic degree '' doctor of the sciences '' ( doktor nauk ) marked the highest academic degree that can be achieved by an examination . ( the '' doctor nauk '' degree was introduced in russia in 1819 , abolished in 1917 , and revived in the ussr in 1934 . ) leitenberg , milton and raymond a . zilinskas ( 2012 ) , the soviet biological weapons program : a history , cambridge , massachusetts : harvard university press , 2012 , table 2.1 . this system was generally adopted by the ussr/russia and many post-soviet countries . a lower degree , '' candidate of sciences candidate doctor of the sciences '' ( kandidat nauk ; first introduced in the ussr on january 13 , 1934 , by a decision of the sovnarkom ) , is , roughly , the russian equivalent to the research doctorate in other countries . spain . doctoral degrees are regulated by royal decree ( r.d . 778/1998 ) , real decreto ( in spanish ) . they are granted by the university on behalf of the king . its diploma has the force of a public document . the ministry of science keeps a national registry of theses called teseo . according to the national institute of statistics ( ine ) , fewer than 5 % of m.sc . degree holders are admitted to ph.d . programmes . all doctoral programs are research-oriented . a minimum of 4 years of study is required , divided into 2 stages : a 2-year ( or longer ) period of studies concludes with a public dissertation presented to a panel of 3 professors . upon approval from the university , the candidate receives a '' diploma de estudios avanzados '' ( part qualified doctor , equivalent to m.sc . ) . from 2008 it is possible to substitute the former diploma by a recognized master program . a 2-year ( or longer ) research period includes extensions for up to 10 years . the student must present a thesis describing a discovery or original contribution . if approved by their thesis director , the study is presented to a panel of 5 distinguished scholars . any doctor attending the public defense is allowed to challenge the candidate with questions . if approved , the candidate receives the doctorate . four marks used to be granted : unsatisfactory ( suspenso ) , pass ( aprobado ) , remarkable ( notable ) , '' cum laude '' ( sobresaliente ) , and '' summa cum laude '' ( sobresaliente cum laude ) . those doctors granted their degree '' summa cum laude '' were allowed to apply for an '' extraordinary award '' . since september 2012 and regulated by royal decree ( r.d . 99/2011 ) ( in spanish ) , three marks can be granted : unsatisfactory ( no apto ) , pass ( apto ) and '' cum laude '' ( apto cum laude ) as maximum mark . in the public defense the doctor is notified if the thesis has passed or not passed . the apto cum laude mark is awarded after the public defense as the result of a private , anonymous vote . votes are verified by the university . a unanimous vote of the reviewers nominates doctors granted apto cum laude for an '' extraordinary award '' ( premio extraordinario de doctorado ) . in the same royal decree the initial 3-year study period was replaced by a research master 's degree ( one or two years ; professional master 's degrees do not grant direct access to ph.d . programs ) that concludes with a public dissertation called '' trabajo de fin de máster '' or '' proyecto de fin de máster '' . an approved project earns a master 's degree that grants access to a ph.d . program and initiates the period of research . a doctorate is required in order to teach at the university . only ph.d . holders , grandees and dukes can sit and cover their heads in the presence of the king . from 1857 , complutense university was the only one in spain authorised to confer the doctorate . this law remained in effect until 1954 , when the university of salamanca joined in commemoration of its septcentenary . in 1970 , the right was extended to all spanish universities . all doctorate holders are reciprocally recognised as equivalent in germany and spain ( according to the '' bonn agreement of november 14 , 1994 '' ) . . united kingdom . . history of the uk doctorate . the doctorate has long existed in the uk as , originally , the second degree in divinity , law , medicine and music . but it was not until the late 19th century that the research doctorate , now known as the higher doctorate , was introduced . the first higher doctorate was the doctor of science at durham university , introduced in 1882 . this was soon followed by other universities , including the university of cambridge establishing its scd in the same year , the university of london transforming its dsc from an advanced study course to a research degree in 1885 , and the university of oxford establishing its doctor of letters ( dlitt ) in 1900 . m.g . brock and m.c curthouys , eds . , the history of the university of oxford . , vol . vii , part 2 : nineteenth century oxford , ( oxford : oxford university press , 2000 ) , p . 619 . the phd was adopted in the uk following a joint decision in 1917 by british universities , although it took much longer for it to become established . oxford became the first university to institute the new degree , although naming it the dphil . the phd was often distinguished from the earlier higher doctorates by distinctive academic dress . at cambridge , for example , phds wear a master 's gown with scarlet facings rather than the full scarlet gown of the higher doctors , while the university of wales gave phds crimson gowns rather than scarlet . professional doctorates were introduced in britain in the 1980s and 1990s . the earliest professional doctorates were in the social sciences , including the doctor of business administration ( dba ) , doctor of education ( edd ) and doctor of clinical psychology ( dclinpsy ) . . british doctorates today . today , except for those awarded honoris causa ( honorary degrees ) , all doctorates granted by british universities are research doctorates , in that their main ( and in many cases only ) component is the submission of an extensive and substantial thesis or portfolio of original research , examined by an expert panel appointed by the university . uk doctorates are categorised as : ; junior doctorates : subject specialist doctorates – normally phd/dphil ; the most common form of doctorate : integrated subject specialist doctorates – integrated phds including teaching at master 's level : doctorates by publication – phd by published works ; only awarded infrequently : professional and practice-based ( or practitioner ) doctorates – e.g . edd , profdoc/dprof , engd , etc . ; usually include taught elements and have a professional , rather than academic , orientation ; higher doctorates : e.g . dd , lld , dsc , dlitt ; higher level than junior doctorates , usually awarded either for a substantial body of work over an extended period or as honorary degrees . the quality assurance agency states in the framework for higher education qualifications of uk degree-awarding bodies ( which covers junior doctorates but not higher doctorates ) that : in the uk , the ( junior ) doctorate is a qualification awarded at fheq level 8/level 12 of the fqheis on the national qualifications frameworks . the higher doctorates are stated to be '' a higher level of award '' , which is not covered by the qualifications frameworks . . subject specialist doctorates . these are the most common doctorates in the uk and are normally awarded as phds . while the master/apprentice model was traditionally used for british phds , since 2003 courses have become more structured , with students taking courses in research skills and receiving training for professional and personal development . however , the assessment of the phd remains based on the production of a thesis or equivalent and its defence at a oral exam oral examination , normally held in front of at least two examiners , one internal and one external . access to phds normally requires an british degree classification bachelor 's degree , or a master 's degree . courses normally last three years , although it is common for students to be initially registered for mphil degrees and then formally transferred onto the phd after a year or two . students who are not considered likely to complete a phd may be offered the opportunity to complete an mphil instead . integrated doctorates , originally known as 'new route phds ' , were introduced from 2000 onwards . these integrate teaching at master 's level during the first one or two years of the degree , either alongside research or as a preliminary to starting research . these courses usually offer a master's-level exit degree after the taught courses are completed . while passing the taught elements is often required , examination of the final doctorate is still by thesis ( or equivalent ) alone . the duration of integrated doctorates is a minimum of four years , with three years spent on the research component . in 2013 , research councils uk issued a 'statement of expectations for postgraduate training ' , which lays out the expectations for training in phds funded by the research councils . in the latest version ( 2016 ) , issued together with cancer research uk , the wellcome trust and the british heart foundation , these include the provision of careers advice , in-depth advanced training in the subject area , provision of transferable skills , training in experimental design and statistics , training in good research conduct , and training for compliance with legal , ethical and professional frameworks . the statement also encourages peer-group development through cohort training and/or graduate schools . . higher doctorates . higher doctorates are awarded in recognition of a substantial body of original research undertaken over the course of many years . typically the candidate submits a collection of previously published , peer-refereed work , which is reviewed by a committee of internal and external academics who decide whether the candidate deserves the doctorate . the higher doctorate is similar in some respects to the habilitation in some european countries . however , the purpose of the award is significantly different . while the habilitation formally determines whether an academic is suitably qualified to be a university professor , the higher doctorate does not qualify the holder for a position but rather recognises their contribution to research . higher doctorates were defined by the uk council for graduate education ( ukcge ) in 2013 as : in terms of number of institutions offering the awards , the most common doctorates of this type in ukcge surveys carried out in 2008 and 2013 were the doctor of science ( dsc ) , doctor of letters ( dlitt ) , doctor of law ( lld ) , doctor of music ( dmus ) and doctor of divinity ( dd ) ; in the 2008 survey the doctor of technology ( dtech ) tied with the dd . the dsc was offered by all 49 responding institutions in 2008 and 15 out of 16 in 2013 and the dlitt by only one less in each case , while the dd was offered in 10 responding institutions in 2008 and 3 in 2013 . in terms of number of higher doctorates awarded ( not including honorary doctorates ) the dsc was most popular , but the number of awards was very low : the responding institutions had averaged an award of at most one earned higher doctorate per year over the period 2003–2013 . . honorary degrees . most british universities award degrees honoris causa to recognise individuals who have made a substantial contribution to a particular field . usually an appropriate higher doctorate is used in these circumstances , depending on the candidate 's achievements . however , some universities differentiate between honorary and substantive doctorates , using the degree of doctor of the university ( d.univ . ) for these purposes , and reserve the higher doctorates for formal academic research . united states . the structure of us doctoral programs is more formal and complex than some others . us research doctorates are awarded for successfully completing and defending independent research presented in the form of a dissertation , along with advanced study . multiple professional degrees use the term '' doctor '' in their title , such as juris doctor and doctor of medicine , but these degrees do not always contain an independent research component or always require a dissertation and should not be confused with ph.d./d.phil./ed.d./d.ed . degrees or other research doctorates . law school graduates , although awarded the j.d . degree , are not normally addressed as '' doctor '' . in legal studies the ph.d . equivalent is the much rarer doctor of juridical science . many universities offer ph.d./d.phil . followed by a professional doctorate or joint ph.d./d.phil . with the professional degree . most often , ph.d . work comes sequential to the professional degree , e.g . , ph.d./d.phil . in law after a j.d . or equivalent in physical therapy after dpt , in pharmacy after pharm.d . such professional degrees are referred to as an entry level doctorate program and ph.d . as a post-professional doctorate . . research degrees . the most common research doctorate is the doctor of philosophy ( ph.d . or d.phil . ) . this degree was first awarded in the u.s . at the 1861 yale university commencement . . retrieved on 2010-10-26 . the university of pennsylvania followed in 1871 , american higher education in the . – google books . books.google.com . retrieved on 2010-10-26 . with cornell ( 1872 ) , cornell university graduate school – our history . gradschool.cornell.edu . retrieved on 2010-10-26 . harvard ( 1873 ) , michigan ( 1876 ) . bicentennial timeline and princeton ( 1879 ) history & purpose – the graduate school – princeton university . gradschool.princeton.edu ( 2010-10-01 ) . retrieved on 2010-10-26 . following suit . unlike the introduction of the professional doctorate m.d . , considerable controversy and opposition followed the introduction of the ph.d . into the u.s . educational system , lasting into the 1950s , as it was seen as an unnecessary artificial transplant from a foreign ( germany ) educational system , which corrupted a system based on england 's oxbridge model . prior , moody e . ( 1965 ) . '' the doctor of philosophy degree . '' in walters , e . ed . graduate education today . american council on education . washington , d.c . p . 32 . ph.d.s and other research doctorates in the u.s . typically entail successful completion of pertinent classes , passing a comprehensive examination , and thesis defense . the median number of years for completion of us doctoral degrees is seven . doctoral applicants were previously required to have a master 's degree , but many programs accept students immediately following undergraduate studies . many programs gauge the potential of a student applying to their program and grant a master 's degree upon completion of the necessary ph.d . course work . when so admitted , the student is expected to have mastered the material covered in the master 's degree despite not holding one , though this tradition is under heavy criticism . finishing ph.d . qualifying exams confers ph.d . candidate status , allowing dissertation work to begin . while not authoritative , the international affairs office of the u.s . department of education listed over 20 '' frequently '' awarded research doctorate titles identified by the national science foundation ( nsf ) in a 2008 document as representing degrees equivalent in research content to the ph.d . at the time . the 2008 version of the nsf list of research doctorates included in the survey of earned doctorates ( sed ) , contained 18 awards . the doctor of music and doctor of industrial technology were removed in 2008 , after the study evaluation identified that these were fully professional , rather than research-based , doctorates . the current list ( as of the 2016 sed , published in march 2018 ) contains the same 18 awards . . professional degrees . many fields offer professional doctorates ( or professional master 's ) such as pharmacy , medicine , public health , dentistry , occupational therapy , optometry , psychology , speech-language pathology , physical therapy , occupational therapy , health science , advanced practice registered nurse , chiropractic , naturopathic medicine , law , architecture , education , teaching , trade , management , and others that require such degrees for professional practice or licensure . some of these degrees are also termed '' first professional degrees , '' since they are the first field-specific master 's or doctoral degrees . a doctor of pharmacy is awarded as the professional degree in pharmacy replacing a bachelor 's degree . it is the only professional pharmacy degree awarded in the us . pharmacy programs vary in length between 4 years for matriculants with a b.s./b.a . to 6 years for others . in the twenty-first century professional doctorates appeared in other fields , such as the doctor of audiology in 2007 . advanced practice registered nurses were expected to completely transition to the doctor of nursing practice by 2015 , and physical therapists to the doctor of physical therapy by 2020 . professional associations play a central role in this transformation amid criticisms on the lack of proper criteria to assure appropriate rigor . in many cases masters level programs were relabeled as doctoral programs . . revocation . a doctoral degree can be revoked or rescinded by the university that awarded it . possible reasons include plagiarism , criminal or unethical activities of the author , or malfunction or manipulation of academic evaluation processes . . see also . compilation thesis habilitation doctor ( title ) eurodoctorate list of fields of doctoral studies