Early Islamic philosophy

origin . muhammad . the life of muhammad or sira generated both the qur'an ( revelation ) and hadith ( his daily utterances and discourses ) , during which philosophy was defined by muslims as consisting in acceptance or rejection of his message . together the sira and hadith constitute the sunnah and are validated by isnad ( '' backing '' ) to determine the likely truth of the report of any given saying of muhammad . key figures are imam ahmad ibn hanbal , imam bukhari , imam muslim , al-tirmidhi , ibn majah , abu dawud and al-nasa ' i . this work , which was not completed until the 10th century , began shortly after the farewell sermon in 631 . branches . kalam . ilm al-kalām , literally the study of '' speech '' or '' words '' ) is the islamic philosophy discipline of seeking theological principles through dialectic . kalām in islamic practice relates to the discipline of seeking theological knowledge through debate and argument . a scholar of kalām is referred to as a mutakallim ( plural mutakallimiin ) . with kalam , questions about the sira and hadith , as well as science ( islamic science ) and law ( fiqh and sharia ) , began to be investigated beyond the scope of muhammad 's beliefs . this period is characterized by emergence of ijtihad and the first fiqh . as the sunnah became published and accepted , philosophy separate from muslim theology was discouraged due to a lack of participants . during this period , traditions similar to socratic method began to evolve , but philosophy remained subordinate to religion . independent minds exploiting the methods of ijtihad sought to investigate the doctrines of the qur'an , which until then had been accepted in faith on the authority of divine revelation . one of the first debates was that between the qadarites , who affirmed free will , and the jabarites , who maintained the belief in fatalism . at the 2nd century of the hijra , a new movement arose in the theological school of basra , iraq . a pupil , wasil ibn ata ( ad 700–748 ) , who was expelled from the school of hasan of basra because his answers were contrary to then-orthodox islamic tradition and became leader of a new school , and systematized the radical opinions of preceding sects , particularly those of the qadarites . this new school was called mutazilite ( from i'tazala , to separate oneself , to dissent ) that lasted from the 8th to 10th centuries . its principal dogmas were three : god is an absolute unity , and no attribute can be ascribed to him . man is a free agent . it is on account of these two principles that the mu'tazilities designate themselves the '' partisans of justice and unity '' . all knowledge necessary for the salvation of man emanates from his reason ; humans could acquire knowledge before , as well as after , revelation , by the sole light of reason . this fact makes knowledge obligatory upon all men , at all times , and in all places . the mutazilities , compelled to defend their principles against the orthodox islam of their day , looked for support in philosophy , and are one of the first to pursue a rational theology called ilm-al-kalam ( scholasticism ) ; those professing it were called mutakallamin . this appellation became the common name for all seeking philosophical demonstration in confirmation of religious principles . the first mutakallamin had to debate both the orthodox and the non-muslims , and they may be described as occupying the middle ground between those two parties . but subsequent generations were to large extent critical towards the mutazilite school , especially after formation of the asharite concepts . throughout history , the place of kalam in islamic thought has been controversial . the vast majority of the early traditional sunni muslim scholars have either criticized or prohibited it . jewish and muslim peripatetics , generally , stopped short in their respective aristotelianism whenever there was danger of wounding orthodox religion . falsafa . from the 9th century onward , owing to caliph al-ma'mun and his successor , greek philosophy was introduced among the arabs , and the peripatetic school began to find able representatives among them ; such were al-kindi , al-farabi , avicenna , and averroes , all of whose fundamental principles were considered as criticized by the mutakallamin . another trend , represented by the brethren of purity , used aristotelian language to expound a fundamentally neoplatonic and neopythagorean world view . during the abbasid caliphate a number of thinkers and scientists , some of them heterodox muslims or non-muslims , played a role in transmitting greek , hindu , and other pre-islamic knowledge to the christian west . they contributed to making aristotle known in christian europe . three speculative thinkers , al-farabi , avicenna and al-kindi , combined aristotelianism and neoplatonism with other ideas introduced through islam . they were considered by many as highly unorthodox and a few even described them as non-islamic philosophers . from spain arabic philosophic literature was translated into hebrew and latin , contributing to the development of modern european philosophy . the philosophers maimonides ( a jew born in al andalus ) and ibn khaldun ( born in modern-day tunisia ) , the father of sociology and historiography , were also important philosophers , though the latter did not identify himself as a falsafa , but rather a kalam author . some differences between kalam and falsafa . aristotle attempted to demonstrate the unity of god ; but from the view which he maintained , that matter was eternal , it followed that god could not be the creator of the world . to assert that god 's knowledge extends only to the general laws of the universe , and not to individual and accidental things , is tantamount to denying prophecy . one other part of aristotle 's theory shocked the faith of the mutakallamin & mdash ; the aristotelian theory of the soul . according to aristotelianism , the human soul is simply man 's substantial form , the set of properties that make matter into a living human body . anthony kenny , aquinas on mind ( london : routledge , 1993 ) , p . 24 , 26 , 28 this seems to imply that the human soul can not exist apart from the body . indeed , aristotle writes , '' it is clear that the soul , or at least some parts of it ( if it is divisible ) , can not be separated from the body . and thus , those have the right idea who think that the soul does not exist without the body . '' de anima 413a4-5 ; 414a19-20 in aristotelianism , at least one psychological force , the active intellect , can exist apart from the body . '' this intellect is separate , unaffected , and unmixed . in separation , it is just what it is , and this alone is immortal and eternal '' ( de anima 430a18 , 23-24 ) . however , according to many interpretations , the active intellect is a superhuman entity emanating from god and enlightening the human mind , not a part of any individual human soul . medieval philosophy , ed . john marenbon ( london : routledge , 2003 ) , p . 54 timothy robinson , aristotle in outline ( indianapolis : hackett , 1995 ) p . 51 thus , aristotle 's theories seem to deny the immortality of the individual human soul . wherefore the mutakallamin had , before anything else , to establish a system of philosophy to demonstrate the creation of matter , and they adopted to that end the theory of atoms as enunciated by democritus . they taught that atoms possess neither quantity nor extension . originally atoms were created by god , and are created now as occasion seems to require . bodies come into existence or die , through the aggregation or the sunderance of these atoms . but this theory did not remove the objections of philosophy to a creation of matter . for , indeed , if it be supposed that god commenced his work at a certain definite time by his '' will '' , and for a certain definite object , it must be admitted that he was imperfect before accomplishing his will , or before attaining his object . in order to obviate this difficulty , the motekallamin extended their theory of the atoms to time , and claimed that just as space is constituted of atoms and vacuum , time , likewise , is constituted of small indivisible moments . the creation of the world once established , it was an easy matter for them to demonstrate the existence of a creator , and that god is unique , omnipotent , and omniscient . main protagonists of falsafa and their critics . the 12th century saw the apotheosis of pure philosophy and the decline of the kalam , which later , being attacked by both the philosophers and the orthodox , perished for lack of champions . this supreme exaltation of philosophy may be attributed , in great measure , to al-ghazali ( 1005–1111 ) among the persians , and to judah ha-levi ( 1140 ) among the jews . it can be argued that the attacks directed against the philosophers by al-ghazali in his work , tahafut al-falasifa ( the incoherence of the philosophers ) , not only produced , by reaction , a current favorable to philosophy , but induced the philosophers themselves to profit by his criticism . they thereafter made their theories clearer and their logic closer . the influence of this reaction brought forth the two greatest philosophers that the islamic peripatetic school ever produced , namely , ibn bajjah ( avempace ) and ibn rushd ( averroes ) , both of whom undertook the defense of philosophy . since no idea and no literary or philosophical movement ever germinated on persian or arabian soil without leaving its impress on the jews , the persian ghazali found an imitator in the person of judah ha-levi . this poet also took upon himself to free his religion from what he saw as the shackles of speculative philosophy , and to this end wrote the '' kuzari '' , in which he sought to discredit all schools of philosophy alike . he passes severe censure upon the mutakallamin for seeking to support religion by philosophy . he says , '' i consider him to have attained the highest degree of perfection who is convinced of religious truths without having scrutinized them and reasoned over them '' ( '' kuzari '' , v . ) . then he reduced the chief propositions of the mutakallamin , to prove the unity of god , to ten in number , describing them at length , and concluding in these terms : '' does the kalam give us more information concerning god and his attributes than the prophet did ? '' ( ib . iii . and iv . ) aristotelianism finds no favor in judah ha-levi 's eyes , for it is no less given to details and criticism ; neoplatonism alone suited him somewhat , owing to its appeal to his poetic temperament . averroes ( averroës ) , the contemporary of maimonides , closed the first great philosophical era of the muslims . he was a defender of aristotelian philosophy against ash'ari theologians led by al-ghazali . averroes ' philosophy was considered controversial in muslim circles . the theories of ibn rushd do not differ fundamentally from those of ibn bajjah and ibn tufail , who only follow the teachings of ibn sina ( avicenna ) and al-farabi . like all islamic peripatetics , ibn rushd admits the hypothesis of the intelligence of the spheres and the hypothesis of universal emanation , through which motion is communicated from place to place to all parts of the universe as far as the supreme world & mdash ; hypotheses which , in the mind of the arabic philosophers , did away with the dualism involved in aristotle 's doctrine of pure energy and eternal matter . his ideas on the separation of philosophy and religion , further developed by the averroism school of philosophy , were later influential in the development of modern secularism . but while al-farabi , ibn sina ( avicenna ) , and other persian and muslim philosophers hurried , so to speak , over subjects that trenched on religious dogmas , ibn rushd delighted in dwelling upon them with full particularity and stress . thus he says , '' not only is matter eternal , but form is potentially inherent in matter ; otherwise , it were a creation ex nihilo '' ( munk , '' mélanges '' , p . & nbsp ; 444 ) . according to this theory , therefore , the existence of this world is not only a possibility , as ibn sina declared & mdash ; in order to make concessions to the orthodox & mdash ; but also a necessity . driven from the islamic schools , islamic philosophy found a refuge with the jews , to whom belongs the honor of having transmitted it to the christian world . a series of eminent men & mdash ; such as the ibn tibbons , narboni , gersonides & mdash ; joined in translating the arabic philosophical works into hebrew and commenting upon them . the works of ibn rushd especially became the subject of their study , due in great measure to maimonides , who , in a letter addressed to his pupil joseph ben judah , spoke in the highest terms of ibn rushd 's commentary . it should be mentioned that this depiction of intellectual tradition in islamic lands is mainly dependent upon what west could understand ( or was willing to understand ) from this long era . in contrast , there are some historians and philosophers who do not agree with this account and describe this era in a completely different way . their main point of dispute is on the influence of different philosophers on islamic philosophy , especially the comparative importance of eastern intellectuals such as ibn sina and of western thinkers such as ibn rushd . henry corbin , history of islamic philosophy . . judeo-islamic philosophy . the oldest jewish religio-philosophical work preserved is that of saadia gaon ( 892-942 ) , emunot ve-deot , '' the book of beliefs and opinions '' . in this work saadia treats the questions that interested the mutakallamin , such as the creation of matter , the unity of god , the divine attributes , the soul , etc . saadia criticizes other philosophers severely . for saadia there was no problem as to creation : god created the world ex nihilo , just as the bible attests ; and he contests the theory of the mutakallamin in reference to atoms , which theory , he declares , is just as contrary to reason and religion as the theory of the philosophers professing the eternity of matter . to prove the unity of god , saadia uses the demonstrations of the mutakallamin . only the attributes of essence ( sifat al-dhatia ) can be ascribed to god , but not the attributes of action ( sifat-al-fi'aliya ) . the soul is a substance more delicate even than that of the celestial spheres . here saadia controverts the mutakallamin , who considered the soul an '' accident '' arad ( compare guide for the perplexed i . 74 ) , and employs the following one of their premises to justify his position : '' only a substance can be the substratum of an accident '' ( that is , of a non-essential property of things ) . saadia argues : '' if the soul be an accident only , it can itself have no such accidents as wisdom , joy , love '' , etc . saadia was thus in every way a supporter of the kalam ; and if at times he deviated from its doctrines , it was owing to his religious views ; just as the jewish and muslim peripatetics stopped short in their respective aristotelianism whenever there was danger of wounding orthodox religion . schools . farabism . al-farabi ( alfarabi ) was a founder of his own school of islamic philosophy but which was later overshadowed by avicennism . al-farabi 's school of philosophy '' breaks with the philosophy of plato and aristotle . and . moves from metaphysics to methodology , a move that anticipates modernity '' , and '' at the level of philosophy , alfarabi unites theory and practice . and in the sphere of the politics he liberates practice from theory '' . his neoplatonic theology is also more than just metaphysics as rhetoric . in his attempt to think through the nature of a first cause , alfarabi discovers the limits of human knowledge '' . al-farabi had great influence on science and philosophy for several centuries , and was widely considered second only to aristotle in knowledge ( alluded to by his title of '' the second teacher '' ) in his time . his work , aimed at synthesis of philosophy and sufism , paved the way for the work of avicenna ( avicenna ) . . avicennism . due to avicenna 's ( ibn sina 's ) successful reconciliation between aristotelianism and neoplatonism along with kalam , avicennism eventually became the leading school of islamic philosophy by the 12th century . avicenna had become a central authority on philosophy by then , and several scholars in the 12th century commented on his strong influence at the time : nahyan a . g . fancy ( 2006 ) , p . 80-81 , '' pulmonary transit and bodily resurrection : the interaction of medicine , philosophy and religion in the works of ibn al-nafīs ( d . 1288 ) '' , electronic theses and dissertations , university of notre dame . avicennism was also influential in medieval europe , particularly his doctrines on the nature of the soul and his existence-essence distinction , along with the debates and censure that they raised in scholasticism . this was particularly the case in paris , where avicennism was later proscribed in 1210 . nevertheless , his psychology and theory of knowledge influenced william of auvergne and albertus magnus , and his metaphysics influenced the thought of thomas aquinas . the internet encyclopedia of philosophy , avicenna/ibn sina ( ca . 980-1037 ) . averroism . averroes ( ibn rushd ) is most famous for his commentaries on aristotle 's works and for writing the incoherence of the incoherence in which he defended the falasifa against al-ghazali 's the incoherence of the philosophers . while he had very little influence in the islamic world , which was then dominated by avicennian philosophy and ash'ari theology , averroism became very influential in medieval europe , especially among the scholastics . averroism eventually led to the development of modern secularism , abdel wahab el messeri . episode 21 : ibn rushd , everything you wanted to know about islam but were afraid to ask , philosophia islamica . fauzi m . najjar ( spring , 1996 ) . the debate on islam and secularism in egypt , arab studies quarterly ( asq ) . for which ibn rushd is considered as the founding father of secular thought in western europe . majid fakhry ( 2001 ) . averroes : his life , works and influence . oneworld publications . the concept of '' existence precedes essence '' , a key foundational concept of existentialism , can also be found in the works of averroes , as a reaction to avicenna 's concept of '' essence precedes existence '' . . ethics . environmental philosophy . perhaps due to resource scarcity in most islamic nations , there was an emphasis on limited ( and some claim also sustainable ) use of natural capital , i.e . producing land . traditions of haram and hima and early urban planning were expressions of strong social obligations to stay within carrying capacity and to preserve the natural environment as an obligation of khalifa or '' stewardship '' . s . nomanul haq , '' islam '' , in dale jamieson ( 2001 ) , a companion to environmental philosophy , pp . 111-129 , blackwell publishing , . muhammad is considered a pioneer of environmentalism for his teachings on environmental preservation . his hadiths on agriculture and environmental philosophy were compiled in the '' book of agriculture '' of the sahih bukhari , which included the following saying : s . nomanul haq , '' islam '' , in dale jamieson ( 2001 ) , a companion to environmental philosophy , pp . 111-129 119-129 , blackwell publishing , . several such statements concerning the environment are also found in the qur'an , such as the following : s . nomanul haq , '' islam '' , in dale jamieson ( 2001 ) , a companion to environmental philosophy , pp . 111-129 111-119 , blackwell publishing , . avicenna 's most influential theory in epistemology is his theory of knowledge , in which he developed the concept of tabula rasa . he argued that the '' human intellect at birth is rather like a tabula rasa , a pure potentiality that is actualized through education and comes to know '' and that knowledge is attained through '' empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts '' which is developed through a '' syllogism method of reasoning ; observations lead to prepositional statements , which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts . '' sajjad h . rizvi ( 2006 ) , avicenna/ibn sina ( ca . 980-1037 ) , internet encyclopedia of philosophy in the 12th century , ibn tufail further developed the concept of tabula rasa in his arabic novel , hayy ibn yaqzan , in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child '' from a tabula rasa to that of an adult , in complete isolation from society '' on a desert island . the latin translation of his work , entitled philosophus autodidactus , published by edward pococke the younger in 1671 , had an influence on john locke 's formulation of tabula rasa in an essay concerning human understanding . g . a . russell ( 1994 ) , the 'arabick ' interest of the natural philosophers in seventeenth-century england , pp . 224-262 , brill publishers , . . eschatology . islamic eschatology is concerned with the qiyamah ( end of the world ; last judgement ) and the last judgment . eschatology relates to one of the six articles of faith ( aqidah ) of islam . like the other abrahamic religions , islam teaches the bodily resurrection of the dead , the fulfillment of a divine plan for creation , and the immortality of the human soul ( though jews do not necessarily view the soul as eternal ) ; the righteous are rewarded with the pleasures of jannah ( heaven ) , while the unrighteous are punished in jahannam ( hell ) . a significant fraction ( one third , in fact ) of the quran deals with these beliefs , with many hadith elaborating on the themes and details . islamic apocalyptic literature describing the armageddon is often known as fitna ( a test ) and malahim ( or ghayba in the shi ' a tradition ) . ibn al-nafis dealt with islamic eschatology in some depth in his theologus autodidactus , where he rationality the islamic view of eschatology using reason and science to explain the events that would occur according to islamic eschatology . he presented his rational and scientific arguments in the form of arabic fiction , hence his theologus autodidactus may be considered the earliest science fiction work . dr . abu shadi al-roubi ( 1982 ) , '' ibn al-nafis as a philosopher '' , symposium on ibn al-nafis , second international conference on islamic medicine : islamic medical organization , kuwait ( cf . ibn al-nafis as a philosopher , encyclopedia of islamic world ) . . legal philosophy . sharia refers to the body of islamic law . the term means '' way '' or '' path '' ; it is the legal framework within which public and some private aspects of life are regulated for those living in a legal system based on islamic principles of jurisprudence . fiqh is the term for islamic jurisprudence , made up of the rulings of islamic jurists . a component of islamic studies , fiqh expounds the methodology by which islamic law is derived from primary and secondary sources . mainstream islam distinguish fiqh , which means understanding details and inferences drawn by scholars , from sharia that refers to principles that lie behind the fiqh . scholars hope that fiqh and sharia are in harmony in any given case , but they can not be sure . on the sources of islamic law and practices , the journal of law and religion 0748-0814 souaiaia yr:2005 vol:20 iss:1 pg:123 . philosophical novels . the islamic philosophers , ibn tufail ( abubacer ) jon mcginnis , classical arabic philosophy : an anthology of sources , p . 284 , hackett publishing company , . and ibn al-nafis , muhsin mahdi ( 1974 ) , '' the theologus autodidactus of ibn at-nafis by max meyerhof , joseph schacht '' , journal of the american oriental society 94 ( 2 ) , p . 232-234 . were pioneers of the philosophical novel . ibn tufail wrote the first fictional arabic novel hayy ibn yaqdhan ( philosophus autodidactus ) as a response to al-ghazali 's the incoherence of the philosophers , and then ibn al-nafis also wrote a fictional novel theologus autodidactus as a response to ibn tufail 's philosophus autodidactus . both of these novels had protagonists ( hayy in philosophus autodidactus and kamil in theologus autodidactus ) who were autodidactic individuals abiogenesis in a cave and living in seclusion on a desert island , both being the earliest examples of a desert island story . however , while hayy lives alone on the desert island for most of the story in philosophus autodidactus , the story of kamil extends beyond the desert island setting in theologus autodidactus , developing into the first example of a science fiction novel . nahyan a . g . fancy ( 2006 ) , '' pulmonary transit and bodily resurrection : the interaction of medicine , philosophy and religion in the works of ibn al-nafīs ( died 1288 ) '' , p . 95-101 , electronic theses and dissertations , university of notre dame . ibn al-nafis described his book theologus autodidactus as a defense of '' the system of islam and the muslims ' doctrines on the missions of prophets , the religious laws , the resurrection of the body , and the transitoriness of the world . '' he presents rational arguments for bodily resurrection and the immortality of the human soul , using both demonstrative reasoning and material from the hadith corpus to prove his case . later islamic scholars viewed this work as a response to the metaphysics claim of avicenna and ibn tufail that bodily resurrection can not be proven through reason , a view that was earlier criticized by al-ghazali . nahyan a . g . fancy ( 2006 ) , '' pulmonary transit and bodily resurrection : the interaction of medicine , philosophy and religion in the works of ibn al-nafīs ( d . 1288 ) '' , p . 42 & 60 , electronic theses and dissertations , university of notre dame . a latin translation of philosophus autodidactus was published in 1671 , prepared by edward pococke the younger . g . j . toomer ( 1996 ) , eastern wisedome and learning : the study of arabic in seventeenth-century england , pp . 220-221 , oxford university press , . the first english translation by simon ockley was published in 1708 , and german and dutch translations were also published at the time . philosophus autodidactus went on to have a significant influence on european literature , martin wainwright , desert island scripts , the guardian , 22 march 2003 . and became an influential best-seller throughout western europe in the 17th and 18th centuries . g . a . russell ( 1994 ) , the 'arabick ' interest of the natural philosophers in seventeenth-century england , p . 228 , brill publishers , . these translations later inspired daniel defoe to write robinson crusoe , which also featured a desert island narrative and was regarded as the first novel in english . nawal muhammad hassan ( 1980 ) , hayy bin yaqzan and robinson crusoe : a study of an early arabic impact on english literature , al-rashid house for publication . cyril glasse ( 2001 ) , new encyclopedia of islam , p . 202 , rowman altamira , . amber haque ( 2004 ) , '' psychology from islamic perspective : contributions of early muslim scholars and challenges to contemporary muslim psychologists '' , journal of religion and health 43 ( 4 ) : 357-377 369 . philosophus autodidactus also had a '' profound influence '' on modern western philosophy . g . j . toomer ( 1996 ) , eastern wisedome and learning : the study of arabic in seventeenth-century england , p . 218 , oxford university press , . it became '' one of the most important books that heralded the scientific revolution '' and age of enlightenment , and the thoughts expressed in the novel can be found in '' different variations and to different degrees in the books of thomas hobbes , john locke , isaac newton , and immanuel kant . '' samar attar , the vital roots of european enlightenment : ibn tufayl 's influence on modern western thought , lexington books , . the novel inspired the concept of '' tabula rasa '' developed in an essay concerning human understanding ( 1690 ) by locke , who was a student of pococke . g . a . russell ( 1994 ) , the 'arabick ' interest of the natural philosophers in seventeenth-century england , pp . 224-239 , brill publishers , . g . j . toomer ( 1996 ) , eastern wisedome and learning : the study of arabic in seventeenth-century england , p . 221-222 , oxford university press , . philosophus autodidactus also developed the themes of empiricism , tabula rasa , nature versus nurture , condition of possibility , materialism , dominique urvoy , '' the rationality of everyday life : the andalusian tradition ? ( aropos of hayy 's first experiences ) '' , in lawrence i . conrad ( 1996 ) , the world of ibn tufayl : interdisciplinary perspectives on ḥayy ibn yaqẓān , pp . 38-46 , brill publishers , . and molyneux 's problem . muhammad ibn abd al-malik ibn tufayl and léon gauthier ( 1981 ) , risalat hayy ibn yaqzan , p . 5 , editions de la méditerranée . the novel also inspired robert boyle , another acquaintance of pococke , to write his own philosophical novel set on an island , the aspiring naturalist . g . j . toomer ( 1996 ) , eastern wisedome and learning : the study of arabic in seventeenth-century england , p . 222 , oxford university press , . other european scholars influenced by philosophus autodidactus include gottfried leibniz , melchisédech thévenot , john wallis , christiaan huygens , g . a . russell ( 1994 ) , the 'arabick ' interest of the natural philosophers in seventeenth-century england , p . 227 , brill publishers , . george keith , robert barclay , the quakers , g . a . russell ( 1994 ) , the 'arabick ' interest of the natural philosophers in seventeenth-century england , p . 247 , brill publishers , . and samuel hartlib . . political philosophy . early islamic political philosophy emphasized an inexorable link between science and religion , and the process of ijtihad to find truth - in effect all philosophy was '' political '' as it had real implications for governance . this view was challenged by the mutazilite philosophers , who held a more secular view and were supported by secular aristocracy who sought freedom of action independent of the caliphate . the only greek political treatise known to medieval muslims at the time was plato 's republic . by the end of the islamic golden age , however , the asharite view of islam had in general triumphed . islamic political philosophy , was , indeed , rooted in the very sources of islam , i.e . the qur'an and the sunnah , the words and practices of muhammad . however , in the western thought , it is generally known that it was a specific area peculiar merely to the great philosophers of islam : al-kindi ( alkindus ) , al-farabi ( alfarabi ) , avicenna ( avicenna ) , ibn bajjah ( avempace ) , averroes ( averroes ) , and ibn khaldun . the political conceptions of islam such as kudrah , sultan , ummah , cemaa -and even the '' core '' terms of the qur'an , i.e . ibada , din , rab and ilah- is taken as the basis of an analysis . hence , not only the ideas of the muslim political philosophers but also many other fiqh and ulema posed political ideas and theories . for example , the ideas of the khawarij in the very early years of muslim history on khilafa and ummah , or that of shia islam on the concept of imamah are considered proofs of political thought . the clashes between the sunni islam and shia in the 7th and 8th centuries had a genuine political character . the 14th-century arab scholar ibn khaldun is considered one of the greatest political theorists . the british philosopher-anthropologist ernest gellner considered ibn khaldun 's definition of government , '' an institution which prevents injustice other than such as it commits itself '' , the best in the history of political theory . ernest gellner , plough , sword and book ( 1988 ) , p . 239 . see also . islamic philosophy modern islamic philosophy islamic science islamic golden age peripatetic school sufi philosophy . notes . references . de lacy o'leary , d.d . how greek science passed to the arabs . chapter xiii : '' the arab philosophers '' . first published in great britain in 1949 by routledge & kegan paul ltd .