1927 in literature

events . january – the books kinokuniya ( 紀伊國屋書店 ) bookstore business is established in tokyo . february 4 – gertrude stein is honored by the académie des femmes , an informal gathering for woman writers , founded by the expatriate american natalie clifford barney starts at her paris salon . others honored include colette , anna wickham , rachilde , lucie delarue-mardrus , mina loy , djuna barnes , and posthumously , renée vivien . february 24 - the new broadway theater john golden theatre ( theatre masque ) opened in new york city at 252 west 45th street ( george abbott way ) in midtown manhattan . may 5 – virginia woolf 's stream of consciousness novel to the lighthouse is published by hogarth press in london . a second impression follows in june . it is seen as a landmark of high modernism , june 29 – t . s . eliot , hitherto unitarian , is baptised into the church of england at finstock . in november he takes british citizenship . july 7 – james joyce 's collection pomes penyeach is published by shakespeare and company in paris . july 9 – p . g . wodehouse 's short story '' pig-hoo-o-o-o-ey '' , published in the u.s . magazine liberty , introduces lord emsworth 's prize pig , the empress of blandings . the first uk appearance follows in the august issue of the strand magazine ) . august – t . s . eliot 's poem journey of the magi appears in faber and faber 's ariel poems series in london , illustrated by e . mcknight kauffer . september – eric blair ( george orwell ) decides while on leave from the imperial police in burma to remain in the u.k . he moves to london to become a writer . october – victor gollancz founds the london publishing house victor gollancz ltd . december – agatha christie 's fictional amateur detective miss marple makes a first appearance in '' the tuesday night club '' , published in the royal magazine . this becomes the first chapter of the thirteen problems ( 1932 ) . unknown dates a translation of franz roh 's work of art criticism nach expressionismus – magischer realismus : probleme der neuesten europäischen malerei ( after expressionism – magical realism : problems of the newest european painting , 1925 ) into spanish by revista de occidente leads to the concept of magic realism becoming popular in latin american literature . irene guenther , '' magic realism in the weimar republic '' in mr : theory , history , community . the strand bookstore is founded in manhattan by benjamin bass . . new books . fiction . djamaluddin adinegoro – darah muda ( young blood ) ion agârbiceanu – legea minții arthur bernède – belphégor tjoe hong bok – setangan berloemoer darah ( a glove covered in blood ) james boyd – marching on edgar rice burroughs – the outlaw of torn james branch cabell – something about eve willa cather – death comes for the archbishop blaise cendrars – la confession de dan yack agatha christie – the big four jaime de angulo – the lariat mazo de la roche – jalna warwick deeping – kitty ding ling – miss sophia 's diary arthur conan doyle – the case-book of sherlock holmes william faulkner – mosquitoes david garnett – go she must ! julien green – the closed garden ernest hemingway – men without women hermann hesse – steppenwolf james weldon johnson – god 's trombones franz kafka – amerika kwee tek hoay – boenga roos dari tjikembang ze'ev jabotinsky – samson d . h . lawrence – john thomas and lady jane halldór laxness – vefarinn mikli frá kasmír ( the great weaver from kashmir ) rosamond lehmann – dusty answer sinclair lewis – elmer gantry marie belloc lowndes – the story of ivy philip macdonald – patrol compton mackenzie rogues and vagabonds vestal fire françois mauriac – thérèse desqueyroux vilhelm moberg – raskens paul morand – the living buddha mourning dove – cogewea yury olesha – envy baroness orczy – sir percy hits back t . f . powys – mr . weston 's good wine j.b . priestley – benighted marcel proust ( posthumous ) – le temps retrouvé ( time regained or the past recaptured ; final instalment of in search of lost time ) waverley lewis root – king of the jews joseph roth – flight without end rafael sabatini – the nuptials of corbal dorothy l . sayers – unnatural death upton sinclair – oil ! aleksey nikolayevich tolstoy – the garin death ray ( « гиперболоид инженера гарина » , the hyperboloid of engineer garin ) b . traven – der schatz der sierra madre ( the treasure of the sierra madre ) sigrid undset the snake pit the son avenger konstantin vaginov – goat song s . s . van dine – the canary murder case edgar wallace the forger the squeaker terror keep the traitor 's gate thornton wilder – the bridge of san luis rey henry williamson – tarka the otter p . g . wodehouse meet mr mulliner the small bachelor virginia woolf – to the lighthouse eiji yoshikawa ( 吉川 英治 ) – naruto hitcho ( 鳴門秘帖 , a secret record of naruto ; serialization concludes ) francis brett young – portrait of clare arnold zweig – streit um den sergeanten grischa ( the case of sergeant grischa ) . children and young people . walter r . brooks – to and again ( reissued 1949 as freddy goes to florida , first of the freddy the pig series ) franklin w . dixon – the tower treasure will james – smoky the cowhorse may justus – peter pocket : a little boy of the cumberland mountains john masefield – the midnight folk a . a . milne – now we are six ( verse ) edward wyke smith – the marvellous land of snergs ( proto-hobbits ) ruth plumly thompson – the gnome king of oz ( 21st in the oz series overall and the seventh written by her ) constancio c . vigil botón tolón cuentos para niños la hormiguita viajera los escarabajos y la moneda de oro . drama . isaac babel – sunset philip barry – paris bound noel pemberton billing – high treason bertolt brecht – in the jungle of cities ( im dickicht der städte in its final version ) mikhail bulgakov – flight ( « бег » , beg , written ) james bernard fagan – the greater love federico garcía lorca – mariana pineda joseph goebbels – der wanderer ( only performances ; written 1923 ) walter c . hackett – the wicked earl dubose heyward and dorothy heyward – porgy vsevolod ivanov – armoured train 14-69 ( « бронепоезд 14-69 » , bronepoezd 14-69 ) georgia douglas johnson – plumes george s . kaufman and edna ferber – the royal family john howard lawson – loud speaker alexander lernet-holenia – szene als einleitung zu einer totenfeier für rainer maria rilke frederick lonsdale – the high road w . somerset maugham – the letter ernst toller – hoppla , we 're alive ! ( hoppla , wir leben ! ) ben travers – thark jim tully – twenty below john van druten chance acquaintance diversion bayard veiller – the trial of mary dugan roger vitrac – the mysteries of love ( les mystères de l'amour ) frank vosper – the combined maze edgar wallace double dan the terror emlyn williams – full moon carl zuckmayer – schinderhannes . poetry . robert desnos – la liberté ou l'amour ! ( liberty or love ! ) allama iqbal – zabur-i-ajam ( persian psalms ) james joyce – pomes penyeach don marquis – archy and mehitabel . non-fiction . stanley baldwin – on england and other addresses nan britton – the president 's daughter alexandra david-néel – my journey to lhasa / voyage d'une parisienne à lhassa john dewey – philosophy and civilization j . w . dunne – an experiment with time walter evans-wentz ( translator ) – the tibetan book of the dead ( translation of bardo thodol ) e . m . forster – aspects of the novel sigmund freud – the future of an illusion ( die zukunft einer illusion ) martin heidegger – being and time ( sein und zeit ) christopher hussey – the picturesque : studies in a point of view ernst kantorowicz – kaiser friedrich der zweite john livingston lowes – the road to xanadu : a study in the ways of the imagination bertrand russell – an outline of philosophy helen waddell – the wandering scholars . births . january 8 – charles tomlinson , english poet ( died 2015 ) january 16 – oldřich daněk , czech dramatist ( died 2000 ) january 24 lasse pöysti , finnish writer , playwright and actor ( died 2019 ) marvin kaplan , american actor , screenwriter and playwright ( died 2016 ) january 25 – john calder , canadian-born scottish publisher ( died 2018 ) january 28 – vera williams , american author and illustrator ( died 2015 ) february 1 – galway kinnell , american poet ( died 2014 ) february 6 – william gardner smith , expatriate american novelist and journalist ( died 1974 ) february 16 – shahidullah kaiser , bangladeshi novelist ( died 1971 ) february 21 – erma bombeck , american humorist ( died 1996 ) march 6 – gabriel garcía márquez , colombian novelist ( died 2014 ) march 15 – hanns joachim friedrichs , german journalist ( died 1995 ) march 18 – george plimpton , american writer and actor ( died 2003 ) march 24 – martin walser , german author march 22 – vera henriksen , née roscher lund , norwegian historical novelist ( died 2016 ) april 2 – kenneth tynan , english theatre critic ( died 1980 ) may 1 – tamar bornstein-lazar , israeli children 's writer ( died 2020 ) may 19 – yusuf idris , egyptian writer ( died 1991 ) may 25 – robert ludlum , american novelist ( died 2001 ) may 27 – malayattoor ramakrishnan , indian malayali novelist ( died 1997 ) may 28 – william a . hilliard , american journalist ( died 2017 ) june 6 – alan seymour , australian playwright ( died 2015 ) june 13 – paul ableman , english writer of erotic fiction and playwright ( died 2006 ) june 20 – simin behbahani , persian poet ( died 2014 ) june 23 – jacobo langsner , romanian-born uruguayan screenwriter and playwright ( died 2020 ) june 24 – frederick vreeland , american diplomat and writer june 27 – dominic jeeva ( டொமினிக் ஜீவா ) , ceylonese tamil fiction writer and essayist ( died 2021 ) june 30 – james goldman , american screenwriter and playwright ( died 1998 ) july 4 – neil simon , american playwright ( died 2018 ) july 15 – ann jellicoe , british playwright , stage director and actress ( died 2017 ) july 22 – katharine topkins , american novelist july 27 – john seigenthaler , american journalist , writer and political figure ( died 2014 ) july 31 – peter nichols , english playwright ( died 2019 ) august 9 – robert shaw , english-born actor , novelist and playwright ( died 1978 ) august 15 – patrick galvin , irish poet and dramatist ( died 2011 ) august 17 – stefan geosits , burgenland croatian writer and translator august 23 – dick bruna , dutch author and illustrator ( died 2017 ) august 24 – david ireland , australian novelist august 27 – fouad al-tikerly , iraqi novelist and writer ( died 2008 ) september 4 – bernardino zapponi , italian novelist ( died 2000 ) september 30 – w . s . merwin , american poet ( died 2019 ) october 7 – robert westall , english novelist and children 's writer ( died 1993 ) october 16 – günter grass , german novelist ( died 2015 ) october 31 – sybil wettasinghe , ceylonese children 's writer and illustrator ( died 2020 ) november 16 – franz jalics , hungarian jesuit priest and author november 24 – charles osborne , australian-born british writer and arts administrator ( died 2017 ) december 4 – rafael sánchez ferlosio , spanish writer ( died 2019 ) december 13 – james wright , american poet ( died 1980 ) december 24 mary higgins clark , american novelist ( died 2020 ) great women mystery writers , 2nd ed . by elizabeth blakesley lindsay , page 40 , 2007 , greenwood press ; diane de margerie , french translator . deaths . january 24 – agnes maule machar , canadian poet and author ( born 1837 ) february 26 – alfred remy , german-born american philologist and music writer ( born 1870 ) march 18 – philip wicksteed , english theologian and critic ( born 1844 ) march 31 – mabel collins , british theosophist and author ( born 1851 ) april 16 – gaston leroux , french novelist ( born 1868 ) may 25 – henri hubert , french sociologist ( born 1872 ) may 29 – georges eekhoud , belgian novelist ( born 1854 ) june 1 – j . b . bury , irish historian ( born 1861 ) june 9 – adolfo león gómez , colombian poet ( born 1857 ) june 14 – jerome k . jerome , english humorous writer ( born 1859 ) june 20 – clara louise burnham , american novelist ( born 1854 ) july 5 – lesbia harford , australian poet ( born 1891 ) july 24 – ryūnosuke akutagawa ( 芥川 龍之介 ) , japanese short story writer and poet ( suicide , born 1892 ) august 13 – james oliver curwood , american novelist and conservationist ( born 1878 ) august 24 – manuel díaz rodríguez , venezuelan writer ( born 1871 ) september 14 – hugo ball , german poet ( born 1886 ) september 15 – herman gorter , dutch poet and socialist ( born 1864 ) october 8 ricardo güiraldes , argentine novelist and poet ( hodgkin 's disease , born 1886 ) escuela normal superior de chascomús . mary webb , english novelist ( born 1881 ) october 22 – borisav stanković , serbian writer ( born 1876 ) october 23 – bernhard alexander , hungarian philosopher and polymath ( born 1850 ) november 23 – stanisław przybyszewski , polish novelist , dramatist , and poet ( born 1868 ) december 5 – fyodor sologub , russian dramatist and essayist ( born 1863 ) december 17 – hubert harrison , african-american writer , critic , and activist ( born 1883 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : francis brett young , the portrait of clare james tait black memorial prize for biography : h . a . l . fisher , james bryce , viscount bryce of dechmont , o.m . newbery medal for children 's literature : will james , smoky the cow horse newdigate prize for poetry : g . e . trevelyan , julia , daughter of claudius ( first female winner ) nobel prize for literature : henri bergson prix goncourt : maurice bedel , jérôme 60° latitude nord pulitzer prize for drama : paul green , in abraham 's bosom pulitzer prize for poetry : leonora speyer , fiddler 's farewell pulitzer prize for the novel : louis bromfield , early autumn . references .