Great chain of being

divisions . the chain of being hierarchy has god at the top , above angels , which like him are entirely spirit , without material bodies , and hence unchangeable . beneath them are humans , consisting both of spirit and matter ; they can change and die , and are thus essentially impermanent . lower still are animals and plants . at the bottom are the mineral materials of the earth itself ; they consist only of matter . thus , the higher the being is in the chain , the more attributes it has , including all the attributes of the beings below it . the minerals are , in the medieval mind , a possible exception to the immutable of the material beings in the chain , as alchemy promised to turn lower elements like lead into those higher up the chain , like silver or gold . . subdivisions . each link in the chain might be divided further into its component parts . in medieval secular society , for example , the king is at the top , succeeded by the aristocratic lords and the clergy , and then the peasants below them . solidifying the king 's position at the top of humanity 's social order is the doctrine of the divine right of kings . the implied permanent state of inequality became a source of popular grievance , and led eventually to political change as in the french revolution . the hierarchy was visible in every structure of society : '' in the family , the father is head of the household ; below him , his wife ; below her , their children . '' milton 's paradise lost ranked the angels ( c.f . pseudo-dionysius the areopagite 's ranking of angels ) , and christian culture conceives of angels '' in orders of archangels , seraphim , and cherubim , among others . '' the animal division is similarly subdivided , from strong , wild , and untameable lions at the top , to useful but still spirited domestic animals like dogs and horses , to merely docile farm stock like sheep . in the same way , birds could be ranked from lordly eagles high above common birds like pigeons . below them were fish , those with bones being above the various soft sea creatures . lower still were insects , with useful ones like bees high above nuisances like fly and beetles . the snake found itself at the bottom of the animal scale , cast down , the medievals supposed , for its wicked role in the garden of eden . '' below animals came plants , ranging from the useful and strong oak at the top to the supposedly demonic yew tree at the bottom . crop plants too were ranked from highest to lowest . which in turn cites '' wk 2011 '' the minerals too were graded , from useful metals ( from gold down to lead ) , to rocks ( again , from useful marble downwards ) , all the way down to soil . . the chain . the chain of being links god , angels , humans , animals , plants , and minerals . the links of the chain are : . god . god has created all other beings and is therefore outside creation , time , and space . he has all the spiritual attributes found in humans and angels , and uniquely has his own attributes of omnipotence , omniscience , and omnipresence . he is the model of perfection for all lower beings . . angelic beings . in christian angelology , angels are immortal beings of pure spirit without physical bodies , so they require temporary bodies made of earthly materials to be able to do anything in the material world . they were thought to have spiritual attributes such as reason , love , and imagination . based on mentions of types of angel in the bible , pseudo-dionysios devised a hierarchy of angelic beings , which other theologians like st . thomas aquinas adopted : seraphim ( seraph is the primate , or superior type of angel ) cherubim thrones ( ophanim ) dominions virtues powers principalities archangels angels . humanity . humans uniquely shared spiritual attributes with god and the angels above them , love and language , and physical attributes with the animals below them , like having material bodies that experienced emotions and sensations like lust and pain , and physical needs such as hunger and thirst . . animals . animals have senses , are able to move , and have physical appetites . the highest animals like the lion , the king of beasts , could move vigorously , and had powerful senses such as excellent eyesight and the ability to smell their prey , while lower animals might wriggle or crawl , and the lowest like oysters were sessile , attached to the sea-bed . all , however , had the senses of touch and taste . . plants . plants lacked sense organs and the ability to move , but they could grow and reproduce . the highest plants had attractive attributes like leaves and flowers , while the lowest plants , like mushrooms and moss , did not , and stayed low on the ground , close to the mineral earth . all the same , many plants had useful properties serving for food or medicine . . minerals . at the bottom of the chain , minerals were unable to move , sense , grow , or reproduce . their attributes were being solid and strong , while the gemstones possessed magic . the king of gems was the diamond . . natural science . from aristotle to linnaeus . the basic idea of a ranking of the world 's organisms goes back to aristotle 's biology . in his history of animals , where he ranked animals over plants based on their ability to move and sense , and graded the animals by their reproductive mode , live birth being '' higher '' than laying cold eggs , and possession of blood , warm-blooded mammals and birds again being '' higher '' than '' bloodless '' invertebrates . aristotle 's non-religious concept of higher and lower organisms was taken up by natural philosophers during the scholasticism to form the basis of the scala naturae . the scala allowed for an ordering of beings , thus forming a basis for classification where each kind of mineral , plant and animal could be slotted into place . in medieval times , the great chain was seen as a god-given and unchangeable ordering . in the northern renaissance , the scientific focus shifted to biology ; the threefold division of the chain below humans formed the basis for carl linnaeus 's systema naturæ from 1737 , where he divided the physical components of the world into the three familiar kingdoms of minerals , plants and animals . . in alchemy . alchemy used the great chain as the basis for its cosmology . since all beings were linked into a chain , so that there was a fundamental unity of all matter , transformation from one place in the chain to the next might , according to alchemical reasoning , be possible . in turn , the unit of matter enabled alchemy to make another key assumption , the philosopher 's stone , which somehow gathered and concentrated the universal spirit found in all matter along the chain , and which ex hypothesi might enable the alchemical transformation of one substance to another , such as the base metal lead to the noble metal gold . . scala naturae in evolution . the set nature of species , and thus the absoluteness of creatures ' places in the great chain , came into question during the 18th century . the dual nature of the chain , divided yet united , had always allowed for seeing creation as essentially one continuous whole , with the potential for overlap between the links . radical thinkers like jean-baptiste lamarck saw a progression of life forms from the simplest creatures striving towards complexity and perfection , a schema accepted by zoologists like henri de blainville . the very idea of an ordering of organisms , even if supposedly fixed , laid the basis for the idea of transmutation of species , whether progressive goal-directed orthogenesis or charles darwin 's undirected theory of evolution . the chain of being continued to be part of metaphysics in 19th century education , and the concept was well known . the geologist charles lyell used it as a metaphor in his 1851 elements of geology description of the geological column , where he used the term '' missing links '' in relation to missing parts of the continuum . the term '' missing link '' later came to signify transitional fossils , particularly those bridging the gulf between man and beasts . the idea of the great chain as well as the derived '' missing link '' was abandoned in early 20th century science , as the notion of ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny was abandoned in biology . the idea of a certain sequence from '' lower '' to '' higher '' however lingers on , as does the idea of orthogenesis . . politics . allenby and garreau propose that the catholic church 's narrative of the great chain of being kept the peace in europe for centuries . the very concept of rebellion simply lay outside the reality within which most people lived for to defy the king was to defy god . king james i himself wrote , '' the state of monarchy is the most supreme thing upon earth : for kings are not only god 's lieutenants upon earth , and sit upon god 's throne , but even by god himself they are called gods . '' the enlightenment broke this supposed divine plan , and fought the last vestiges of feudal hierarchy , by creating secular governmental structures that vested power into the hands of ordinary citizens , rather than in those of divinely ordained monarchs . however , scholars such as brian tierney and michael novak have noted the medieval contribution to democracy and human rights . adaptations and similar concepts . the american philosopher ken wilber described a '' great nest of being '' which he claims to belong to a culture-independent '' perennial philosophy '' traceable across 3000 years of mystical and esoteric writings . wilber 's system corresponds with other concepts of transpersonal psychology . in his 1977 book a guide for the perplexed , the economist e . f . schumacher described a hierarchy of beings , with humans at the top able mindfully to perceive the '' eternal now '' . . see also . references . sources . . further reading . e . m . w . tillyard ( 1942 ) the elizabethan world picture : a study of the idea of order in the age of shakespeare , donne & milton . new york : random house . external links . dictionary of the history of ideas – chain of being the great chain of being reflected in the work of descartes , spinoza & leibniz peter suber , earlham college , indiana the chain of being : tillyard in a nutshell