Ultra-wideband

characteristics . ultra-wideband is a technology for transmitting information across a wide bandwidth ( > 500 & nbsp ; mhz ) . this allows for the transmission of a large amount of signal energy without interfering with conventional narrowband and carrier wave transmission in the same frequency band . regulatory limits in many countries allow for this efficient use of radio bandwidth , and enable high-data-rate personal area network ( pan ) wireless connectivity , longer-range low-data-rate applications , and radar and imaging systems , transparently with existing communications systems . ultra-wideband was formerly known as pulse radio , but the fcc and the international telecommunication union radiocommunication sector ( itu-r ) currently define uwb as an antenna transmission for which emitted signal bandwidth exceeds the lesser of 500 & nbsp ; mhz or 20 % of the arithmetic center frequency . characteristics of ultra-wideband technology thus , pulse-based systems—where each transmitted pulse occupies the uwb bandwidth ( or an aggregate of at least 500 & nbsp ; mhz of narrow-band carrier ; for example , orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing ( ofdm ) ) —can access the uwb spectrum under the rules . theory . a significant difference between conventional radio transmissions and uwb is that conventional systems transmit information by varying the power level , frequency , and/or phase of a sinusoidal wave . uwb transmissions transmit information by generating radio energy at specific time intervals and occupying a large bandwidth , thus enabling pulse-position or time modulation . the information can also be modulated on uwb signals ( pulses ) by encoding the polarity of the pulse , its amplitude and/or by using orthogonal pulses . uwb pulses can be sent sporadically at relatively low pulse rates to support time or position modulation , but can also be sent at rates up to the inverse of the uwb pulse bandwidth . pulse-uwb systems have been demonstrated at channel pulse rates in excess of 1.3 gigapulses per second using a continuous stream of uwb pulses ( continuous pulse uwb or c-uwb ) , supporting forward error correction encoded data rates in excess of 675 mbit/s . a uwb radio system can be used to determine the '' time of flight '' of the transmission at various frequencies . this helps overcome multipath propagation , since some of the frequencies have a line-of-sight trajectory . with a cooperative symmetric two-way metering technique , distances can be measured to high resolution and accuracy . efficient method of toa estimation for through wall imaging by uwb radar . international conference on ultra-wideband , 2008 . . applications . real-time location . uwb is used for real-time location systems . its precision capabilities and low power make it well-suited for radio-frequency-sensitive environments , such as hospitals . uwb is also used for peer-to-peer fine ranging , which allows many applications based on relative distance between two entities . mobile telephony . apple launched the first three phones with ultra-wideband capabilities in september 2019 , namely , the iphone 11 , iphone 11 pro , and iphone 11 pro max . apple also launched series 6 of apple watch in september 2020 , which features uwb , with their leaked airtags product expected to feature it . the samsung galaxy note 20 ultra and galaxy s21 ultra and s21+ also support uwb , along with the samsung galaxy smarttag+ . the fira consortium was founded in august 2019 to develop interoperable uwb ecosystems including mobile phones . samsung , xiaomi , oppo are currently members of the fira consortium . in november 2020 , android open source project received first patches related to upcoming uwb api ; feature-complete uwb support is expected in later versions of android . . digital key . uwb digital car key is operating based on the distance between a car and a smartphone . products . a small number of uwb ics focused on location systems are currently in production or planned for production . industrial applications . uwb has been evaluated for use in the signaling of the new york city subway . radar . ultra-wideband gained widespread attention for its implementation in synthetic-aperture radar technology . due to its high resolution despite using lower frequencies , uwb sar was heavily researched for its object-penetration ability . starting in the early 1990s , the u.s . army research laboratory ( arl ) developed various stationary and mobile ground- , foliage- , and wall-penetrating radar platforms that served to detect and identify buried ieds and hidden adversaries at a safe distance . examples include the railsar , the boomsar , the sire radar , and the safire radar . arl has also investigated the feasibility of whether uwb radar technology can incorporate doppler processing to estimate the velocity of a moving target when the platform is stationary . while a 2013 report highlighted the issue with the use of uwb waveforms due to target range migration during the integration interval , more recent studies have suggested that uwb waveforms can demonstrate better performance compared to conventional doppler processing as long as a correct matched filter is used . ultra-wideband pulse doppler radars have also been used to monitor vital signs of the human body , such as heart rate and respiration signals as well as human gait analysis and fall detection . it serves as a potential alternative to continuous-wave radar since it involves less power consumption and a high-resolution range profile . however , its low signal-to-noise ratio has made it vulnerable to errors . a commercial example of this application is raybaby , which is a baby monitor that detects breathing and heart rate to determine whether a baby is asleep or awake . raybaby has a detection range of five meters and can detect fine movements of less than a millimeter . ultra-wideband is also used in '' see-through-the-wall '' precision radar-imaging technology , thales group 's through-the-wall imaging system michal aftanas through-wall imaging with uwb radar system dissertation thesis , 2009 precision locating and tracking ( using distance measurements between radios ) , and precision time-of-arrival-based localization approaches . performance of ultra-wideband time-of-arrival estimation enhanced with synchronization scheme it is efficient , with a spatial capacity of approximately 10 13 bit/s/m 2 . uwb radar has been proposed as the active sensor component in an automatic target recognition application , designed to detect humans or objects that have fallen onto subway tracks . . data transfer . ultra-wideband characteristics are well-suited to short-range applications , such as wireless usb , such as wireless monitors , camcorders , wireless printing , and file transfers to portable media players . uwb was proposed for use in personal area networks , and appeared in the ieee 802.15.3a draft pan standard . however , after several years of deadlock , the ieee 802.15.3a task group was dissolved in 2006 . the work was completed by the wimedia alliance and the usb implementer forum . slow progress in uwb standards development , the cost of initial implementation , and performance significantly lower than initially expected are several reasons for the limited use of uwb in consumer products ( which caused several uwb vendors to cease operations in 2008 and 2009 ) . tzero technologies shuts down ; that 's the end of ultrawideband , venturebeat . regulation . in the usa , ultra-wideband refers to radio technology with a bandwidth exceeding the lesser of 500 & nbsp ; mhz or 20 % of the arithmetic center frequency , according to the u.s . federal communications commission ( fcc ) . a february 14 , 2002 fcc report and order authorized the unlicensed use of uwb in the frequency range from 3.1 to 10.6 & nbsp ; ghz . the fcc power spectral density emission limit for uwb transmitters is −41.3 & nbsp ; dbm/mhz . this limit also applies to unintentional emitters in the uwb band ( the '' part 15 '' limit ) . however , the emission limit for uwb emitters may be significantly lower ( as low as −75 & nbsp ; dbm/mhz ) in other segments of the spectrum . deliberations in the international telecommunication union radiocommunication sector ( itu-r ) resulted in a report and recommendation on uwb in november 2005 . uk regulator ofcom announced a similar decision on 9 august 2007 . there has been concern over interference between narrowband and uwb signals that share the same spectrum . earlier , the only radio technology that used pulses were spark-gap transmitters , which international treaties banned because they interfere with medium-wave receivers . uwb , however , uses lower power . the subject was extensively covered in the proceedings that led to the adoption of the fcc rules in the u.s . and in the meetings relating to uwb of the itu-r leading to its report and recommendations on uwb technology . commonly used electrical appliances emit impulsive noise ( for example , hair dryers ) and proponents successfully argued that the noise floor would not be raised excessively by wider deployment of low power wideband transmitters . coexistence with other standards . in february 2002 , the federal communication commission ( fcc ) released an amendment ( part 15 ) that speciﬁes the rules of uwb transmission / reception . according to this release any signal with fractional bandwidth greater than 20 % or having a bandwidth greater than 500 & nbsp ; mhz is considered as an uwb signal . the fcc ruling also deﬁnes access to a 7.5 & nbsp ; ghz of unlicensed spectrum between 3.1 and 10.6 & nbsp ; ghz that is made available for communication and measurement systems . narrowband signals that exist in the uwb range such as the ieee802.11a transmitters may exhibit a high power spectral density ( psd ) levels compared to the psd of uwb signals as seen by a uwb receiver . as a result , one would expect a degradation of the uwb bit error rate performance . . technology groups .