Clive Davis

early life and education . davis was born in brooklyn , new york , to a jewish family , the son of herman and florence davis . his father was an electrician and salesman . davis was raised in the middle-class neighborhood of crown heights , brooklyn . his mother died at age 47 , and his father died the following year when davis was only a teenager , leaving him an orphan with no money . he then moved in with his married sister in bayside , queens , new york city , new york . he attended new york university college of arts and science , where he graduated magna cum laude , with a degree in political science and phi beta kappa in 1953 . he received a full scholarship to harvard law school , where he was a member of the board of student advisers and graduated in 1956 . . career . columbia/cbs records years . davis practiced law in a small firm in new york , then moved on to the firm of rosenman & colin two years later , where partner ralph colin had cbs as a client . davis was subsequently hired by a former colleague at the firm , harvey schein , to become assistant counsel of cbs subsidiary columbia records at age 28 , and then general counsel the following year . dannen , frederic ( 1990 ) . hit men . times books . pp . 66-67 . as part of a reorganization of columbia records group , group president goddard lieberson appointed davis as administrative vice president and general manager in 1965 . in 1966 , cbs formed the columbia-cbs group which reorganized cbs 's recorded music operations into cbs records with davis heading the new unit . the next year , davis was appointed president and became interested in the newest generation of folk rock and rock and roll . one of his earliest pop signings was the british folk-rock musician donovan , who enjoyed a string of successful hit singles and albums released in the u.s . on the epic records label . that same year , davis hired 23 year old recording artist tony orlando as general manager of columbia publishing subsidiary april-blackwood music , who went on to become vice-president of columbia/cbs music and sign barry manilow in 1969 . in june 1967 , at the urging of his friend and business associate lou adler , davis attended the monterey pop festival . clive davis with anthony decurtis , the soundtrack of my life ( ny : simon and schuster , 2013 ) , 64-69 and 125 . he immediately signed janis joplin with big brother and the holding company , and columbia went on to sign laura nyro , the electric flag , santana , the chambers brothers , bruce springsteen , chicago , billy joel , blood , sweat & tears , loggins & messina , aerosmith and pink floyd ( for rights to release their material outside of europe ) . the company , which had previously avoided rock music ( its few rock acts prior to the davis presidency included dion dimucci , the byrds , simon & garfunkel , and paul revere and the raiders ) , doubled its market share in three years . one of the most commercially successful recordings released during davis ' tenure at columbia was lynn anderson 's rose garden , in late 1970 . it was davis who insisted '' rose garden '' be the country singer 's next single release . the song reached no.1 in 16 countries around the world and remained the biggest selling album by a female country artist for 27 years . in 1972 , davis signed earth , wind & fire to columbia records . one of his most recognized accomplishments was signing the boston group aerosmith to columbia records in the early 1970s at new york city 's max 's kansas city . the accomplishment was mentioned in the 1979 aerosmith song '' no surprize '' , where steven tyler sings , '' old clive davis said he 's surely gon na make us a star , i 'm gon na make you a star , just the way you are . '' starting on december 30 , 1978 , bob weir of the grateful dead occasionally changed the lyrics of the dead standard '' jack straw '' in concert from '' we used to play for silver , now we play for life , '' to '' we used to play for acid , now we play for clive . '' one of the last bands davis tried to sign to columbia records was the proto-punk band death . according to their documentary he was the only person who was interested in a black band doing rock music , but he asked them to change their name . they refused , as the name was a reflection of a personal event . the contract dissolved , and the band released their album on another label 35 years later . arista years . after davis was fired from cbs records in 1973 for allegedly using company funds to bankroll his son 's bar mitzvah , columbia pictures then hired him to be a consultant for the company 's bell records label . davis took time out to write his memoirs and then founded arista records in 1974 . the company was named after new york city 's secondary school honor society , of which davis was a member . at arista , davis signed barry manilow , followed by aretha franklin , dionne warwick , patti smith , westlife , al jourgensen , the outlaws , eric carmen , the bay city rollers , exposé , taylor dayne , ace of base , the right profile , air supply , ray parker , jr . and raydio , and alicia keys , and he brought carly simon , grateful dead , the kinks , jermaine stewart , gil scott-heron ( on whose episode of tv one 's unsung davis was interviewed ) and lou reed to the label . he founded arista nashville which became the home to alan jackson , brooks & dunn , pam tillis , and brad paisley . davis founded laface records with l.a . reid and babyface . laface subsequently became the home of tlc , usher , outkast , pink and toni braxton . he founded bad boy records with sean '' puffy '' combs and it became the home of the notorious b.i.g . , combs , mase , 112 , and faith evans , although davis would later admit that he never quite understood rap music . in 1998 , davis signed lfo from european success . lfo charted 3 with '' summer girls '' in 1999 , and went on to multiplatinum success . davis was made aware of cissy houston 's daughter whitney houston after he saw the houstons perform at a new york city nightclub . impressed with what he heard , davis signed her to arista . houston became one of the biggest selling artists in music history under the guidance of davis at arista . . j records , rca , sony years . davis left arista in 2000 and started j records , an independent label with financial backing from arista parent bertelsmann music group , named with the middle initial of davis and his four children . bmg would buy a majority stake in j records in 2002 , and davis would become president and ceo of the larger rca music group . davis ' continued success in breaking new artists was recognised by the music industry a & r site hitquarters when the executive was named '' world 's no.1 a & r of 2001 '' based on worldwide chart data for that year . in 2004 , bmg merged with sony music entertainment to form sony bmg . with the assets of the former cbs records ( renamed sony music entertainment in 1991 ) now under sony 's ownership , the joint venture would mean a return of sorts for davis to his former employer . davis remained with rca label group until 2008 , when he was named chief creative officer for sony bmg . davis was elevated to chief creative officer of sony music entertainment , a title he currently holds , as part of a corporate restructuring when sony bmg became sony music entertainment in late 2008 when bmg sold its shares to sony . arista records and j records , which were both founded by davis , were dissolved in october 2011 through the restructuring of rca records . all artists under those labels were moved to rca records . . awards and honors . as a producer , davis has won four grammy awards . 2009 : best r & b album – jennifer hudson , jennifer hudson 2006 : best pop vocal album – breakaway , kelly clarkson 2000 : album of the year – supernatural , santana 2000 : best rock album – supernatural , santana davis also received the grammy trustees award in 2000 and the president 's merit award at the 2009 grammys . in 2011 , the 200-seat theater at the grammy museum was named the '' clive davis theater '' . in 2000 , davis was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame in the non-performers category . in 2000 , davis received the golden plate award of the academy of achievement . in 2015 , he was recognized by equality forum as one of the 31 icons of the lgbt history month . davis was a 2018 honoree at the new jewish home 's eight over eighty gala . an alumnus of new york university , davis is a significant benefactor to it . the recorded music division of its tisch school of the arts , is named after him : the clive davis institute of recorded music . personal life . davis has been married and divorced twice . he was married to helen cohen from 1956 to 1965 and to janet adelberg from 1965 to 1985 . he has four children : fred ( born 1960 ) , a prominent media investment banker , lauren ( born 1962 ) , mitchell ( born 1970 ) , and doug davis ( born 1974 ) , a music executive and grammy award winning record producer . davis has eight grandchildren . in 2013 , davis publicly came out as bisexual in his autobiography the soundtrack of my life . on the daytime talk show katie , he told host katie couric that he hoped his coming out would lead to '' greater understanding '' of bisexuality . in february 2021 , davis was diagnosed with bells palsy . . further reading . davis , clive ( 1975 ) . clive : inside the record business , william morrow & company , inc . davis , clive ( 2013 ) . the soundtrack of my life , simon & schuster . references . external links .