Relay race

relays in swimming . a swimming relay of four swimmers usually follows this strategy : second-fastest , third-fastest , slowest , then fastest ( anchor ) . however , it is not uncommon to see either the slowest swimmer racing in the second slot ( creating an order of second-fastest , slowest , third-fastest , and then fastest ) , or an order from slowest to fastest ( an order of slowest , third-fastest , second-fastest , fastest ) . fina rules require that a foot of the second , third or fourth swimmer must be contacting the platform while ( and before ) the incoming teammate is touching the wall ; the starting swimmer may already be in motion , however , which saves 0.6–1.0 seconds compared to a regular start . besides , many swimmers perform better in a relay than in an individual race owing to a team spirit atmosphere . as a result , relay times are typically 2–3 seconds faster than the sum of best times of individual swimmers . in medley swimming , each swimmer uses a different stroke ( in this order ) : backstroke , breaststroke , butterfly , and freestyle , with the added limitation that the freestyle swimmer can not use any of the first three strokes . at competitive levels , essentially all freestyle swimmers use the front crawl . note that this order is different from that for the individual medley , in which a single swimmer swims butterfly , backstroke , breaststroke , and freestyle in a single race , in that order . the three standard relays raced at the olympics are the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay , 4 × 200 m freestyle relay and 4 × 100 m medley relay . mixed-gendered relays were introduced at the 2014 fina world swimming championships ( 25 m ) ( 4 × 50 m freestyle and medley ) and the 2015 world aquatics championships ( 4 × 100 m freestyle and medley ) . the event will debut at the 2020 summer olympics ( 4 × 100 m medley ) . in open water swimming , mixed-gendered relays were introduced at the 2011 world aquatics championships ( 4 × 1250 m ) . relays in athletics . in athletics , the two standard relays are the 4 × 100 metres relay and the 4 × 400 metres relay . 4 × 200 , 4 × 800 , and 4 × 1500 m relays exist as well , but they are rarer . mixed-gendered 4 × 400 metres relays were introduced at the 2017 iaaf world relays , repeated at the 2018 asian games , and will be added to the 2019 world championships in athletics and 2020 summer olympics . in addition , a 2 × 2 × 400 m and shuttle hurdles mixed relay races were introduced at the 2019 iaaf world relays . traditionally , the 4 × 400 m relay finals are the last event of a track meet , and is often met with a very enthusiastic crowd , especially if the last leg is a close race . it is hard to measure exact splits in a 4 × 400 ( or a 4 × 100 ) relay . for example , if a team ran a 3-minute 4 × 400 , it does not mean every runner on the team has to run a 45-second open 400 , because a person starts accelerating before they have the baton , therefore allowing for slightly slower overall open 400 times . a 4 × 400 relay generally starts in lanes for the first leg , including the handoff . the second leg then proceeds to run in lanes for the first 100 metres , after which point the runners are allowed to break into the first lane on the backstretch , as long as they do not interfere with other runners . a race organizer then puts the third-leg runners into a line depending on the order in which they are running ( with the first place closest to the inside ) . the faster teams pass first , while the slower teams have to slide in to the inside lanes as they come available . according to the iaaf rules , world records in relays can only be set if all team members have the same nationality . major usa track and field events , f.e . the penn relays , drake relays , kansas relays , mt . sac relays , modesto relays , texas relays , west coast relays , include different types of relays . rules and strategy . each runner must hand off the baton to the next runner within a certain zone , usually marked by triangles on the track . in sprint relays , runners typically use a '' blind handoff '' , where the second runner stands on a spot predetermined in practice and starts running when the first runner hits a visual mark on the track ( usually a smaller triangle ) . the second runner opens their hand behind them after a few strides , by which time the first runner should be caught up and able to hand off the baton . usually a runner will give an auditory signal , such as '' stick ! '' repeated several times , for the recipient of the baton to put out his hand . in middle-distance relays or longer , runners begin by jogging while looking back at the incoming runner and holding out a hand for the baton . a team may be disqualified from a relay for : losing the baton ( dropping the baton shall not result in disqualification.see iaaf rule no . 170.6 ) making an improper baton pass , especially when not passing in the exchange zone false starting ( usually once but sometimes twice ) improperly overtaking another competitor preventing another competitor from passing wilfully impeding , improperly crossing the course , or in any other way interfering with another competitor based on the speed of the runners , the generally accepted strategy used in setting up a four-person relay team is : second-fastest , third-fastest , slowest , then fastest ( anchor ) ; however some teams ( usually middle school or young high school ) use second-fastest , slowest , third-fastest , then the fastest ( anchor ) . but if a runner is better in the starting blocks than the others , he is sometimes moved to the first spot because it is the only spot that uses starting blocks . competitions . the largest relay event in the world is the norwegian holmenkollstafetten , 2,944 teams of 15 starting and ending at bislett stadium in oslo which had a total of 44,160 relay-competitors on may 10 , 2014 . another large relay event is the penn relays , which attracts over 15,000 competitors annually on the high-school , collegiate and professional levels , and over its three days attracts upwards of 100,000 spectators . it is credited with popularizing relay racing in the sport of track & field . thumb . long-distance relays . long-distance relays have become increasingly popular with runners of all skill levels . these relays typically have 5 to 36 legs , each usually between long , though sometimes as long as . the iaaf world road relay championships was held from 1986 to 1998 , with six-member teams covering the classic marathon distance . races under are run in a day , with each runner covering one or two legs . longer relays are run overnight , with each runner typically covering three legs . the world 's longest relay race is japan 's prince takamatsu cup nishinippon round-kyūshū ekiden , which begins in nagasaki and continues for . cross-country relays . for the 2017 iaaf world cross country championships , a mixed relay race was added ( 4 × 2 & nbsp ; km ) . the crusader team sprint cross country relay race is a fun and unique venue specifically designed to get runners familiar with distance running and excited for the rest of the cross country season . teams will be pairs of runners . the team will run four loops of a 1-mile course . runner “ a ” will run loop 1 and hand off to runner “ b . ” runner “ b ” will run the same loop and hand off back to runner “ a . ” “ a ” runs one more loop , hands off to “ b , ” and “ b ” finishes . 3 race categories : boys , girls , and co-ed . awards will be given in each of the three categories . shuttle hurdle relay . the shuttle hurdle relay is a men 's and women 's competition that is part of relay meetings like drake relays or penn relays . a mixed version was introduced at the 2019 iaaf world relays , it consist of a race in which two men and two women on each team , are running a 110 m hurdles . . medley relay . medley relay events are also occasionally held in track meets , usually consisting of teams of four runners running progressively longer distances . the distance medley relay consists of four legs run at distances of 1200 , 400 , 800 , and 1,600 metres , in that order . the sprint medley relay usually consists of four legs run at distances of 400 , 200 , 200 , and 800 metres , though a more uncommon variant of 200 , 100 , 100 and 400 metres ( sometimes called a short sprint medley ) also exists . see also swedish relay . relays on coinage . relay race events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors ' coins . one of the recent samples is the €10 greek relays commemorative coin , minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 summer olympics . in the obverse of the coin three modern athletes run , holding their batons while in the background three ancient athletes are shown running a race known as the dolichos ( a semi-endurance race of approximately 3,800 metres ' distance ) . relays in skiing . cross-country skiing . the fis nordic world ski championships features a relay race since 1933 , and a women 's race since 1954 . each team has four skiers , each of whom must complete 10 kilometres / 6.2 miles ( men ) or 5 kilometres / 3.1 miles ( women ) . biathlon . in biathlon , the relay race features a mass start , with teams consist of four biathletes . each competitor must complete 7.5 kilometres / 4.66 miles ( men ) or 6.0 kilometres / 3.73 miles ( women ) . each leg is held over three laps , with two shooting rounds ; one prone , one standing . a mixed biathlon relay race was first held at the biathlon world championships 2005 in khanty-mansiysk , and it was added to the 2014 winter olympics . relays in orienteering . there are two major relays in orienteering : tiomila in april/may in sweden jukola relay in june in finland there are other relays in autumn with requirements about the age and gender distributions : halikko relay , near salo , finland 25-manna , near stockholm , sweden . other relays . the itu triathlon mixed relay world championships is a mixed-gendered relay triathlon race held since 2009 . previously , the triathlon team world championships were held in 2003 , 2006 and 2007 . also , the triathlon at the youth olympic games has a mixed relay race since 2010 , and the event will be introduced at the 2020 summer olympics . as in standard triathlons , each triathlon competitor must do a segment of swimming , cycling and running . the madison is a track cycling event where two riders take turns to complete the race . riders can alternate at any moment by touching the partner with the hand . the madison is featured at the uci track cycling world championships since 1995 and the olympics since 2000 . the format has been used in six-day racing . in road racing , the duo normand is a two-man time trial relay held annually in normandy , france . the game show triple threat had a bonus round called the '' triple threat relay round '' which was played like a relay race . the winning team had to take turns matching song titles to its corresponding musical artists . see also . 4 × 100 metres relay 4 × 400 metres relay ekiden relay ( disambiguation ) river to river relay . notes and references . external links . iaaf list of relay-records in xml