Ba'ath Party

history . the party was founded on 7 april 1947 as the arab ba'ath party by michel aflaq ( an antiochian christian ) , salah al-din al-bitar ( a sunni muslim ) , and the followers of zaki al-arsuzi ( an atheist ) in damascus , syria , leading to the establishment of the syrian regional branch . other regional branches were established throughout the arab world in the later 1940s and early 1950s , in , among others , iraq , yemen and jordan . throughout its existence , the national command ( the body responsible for all-arab affairs ) , gave most attention to syrian affairs . the 2nd national congress was convened in june 1954 , and elected a seven-man national command ; aflaq , bitar , and akram al-hawrani were elected and represented the syrian regional branch , while abdullah rimawi and abdallah na'was were elected to represent the jordanian branch . the congress is notable for sanctioning the merger of the arab socialist movement and the ba'ath party , which took place in 1952 . the syrian regional branch rose to prominence in the 1940s and 1950s ; in the 1954 parliamentary elections the syrian regional branch won 22 seats in parliament , becoming the second largest party in the country . 90 percent of ba'ath party members who stood for elections were elected to parliament . the failure of the traditional parties represented by the people 's party and the national party , strengthened the ba'ath party 's public credibility . through this position , the party was able to get two of its members into the cabinet ; bitar was appointed minister of foreign affairs and khalil kallas became minister of economics . its new , strengthened position , was used successfully to garner support for syria 's merger with gamal abdel nasser 's egypt , which led to the establishment of the united arab republic ( uar ) in 1958 . on 24 june 1959 , fuad al-rikabi , the regional secretary of the iraqi regional branch , accused the national command of betraying arab nationalist principles by conspiring against the uar . in light of these criticisms , the ba'ath convened the 3rd national congress ( held 27 august – 1 september 1959 ) , which was attended by delegates from '' iraq , lebanon , jordan , south arabia , the gulf , arab south , arab maghreb , palestine and party student organisations in arab and other universities outside the arab homeland '' . the congress is notable for endorsing the dissolution of the syrian regional branch , which had been decided by aflaq and bitar without inner-party consultation in 1958 , and for expelling rimawi , the regional secretary of the jordanian regional branch . rimawi reacted to his expulsion by forming his own party , the arab socialist revolutionary ba'ath party , which established a rival national command to compete with the original . the national command responded to the problems in iraq by appointing a temporary regional command on 2 february 1960 , which appointed talib el-shibib as regional secretary , and on 15 june 1961 the national command expelled rikabi from the party . in iraq , the iraqi regional branch had supported abd al-karim qasim 's seizure of power and its ensuing abolishment of the iraqi monarchy . the iraqi ba'athists supported qasim on the ground that they believed he would enter iraq into the uar , enlarging the arab nationalist republic . however , this was proven to be a ruse , and after taking power qasim launched an iraq first policy . in retaliation , the ba'ath party tried to assassinate qasim in february 1959 , but the operation ( which was led by a young saddam hussein ) failed . qasim was overthrown in the ramadan revolution led by young ba'athist officer ahmed hassan al-bakr , and rumoured to be supported by the american central intelligence agency ( cia ) . declassified documents and the testimony of former cia officers indicate there was no direct american involvement , although the cia had been previously notified of an earlier ba'athist coup plot in july 1962 by a high-ranking informant within the party . the cia official working with archie roosevelt , jr . on a separate plan to instigate a military coup against qasim , and who later became the head of the cia 's operations in iraq and syria '' from late 1968 to june 1970 , '' has '' denied any involvement in the ba'ath party 's actions . '' the iraqi regional branch , when it took power , was so riven by factionalism that its purported allies launched a counter-coup forcing them out of power in november 1963 . the 4th national congress , held in august 1960 , criticized the leadership of aflaq and bitar , called for the reestablishment of the syrian regional branch and deemphasized the party 's commitment to arab nationalism while emphasizing more the socialist character of the party . a year after , at the uar 's nadir in syria , the syrian general abd al-karim al-nahlawi launched a coup on 28 september 1961 , which led to the reestablishment of the syrian arab republic . . rule in syria , infighting , the 1966 coup and split : 1963–1966 . the challenges of building a ba'athist state led to considerable ideological discussion and internal struggle within the party . the iraqi regional branch was increasingly dominated by ali salih al-sadi , a self-described marxism . he was supported in his ideological reorientation by hammud al-shufi , the regional secretary of the syrian regional branch , yasin al-hafiz , one of the party ’ s few ideological theorists , and by certain members of the secret military committee . the marxist-wing gained new ground at the 6th national congress ( held in october 1963 ) , in which the iraqi and syrian regional branches called for the establishment of '' socialist planning '' , '' collective farms run by peasants '' , '' workers ' democratic control of the means of production '' , and other demands reflecting a certain emulation of soviet-style socialism . aflaq , angry at this transformation of his party , retained a nominal leadership role , but the national command as a whole came under the control of the radicals . in 1963 the ba'ath party seized power , from then on the ba'ath functioned as the only officially recognized syrian political party , but factionalism and splintering within the party led to a succession of governments and new constitutions . on 23 february 1966 , a coup d'état led by salah jadid , the informal head of the military committee , overthrew aflaq and the bitar 's cabinet . the coup sprung out of factional rivalry between jadid 's '' regionalist '' ( qutri ) camp , which promoted ambitions for a greater syria and the more traditionally pan-arab , in power faction , called the '' nationalist '' ( qawmi ) faction . jadid 's supporters are considered more left-wing then aflaq and his peers . several of jadid 's opponents managed to make their escape and fled to beirut , lebanon . jadid moved the party in a more radical direction . although he and his supporters had not been supporters of the victorious far-left line at the 6th party congress , they had now moved to adopt its positions . the moderate faction , formerly led by aflaq and al-bitar , were purged from the party . while it took some years , the 1966 coup resulted in the creation of two competing national commands , one syrian-dominated and another iraqi-dominated . however , both in iraq and syria , the regional command became the real centre of party power , and the membership of the national command became a largely honorary position , often the destination of figures being eased out of the leadership . a consequence of the split was that zaki al-arsuzi took aflaq 's place as the official father of ba'athism in the pro-syrian ba'ath movement , while the pro-iraqi ba'ath movement still considered aflaq the de jure father of ba'athist thought . organization . the organizational structure of the ba'ath party was created at the 2nd national congress by amending the party 's internal regulations , which was approved at the party 's 1st national congress in 1947 . the organizational structure ran from top to bottom , and members were forbidden to initiate contacts between groups on the same level of the organisation—all contacts had to pass through a higher command level . national organization . the national command was the ruling organ of the party between sessions of the national congress , and was headed by a secretary-general . between national congresses , the national command was held accountable by the national consultative council ( arabic : al-majlis al-istishari al-quami ) . the national consultative council was a forum made up of representatives from the party 's regional branches . however , the number of national consultative council members were decided by the size of the regional branch . the national congress elected the national command , national tribunal , the party 's discipline body , and the secretary-general , the party leader . the congress delegates determined the party 's policies and procedures . before 1954 , the party was ruled by the executive committee , but this organ , along with others too , were replaced at the 2nd national congress . in ba'athist jargon '' nation '' means the arab nation , because of that , the national command formed the highest policy-making and coordinating council for the ba'ath movement throughout the arab world . the national command had several bureaus , similar to those of the regional command . national command sessions were held monthly . of these , the national liaisons office was responsible for maintaining contact with the party 's regional branches . regional organization . the term region reflected the party 's refusal to acknowledge them as separate nation-states . a '' region '' ( quṭr ) , in ba'athist parlance , is an arab state such as syria , iraq , or lebanon . the regional congress , which combined all the provincial branches , was the region 's highest authority and elected a regional command , the party leadership in a specific region , the regional tribunal , the body responsible for discipline inspection , and a regional secretary , the regional party leader . the regional congress is made of delegates from the provincial branches ; other members attended , but as observers . the regional congress was responsible for evaluating the party 's performance since the last regional congress , while at the same time formulating new policies for the next period , which lasts until the next regional congress is held . how long this period lasts is decided by the regional command . the regional command , similar to the branch command , operated through bureaus and met for weekly-sessions . below the regional commands there existed branches . the branch came above the subbranch ; it comprised at least two to five subbranches , and operated at the provincial level . the branch held a congress periodically in which it elected a command and a secretary ( leader ) . the command operated through bureaus , such as the workers bureau and the bureau of the secretariat for instance . underneath the branch was the subbranch , which was made up of three to five sections , '' and was the lowest level of the party to hold a periodical congress . '' some subbranches were independent of central authority , and elected their own command and secretaries , while other subbranches were incorporated into the branches . in these cases the subbranch secretary is appointed by the superior branch . a section , which comprised two to five divisions , functioned at the level of a large city quarter , a town , or a rural district . it elected its own command , composed of five members , but the subbranch appointed the command 's secretary . below that there existed divisions . a division comprised two to seven circles , controlled by a division commander . such ba'athist groups occurred throughout the bureaucracy and the military . they functioned as the party ’ s watchdog and were an effective form of covert surveillance within a public administration . the lowest level was the circle . it was composed of three to seven members , constituted the basic organizational unit . the military organization was made up of branches similar to those in the ba'ath 's civilian sector . however , unlike the civilian sector the military organization was controlled by a separate military bureau , and held periodical military congresses . the military organization and the civilian organization converged at the regional congress . membership . there existed three types of membership categories in the ba'ath party ; active member ( arabic : udw ämil ) , apprentice member ( arabic : udw mutadarrib ) and supporter ( arabic : firqa ) . an active member had to attend all formal meetings of his party unit , was given the right to vote in party elections , and could run for party office . in the syrian regional branch a member had to spend 18 months as a supporter to be promoted to apprentice status , and then wait another 18 months to be promoted to active member status . ideology and policy . classical ba'ath : 1947–1960 . . arab nation . from its very beginning , the party was a manifestation of arab nationalist thought , with the party itself referring to itself as '' the party of arab unity '' . the pan-arab tendencies of the party 's predecessor , the arab ba'ath movement , was strengthened 1945–1947 by recruiting members from the zaki al-arsuzi 's arab ba'ath . the first article of the party 's constitution stated '' the arabs form one nation . this nation has the natural right to live in a single state . as such , the arab fatherland constitutes an indivisible political and economic unit . no arab can live apart from the others . '' to express his heartfelt belief in arab nationalism , aflaq coined the term '' one arab nation with an eternal message '' . party ideology , and ba'athism in general , was not based on concepts such as the purity of the arab race or ethnic chauvinism , but on idealistic thoughts borrowed from the enlightenment era . according to middle east expert tabitha petran , the basic idea of the party 's ideology was ; that the arab nation is a permanent entity in history . the arab nation is considered , philosophically speaking , not as a social and economic formation , but as a transcendent fact inspiring different forms , one of its highest contributions taking the form of islam . it was not islam that modeled the peoples of arabia , the fertile crescent , and north africa , equipping them with islamic values , especially the arabic language and the arabic culture , but the arab nation which created islam . this conception of the arab nation implicitly advantages the arab contribution to history . on the other hand , arab decadence can be overcome through a purifying and spiritual action , not religious but moral . '' . peasant and workers . the early ba'ath gave little attention to the problems facing the peasants and workers . as hanna batatu notes , '' aflaq was basically urban in outlook . the peasants never constituted an object of his special concern . in his writing there is scarcely an expression of concentrated interest in the country 's husbandsmen . '' while peasants and issues facing them are mentioned in some of aflaq 's work , there was scarcely any depth given to them or the issues facing them . to take an example , in one instance aflaq states '' the national struggle . can only be based on the generality of the arabs and these will not take part in it if they are exploited . '' secondly , aflaq never had any official enmity towards the traditional landlords . issues such as these would only gain prominence when akram al-hawrani became a leading party figure , and when the '' transitional ba'athists '' took power . of the four members in the 1st executive committee , wahib al-ghanim was the only who paid much attention to the problems of the peasants and workers , because the other members ( aflaq , salah al-din al-bitar and jalil al-sayyide ) had a middle class upbringing and upheld middle class values . the early party organization never cultivated a deep following in rural areas . in fact , at the party 's founding congress , only one peasant and one worker were present among the 217 delegates . most of the delegates were either school teacher or students attending universities . when the akram al-hawrani 's arab socialist party ( asp ) merged with the ba'ath party , the majority of asp members of peasants origins did not join the ba'ath party , instead becoming personal followers of hawrani . however , the majority of ba'ath members were of rural upbringing . the '' transitional ba'ath '' , which grew out of the dissolution of the syrian regional branch in 1958 dissolution and the military committee , were more rural in outlook , policy and ideology . '' unity , liberty , socialism '' . the slogan '' unity , liberty , socialism '' is the key tenet in ba'athist thought . unity stood for the creation of an independent , strong arab nation . liberty did not mean liberal democracy , but rather freedom from colonial oppression and freedom of speech and thought . aflaq believed that the ba'ath party , at least in theory , would rule , and guide the people , in a transitional period of time without consulting the people , however he did support intra-party democracy . the last tenet , 'socialism ' , did not mean socialism as it is defined in the west , but rather a unique form of arab socialism . according to ba'athist thought , socialism had originated under the rule of muhammad . the original interpretation of arab socialism did not answer questions such as : how much state control was necessary , or economic equality ; but instead focused on freeing the arab nation and its people from colonization and oppression in general . transitional ba'ath : 1960–1964 . . regionalists versus nationalists . after the failure of the united arab republic ( uar ) , a union of egypt and syria , the ba'ath party was divided into two main factions , the regionalists and the nationalists ( pan-arab ) . when the union with egypt collapsed , the ba'ath party was put in a difficult position , the party still sought arab unity , but did not oppose the uar 's dissolution and did not want to seek another union with egypt under gamal abdel nasser 's rule . however , being the unionist party that it was , the party 's leaders could not state their position on this issue . the end result was that the pro-arab nationalists within the ba'ath party became committed nasserists , while the more moderate arab nationalists founded the pro-nasserite socialist unionists party . the third group , led by people disenchanted with both nasser and the union period , remained in the ba'ath party , stopped believing in the feasibility of pan-arabism . on 21 february 1962 , the national command issued a new policy regarding the pan-arab project by first mentioning the successes and failures of the uar , but ending the statement by calling for the reestablishment of the uar as a decentralized federation with nasser 's egypt . many rank-and-file members opposed this change in policy , with many members being both disenchanted with pan-arabism and aflaq 's continued party rule . when the syrian regional branch was reestablished , the majority of its members in the provinces were of communal origins–druze , alawi or ismaili . the provincial party members had not been told of the syrian regional branch 's dissolution , which in fact broke the communication line with provincial branches and the national command . while its true that in 1962 the regionalists supported the slogan , adopted at the 5th national congress , '' the renewal of the union with egypt while taking note of past mistakes '' , they treated such a slogan as a propaganda slogan , and not as a feasible goal . the '' arab road to socialism '' . the disillusionment felt among party members on the pan-arab project , led to the radicalization of the party 's interpretation of socialism . yasin al-hafiz , a former member of the syrian communist party , was an early frontrunner for the party 's radicalization . while he did n't oppose the pan-arab project , he wanted to turn the concept of arab socialism into a scientific and revolutionary socialism ideology which adapted marxism to local conditions . jamal al-atassi , who had been a moderate socialist for most of his life , called for the renunciation of arab socialism in 1963 and the adoption of a '' virtually marxist concept of socialism '' by claiming that class conflict was the moving force in society . hammud al-shufi became the leader of the party 's marxist faction during his short stint as syrian regional secretary , literally the head of the syrian regional organization . shufi was able , due to his position as head of the organization bureau of the regional command , to recruit several marxist or marxist-leaning members to the top of the syrian regional party hierarchy . radical socialists led by ali salih al-sadi took control of the iraqi regional branch in 1963 , which led to the official radicalization of the party 's ideology . the delegates at the 6th national congress elected an ideology committee that was responsible for writing a charter about the party 's ideology . the end result was the document points of departure . the document , which was approved by the 6th national congress , relegated arab unity to a secondary role and gave socialism prominence . marxist concepts were used interchangeably alongside ba'athist ones ; however , the document was reluctant in explicitly admitting that certain ideas were of marxist origins . while the points of departure did n't create a break with the party 's traditional ideology , it criticized the party 's old guard for giving arab unity primacy over socialism and their failure to turn ba'athism into a comprehensive theory . while the documents says arab unity is progressive , the reason for it being important changed . the document stated : '' arab unity is an indispensable basis for the construction of a socialist economy . '' aflaq also believed that arab unity was only an intermediate goal , but it stood at the centre of classical ba'athism . in the points of departure , despite not firmly stating it , the goal of creating a socialist society seemed to be both an immediate goal and the main goal of the party . the concept of arab socialism , accused of being narrow-minded and nationalistic , was replaced with the '' arab road to socialism '' concept . the points of departure criticized the classical ba'athist view regarding private property . classical ba'athists supported private ownership as a way to recruit into the party many petty bourgeois elements . the document called for nationalization of the commanding heights of the economy , the slow incorporation of the petty bourgeoisie into the socialist economy and the elimination of the bourgeoisie and its allied classes . to safeguard the party from evolving into one supporting state capitalism , the socialist economy would be controlled by a vanguardism together with popular participation from the toiler masses . neo-ba'ath : 1964–1966 . neo-ba'athism is the dramatic changes that manifested in ba'athist ideology from 1960 to 1964 , and the military committee 's takeover of the syrian regional branch and the national command in the period 1964 to 1966 . the 6th national congress signified the takeover of the party by an anti-militarist left , which opposed both the traditional leaders in the national command and the pragmatists in the military committee . when the anti-military left called for popular democracy , no involvement of the military in national politics and popular struggle , the military committee became concerned . by 1965 the anti-military leftists began to '' spread rumors about the rightist character of the military junta military committee within the party and their subversive efforts to engulf it . there was not a single officer in the party who was not accused of conspiracy and reactionary tendencies . '' in collaboration with the national command the military committee succeeded in expelling the anti-military left from the party at the 7th national congress . the military committee , which now controlled the syrian regional branch , took control of the ba'ath party in the coup of 1966 . according to middle east expert avraham ben-tzur '' the neo-ba'th in its latest variant is a bureaucratic apparatus headed by the military , whose daily life and routine are shaped by the rigid military oppression on the home front , and soviet aid among others military aid . '' . regional branches . iraq . fuad al-rikabi founded the iraqi regional branch in 1951 or 1952 . there are those who trace the branch 's founding to abd ar rahman ad damin and abd al khaliq al khudayri in 1947 , after their return from the 1st national congress , which was held in syria . another version is that the branch was established in 1948 by rikabi and sa'dun hamadi , a shia muslim . however , efraim karsh and inari rautsi contend that the regional branch was established in the 1940s , but that it received official recognition as a regional branch of the ba'ath party in 1952 by the national command . what is certain is that rikabi was elected the regional branch 's first regional secretary in 1952 . the party initially consisted of a majority of shia muslims , as rikabi recruited supporters mainly from his friends and family , but slowly became sunni dominated . the regional branch , and other parties of pan-arab inclination , had difficulties in recruiting shia members . most shi'ites considered pan-arab ideology as a sunni project , since the majority of arabs are sunnis . at the time of 14 july revolution in 1958 , which overthrew the kingdom of iraq , the regional branch had 300 members . the iraqi regional branch supported abd al-karim qasim 's rule on the grounds that he would seek iraq 's entry into the united arab republic . of the 16-members of qasim 's cabinet , 12 of them were regional branch members . after taking power , qasim 's change his position on the uar , reverting to the old '' iraq first policy '' . this turn displeased the regional branch and other arab nationalists groups . because of his policy reversal , the regional branch gathered a group , led by saddam hussein , which tried but failed to assassinate qasim . the regional branch seized power in the ramadan revolution . the coup was led by leading regional branch member ahmed hassan al-bakr . the plotters appointed abdul salam arif , a nasserite , to the presidency while al-bakr was appointed the prime minister of iraq . however , real power was in the hands of ali salih al-sadi , the branch 's regional secretary . after taking power , the regional branch through its militia , the national guard , initiated what iraqi expert con coughlin referred to as an '' orgy of violence '' against communism and left-wing elements . these repressive measures coupled with factionalism within the regional branch led to the november 1963 iraqi coup d'état by president arif and his nasserite supporters . iraq expert malik mufti believes aflaq may have supported arif 's coup because it weakened al-sadi 's position within the party and strengthened his own . the coup forced the branch to go underground . because of the coup , several leading ba'athist were jailed , such as al-bakr and saddam . despite this , the regional branch elected al-bakr as regional secretary in 1964 . jordan . following the party 's establishment in syria , ba'athist ideas spread throughout the arab world . in jordan ba'athist thought first spread to the east bank in the late-1940s , most notably at universities . while the regional branch was not formed until 1951 , several meetings took place at the universities where students and professors alike would discuss the ba'athist thought . despite the ideology being very popular , it took time before the actual regional branch was established . a group of teachers established the regional branch in the city by al-karak . at the very beginning , the clinic owned by abd al-rahman shuqyar was used as the branch 's meeting place . bahjat abu gharbiyah became the regional branch 's first member in the west bank , and was thus resigned the responsibility of building the party 's organization in the area the branch secretary in the west bank , and was thus responsible in that area . in the west bank , the branch was most active in the cities of jerusalem and ramallah . the 1st regional congress was held in 1951 in the home of abdullah rimawi . the congress mapped out the '' future course of the party '' . the next year , the 2nd regional congress was held , this time in abdallah na'was ' home . it elected a regional command and appointed rimawi as the branch 's regional secretary . shugyar , gharbiyah and na'was agreed to serve in the regional branch 's central committee . rimawi and na'was , his deputy , would prove effective leaders . shortly after the 2nd regional congress , the branch launched a successful recruitment campaign in jordanian and palestinian neighbourhoods and cities . on 28 august 1956 the branch was legalized by a high court . both rimawi and na'was were parliament of jordan in the 1950 and 1951 elections as independents ( the branch was not a legal party at the time ) . in the 1951 election , the branch managed to elect three members to parliament . rimawi was able to retain his seat in parliament until the 1956 election . none of these elections can be considered democratic . shuqyar , during the 1951 elections , was imprisoned by the authorities because his views were deemed to radical . less than a month before the election day , the british embassy in amman had estimated that shuqyar would gain an easy victory . however , because of the undemocratic nature of the election , shuqyar was not elected . as voting patterns would prove , voters who voted for ba'athist candidates lived in irbid and amman on the east bank , and jerusalem and nablus on the west bank . shuqyar during a government-imposed exile to southern jordan , used his spare time reading marxist and leninism literature . while he never became a communist , shuqyar began to support communist concepts . on his return from exile he tried to persuade the regional branch to join in an electoral front with the jordanian communist party . however , the regional branch leaders rimawi , na'was , gharbiyah and munif al-razzaz opposed such an idea , and because of it , shuqyar left the ba'ath party . rimawi and na'was were elected to the national command at the 2nd national congress ( held in 1952 ) . at the 6th and 7th national congress , the regional branch elected razzaz to the national command . lebanon . the lebanese regional branch was formed in 1949–1950 . during the existence of the uar , the regional branch was split into two factions , those supporting nasser and those opposing him . however , in april 1960 , the uar denied the regional branch organ as sahafäh access into the uar-ruled syria . the regional branch was strongest in the city of tripoli . in the 1960 elections , abd al-majid al-rafei was just a few votes short of being elected to parliament . however , a persistent problem for him during his election campaign was the vocal criticism of him and the regional branch by the lebanese communist party . in tripoli the communists supported the candidacy of rashid karami , to ensure themselves of a regional branch victory . on 17 july 1961 a group of rival ba'athists led by rimawi opened fire on several of the regional branch 's members . during the uar years , the same factional lines that developed in the syrian regional branch came to the lebanese regional branch . at the 4th national congress ( held in lebanon ) , which was mainly attended by delegates representing lebanon , several resolutions with a pronounced anti-nasser tone were approved . at the same time , criticism of aflaq and bitar was severe , both their leadership records and their ideology were criticized . a resolution was approved , which stated that the party leaders [ aflaq , al-bitar among others had to hastily entered into a union with egypt , had wrongly dissolved the syrian regional branch in 1958 , given pan-arabism primacy when socialism was the more important , the need to use marxist , not ba'athi , tools to analyze the current situation and the need for the party to strengthen their positions amongst the popular classes–the workers , peasants , artisans and shopkeepers . because of the position of the lebanese regional branch , aflaq at the 5th national congress invited enough iraqi regional branch delegates to neutralize the lebanese delegates . however , at the same time , the lebanese regional branch opposed hawrani and his faction . at the 6th national congress , the lebanese regional branch elected jubrän majdalani and khalid al-ali to the national command . at the 7th national congress the national command in collaboration with the military committee either expelled or removed leftists such as those found in the lebanese regional branch from leadership position , and in the most severe cases , expelled them from the party . the lebanese regional branch managed to elect three members to the national command at the 7th national congress ; majdalani , al-ali and abd al-majid rafi . libya . the regional branch was founded in the 1950s by amr taher deghayes . ba'athism was a major political force in libya following the establishment of the united arab republic . many intellectuals were attracted to ba'athist ideology during the later years of the kingdom of libya . however , with help from nasserist propaganda , several ba'athists changed affiliation and became nasserists instead . the growth of these pan-arab ideologies concerned the government , which led to the incarceration of several nasserist and ba'athist military officers in the early sixties . the ba'athist were accused of working to overthrow '' the political , economic and social system '' of the kingdom ; the sentences ranged from everything to eight months to two years . by 1964 , the libyan regional branch had only managed to establish one-level below the regional command , the branch-level . syrian specialist john devlin estimated that the libyan regional branch had been 50 and 150 members in 1964 . syria . syrian politics took a dramatic turn in 1954 when the military government of adib shishakli was overthrown and the democratic system restored . the ba'ath , now a large and popular organisation , won 15 out of 142 parliamentary seats in the syrian election that year , becoming the second-largest party in parliament . aside from the syrian communist party ( scp ) , the ba'ath party was the only party able to organise mass protests among workers . the party was supported by the intelligentsia due to their pro-egyptian and anti-imperialism stance along with their advocation of social reform . the ba'ath faced considerable competition from ideological competitors , notably the syrian social nationalist party ( ssnp ) , which supported the establishment of a greater syria . the ba'ath party 's main adversary was the scp , whose support for class struggle and internationalism was anathema to the ba'ath . in addition to parliamentary-level competition , all these parties ( as well as islamism ) competed in street-level activity and sought to recruit support among the military . by the end of 1957 , the scp was able to weaken the ba'ath party to such an extent that the ba'ath party drafted a bill in december that called for a union with egypt , a move that proved to be very popular . the ba'ath leadership dissolved the party in 1958 , gambling that the illegalisation of certain parties would hurt the scp more than it would the ba'ath . a military coup in damascus in 1961 brought the uar to an end . sixteen prominent politicians signed a statement supporting the coup , among them al-hawrani and salah al-din al-bitar ( who later retracted his signature ) . following the uar 's dissolution , the ba'ath party was reestablished at the 1962 congress . the military committee did not show itself to the civilian wing of the party at this congress . during the congress , aflaq and the military committee , through muhammad umran , made contact for the first time ; the committee asked for permission to initiate a coup d'état ; aflaq supported the conspiracy . following the success of the ramadan revolution , led by the ba'ath party 's iraqi regional branch , the military committee hastily convened to hatch a coup against nazim al-kudsi 's presidency . the 8 march revolution proved successful , and a ba'athist government in syria was established . the plotters first order was to establish the national council for the revolutionary command ( ncrc ) , consisting entirely of ba'athists and nasserists , and controlled by military personnel rather than civilians from the very beginning . while the ba'ath party had attained power , there was a problem ; internal infighting . the military committee , which was itself a tiny minority of the already small ba'ath party membership , was forced to rule by force . the ba'ath party had only 2,500 members by mid-1963 , the party lacked a popular base . even if membership expanded , the authoritarian way of ruling it had introduced when coming to power would get worse , not better . another problem was that the civilian wing was riven by infighting between the radical socialist and moderate faction , while the military stood more unified . whatever the case , the syrian regional command slowly amassed its powers by weakening the national command . this all came to a head in the 1966 syrian coup d'état . others . following the ba'ath party 's founding , regional branches were established in kuwait and saudi arabia . not long after it established branches in north yemen and south yemen . in tunisia , a regional branch was established in the 1950s , but was forced underground for much of its existence . the saudi regional branches elected ali ghannäm to represent them at the 7th national command . while its currently unknown which side the saudi ba'ath took after the 1966 split , it published a newspaper , sawt al-tal ‘ iyya , from 1973 to 1980 . it was an ardent critic of the house of saud and american imperialism . the majority of its members were shia muslims . in late 1963 , ba'ath cells were being established in sudan , and there were even rumours that a ba'ath cell had been established in egypt . notes . bibliography . ; articles & journals ; bibliography . external links . the five volumes of michel aflaq ’ s on the way of resurrection ( fi sabil al ba'th ) the constitution of the arab socialist ba'th party