Phaistos Disc

discovery . thumbthe phaistos disc was discovered in the minoan palace-site of phaistos , near hagia triada , on the south coast of crete ; c.michael hogan , phaistos fieldnotes , the modern antiquarian , 2007 specifically the disc was found in the basement of room 8 in building 101 of a group of buildings to the northeast of the main palace . this grouping of four rooms also served as a formal entry into the palace complex . italy archaeologist luigi pernier recovered the intact '' dish '' , about in diameter and uniformly slightly more than in thickness , on 3 july 1908 during his excavation of the first minoan palace . it was found in the main cell of an underground '' temple depository '' . these basement cells , only accessible from above , were neatly covered with a layer of fine plaster . their content was poor in precious artifacts , but rich in black earth and ashes , mixed with burnt bovine bones . in the northern part of the main cell , in the same black layer , a few centimetres south-east of the disc and about above the floor , linear a tablet ph 1 was also found . the site apparently collapsed as a result of an earthquake , possibly linked with the eruption of the santorini volcano that affected large parts of the mediterranean region during the mid second millennium b.c . authenticity . the phaistos disc is generally accepted as authentic by archaeologists . the assumption of authenticity is based on the excavation records by luigi pernier . this assumption is supported by the later discovery of the arkalochori axe with similar but not identical glyphs . the possibility that the disc is a 1908 forgery or hoax has been raised by two scholars . robinson:2008 according to a report in the times the date of manufacture has never been established by thermoluminescence . dalya alberge , '' phaistos disc declared as fake by scholar '' , the times , 12 july 2008 in his 2008 review , robinson does not endorse the forgery arguments , but argues that '' a thermoluminescence test for the phaistos disc is imperative . it will either confirm that new finds are worth hunting for , or it will stop scholars from wasting their effort . '' a gold signet ring from knossos ( the mavro spilio ring ) , found in 1926 , contains a linear a inscription developed in a field defined by a spiral—similar to the phaistos disc . siegel cms ii,3 038 a sealing found in 1955 shows the only known parallel to sign 21 ( 𐇤 , the '' comb '' ) of the phaistos disc . notes on the autheticity of the phaistos disc this is considered as evidence that the phaistos disc is a genuine minoan artifact . seal of the month - 2013 heidelberg university . dating . yves duhoux ( 1977 ) dates the disc to between 1850 b.c . and 1600 b.c . ( mmiii ) on the basis of luigi pernier 's report , which says that the disc was in a middle minoan undisturbed context . jeppesen ( 1963 ) dates it to after 1400 ( lmii-iii ) . doubting the viability of pernier 's report , louis godart ( 1990 ) resigns himself to admitting that archaeologically , the disc may be dated to anywhere in middle or late minoan times ( mmi-lmiii , a period spanning most of the second millennium b.c . ) . j . best suggests a date in the first half of the fourteenth century b.c . ( lmiiia ) based on his dating of tablet ph 1 . . typography . the inscription was apparently made by pressing hieroglyphic '' seals '' into the soft clay , in a clockwise sequence spiraling toward the center of the disk . it was then fired at high temperature . the unique character of the phaistos disc stems from the fact that the entire text was inscribed in this way , reproducing a body of text with reusable characters . the german typesetter and linguist herbert brekle , in his article '' the typographic principle '' in the gutenberg-jahrbuch , argues that the phaistos disc is an early document of movable type printing , since it meets the essential criterion of typographic printing , that of type identity : as a medieval example for the same technique he goes on to cite the prüfening dedicatory inscription . herbert e . brekle ( 1997 ) : '' das typographische prinzip . versuch einer begriffsklärung '' , gutenberg-jahrbuch , vol . 72 , pp . 58–63 ( 62f . ) herbert e . brekle ( 2005 ) : die prüfeninger weiheinschrift von 1119 . eine paläographisch-typographische untersuchung ( brief summary ) , scriptorium verlag für kultur und wissenschaft , regensburg , in his work on decipherment , benjamin schwartz also refers to the phaistos disc as '' the first movable type '' . in his popular science book guns , germs and steel , jared diamond describes the disc as an example of a technological advancement that did not become widespread because it was made at the wrong time in history , and contrasts this with gutenberg 's printing press . . inscription . unicode . a set of 46 phaistos disc characters , comprising 45 signs and one combining oblique stroke , have been encoded in unicode since april 2008 ( unicode version 5.1 ) . they are assigned to the range 101d0–101ff in plane 1 ( the supplementary multilingual plane ) . phaistos disc characters were encoded with strong left-to-right directionality , and so in code charts and text ( such as elsewhere on this page ) the glyphs are mirrored from the way they appear on the disc itself . modern use . side a of the phaistos disc is used as the logo of forth , one of the largest research centers in greece . see also . arkalochori axe dispilio tablet youra potsherds cretan hieroglyphs linear a . references . further reading . general . balistier , thomas . the phaistos disc - an account of its unsolved mystery , verlag thomas balistier , 2000 . bennett , emmett l . ( 1996 ) — aegean scripts , ( in the world 's writing systems , peter t . daniels and william bright ( eds . ) oxford : university press . chadwick , john . the decipherment of linear b , cambridge university press , 1958 . duhoux , yves . le disque de phaestos , leuven , 1977 . duhoux , yves . how not to decipher the phaistos disc , american journal of archaeology , vol . 104 , no . 3 ( 2000 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 597–600 . evans , a . j . , scripta minoa , the written documents of minoan crete , with special reference to the archives of knossos , classic books ( 1909 ) , . faure , p . '' tourne disque '' , l'énigme du disque de phaistos , notre histoire n°213 , october 2003 ( pdf 0.7 mb . gaur , albertine . 1984 — a history of writing — charles scribner 's sons . gustave glotz ; marryat ross dobie , e . m . riley , the aegean civilization '' a . a . knopf , 1925 godart , louis . the phaistos disc - the enigma of an aegean script , itanos publications , 1995 . kober , alice . the minoan scripts : facts and theory , american journal of archaeology , vol . 52 , no . 1 ( 1948 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 82–103 . ( pdf 0.5 mb ) trauth , michael . the phaistos disc and the devil 's advocate . on the aporias of an ancient topic of research . 1990 , glottometrika 12 , pp . & nbsp ; 151 – 173 . international phaistos disk conference 2008 , sponsored by minerva magazine . abstracts . attempted decipherments . this list contains off-line accounts of various decipherments . aartun , kjell , 'der diskos von phaistos ; die beschriftete bronzeaxt ; die inschrift der taragona-tafel ' in die minoische schrift : sprache und texte vol . 1 , wiesbaden , harrassowitz ( 1992 ) achterberg , winfried ; best , jan ; enzler , kees ; rietveld , lia ; woudhuizen , fred , the phaistos disc : a luwian letter to nestor , publications of the henry frankfort foundation vol xiii , dutch archeological and historical society , amsterdam 2004 balistier , thomas , the phaistos disc - an account of its unsolved mystery , verlag thomas balistier , 2000 ( as above ) ; describes aarten 's and ohlenroth 's decipherments . ephron , henry d , ( 1962 ) , '' tharso and iaon : the phaistos disk , harvard studies in classical philology , vol . 66 . ( 1962 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 1–91 . jstor url faucounau , jean , le déchiffrement du disque de phaistos & les proto-ioniens : histoire d'un peuple oublié , paris 1999 & 2001 . fischer , steven r . , evidence for hellenic dialect in the phaistos disk , herbert lang ( 1988 ) , gordon , f . g . 1931 . through basque to minoan : transliterations and translations of the minoan tablets . london : oxford university press . hausmann , axel , der diskus von phaistos . ein dokument aus atlantis , bod gmbh ( 2002 ) , . martin , adam , der diskos von phaistos - ein zweisprachiges dokument geschrieben in einer frühgriechischen alphabetschrift , ludwig auer verlag ( 2000 ) , . ohlenroth , derk , das abaton des lykäischen zeus und der hain der elaia : zum diskos von phaistos und zur frühen griechischen schriftkultur , m . niemeyer ( 1996 ) , . polygiannakis , ο δισκος της φαιστού μιλάει ελληνικά ( the phaistos disk speaks in greek ) , georgiadis , athens ( 2000 ) . pomerance , leon , the phaistos disk : an interpretation of astronomical symbols , paul astroms forlag , goteborg ( 1976 ) . reviewed by d . h . kelley in the journal of archeoastronomy ( vol ii , number 3 , summer 1979 ) . external links .