Miguel López de Legazpi

early years . born in 1502 , miguel lópez de legazpi was the youngest son of don juan martínez lópez de legazpi and doña elvira de gurruchátegui . he was born to a nobility and lived in the town of zumárraga , in the basque province of guipúzcoa in spain . between 1526 and 1527 , lópez de legazpi worked as a councilor in the municipal government of his town . mexico . in 1528 , hernán cortés established settlements in north america and lópez de legazpi traveled to mexico ( new spain ) to start a new life . this was due to the death of his parents and his dissatisfaction with his eldest sibling , who inherited the family fortune . in tlaxcala , he worked with juan garcés and juan 's sister , isabel garcés . lópez de legazpi would go on to marry isabel and have nine children with her . isabel died in the mid-1550s . between 1528 and 1559 , he worked as a leader of the financial department council and as the civil governor of mexico city . expedition to the philippines . in 1564 , lópez de legazpi was commissioned by the viceroy , luís de velasco , to lead an expedition in the pacific ocean , to find the spice islands where the earlier explorers ferdinand magellan and ruy lópez de villalobos had landed in 1521 and 1543 , respectively . the expedition was ordered by king philip ii of spain , after whom the philippines had earlier been named by ruy lópez de villalobos . the viceroy died in july 1564 , but the audiencia and lópez de legazpi completed the preparations for the expedition . on november 19 or 20 , 1564 , five ships , carrying 500 soldiers , sailed from the port of barra de navidad , new spain , in what is now jalisco state , mexico ( other sources give the date as november 1 , 1564 , and mention 'four ships and 380 men ' ) . members of the expedition included six augustinian missionaries , in addition to fr . andrés de urdaneta , who served as navigator and spiritual adviser , '' blood compact '' , bohol philippines history website melchor de legazpi ( miguel lópez de legazpi 's son ) , felipe de salcedo ( one of miguel lópez de legazpi 's grandsons ) , and guido de lavezarez ( a survivor of ferdinand magellan 's expedition ) . lópez de legazpi and his men sailed the pacific ocean for 93 days . in 1565 , they landed in the mariana islands , where they briefly anchored and replenished their supplies . there they fought with chamorro tribes and burned several huts . arrival in the philippines . a chief of bohol island named catunao gave information to miguel lópez about cebu and accompanied lópez as a guide . the philippine islands , 1493-1898 — volume 12 of 55 lópez de legazpi 's expedition anchored off the indianized rajahnate of cebu on february 13 , 1565 , but did not put ashore due to opposition from natives . on february 22 , 1565 , the expedition reached the island of samar and made a blood compact with datu urrao . the spaniards then proceeded to limasawa and were received by datu bankaw , then to bohol , where they befriended datu sikatuna ( or catunao and rajah sigala . on march 16 , 1565 , lópez de legazpi made a blood compact with datu sikatuna . on april 27 , 1565 , the expedition returned to cebu and landed there . rajah tupas challenged the spaniards , but was overpowered . the spaniards established a colony , naming the settlements '' villa del santisimo nombre de jesús '' ( town of the most holy name of jesus ) after an image of sto . niño in one of the native houses . . panay and mindoro . in 1569 , due to a scarcity of food provisions in cebu , lópez de legazpi transferred to panay town on the island of panay , where they were peacefully welcomed by the people in the kedatuan of madja-as . subsequently , they founded a second settlement , then named capiz and now the city of roxas in capiz province , located on the bank of the panay river . in 1570 , lópez de legazpi sent juan de salcedo , his grandson who had arrived from mexico in 1567 , to mindoro ( former location of the huangdom of ma-i ) to punish the muslim moro pirates who had been plundering panay villages . salcedo also destroyed forts on the islands of ilin and lubang , respectively south and northwest of mindoro iloilo history part 1 - research center for iloilo . luzon and the capture of manila . in 1570 , having heard of the rich resources in luzon , lópez de legazpi dispatched martín de goiti to explore the northern region . landing in batangas with a force of 120 spaniards , de goiti explored the pansipit river , which drains taal lake . on may 8 , they arrived in manila bay . there , they were welcomed by the natives . goiti 's soldiers camped there for a few weeks while forming an alliance with the muslim leader , rajah ache ( better known as rajah matanda ) , who was a vassal under the sultan of brunei . lópez de legazpi wanted to use manila 's harbor as a base for trade with china . however , the rajah 's ally in northern shores of manila bay , historically known as the young bambalito of macabebe , asked rajah soliman ( old ache ) to revoke his alliance with the spaniards . rajah matanda refused because of the '' word of honor '' of the spaniards . rajah soliman had his conditions for bambalito that if they were able to kill as least 50 spaniards , he would revoke his alliance with lópez de legazpi , and the old ache would help to expel the conquerors . bambalito rode back to macabebe and formed a fleet of two thousand five hundred moros consisting of soldiers from the villages along manila bay particularly from macabebe and hagonoy . on may 30 , 1570 , bambalito sailed to tondo with caracoas and encountered the spaniards at bangkusay channel , headed by martin de goiti on june 3 , 1571 . bambalito and his fleet had lost the battle , and after disputes and hostility had erupted between the two groups , the spaniards occupied the islamized states of tondo and maynila . manila was prepared by goiti for lópez de legazpi who left panay . in the same year , more reinforcements arrived in the philippines , prompting lópez de legazpi to leave cebu for panay and then for luzon . he recruited 250 spanish soldiers and 600 native warriors to explore the regions of leyte and panay . the following year , he followed goiti and salcedo in manila , after learning that the villages had been conquered . during the early phase of the exploration of the northern part of the philippines , lópez de legazpi remained in cebu and did not accompany his men during their conquest of manila because of health problems and advanced age . in manila , lópez de legazpi formed a peace pact with the native councils as well as the local rulers , rajah sulayman and lakandula , lakan and rajah are same title of the native royalty . both groups agreed to organize a city council , consisting of two mayors , twelve councilors and a secretary . lópez de legazpi established a settlement there on june 24 , 1571 , and he also ordered the construction of the walled city of intramuros . he proclaimed the town as the island 's capital , and the seat of the spanish government in the east indies . upon the defeat of bambalito , legazpi orders the exploration of the villages north of manila . in september 1571 , goiti pacified lubao and betis , using riverine tributaries of rio chico , then he reached the settlements in calumpit and malolos on november 14 , 1571 and other old villages mostly along manila bay . lópez de legazpi had established a government on the islands and became the first spanish governor of the philippines . last years . lópez de legazpi governed the philippines for a year before dying suddenly of a stroke in manila on august 20 , 1572 after scolding an aide . stanley karnow , in our image : america 's empire in the philippines , pg 47 . he died bankrupt , leaving a few pesos behind , due to having spent most of his personal fortune during the conquest . he was laid to rest in san agustin church , intramuros . by the time of lópez de legazpi 's death , the parts of the visayas had passed to spanish rule . the spanish met strong resistance from moro people on the island of mindanao , the zambal tribes of zambales , and the igorot of the cordilleran mountains , as well as some wokou pirates from china and japan . letters to the king of spain . during his final years , lópez de legazpi wrote several letters to philip ii of spain about his journey to the east indies , and the conquest he had achieved . these were collectively known as the ( letters to the king lord philip ii : on the expedition , conquests , and progress of the philippine islands ) . the letters are still preserved today at the general archive of the indies in seville , spain . role of religion on the expedition . at the time of lópez de legazpi 's arrival , the natives of the archipelago practiced islam , hinduism , buddhism and animism . part of the motivation of the spaniards was to evangelize population and convert people to roman catholicism . with the augustinian , franciscan and other friars , who had helped him established a government on the islands , lópez de legazpi worked to convert the natives to the christian religion . in 1609 , antonio de morga , alcalde of criminal causes , in the royal audiencia of new spain wrote : after the islands had been conquered by the sovereign light of the holy gospel which entered therein , the heathen were baptized , the darkness of their paganism was banished and they changed their own for christian names . the islands also , losing their former name , took — with the change of religion and the baptism of their inhabitants — that of filipinas islands , in recognition of the great favors received at the hands of his majesty filipe the second , our sovereign , in whose fortunate time and reign they were conquered , protected and encouraged , as a work and achievement of his royal hands . . legacy . the lópez de legazpi and urdaneta expedition to the philippines effectively created the trans-pacific manila galleon trade , in which silver mined from mexico and potosí was exchanged for chinese silk , porcelain , indonesian spices , indian gems and other goods precious to europe at the time . the trade route formed an important commercial link between latin america and the asia-pacific with the trade products even carried over to europe via the havana galleons , while heavily financing the spanish empire . the introduction of western ingredients , goods , and imperialism brought about the 'hispanization ' of the islands . for the next 333 years , from 1565 when spain first established a colony in the country until the treaty of paris on december 10 , 1898 , the philippines was a spanish colony ( including the years 1762–1764 when the british controlled manila and the port city of cavite but not the whole country ) . media portrayals . portrayed by mark gil in the 2013 tv series , indio . gallery . lopez de legazpi.jpg statue of legazpi outside of fort san pedro , cebu city zumarraga - plaza de euskadi , monumento a legazpi 2.jpg statue of legazpi in zumarraga , spain manilajf8528 38.jpg legazpi-urdaneta monument in manila manilajf8528 40.jpg miguel lópez de legazpi and andrés de urdaneta , manila sanagustinchurch , manilajf0364 06.jpg his mortal remains are in the san agustin church , manila . sanagustinchurch , manilajf0364 07.jpg tomb of miguel lópez de legazpi , manila legazpi500peso.jpg legazpi on a 500 peso banknote , 1936 file : miguel lobos de legazpi monument in legazpi city side view.jpg monument of legazpi at the city hall of the philippine city named after him . see also . history of the philippines . publications . de morga , antonio ( 2004 ) . history of the philippine islands . volume 1 and 2 . project gutenberg . lópez de legazpi , don miguel ( 1564–1572 ) . '' cartas al rey don felipe ii : sobre la expedicion , conquistas y progresos de las islas felipinas '' . sevilla , españa . references . external links . confirmation of lópez de legazpi 's title as governor and captain-general ( article ) '' mga conquistador ng pilipinas '' ( invasions of the philippines by european and chinese would-be conquerors and the fierce resistance , intermittently successful , ultimately doomed , by scattered bands of fishermen and rice farmers ) , elaput.org