1966 in film

top-grossing films . north america . the top ten 1966 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . october 19 - gulf and western industries acquire paramount pictures . november - seven arts productions reach agreement to acquire warner bros . for 32 million , later forming a new company warner bros.-seven arts . december 15 - entertainment pioneer walt disney , best known for his creation of mickey mouse , breakthroughs in the field of animation , filmmaking , theme park design and other achievements , dies at the age of 65 . he died while he was producing the jungle book , the happiest millionaire , and winnie the pooh and the blustery day ; the last three films under his personal supervision . awards . academy awards : : best picture : a man for all seasons - highland , columbia : best director : fred zinnemann - a man for all seasons : best actor : paul scofield - a man for all seasons : best actress : elizabeth taylor - who 's afraid of virginia woolf ? : best supporting actor : walter matthau - the fortune cookie : best supporting actress : sandy dennis - who 's afraid of virginia woolf ? : best foreign language film : a man and a woman ( un homme et une femme ) , directed by claude lelouch , france bafta film awards : : bafta award for best film : who 's afraid of virginia woolf ? : best british film : the spy who came in from the cold golden globe awards : : drama : : best picture : a man for all seasons : best actor : paul scofield – a man for all seasons : best actress : anouk aimée – a man and a woman : comedy or musical : : best picture : the russians are coming , the russians are coming : best actor : alan arkin – the russians are coming , the russians are coming : best actress : lynn redgrave – georgy girl : other : best supporting actor : richard attenborough – the sand pebbles : best supporting actress : jocelyne lagarde – hawaii : best director : fred zinnemann – a man for all seasons palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : : a man and a woman ( un homme et une femme ) , directed by claude lelouch , france : signore & signori ( the birds , the bees and the italians ) , directed by pietro germi , italy italian national syndicate of film journalists , location : italy silver ribbon best actor winner in questa volta parliamo di uomini ( this time let 's talk about men ) : nino manfredi nominee in the 10th victim : marcello mastroianni a third nominee was not determined . best actress winner in la fuga : giovanna ralli nominees in juliet of the spirits : giulietta masina and in the mandrake : rosanna schiaffino best supporting actor winner in i knew her well : ugo tognazzi nominees in the mandrake : totò and romolo valli best supporting actress winner in juliet of the spirits : sandra milo nominee in made in italy anna magnani a third nominee was not determined . best director winner in i knew her well : antonio pietrangeli nominees in fists in the pocket : marco bellocchio and in juliet of the spirits : federico fellini best foreign director winner in the servant : joseph losey nominees in hamlet ( 1964 film ) : grigori kozintsev and in king and country : joseph losey best screenplay winner in i knew her well : ettore scola , antonio pietrangeli and ruggero maccari nominees in fists in the pocket : marco bellocchio and in sandra : suso cecchi d'amico , enrico medioli , luchino visconti best cinematography , b/w winner in sandra : armando nannuzzi best cinematography , color winner in juliet of the spirits : gianni di venanzo . in memory of . best costume design winner in juliet of the spirits : piero gherardi best score winner in seven golden men : armando trovajoli best producer - short film winner in con il cuore fermo sicilia : clodio cinematografica best short film winner in antonio ligabue , pittore : raffaele andreassi best original story winner in fists in the pocket : marco bellocchio nominees in i knew her well : ruggero maccari , ettore scola , antonio pietrangeli and in seven golden men : marco vicario best producer winner in seven golden men : marco vicario nominee in fists in the pocket : enzo doria a third nominee was not determined . best production design winner in juliet of the spirits : piero gherardi . golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : the battle of algiers ( la battaglia di algeri ) , directed by gillo pontecorvo , algeria / italy golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : cul-de-sac , directed by roman polanski , united kingdom . 1966 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1966 1 january red tomahawk 5 january 7 women agent for h.a.r.m . 9 january dracula : prince of darkness ( u.k . ) 16 january our man flint 20 january the ghost and mr . chicken judith 27 january moment to moment february 1966 2 february the rare breed 9 february made in paris 12 february drop dead darling 18 february the silencers 19 february the chase 21 february lord love a duck 23 february harper 25 february the sword of doom ( japan ) march 1966 2 march blood bath 4 march the group the oscar 9 march johnny reno 14 march born free ( u.k . ) war and peace part i ( u.s.s.r ) 25 march a man could get killed 30 march cast a giant shadow hold on ! the trouble with angels 31 march frankie and johnny . april–june . april 1966 1 april hold on ! 4 april the singing nun 6 april django 7 april hold me while i 'm naked 10 april tokyo drifter ( japan ) 13 april the dirty game 17 april gamera vs . barugon ( japan ) may 1966 5 may arabesque our man in marrakesh 11 may the fat spy 14 may destination inner space 19 may the deadly bees 25 may au hasard balthazar ( france ) blindfold the last of the secret agents ? the russians are coming , the russians are coming 27 may the wrong box 31 may a big hand for the little lady june 1966 1 june the daydreamer 7 june fireball 500 8 june boy , did i get a wrong number ! 9 june the glass bottom boat paradise , hawaiian style 10 june nevada smith 15 june assault on a queen duel at diablo munster , go home ! stagecoach the endless summer 21 june the blue max 22 june around the world under the sea who 's afraid of virginia woolf ? 29 june a fine madness walk , do n't run . july–september . july 1966 1 july incident at phantom hill 7 july three on a couch 12 july a man and a woman ( france ) 13 july how to steal a million 14 july torn curtain 20 july war and peace part ii ( u.s.s.r ) the wild angels 29 july lt . robin crusoe , u.s.n . 30 july batman 31 july the war of the gargantuas ( japan ) august 1966 3 august the man called flintstone this property is condemned 5 august daleks – invasion earth : 2150 a.d . ( u.k . ) 10 august the idol 16 august the plainsman 24 august alfie fantastic voyage 31 august persona ( sweden ) what did you do in the war , daddy ? september 1966 1 september waco 8 september after the fox kiss the girls and make them die 14 september ambush bay lost command 15 september the appaloosa chelsea girls 16 september fahrenheit 451 ( u.k . ) 28 september the bible : in the beginning . october–december . october 1966 5 october seconds 9 october alvarez kelly 10 october hawaii 11 october mister buddwing 12 october dead heat on a merry-go-round 13 october any wednesday 16 october a funny thing happened on the way to the forum ( u.s./u.k . ) the poppy is also a flower 17 october georgy girl spinout 19 october the fortune cookie return of the seven 21 october way.way out 23 october ride in the whirlwind the shooting 24 october 10:30 p.m . summer 27 october texas across the river 28 october an american dream chamber of horrors nashville rebel november 1966 2 november not with my wife , you do n't ! the professionals what 's up , tiger lily ? 5 november chappaqua 7 november cul-de-sac 8 november madame x 10 november is paris burning ? penelope wings ( u.s.s.r ) 18 november let 's kill uncle 19 november castle of evil december 1966 1 december follow me , boys ! 8 december la grande vadrouille ( france ) / ( u.k . ) 9 december once before i die triple cross you 're a big boy now 12 december a man for all seasons thunderbirds are go 15 december the good , the bad and the ugly the quiller memorandum 16 december andrei rublev ( u.s.s.r ) 17 december el dorado godzilla vs . the sea monster ( japan ) rage 18 december blowup 20 december murderers ' row the sand pebbles 21 december gambit grand prix 22 december funeral in berlin ( u.k./u.s . ) 30 december one million years b.c . ( u.k . ) . notable films released in 1966 . united states unless stated . . 10:30 p.m . summer , directed by jules dassin and starring melina mercouri and romy schneider 7 women , the last film of john ford , starring anne bancroft , flora robson , margaret leighton , mildred dunnock , anna lee . a . aakhri khat ( the last letter ) – ( india ) after the fox , starring peter sellers and victor mature alfie , directed by lewis gilbert , starring michael caine , shelley winters , millicent martin – ( u.k . ) alice in wonderland , a tv film starring john gielgud , peter cook , peter sellers – ( u.k . ) alvarez kelly , starring william holden ambush bay , starring hugh o'brian , mickey rooney and james mitchum an american dream , starring stuart whitman , janet leigh , eleanor parker amrapali , starring vyjayanthimala and sunil dutt – ( india ) andrei rublev , directed by andrei tarkovsky – ( u.s.s.r . ) the appaloosa , starring marlon brando arabesque , directed by stanley donen , starring sophia loren and gregory peck around the world under the sea , starring lloyd bridges as long as you 've got your health ( tant qu'on a la santé ) , directed by and starring pierre étaix – ( france ) assault on a queen , starring frank sinatra , virna lisi , anthony franciosa au hasard balthazar ( chosen by lot balthazar ) , directed by robert bresson – ( france/sweden ) aybolit-66 – ( u.s.s.r . ) . b . bariera ( barrier ) , directed by jerzy skolimowski – ( poland ) batman , starring adam west , burt ward , burgess meredith , cesar romero , lee meriwether , frank gorshin the battle of algiers , directed by gillo pontecorvo - golden lion winner – ( italy/algeria ) beau geste , directed by douglas heyes beregis avtomobilya ( beware of the automobile ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) the bible : in the beginning . , directed by john huston , starring stephen boyd , franco nero , ava gardner , richard harris , peter o'toole the big gundown ( la resa dei conti ) , starring lee van cleef – ( italy ) a big hand for the little lady , starring henry fonda , joanne woodward , jason robards , burgess meredith , kevin mccarthy the birds , the bees and the italians ( signore & signori ) , directed by pietro germi – ( italy ) birds do it , starring soupy sales black girl ( la noire de . ) , directed by ousmane sembène – ( france/senegal ) blindfold , directed by philip dunne , starring rock hudson and claudia cardinale blowup , directed by michelangelo antonioni , starring david hemmings and vanessa redgrave—winner of palme d'or , 1967 cannes film festival – ( italy/u.k./u.s . ) the blue max , starring george peppard , james mason , ursula andress – ( u.k . ) borom sarret ( the wagoner ) – ( senegal ) born free , starring virginia mckenna and bill travers – ( u.k . ) boy , did i get a wrong number ! , starring bob hope , phyllis diller , elke sommer a bullet for the general ( el chucho , quién sabe ? ) , starring gian maria volonté and klaus kinski – ( italy ) . c . cairo 30 ( al-kahira 30 ) , directed by salāḥ abu seif – ( egypt ) carry on screaming ! , starring harry h . corbett and kenneth williams – ( u.k . ) cast a giant shadow , starring kirk douglas , senta berger , yul brynner , john wayne and frank sinatra chafed elbows , directed by robert downey sr . chappaqua , featuring william s . burroughs the chase , directed by arthur penn , starring marlon brando , jane fonda , angie dickinson and robert redford chelsea girls , directed by andy warhol , starring nico chimes at midnight ( a.k.a . falstaff ) , directed by and starring orson welles , with jeanne moreau and john gielgud – ( france/spain/switzerland ) cinerama 's russian adventure , a documentary on the u.s.s.r . introduced by bing crosby circus of fear , starring christopher lee , leo genn , klaus kinski– ( u.k . ) closely watched trains ( ostře sledované vlaky ) , directed by jiří menzel – ( czechoslovakia ) come drink with me ( da zui xia ) , directed by king hu – ( hong kong ) the crazy-quilt , directed by john korty cul-de-sac , directed by roman polanski , starring donald pleasence and françoise dorléac – ( u.k . ) curse of the swamp creature , starring john agar , francine york curse of the vampires ( dugo ng vampira , a.k.a . blood of the vampires or creatures of evil ) , directed by gerardo de león – ( philippines ) cyborg 2087 , starring michael rennie and wendell corey . d . daimajin , directed by kimiyoshi yasuda – ( japan ) daisies ( sedmikrásky ) , directed by věra chytilová – ( czechoslovakia ) daleks – invasion earth : 2150 a.d . , starring peter cushing – ( u.k . ) the daydreamer , a rankin-bass and embassy pictures stop-motion/live-action film dead heat on a merry-go-round , starring james coburn , camilla sparv , robert webber and rose marie the deadly bees , directed by freddie francis and starring suzanna leigh – ( u.k . ) death of a bureaucrat ( la muerte de un burócrata ) , directed by tomás gutiérrez alea – ( cuba ) the defector , directed by raoul lévy and starring montgomery clift , hardy krüger and macha meril – ( france/west germany ) degueyo , directed by giuseppe vari – ( italy ) destination inner space , starring gary merrill and sheree north the diabolical dr . z ( miss muerte ) , directed by jesús franco – ( france/spain ) dimension 5 , starring jeffrey hunter django , starring franco nero – ( italy/spain ) do n't look now , we 're being shot at ( la grande vadrouille ) , starring terry-thomas and bourvil – ( france/u.k . ) le deuxieme souffle ( a.k.a . second breath ) , directed by jean-pierre melville , starring lino ventura – ( france ) dr . goldfoot and the girl bombs ( le spie vengono dal semifreddo ) , directed by mario bava – ( italy/u.s . ) dracula : prince of darkness , starring christopher lee – ( u.k . ) drop dead darling , starring tony curtis duel at diablo , starring james garner and sidney poitier dutchman , starring al freeman , jr . and shirley knight . e . ebirah , horror of the deep ( gojira , ebira , mosura nankai no daikettō ) , directed by jun fukuda – ( japan ) el dorado , directed by howard hawks , starring john wayne , robert mitchum and james caan the elusive avengers ( neulovimye mstiteli ) , directed by edmond keosayan – ( u.s.s.r . ) eye of the devil , directed by j . lee thompson , starring deborah kerr , david niven and sharon tate . f . the face of another ( tanin no kao ) – ( japan ) fahrenheit 451 , directed by françois truffaut , starring julie christie and oskar werner – ( u.k . ) the family way , a boulting brothers film , starring hayley mills and hywel bennett – ( u.k . ) fantastic voyage , directed by richard fleischer , starring stephen boyd and raquel welch the fat spy , starring phyllis diller , jayne mansfield , brian donlevy fighting elegy ( kenka erejii ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) a fine madness , starring sean connery and joanne woodward fireball 500 , starring frankie avalon , annette funicello , fabian forte follow me , boys ! , directed by norman tokar , starring fred macmurray , vera miles , kurt russell for love and gold ( l'armata brancaleone ) , directed by mario monicelli , starring vittorio gassman – ( italy ) the fortune cookie ( a.k.a . meet whiplash willie ) , directed by billy wilder , starring jack lemmon and walter matthau frankie and johnny , starring elvis presley and donna douglas funeral in berlin , starring michael caine – ( u.k . ) a funny thing happened on the way to the forum , directed by richard lester , starring zero mostel , jack gilford , phil silvers , michael crawford – ( u.s./u.k . ) . g . galia , directed by georges lautner and starring mireille darc – ( france/italy ) gambit , starring michael caine and shirley maclaine the game is over ( la curée ) , directed by roger vadim and starring jane fonda – ( france/italy ) gamera vs . barugon , directed by shigeo tanaka – ( japan ) georgy girl , directed by silvio narizzano , starring lynn redgrave , james mason and alan bates – ( u.k . ) the ghost and mr . chicken , starring don knotts the ghost in the invisible bikini , starring deborah walley , tommy kirk , nancy sinatra the glass bottom boat , starring doris day and rod taylor godzilla vs . the sea monster ( gojira , ebira , mosura nankai no daikettō ) – ( japan ) the good , the bad and the ugly , directed by sergio leone , starring clint eastwood , eli wallach and lee van cleef– ( italy ) grand prix , directed by john frankenheimer , starring james garner , yves montand , toshiro mifune , eva marie saint , jessica walter the great st trinian 's train robbery , starring frankie howerd and dora bryan – ( u.k . ) the group , directed by sidney lumet , starring candice bergen , shirley knight , joan hackett , joanna pettet and jessica walter gunpoint , starring audie murphy , joan staley and warren stevens . h . harper , starring paul newman , robert wagner , lauren bacall , pamela tiffin , julie harris , arthur hill , janet leigh hawaii , directed by george roy hill , starring julie andrews , max von sydow , richard harris the hawks and the sparrows ( uccellacci e uccellini ) , directed by pier paolo pasolini , starring totò – ( italy ) the hellbenders ( i crudeli ) , starring joseph cotten – ( italy ) here is your life ( här har du ditt liv ) – ( sweden ) the hills run red ( un fiume di dollari ) , directed by carlo lizzani – ( italy ) hold on ! , starring peter noone and shelley fabares how to steal a million , directed by william wyler , starring audrey hepburn and peter o'toole hotel paradiso , directed by peter glenville and starring alec guinness – ( u.k . ) the hunchback of soho ( der bucklige von soho ) , directed by alfred vohrer – ( west germany ) hunger ( sult ) – ( denmark/norway/sweden ) la caza ( la caza ) , directed by carlos saura – ( spain ) . i . the idol , directed by daniel petrie and starring jennifer jones and michael parks – ( u.k . ) incident at phantom hill , directed by earl bellamy is paris burning ? ( paris brûle-t-il ? ) , directed by rené clément , starring jean-paul belmondo , charles boyer , leslie caron – ( france/united states ) island of terror , starring peter cushing , edward judd , carole gray it happened here , starring sebastian shaw – ( u.k . ) . j . jack frost ( морозко ) , directed by alexander rou – ( u.s.s.r . ) john f . kennedy : years of lightning , day of drums , a documentary narrated by gregory peck and directed by bruce herschensohn johnny reno , starring jane russell johnny yuma , directed by romolo girolami and starring mark damon – ( italy ) judith , starring sophia loren and peter finch – ( israel/u.k./u.s . ) . k . kaleidoscope , directed by jack smight , starring warren beatty – ( u.k . ) khartoum , directed by basil dearden , starring charlton heston and laurence olivier – ( u.k . ) kill , baby , kill , directed by mario bava– ( italy ) king of hearts ( le roi de cœur ) , directed by philippe de broca , starring alan bates – ( france ) kriminal – ( italy/spain ) . l . let 's kill uncle , directed by william castle lightning bolt ( operazione goldman ) , directed by antonio margheriti – ( italy ) lord love a duck , starring roddy mcdowall and tuesday weld lost command , directed by mark robson , starring anthony quinn , george segal , alain delon , claudia cardinale lt . robin crusoe , u.s.n . , starring dick van dyke and nancy kwan . m . madame x , starring lana turner made in paris , starring ann-margret , louis jourdan , chad everett , edie adams made in u.s.a . , directed by jean-luc godard , starring anna karina and jean-pierre léaud – ( france ) mademoiselle , directed by tony richardson , starring jeanne moreau – ( france/u.k . ) mamta , starring ashok kumar – ( india ) a man and a woman , directed by claude lelouch , starring anouk aimée and jean-louis trintignant -- palme d'or winner – ( france ) the man called flintstone , directed by joseph barbera and william hanna a man for all seasons , directed by fred zinnemann , starring paul scofield , robert shaw , orson welles - winner of 6 academy awards and 5 baftas – ( u.k . ) a man could get killed , starring james garner and sandra dee manos : the hands of fate , starring and written , directed and produced by harold p . warren masculine-feminine by jean-luc godard , starring jean-pierre léaud – ( france ) mera saaya ( my shadow ) , starring sunil dutt and sadhana – ( india ) mission to death mister buddwing , directed by delbert mann , starring james garner , jean simmons , angela lansbury , suzanne pleshette , katharine ross misunderstood ( incompreso ) , directed by luigi comencini – ( italy ) modesty blaise , starring monica vitti and terence stamp – ( u.k . ) moment to moment , starring jean seberg and honor blackman morgan ! ( a.k.a . morgan : a suitable case for treatment ) , directed by karel reisz – ( u.k . ) munster , go home ! , starring fred gwynne , yvonne de carlo , al lewis murderers ' row , starring dean martin ( as matt helm ) , with karl malden , camilla sparv , ann-margret . n . namu , the killer whale , directed by lászló benedek navajo joe , starring burt reynolds – ( italy/spain ) nayak , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) nevada smith , starring steve mcqueen , karl malden , martin landau , suzanne pleshette and arthur kennedy night games ( nattlek ) , directed by mai zetterling and starring ingrid thulin – ( sweden ) nobody wanted to die ( niekas nenorėjo mirti ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) not with my wife , you do n't ! , starring tony curtis , george c . scott and virna lisi the nun ( la religieuse ) , directed by jacques rivette , starring anna karina – ( france ) . o . once before i die , starring ursula andress and john derek one million years b.c . , starring raquel welch – ( u.k . ) operazione san gennaro ( a.k.a . the treasure of san gennaro ) , starring nino manfredi and senta berger – ( italy ) the oscar , starring stephen boyd , elke sommer , jill st . john , tony bennett our man flint , starring james coburn our man in marrakesh , a.k.a . bang ! bang ! you 're dead ! , starring tony randall . p . the pad and how to use it , directed by brian g . hutton paradise , hawaiian style , starring elvis presley penelope , starring natalie wood , peter falk , dick shawn , jonathan winters , ian bannen and arlene golonka le père noël a les yeux bleus ( father christmas has blue eyes ) , starring jean-pierre léaud – ( france ) persona , directed by ingmar bergman , starring bibi andersson and liv ullmann – ( sweden ) pharaoh ( faraon ) , directed by jerzy kawalerowicz – ( poland ) phool aur patthar , starring dharmendra – ( india ) picture mommy dead , starring don ameche and zsa zsa gabor the plague of the zombies , starring andré morell – ( u.k . ) the plainsman , starring don murray , abby dalton and leslie nielsen the poppy is also a flower , directed by terence young , starring senta berger , stephen boyd , rita hayworth , yul brynner and angie dickinson the pornographers ( erogotoshitachi yori jinruigaku nyumon ) , directed by shōhei imamura – ( japan ) the priest and the girl ( o padre e a moça ) – ( brazil ) the professionals , directed by richard brooks , starring lee marvin , burt lancaster , robert ryan , woody strode , jack palance and claudia cardinale the projected man , starring mary peach , bryant haliday and ronald allen– ( u.k . ) . q . queen of blood , starring john saxon , basil rathbone and dennis hopper the quiller memorandum , starring george segal , alec guinness , max von sydow and senta berger – ( u.k./u.s . ) . r . rage , starring glenn ford and stella stevens the rare breed , starring james stewart , maureen o'hara , brian keith and juliet mills a report on the party and the guests ( o slavnosti a hostech ) , directed by jan němec – ( czechoslovakia ) the reptile , starring noel willman , ray barrett and jennifer daniel– ( u.k . ) return of the seven , starring yul brynner , robert fuller , claude akins and warren oates ride in the whirlwind , directed by monte hellman , starring jack nicholson and millie perkins ringo and his golden pistol ( johnny oro ) , directed by sergio corbucci and starring mark damon – ( italy ) roman candles , directed by john waters rondo , directed by zvonimir berković– ( yugoslavia ) rosalie , a short directed by walerian borowczyk – ( france ) the round-up ( szegénylegények ) , directed by miklós jancsó – ( hungary ) run , appaloosa , run , starring rex allen the russians are coming , the russians are coming , directed by norman jewison , starring alan arkin , jonathan winters , carl reiner and eva marie saint . s . the sand pebbles , directed by robert wise , starring steve mcqueen , richard attenborough , candice bergen and richard crenna the sandwich man , starring michael bentine and dora bryan – ( u.k . ) savage pampas , starring robert taylor , ron randell and marc lawrence ( u.s./spain/argentina ) seconds , directed by john frankenheimer , starring rock hudson the she beast , starring barbara steele , john karlsen , ian ogilvy shiroi kyotō ( the white tower ) – ( japan ) the shooting , starring warren oates , jack nicholson and millie perkins sri krishna pandaveeyam , directed by and starring n . t . rama rao – ( india ) the silencers , starring dean martin , stella stevens , daliah lavi , cyd charisse and nancy kovack the singing nun , starring debbie reynolds and greer garson sound of horror , starring james philbrook , arturo fernandez and soledad miranda spinout , starring elvis presley the spy with a cold nose , directed by daniel petrie – ( u.k . ) stagecoach , starring ann-margret , bing crosby , red buttons , alex cord , mike connors and stefanie powers stop the world – i want to get off , directed by philip saville suraj , starring vyjayanthimala and rajendra kumar – ( india ) the swinger , starring ann-margret , tony franciosa and yvonne romain the sword of doom ( dai-bosatsu tōge ) – ( japan ) . t . tarzan and the valley of gold , starring mike henry and nancy kovack teesri kasam ( third oath ) , starring raj kapoor – ( india ) texas across the river , starring dean martin , alain delon , rosemary forsyth , peter graves , joey bishop they 're a weird mob , directed by powell and pressburger – ( australia ) this property is condemned , directed by sydney pollack , starring natalie wood , robert redford , charles bronson , kate reid three on a couch , directed by and starring jerry lewis , with janet leigh , leslie parrish , mary ann mobley thunderbirds are go , produced by gerry anderson and sylvia anderson , voices of peter dyneley , shane rimmer , matt zimmerman , david graham , christine finn , sylvia anderson , jeremy wilkin , ray barrett time to die ( tiempo de morir ) , directed by arturo ripstein , starring marga lópez and jorge martínez de hoyos – ( mexico ) tokyo drifter ( tōkyō nagaremono ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) torn curtain , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring paul newman and julie andrews trace of stones ( spur der steine ) – ( east germany ) the trap , starring rita tushingham and oliver reed – ( u.k./canada ) triple cross , starring christopher plummer , claudine auger , gert fröbe – ( u.k./france ) the trouble with angels , directed by ida lupino , starring rosalind russell and hayley mills trunk to cairo , directed by menahem golan , starring audie murphy – ( israel ) the trygon factor , starring stewart granger , susan hampshire and robert morley – ( u.k./west germany ) . u . the ugly dachshund , directed by norman tokar and starring dean jones and suzanne pleshette ukamau ( and so it is ) – ( bolivia ) the uncle , directed by desmond davis and starring rupert davies – ( u.k . ) . v . liolà ( film ) ( liolà ) , directed by alessandro blasetti – ( italy ) very happy alexander ( alexandre le bienheureux ) , directed by yves robert , starring philippe noiret – ( france ) . w . waco , starring jane russell and howard keel walk , do n't run , starring cary grant ( in his final film ) , samantha eggar , jim hutton the war is over ( la guerre est finie ) , directed by alain resnais , starring yves montand and ingrid thulin – ( france ) the war of the gargantuas ( furankenshutain no kaijū : sanda tai gaira ) – ( japan ) way.way out , starring jerry lewis and connie stevens what did you do in the war , daddy ? , directed by blake edwards , starring james coburn and dick shawn where the spies are , directed by val guest and starring david niven – ( u.k . ) who are you , polly maggoo ? ( qui êtes vous , polly maggoo ? ) – ( france ) who 's afraid of virginia woolf ? , directed by mike nichols , starring elizabeth taylor , ( best actress oscar ) , richard burton , george segal , sandy dennis the wild angels , starring peter fonda and nancy sinatra wings ( крылья ) , directed by larisa shepitko – ( u.s.s.r . ) winnetou and the crossbreed ( winnetou und das halbblut apanatschi ) , directed by harald philipp – ( west germany ) winnie the pooh and the honey tree ( animated short ) the witches , starring joan fontaine the wrong box , starring john mills , michael caine , peter cook , nanette newman – ( u.k . ) . y . yesterday girl , directed by alexander kluge – ( west germany ) young törless ( der junge törless ) , directed by volker schlöndorff – ( west germany ) you 're a big boy now , directed by francis ford coppola , starring peter kastner , elizabeth hartman , karen black , julie harris . z . zatoichi 's pilgrimage ( zatōichi umi o wataru ) , directed by kazuo ikehiro – ( japan ) zatoichi 's vengeance ( zatōichi no uta ga kikoeru ) is a 1966 japanese chambara film directed by tokuzō tanaka . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930 & ndash ; 1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931 & ndash ; 1969 ) sylvester the cat ( 1944-1966 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953 & ndash ; 1968 ) daffy duck ( 1937 & ndash ; 1968 ) . births . january 13 - patrick dempsey , american actor january 20 – rainn wilson , american actor , comedian , writer , director , businessman and producer february 4 - piret kalda , estonian actress february 24 - billy zane , american actor february 25 - téa leoni , american actress march 9 - alison doody , irish model and actress march 26 - michael imperioli , american actor april 8 - robin wright , american actress april 9 - cynthia nixon , american actress may 10 - ilian djevelekov , bulgarian film director and producer may 12 - stephen baldwin , american actor may 20 - mindy cohn , american actress and voice actress may 26 - helena bonham carter , english actress june 22 - emmanuelle seigner , french actress june 28 john cusack , american actor , brother of actress joan cusack mary stuart masterson , american actress july 7 - jim gaffigan , american stand-up comedian , actor , writer and producer july 9 - pamela adlon , american actress , voice actress , screenwriter , producer and director july 10 - a . o . scott , american film critic of the new york times july 11 - debbe dunning , american actress july 15 - irène jacob , french-born swiss actress july 18 - lori alan , american actress and voice actress august 14 - halle berry , american actress september 2 - salma hayek , mexican actress september 7 - toby jones , english actor september 9 - adam sandler , american actor october 6 - jacqueline obradors , american actress october 16 - mary elizabeth mcglynn , american voice actress october 19 - jon favreau , american actor , director , producer and screenwriter october 28 – andy richter , american actor , voice actor , writer , comedian and late night talk show announcer november 2 – david schwimmer , american actor , director and producer november 6 - peter deluise , american actor november 17 - sophie marceau , french actress and director november 22 - michael k . williams , american actor november 23 - vincent cassel , french actor december 6 - fred armisen , american actor and comedian december 7 - c . thomas howell , american actor december 12 - lydia zimmermann , spanish filmmaker december 21 - kiefer sutherland , american actor december 24 - diedrich bader , american actor and voice actor . deaths . january 3 - rex lease , 62 , american actor , rough riding ranger , borrowed wives january 17 - vincent j . donehue , 50 , american director , lonelyhearts , sunrise at campobello january 22 - herbert marshall , 75 , british actor , the letter , the little foxes january 31 - elizabeth patterson , 90 , american actress , the shocking miss pilgrim , remember the night february 1 buster keaton , 70 , american actor and director , the general , sherlock jr . hedda hopper , 80 , american gossip columnist and actress , sunset boulevard , topper february 9 - sophie tucker , 82 , russian-born american singer and actress , thoroughbreds do n't cry , broadway melody of 1938 february 18 - robert rossen , 57 , american writer and director , the hustler , all the king 's men february 19 - james edward grant , 60 , american writer and director , angel and the badman , the alamo february 26 - mientje kling , 71 , dutch actress , the devil in amsterdam march 3 william frawley , 79 , american actor , miracle on 34th street , the lemon drop kid alice pearce , 48 , american actress , on the town , the disorderly orderly march 12 - estelita rodriguez , 34 , cuban actress , tropical heat wave , rio bravo march 26 - cyril hume , 66 , american screenwriter , the great gatsby , forbidden planet april 6 julia faye , 73 , american actress , chicago , the ten commandments edna flugrath , 73 , american silent-film actress , the derby winner , the pursuit of pamela april 16 - marjie millar , 34 , american actress , money from home , about mrs . leslie june 5 - natacha rambova , 69 , american actress , salomé , monsieur beaucaire june 11 - wallace ford , 68 , british-born american actor , another face , 3 ring circus june 19 - ed wynn , 79 , american actor , alice in wonderland , mary poppins july 5 - john p . fulton , 63 , american special effects supervisor , the ten commandments july 6 - anne nagel , 50 , american actress , under the big top , my little chickadee july 23 douglass montgomery , 59 , american actor , little women , waterloo bridge montgomery clift , 45 , american actor , from here to eternity , a place in the sun august 3 - lenny bruce , 40 , american satirist august 15 jan kiepura , 64 , polish tenor and actor , my song for you seena owen , 71 , american actress , queen kelly , victory august 23 - francis x . bushman , 83 , american actor , ben-hur , the phantom planet august 25 - lance comfort , 58 , british director , penn of pennsylvania , eight o'clock walk august 26 - art baker , 68 , american actor , cover up , the farmer 's daughter september 14 - nikolai cherkasov , 63 , soviet actor , alexander nevsky , ivan the terrible , part ii september 22 - jules furthman , 78 , american screenwriter , the big sleep , to have and have not october 13 - clifton webb , 76 , american actor , laura , the man who never was october 16 - george o'hara , 67 , american actor and writer , side street , the grapes of wrath october 23 eugenio bava , 80 , italian cinematographer , cabiria , quo vadis claire mcdowell , 88 , american actress , the mark of zorro , ben-hur october 24 - hans dreier , 81 , german art director of european and american films , sunset boulevard , double indemnity november 3 - byron barr , 49 , american actor , double indemnity , pitfall november 9 - james v . kern , 57 , american screenwriter and director , never say goodbye , two tickets to broadway december 14 emma dunn , 91 , british actress , mother , life with father verna felton , 76 , american actress and voice actress , picnic , cinderella richard whorf , 60 , american actor and director , christmas holiday , yankee doodle dandy december 15 - walt disney , 65 , american producer , cartoonist and studio executive , steamboat willie , cinderella , fantasia december 19 - betty kuuskemaa , 87 , estonian actress , , december 22 harry beaumont , 78 , american director , the broadway melody , enchanted april robert keith , 68 , american actor , the lineup , written on the wind . film debuts . candice bergen - the group michael douglas - cast a giant shadow harrison ford - dead heat on a merry-go-round bette midler - hawaii helen mirren - press for time johnny whitaker - the russians are coming , the russians are coming . notes . references .