Talsi

etymology . it is believed that the name is derived from an old livonian word , talusse , meaning '' secluded place '' . . history . early history . a hill fort has existed in talsi at least since the 10th century , originally inhabited by curonians . the settlement of talsi is mentioned in written sources for the first time in 1231 during the middle ages , in a contract between the elders of a curonian tribe and the papal envoy baldwin von alna . during the northern crusades , the settlement came under german over-lordship and a castle was built in talsi during the late 13th century . the settlement grew in the 15th century , when traders and artisans from german-speaking lands settled in talsi . the presently visible main church of the town was inaugurated in 1567 ; pastor , a close friend of ludwig van beethoven , worked in the church for many years . during the reign of duke jacob kettler , an iron smelting furnace was constructed in talsi , an early industrial development . the town has suffered from the plague twice ( 1657 and 1710 ) and was devastated by a large fire in 1733 . the town became part of the russian empire in 1795 together with the rest of courland . at that time , baltic germans constituted about sixty percent of the population . at the end of the 18th century , jews were allowed to settle in talsi for the first time . most of the jews who settled in talsi originally came from lithuania and would with time come to form a substantial part of the town population . eventually a synagogue was built in talsi . . 19th century and world war i . an elementary school opened in 1863 and a private school in 1873 ( the latter was for many years the workplace of linguist kārlis mīlenbahs ) ; both schools initially taught only in german . in 1887 a russian-language school was also opened in talsi . during the revolution of 1905 , there was unrest in the town and several houses burned down and inhabitants killed . during world war i the town suffered heavily and its population decreased from around 5,000 to about 1,100 . the entire jewish population was expelled by russian military authorities ( but some would later return ) . peace was not entirely restored until 1920 , with the end of the latvian war of independence which made talsi part of the newly proclaimed latvian republic . . in independent latvia and during the 20th century . the town grew rapidly again and in 1935 had 4116 inhabitants ( 82 % ethnic latvians , 12 % jews and 3 % germans ) . the town was occupied by german troops from june 1941 right up until the end of world war ii on 8 may 1945 . the occupying german army used one of the buildings in talsi as a place where they tortured prisoners ; during the soviet times a bas-relief was put up in commemoration of the victims on the wall of the house . during the nazi occupation the town 's entire jewish population was murdered . the germans were aided by ethnic latvian collaborators . a single jewish woman was hidden by a local farmer but discovered in 1944 and killed . the 1950s and 60s were a time of relative prosperity . the town had a forceful leader in kārlis grīnbergs , chairman of talsi executive committee ( as the town now was part of the latvian soviet socialist republic under soviet occupation ) . a metalworking plant was opened in 1965 that would attract many jobs to the town . following the dissolution of the soviet union and the re-establishment of latvia 's independence , one of the main monuments of the town , a sculpture called koklētājs and dedicated to the latvian freedom fighters could finally be inaugurated . it was begun during the 1930s but could not be finished until after the fall of the soviet union . . geography . talsi is characterised by its location by nine hills and two lakes . the hills are called pilskalns , ķēniņkalns , leču kalns , tiguļu kalns , sauleskalns , baznīckalns , krievragkalns , vilkmuižas kalns and dzirnavkalns . pilskalns , meaning '' castle hill '' is the location of the old hill fort . the hill is high and lies at the centre of the town . an archaeological excavation of the hill fort was carried out here in 1936 – 1938 . the highest hill in talsi is tiguļu kalns . this hill has an arboretum and is the location of talsi regional museum , housed in a manor house originally built for a baltic nobility , baron von firck . onleču kalns there is a memorial sculpture in remembrance of the revolution of 1905 , when six revolutionaries where killed here . talsi lake , in the middle of the town , is surrounded by a promenade and there is a fountain installed in the lake . . culture and religion . as mentioned above , the town hosts a regional museum in the former manor house of baron von firck . there is also a cultural centre with a '' creative yard '' in the middle of the town . the town also has two libraries of which one is a children 's library . there are churches of the lutheran , catholic , baptist and seventh-day adventist christian faiths in talsi . the former synagogue is today a private house . the lutheran church , built in 1567 but reconstructed several times , is the oldest stone building in talsi . . sport . talsi has a municipal school of sport , and hosts an annual rally competition . in addition , there are numerous sports facilities in the town , e.g . skating , ice hockey and association football . . transportation and infrastructure . talsi is connected to riga via bus . a journey from riga to talsi takes approximately two hours . an airfield was built around outside talsi during soviet times . it is used for small planes and occasionally for events . name airfield > . notable people . frédéric fiebig ( 1885–1953 ) , painter ( born in talsi ) markus riva ( 1986 ) , singer ( born in talsi ) krišjānis zeļģis ( 1985 ) , poet ( born in talsi ) jānis strēlnieks ( 1989 ) , basketball player ( born in talsi ) intars busulis ( 1978 ) , singer ( born in talsi ) dzintars čīča ( 1993 ) , singer ( born in talsi ) . events . a number of events are arranged annually in the town . the international carl ferdinand amenda music school competition is a classical music competition arranged by the municipality and open for children aged 7–17 years . there is an annual '' talsi celebration '' every year in july , a market fair at the end of august and designated days of poetry and art . in addition , national holidays such as independence day ( 18 november ) and lāčplēsis day are observed in the town . . twin towns — sister cities . talsi is twinned with : alanya , turkey lejre , denmark orhei , moldova prienai , lithuania saaremaa parish , estonia shchyolkovo , russia söderköping , sweden telavi , georgia . references . external links . official site of talsi