Get Carter

releases . the film 's premiere was held in los angeles on 3 february 1971 , with a preview held in new york on 3 march . the film finally opened for general release across the uk on 10 march 1971 and in the us on 18 march , where it was rated ' x ' for violence and female nudity , meaning it was for adults only . it was later reclassified as ' r ' , meaning children under the age of 17 had to be accompanied by an adult . a censored edited version was released in west germany on 6 august 1971 , with a running time nine minutes shorter than the original . michael klinger was involved in promotion of the film in the uk , using the experience from his background as a distributor to conduct a strong advertising campaign . teaser posters for the film appeared on the front of buses across london , featuring the tag-line '' caine is carter '' . the original british quad poster with artwork by arnaldo putzu , in common with many film posters , has aspects or images that differ from the finished screen version . carter is depicted wearing a gaudy floral jacket , as opposed to the dark raincoat and mohair suit he wears in the film . asked in 2006 , putzu could not remember his artistic rationale for painting the floral jacket , but said he was painting a lot of flowers in designs at that time . chibnall describes the flower power imagery as '' what seems like a desperate and misguided attempt to suggest the hipness of a genre which had largely fallen out of favour '' . chibnall , p . 90 however , movie poster expert sim branaghan liked its eccentricity , calling it was '' that kind of quirkiness you would n't get these days '' . jonny trunk of trunk records—a long-time aficionado of the film and its history—has observed that the floral pattern of carter 's jacket is taken from the distinctive pillow and matching sheet design from the bed in the scene where britt ekland writhes naked whilst on the phone to jack . the poster also places carter 's shotgun in eric 's hands , and features a grappling man and woman who seem to belong to a different film . chibnall , p . 133 , footnote 1 promotional shots and poster artwork exist from the film showing carter holding a pump action shotgun ; in the finished film the only shotgun used by carter is a double-barrelled shotgun , which carter finds on top of his brother frank 's wardrobe . mgm sold distribution rights to the film in the u.s . to its future subsidiary united artists , which promoted it poorly , amidst worries the cockney dialogue in the opening scene would be unintelligible to u.s . audiences . the film 's release was delayed while parts of the film were redubbed , with no great improvement . in the process of redubbing the opening , the version of the film with the original dialogue was lost . for years the version shown on british television was the redubbed american cut . ua placed the film on the declining drive-in theater , where it played at the bottom of a double bill with dirty dingus magee , a vehicle for frank sinatra . michael klinger complained in 1974 to president of ua eric pleskow about the lacklustre promotion of carter , and tried to get him to relinquish the u.s . rights to the film so that klinger could find a better distributor . the film did not encounter many censorship problems , although the scene where carter knifes albert swift caused concern for the censor john trevelyan . chibnall , 2003 , p . 76 in south africa the censor cut out britt ekland 's phone sex scene , shortening her already brief role ; her name was still left on the poster , leaving filmgoers to wonder why she was advertised as appearing . chibnall , p . 61 a resurgence of critical and public interest in the film in the 1990s led to the british film institute releasing a new print of the film in 1999 . it worked with hodges to restore the film , with hodges sourcing another set of negatives of the original opening , which were found in the archives of the bbc . the team then spliced the beginning segment onto a high-quality print of the film . the reissue premiered at the national film theatre and went on general release on 11 june 1999 , showing at the tyneside cinema in newcastle . it was also re-released in germany and greece in 2000 and in france in 2004 . . home media . chibnall has established that the film was shown on lwt in 1976 and 1980 '' in a expurgation version '' ( which edited out britt ekland 's phone sex scene ) and once on westward television and on granada in august 1981 , but it was not shown nationally and in its entirety until a post-watershed bbc broadcast in 1986 . chibnall , p . 99 it was finally released on home media in 1993 by mgm/ua as part of its '' elite collection '' . chibnall says '' there was no advertising to suggest a significant event had occurred . it was simply a part of the long process of exploiting mgm 's back catalogue in the run-up to christmas '' . despite this , the release was given a five-star review in empire , where it was described as '' one of the best british films of the 70s '' . chibnall notes '' it did not , however , find a place in empires top fifty videos of the year '' . warner bros . reissued the film in a special edition on dvd in october 2000 in its original 1.85:1 aspect ratio . extras included three trailers ; the international trailer , an introduction by michael caine to the people of newcastle , and a third featuring roy budd playing the opening theme.this format was also used in a vhs set released by warner brothers , copyrighted 2001 , which included bullit and shaft . also included on the dvd was commentary from caine , hodges and suschitzky , constructed from separate interviews with the three . the soundtrack was presented in monaural dolby digital the film was bundled in the 2008 '' movies that matter – 70 's classics '' dvd set with deliverance and dog day afternoon . it is available from the warner archive collection as a made on demand ( mod ) dvd-r or a download , with the same extras as the 2000 release , although with only two trailers and this time in 16:9 ratio . . reception . critical response . describing the initial critical response to the film , steve chibnall wrote '' initial critical vilification or indifference establishes the conditions in which a cult can flourish . get carter had to make do with ambivalence '' . chibnall , p . 91 he thought the general stance of british critics '' was to admire the film 's power and professionalism while condemning its amorality and excessive violence '' . chibnall , p . 92 geoff mayer observed that '' mainstream critics at the time were dismayed by the film 's complex plotting and carter 's lack of remorse '' . in sight and sound , tom milne said the film was well-constructed and had good characterisation , but lacked the mystery and charisma of the earlier american crime films it attempted to emulate . he found carter 's motivations were inconsistent , either being an avenging angel or an '' authentic post-permissive anti-hero , revelling in the casual sadism '' . in contrast , nigel andrews found the characters to be clichéd archetypes of the criminal underworld , such as the '' homosexual chauffeur , bloated tycoon , glamorous mistress '' , describing the film as '' perfunctory '' . richard weaver in films and filming praised the realism of the film , describing it as '' crime at its most blatant '' , while george melly writing in the observer confessed to vicarious enjoyment of it , but admitted it was '' like a bottle of neat gin swallowed before breakfast . it 's intoxicating all right , but it 'll do you no good '' . steve chibnall writes that '' america was rather more used to hard-boiled storytelling '' and that reviewers there were '' more prepared than british criticism to treat get carter as a serious work '' , chibnall , p . 93 pauline kael admiring its '' calculated soullessness '' and wondering if it signalled a '' new genre of virtuoso viciousness '' . us publication box office gave a cautiously approving review , describing the film as '' nasty , violent and sexy all at once '' . it predicted that '' it should please in the action market , but wo n't win any laurels for caine although his portrayal of the vicious anti-hero impresses '' . the reviewer also opined that '' tighter editing would help considerably '' . roger ebert was less reserved in his praise , writing that '' the movie has a sure touch '' . he noted the '' proletarian detail '' of the film which is '' unusual in a british detective movie . usually we get all flash and no humanity , lots of fancy camera tricks but no feel for the criminal strata of society '' . of caine 's performance he wrote , '' the character created by caine is particularly interesting . he 's tough and ruthless , but very quiet and charged with a terrible irony '' . judith crist in new york magazine gave a glowing review , saying '' michael caine is superb , suave and sexy '' and describing the film as '' a hard , mean and satisfying zinger of the old tough-tec school done in frank contemporary terms '' . variety also praised the film , saying it '' not only maintains interest but conveys with rare artistry , restraint and clarity the many brutal , sordid and gamy plot turns '' . however , jay cocks writing in time was disparaging , calling the film '' a doggedly nasty piece of business '' and comparing it unfavourably to point blank . the film appeared on several us critics ' lists of best films of the year . in michael klinger 's the guardian obituary in 1989 , derek malcolm remembered the film as '' one of the most formidable british thrillers of its time '' . on rotten tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 84 % based on 32 reviews . on imdb get carters average rating is 7.6 based on 12,329 user votes . in 2003 steve chibnall observed a large gender imbalance in voting on the film up to april 2002 , with less than 6 % of votes cast ( where the voters gave their gender ) by women ( 53 out of 947 ) . he also noticed a substantial increase in women voting on the film in the eight months leading up to april 2002 . however , although by 2012 the number of votes cast had increased tenfold , the ratio of female to male voters had not changed greatly , falling slightly from 2002 , dropping to nearly 5 % ( 526 out of 9566 voters who gave their gender were women ) . . box office . get carter was a financial success , and according to steve chibnall its box office takings were '' very respectable '' . on its opening week at abc2 cinema at shaftesbury avenue , london , it broke the house record , taking £8,188 . it out-performed up pompeii , which was showing in the larger abc1 . it also performed strongly when moved to the abcs in edgware and fulham road . on its general release in the north of england , chibnall notes it had a '' very strong first week '' , before an unseasonal heatwave damaged cinema attendance . chibnall writes that '' interestingly , although the film 's downbeat and unsentimental tone is now thought to express the mood of its times , the mass cinema audience preferred love story ( arthur hiller 1970 ) , which remained the most popular film in britain throughout get carters run '' . it was the sixth-most popular '' general release '' movie at the british box office in 1971 . peter waymark . '' richard burton top draw in british cinemas '' . times london , england 30 dec . 1971 : 2 . the times digital archive . web . 11 july 2012 . . accolades . at the time of its release , the only recognition the film received was a 1972 bafta awards nomination for ian hendry as best supporting actor . in 1999 , get carter was ranked 16th on the bfi top 100 british films of the 20th century ; five years later , a survey of british film critics in total film magazine chose it as the greatest british film of all time . in 2008 the film was placed at 225 on empires 500 best movies of all time list , which was selected by over 10,000 empire readers , 150 filmmakers and 50 film critics . in october 2010 the critics from the guardian newspaper placed the film on their list of '' greatest films of all time '' , placing it at number 7 in the 25 greatest crime films . in the accompanying poll conducted amongst guardian readers , it was voted fifth . in 2011 time out london placed the film at 32 in its 100 best british films list , which was selected by a panel of 150 film industry experts . . remakes . another film based on lewis ' book , hit man , directed by george armitage and starring bernie casey and pam grier , was released in 1972 , taking some plot details and treatments , such as a sniper shooting carter on a rocky beach , from hodges ' film . warner bros . , which holds the rights to the pre-1986 mgm library , produced a remake of get carter in 2000 under the same title , with sylvester stallone as jack carter . as with hit man , the film credited ted lewis ' jack 's return home as its source , not hodges ' film , and again it contains scenes which are directly borrowed from the original , such as the opening train ride . michael caine appears as cliff brumby in what elvis mitchell described as '' a role that will increase regard for the original '' , speculating that '' maybe that was his intention '' . mickey rourke plays the villain cyrus paice . the remake was compared unfavourably to the original by the majority of reviewers . the consensus opinion of critics on rotten tomatoes was that it was '' a remake that does n't approach the standard of the original , get carter will likely leave viewers confused and unsatisfied . also , reviews are mixed concerning stallone 's acting '' . it was so badly received on its us release that warner bros . decided not to give it a uk theatrical release , anticipating the film would be savaged by british critics and fans . elvis mitchell in the new york times wrote '' it 's so minimally plotted that not only does it lack subtext or context , but it also may be the world 's first movie without even a text '' . mike hodges said in 2003 he had still not seen the remake , but was informed by a friend that it was '' unspeakable '' . his son brought him a dvd of the film back from hong kong and he tried to watch it , but the region format was incompatible '' so we put it in the dustbin '' . the film was voted the worst remake of all time in 2004 by users of british dvd rental website screenselect ( precursor of lovefilm ) . . legacy . tom cox writes that many british film makers '' have stolen from hodges without matching the cold , realistic kick '' of carter . films such as the long good friday , face and lock , stock and two smoking barrels borrow from the carter blueprint . steven soderbergh 's 1999 film the limey is a homage to carter and other british gangster films , and contains similar plot elements and themes of revenge , family and corruption . soderbergh said he envisioned the limey as '' get carter made by alain resnais '' . shane meadows ' film dead man 's shoes has also drawn comparisons to get carter , being similarly a revenge gangster story set around a provincial english town . the behind-the-scenes featurettes accompanying the dvds of life on mars repeatedly cite get carter . the series ' set designers and property masters state that , while the audience and critics may liken the series to the sweeney , get carter was their visual guide and the source of series ' look . the film 's music also enjoyed its own resurgence in popularity , as it tapped into a 1990s interest in vintage film soundtracks . portishead 's adrian utley explained that they found the music to get carter inspiring as '' it was done quickly and cheaply with only a few instruments , and it had to be intensely creative to disguise its limitations '' . the human league album dare contains a track covering the get carter theme , although it was only a version of the sparse leitmotif that opens and closes the film as opposed to the full-blooded jazz piece that accompanies the train journey . stereolab also covers roy budd 's theme on their album aluminum tunes , although they call their version '' get carter '' , as opposed to its proper title , '' main theme ( carter takes a train ) '' . this stereolab version was subsequently used as a sample in the song '' got carter '' by 76 . the finnish rock band laika & the cosmonauts cover the film 's theme on their 1995 album the amazing colossal band . bb davis & the red orchidstra released a version of the film 's title theme in 1999 . jah wobble produced a dub cover version of the theme tune in 2009 . wobble had long been a fan of the bassline of the track , saying in a 2004 interview with the independent that '' there are some bass lines that contain the whole mystery of creation within them '' . . see also . bfi top 100 british films . references . ; bibliography steve chibnall : get carter . british film guides 6 . i.b . taurus , 2003 , . further reading . steve chibnall & robert murphy : british crime cinema , routledge , 1999 , steven paul davies : get carter and beyond : the cinema of mike hodges , batsford , 2003 , douglas keesey : neo-noir : contemporary film noir from chinatown to the dark knight kamera books , 2010 , . external links . get carter on afi catalog of feature films article on fashion in get carter at clothes on film