Microsoft Flight Simulator

add-ons , customisation , and community involvement . the long history and consistent sales of flight simulator has encouraged a very large body of add-on packages to be developed as both commercial and volunteer ventures . a formal software development kit and other tools for the simulator exist to further facilitate third-party efforts , and some third parties have also learned to 'tweak ' the simulator in various ways by trial and error . as for number of add-ons , tweaks , and modifications flight simulator can accommodate solely depends on the user 's hardware setup . the number is not limited by the simulator , and when multiple computers are linked together with multiple monitors and third party software and controls , flight simulator enthusiasts can build their own realistic home cockpits . aircraft . individual attributes of flight simulator aircraft that can be customized include : cockpit layout , cockpit image , aircraft model , aircraft model textures , aircraft flight characteristics , scenery models , scenery layouts , and scenery textures , often with simple-to-use programs , or only a text editor such as 'notepad ' . dedicated 'flightsimmers ' have taken advantage of flight simulator 's vast add-on capabilities , having successfully linked flight simulator to homebuilt hardware , some of which approaches the complexity of commercial full-motion flight simulators . the simulator 's aircraft are made up of five parts : the model , which is a 3d cad-style model of the aircraft 's exterior and virtual cockpit , if applicable . models consist of two distinct sections - the main chassis or '' core '' , and accessories or dynamic parts , such as the landing gear or ailerons . the textures , bitmap images which the game layers onto the model . these can be easily edited ( known as repainting ) , so that a model can adopt any paint scheme imaginable , real or fictional . the sounds , literally what the aircraft sounds like . this is determined by defining which wav files the aircraft uses as its sound-set . the panel , a representation of the aircraft 's cockpit . this includes one or more bitmap images of the panel , instrument gauge files , and sometimes its own sounds . the fde , or flight dynamics engine . this consists of the airfile ( a . air file ) , which contains hundreds of parameters that define the aircraft 's flight characteristics , and the aircraft.cfg file , which contains more and easier-to-edit parameters . most versions of microsoft flight simulator include some of the world 's most popular aircraft from different categories , such as the mooney bravo and beechcraft baron 58 , which fall into the general aviation category ; the airbus a321 and boeing 737 , which fall into the civil jets category ; the robinson r22 , which falls into the helicopter category ; the air scheffel 738 , which falls into the general aviation category again ; and many other planes commonly used around the world . not being limited to using the default aircraft , add-on planes can be downloaded from many sources for free or purchased , which can then be installed into microsoft flight simulator . the beechcraft 1900d pictured above , is an add-on aircraft . similarly , add-on repaints can be added to default aircraft ; these repaints are usually downloaded for free . ai traffic . a growing add-on category for the series is ai ( artificial intelligence ) traffic . ai traffic is the simulation of other vehicles in the fs landscape . this traffic plays an important role in the simulator , as it is possible to crash into traffic ( this can be disabled ) , thus ending your session , and to interact with the traffic via the radio and atc . this feature is active even with third-party traffic . microsoft introduced ai traffic in msfs 2002 with several airliners and private aircraft . this has since been supplemented with many files created by third-party developers . typically , third-party aircraft models have multiple levels of detail , which allow the ai traffic to be better on frame rates , while still being detailed during close looks . there are several prominent freeware developers . some third-party ai traffic can even be configured for '' real time '' departures . scenery . scenery add-ons usually involve replacements for existing airports , with enhanced and more accurate detail , or large expanses of highly detailed ground scenery for specific regions of the world . some types of scenery add-on replace or add structures to the simulator . both freeware and payware scenery add-ons are very widely available . airport enhancements , for example , range from simple add-ons that update runways or taxiways to very elaborate packages that reproduce every lamp , pavement marking , and structure at an airport with near-total accuracy , including animated effects such as baggage cars or marshalling agents . wide-area scenery enhancements may use detailed satellite photos and 3-d structures to closely reproduce real-world regions , particularly those including large cities , landmarks , or spectacular natural wonders . flight networks . virtual flight networks such as ivao , vatsim , and pilot edge as well as vsn.aero , and mindstar aviation 's airspacevr use special , small add-on modules for flight simulator to enable connection to their proprietary networks in multiplayer mode , and to allow for voice and text communication with other virtual pilots and controllers over the network . these networks allow players to enjoy and enhance realism in their game . these networks are for atc ( air traffic control ) . miscellaneous . some utilities , such as fsuipc , merely provide useful tweaks for the simulator to overcome design limitations or bugs , or to allow more extensive interfacing with other third-party add-ons . sometimes certain add-ons require other utility add-ons in order to work correctly with the simulator . other add-ons provide navigation tools , simulation of passengers , and cameras that can view aircraft or scenery from any angle , more realistic instrument panels and gauges , and so on . some software add-ons provide operability with specific hardware , such as game controllers and optical motion sensors . fsdeveloper.com is one website that host a forum style knowledge base aimed at the development of add-on items , tools , and software . excel unusual hosts two versions of flight simulator downloads and tutorials , built from scratch with only vba and cell formulas , in both 2d and 3d . . availability . a number of websites are dedicated to providing users with add-on files ( such as airplanes from actual airlines , airport utility cars , actual buildings located in specific cities , textures , and city files ) . the wide availability over the internet of freeware add-on files for the simulation package has encouraged the development of a large and diverse virtual community , linked up by design group and enthusiast message boards , online multiplayer flying , and 'virtual airlines ' . the internet has also facilitated the distribution of 'payware ' add-ons for the simulator , with the option of downloading the files , which reduces distribution costs . reception . pc magazine in january 1983 called flight simulator '' extraordinarily realistic . a classic program , unique in the market '' . it praised the graphics and detailed scenery , and concluded '' i think it 's going to killer app , and will certainly sell some color graphics adapter '' . byte in december 1983 wrote that '' this amazing package does an incredible job of making you think you 're actually flying a small plane '' . while it noted the inability to use a rgb monitor or a joystick , the magazine concluded that '' for 49.95 you ca n't have everything '' . a pilot wrote in the magazine in march 1984 that he found the simulated cessna 182 to be '' surprisingly realistic '' . while criticizing the requirement of using the keyboard to fly , he concluded '' microsoft flight simulator is a tour de force of the programmer 's art . it can be an excellent introduction to how an aircraft actually operates for a budding or student pilot and can even help instrument pilots or those going for an instrument rating sharpen their skills '' . another pilot similarly praised flight simulator 2.0 in pc magazine that year , giving it 18 out of 18 points . he reported that its realism compared well to two 3 million hardware flight simulators he had recently flown , and that he could use real approach plates to land at and navigate airports flight simulators manual did not document . compute ! warned '' if you do n't know much about flying , this program may overwhelm you . it 's not a simple simulation . it 's a challenging program even for experienced pilots '' . the magazine concluded that flight simulator '' is interesting , challenging , graphically superb , diverse , rewarding , and just plain fun . sheer delight '' . flight simulator 2.0 was reviewed in 1989 in dragon 142 by hartley , patricia , and kirk lesser in '' the role of computers '' column . the reviewers gave the game 5 out of 5 stars . computer gaming world stated in 1994 that flight simulator 5 '' is closer to simulating real flight than ever before '' . microsoft flight simulator x was reviewed in 2006 by gamespot . the reviewer gave the game an 8.4 out of 10 and commented on how it was realistic enough to be used for real-life flight training . jeff lackey , '' microsoft flight simulator review '' , gamespot , 21 oct 2012 . awards . the success of the microsoft flight simulator series has led to guinness world records awarding the series seven world records in the guinness world records : gamer 's edition 2008 . these records include '' longest running flight sim series '' , '' most successful flight simulator series '' , and '' most expensive home flight simulator cockpit '' , which was built by australian trucking tycoon matthew sheil , and cost around 200,000 to build . . see also . x-plane ( simulator ) flightsim.com and avsim.com – flight simulator resource and review communities microsoft train simulator , microsoft space simulator , and microsoft combat flight simulator training simulation international virtual aviation organisation virtual air traffic simulation network . references . external links . microsoft flight simulator insider – an official microsoft site .