Sallust

life and career . sallust was probably born in amiternum in central italy , syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 7 mellor , r . j . ( 1999 ) the roman historians . routledge . p . 30 grant , m . ( 1995 ) greek and roman historians : information and misinformation . routledge . p . 13 though eduard schwartz takes the view that sallust 's birthplace was rome . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 15 . r . syme provides an analysis of the hypothesis his birth date is calculated from the report of jerome 's chronicon . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 13 but ronald syme suggests that jerome 's date has to be adjusted because of his carelessness , and suggests 87 bc as a more correct date . however , sallust 's birth is widely dated at 86 bc , альбрехт , м . ( 2002 ) история римской литературы istoriya rimskoy literatury , т . 1 . греко-латинский кабинет . с . 480 горенштейн , в . о . ( 1981 ) гай саллюстий крисп . сочинения . наука . с . 148 and the der kleine pauly takes 1 october 86 bc as the birthdate . schmidt , p . l . '' sallustius ( 4 ) '' , der kleine pauly . bd . iv . sp . 1513 michael grant cautiously offers 80s bc . there is no information about sallust 's parents or family , syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 14 except for tacitus ' mention of his sister . tacitus . annales , iii.30.3 the sallustii were a provincial noble family of sabine origin . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 9 they belonged to the equestrian order and had full roman citizenship . during the social war sallust ’ s parents hid in rome , because amiternum was under threat of siege by rebelling italic tribes . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 12 because of this sallust could have been raised in rome he received a very good education . after an ill-spent youth , sallust entered public life and may have won election as quaestor in 55 bc . however , there is no conclusive evidence about this , and some scholars suppose that sallust did not become a quaestor — the practice of violating the cursus honorum was common in the last years of the republic . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 28 earl d . c . '' the early career of sallust '' , historia : zeitschrift für alte geschichte , 15 ( 1966 ) , p . 306 he became a tribune of the plebs in 52 bc , the year in which the followers of milo killed clodius in a street brawl . sallust then supported the prosecution of milo . sallust , titus munatius plancus and quintus pompeius rufus also tried to blame cicero , one of the leaders of the senators ' opposition to the triumvirate , for his support of milo . ( asc . mil . , 20 ( 37 ) ) asconius pedianus . commentary on pro milone , 20 ( 37 ) syme suggests that sallust , because of his position in milo 's trial , did not originally support caesar . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 29 theodor mommsen states that sallust acted in pompey 's interests ( according to mommsen , pompey was preparing to install his own dictatorship ) . моммзен , т . ( 2005 ) история рима . т . 3 . наука . с . 223 according to one inscription , some sallustius ( with unclear praenomen ) was a proquaestor in syria in 50 bc under marcus calpurnius bibulus . broughton , t . r . s . ( 1952 ) magistrates of the roman republic , vol . 2 . american philological association . p . 242 mommsen identified this sallustius with sallust the historian , though t . r . s . broughton argued that sallust the historian could not have been an assistant to julius caesar 's adversary . broughton , t . r . s . ( 1952 ) magistrates of the roman republic , vol . 2 . american philological association . p . 247 from the beginning of his public career , sallust operated as a decided partisan of julius caesar , to whom he owed such political advancement as he attained . in 50 bc , the censor appius claudius pulcher removed him from the senate on the grounds of gross immorality ( probably really because of his opposition to milo and cicero ) . in the following year , perhaps through caesar 's influence , he was reinstated . during the caesar 's civil war sallust acted as caesar 's partisan , but his role was not significant , so his name is not mentioned in the dictator 's commentarii de bello civili . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 36 it was reported by plutarch that sallust dined with caesar , hirtius , oppius , balbus and sulpicius rufus on the night after caesar 's famous crossing of the rubicon river into italy on 10 january . in 49 bc sallust was moved to illyricum and probably commanded at least one legion there after the failure of publius cornelius dolabella and gaius antonius . this campaign was unsuccessful . in 48 bc he was probably made quaestor by caesar to re-enter the senate . however , the last statement is based on the '' invective against sallust '' ascribed to cicero , broughton , t . r . s . ( 1952 ) magistrates of the roman republic , vol . 2 . american philological association . p . 274 which is probably a later forgery . in late summer 47 bc a group of soldiers rebelled near rome , demanding their discharge and payment for service . sallust , as praetor designatus , with several other senators , was sent to persuade the soldiers to abstain , but the rebels killed two senators , and sallust narrowly escaped death . ( app . b . c . , ii , 92 ) appian . roman history . civil wars , ii , 92 ( cass . dio , xlii , 52 ) cassius dio . roman history , xlii , 52 in 46 bc , he served as a praetor and accompanied caesar in his african campaign , which ended in the decisive defeat of the remains of the pompeian war party at thapsus . sallust did not participate in military operations directly , but he commanded several ships and organized supply through the kerkennah islands . as a reward for his services , sallust was appointed governor of the province of numidia — it is not clear why : sallust was not a skilled general , and the province was militarily significant , with three legions deployed there . moreover , his successors as governor were experienced military men . however , sallust successfully managed the organization of supply and transportation , and these qualities could have determined caesar 's choice . syme , r . ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 37 as governor he committed such oppression and extortion that only caesar 's influence enabled him to escape condemnation . on his return to rome he purchased and began laying out in great splendour the famous gardens on the quirinal known as the horti sallustiani or gardens of sallust . these gardens would later belong to the emperors . sallust then retired from public life and devoted himself to historical literature , and further developed his gardens , upon which he spent much of his accumulated wealth . according to jerome , sallust later became the second husband of cicero 's ex-wife terentia . jerome . adversus jovinianum libri duo , i , 48 : '' illa terentia … nupsit sallustio '' read online : however prominent scholars of roman prosopography such as ronald syme refute this as a legend . according to procopius , when alaric 's invading army entered rome they burned sallust 's house . procopius . history of the wars , books iii & iv , trans . dewing , loeb classical library , g.p . putman 's sons , london , ç1916 , p.17 . works . sallust 's account of the catiline conspiracy ( de coniuratione catilinae or bellum catilinae ) and of the jugurthine war ( bellum jugurthinum ) have come down to us complete , together with fragments of his larger and most important work ( historiae ) , a history of rome from 78 to 67 bc , intended as a continuation of cornelius sisenna 's work . the conspiracy of catiline . this is sallust 's first published work , an account of the attempt by lucius sergius catalina ( catiline ) to overthrow the roman republic in the year 63 bc . sallust presents catiline as a deliberate foe of law , order and morality , and does not give a comprehensive explanation of his views and intentions ( catiline had supported the party of sulla , whom sallust had opposed ) . theodor mommsen suggested that sallust particularly wished to clear his patron ( caesar ) of all complicity in the conspiracy . in writing about the conspiracy of catiline , sallust 's tone , style , and descriptions of aristocratic behavior show that he was deeply troubled by the moral decline of rome . while he inveighs against catiline 's depraved character and vicious actions , he does not fail to state that the man had many noble traits , indeed all that a roman man needed to succeed . in particular , sallust shows catiline as deeply courageous in his final battle . the work probably was written between 44 and 40 bc , mellor , r . ( 1999 ) the roman historians . routledge . p . 32 or between 42 and 41 bc according to der kleine pauly . louis mackay proposed a different dating . according to him , the conspiracy was prepared by sallust in 50 bc as a political pamphlet , but was not published ; after the civil war sallust reviewed and finally published it : mackay , l . a . '' sallust 's catiline : date and purpose '' , phoenix , 16 ( 1962 ) , p . 190 the work does not show any traces of personal experience , and the most common explanation is that sallust was absent from rome on military service during this period . earl d . c . '' the early career of sallust , '' historia : zeitschrift für alte geschichte . vol . 15 , no . 3 . 1966 . p . 307-309 the main source for this work is de consulatu suo by cicero . mackay , '' sallust 's catiline : date and purpose '' , p . 183 . jugurthine war . sallust 's jugurthine war is a monograph recording the war against jugurtha in numidia from c . 112 bc to 105 bc . its true value lies in the introduction of marius and sulla to the roman political scene and the beginning of their rivalry . sallust 's time as governor of africa nova ought to have let the author develop a solid geographical and ethnographical background to the war ; however , this is not evident in the monograph , despite a diversion on the subject , because sallust 's priority in the jugurthine war , as with the catiline conspiracy , is to use history as a vehicle for his judgement on the slow destruction of roman morality and politics . other works . the extant fragments of the histories ( some discovered in 1886 ) show sufficiently well the political partisan , who took a keen pleasure in describing the reaction against sulla 's policy and legislation after the dictator 's death . historians regret the loss of the work , as it must have thrown much light on a very eventful period , embracing the war against sertorius ( died 72 bc ) , the campaigns of lucullus against mithradates vi of pontus ( 75-66 bc ) , and the victories of pompey in the east ( 66–62 bc ) . two letters ( duae epistolae de republica ordinanda ) , letters of political counsel and advice addressed to caesar , and an attack upon cicero ( invectiva or declamatio in ciceronem ) , frequently attributed to sallust , are thought by modern scholars to have come from the pen of a rhetorician of the first century ad , along with a counter-invective attributed to cicero . at one time marcus porcius latro was considered a candidate for the authorship of the pseudo-sallustian corpus , but this view is no longer commonly held . . style . the style of works written by sallust was well known in rome . it differs from the writings of his contemporaries — caesar and especially cicero . it is characterized by brevity and by the use of rare words and turns of phrase . as a result , his works are very far from the conversational latin of his time . альбрехт , м . ( 2002 ) история римской литературы , т . 1 . греко-латинский кабинет . с . 494 consider his use of archaic words . according to suetonius , lucius ateius praetextatus helped sallust to collect them . ( suet . gram . 10 ) suetonius . on famous grammarians and rhetoricians , 10 ronald syme suggests that sallust 's choice of style and even particular words was influenced by his antipathy to cicero , his rival , but also one of the trendsetters in latin literature in the first century bc . syme , ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 257 '' the conspiracy of catiline '' reflects many features of style that were developed in his later works . syme , ( 1964 ) sallust . university of california press . p . 266 sallust avoids common words from public speeches of contemporary roman political orators , such as honestas , humanitas , consensus . альбрехт , м . ( 2002 ) история римской литературы , т . 1 . греко-латинский кабинет . с . 493 in several cases he uses rare forms of well-known words : for example , lubido instead of libido , maxumum instead of maximum , the conjunction quo in place of more common ut . he also uses the less common endings -ere instead of common -erunt in the third person plural in the perfect indicative , and -is instead of -es in the accusative plural for third declension ( masculine or feminine ) adjectives and nouns . some words used by sallust ( for example , antecapere , portatio , incruentus , incelebratus , incuriosus ) , are not known in other writings before him . they are believed to be either neologisms or intentional revivals of archaic words . mcgushin , p . bellum catilinae : a commentary . brill archive , 1977 . p . 19 sallust also often uses antithesis , alliterations and chiasmus . горенштейн , в . о . ( 1981 ) гай саллюстий крисп . сочинения . москва : наука . с . 161 . significance . on the whole , antiquity looked favourably on sallust as a historian . tacitus speaks highly of him ( annals , iii.30 ) ; and quintilian does not hesitate to put him on a level with thucydides , and declares that he is a greater historian than livy . martial joins the praise : '' sallust , according to the judgment of the learned , will rank as the prince of roman historiographers '' . ( mart . xiv , 191 ) martial . epigrams , xiv , 191 : hic erit , ut perhibent doctorum corda virorum , // primus romana crispus in historia . his books were sometimes used by authors of the first and second centuries ad , especially after imitations of archaic style gained popularity . among those who borrowed information from his works were silius italicus , lucan , plutarch , and ammianus marcellinus . альбрехт , м . ( 2002 ) история римской литературы , т . 1 . греко-латинский кабинет . с . 504 rawson e . sallust on the eighties ? // in : the classical quarterly , new series , vol . 37 , no . 1 ( 1987 ) . p . 164 fronto used ancient words collected by sallust to provide '' archaic coloring '' for his works . тронский , и . м . ( 1946 ) история античной литературы ленинград : учпедгиз . с . 47 in the second century ad zenobius translated his works into ancient greek . other opinions were also present . for example , gaius asinius pollio criticized sallust 's addiction to archaic words and his unusual grammatical features . ( suet . gram . 10 ) suetonius . on famous grammarians and rhetoricians , 10 aulus gellius saved pollio 's unfavorable statement about sallust 's style . according to him , sallust once used the word transgressus meaning generally '' passage by foot '' for a platoon which crossed the sea ( the usual word for this type of crossing was transfretatio ) . gellius . noctes atticae , x , 26 though quintilian has a generally favorable opinion of sallust , he disparages several features of his style : sallust struck out practically a new line in literature for himself : his predecessors had been little better than mere dry-as-dust chroniclers , but he endeavoured to explain the connection and meaning of events and successfully delineated character . the contrast between his early life and the high moral tone he adopted in his writings has frequently made him a subject of reproach , but history gives no reason why he should not have reformed . in any case , his knowledge of his own former weaknesses may have led him to take a pessimistic view of the morality of his fellow men , and to judge them severely . he took as his model thucydides , whom he imitated in his truthfulness and impartiality , in the introduction of philosophical reflections and speeches , and in the brevity of his style , sometimes bordering upon obscurity . during the late antiquity and early middle ages his works retained their popularity , and some influential early christian theologists ( marcus minucius felix and augustine of hippo ) knew his writings well . альбрехт , м . ( 2002 ) история римской литературы , т . 1 . греко-латинский кабинет . с . 505 in the middle ages sallust 's works were often used in schools to teach latin . his brief style influenced , among others , widukind of corvey and wipo of burgundy . in the thirteenth century sallust 's passage on the expansion of the roman republic ( cat . 7 ) was cited and interpreted by theologian thomas aquinas and scholar brunetto latini . osmond p . j . '' princeps historiae romanae : sallust in renaissance political thought '' , memoirs of the american academy in rome 40 ( 1995 ) , p . 104 during the late middle ages and renaissance sallust 's works began to influence political thought in italy . among many scholars and historians interested in sallust , the most notable are leonardo bruni , coluccio salutati and niccolo machiavelli . osmond p . j . '' princeps historiae romanae : sallust in renaissance political thought '' , memoirs of the american academy in rome , 40 ( 1995 ) , p . 107ff . petrarch also praised sallust highly , though he primarily appreciated his style and moralization . osmond p . j . '' princeps historiae romanae : sallust in renaissance political thought '' , memoirs of the american academy in rome , 40 ( 1995 ) , p . 106 during the french wars of religion , de coniuratione catilinae became widely known as a tutorial on disclosing conspiracies . osmond p . j . '' princeps historiae romanae '' , p . 121 among his admirers in england were thomas more , alexander barclay and thomas elyot . osmond p . j . '' princeps historiae romanae '' , p . 120 justus lipsius marked sallust as the second most notable roman historian after tacitus . osmond p . j . '' princeps historiae romanae : sallust in renaissance political thought '' , p . 101 nietzsche credits sallust in twilight of the idols nietzsche , twilight of the idols , s . 13.1 for his epigrammatic style : '' my sense of style , for the epigram as a style , was awakened almost instantly when i came into contact with sallust '' and praises him for being '' compact , severe , with as much substance as possible , a cold sarcasm against 'beautiful words ' and 'beautiful sentiments ' . '' henrik ibsen 's first play was catiline , based on sallust 's story . . manuscripts . several manuscripts of his works survived due to his popularity in antiquity and the middle ages . manuscripts of his writings are usually divided into two groups : mutili ( mutilated ) and integri ( whole ; undamaged ) . the classification is based on the existence of the lacuna ( gap ) between 103.2 and 112.3 of the jugurthine war . the lacuna exists in the mutili scrolls , while integri manuscripts have the text there . the most ancient scrolls which survive are the codex parisinus 16024 and codex parisinus 16025 , known as '' p '' and '' a '' respectively . they were created in the ninth century , and both belong to the mutili group . ramsey , j . t . ( 2007 ) sallust ’ s bellum catilinae . 2nd ed . new york—oxford : oxford university press . p . 14 both these scrolls include only catiline and jugurtha , while some other mutili manuscripts also include invective and cicero 's response . rolfe j . c . '' introduction '' , sallust . loeb classical library p . xviii the oldest integri scrolls were created in the eleventh century ad . ramsey j . t . ( 2007 ) sallust ’ s bellum catilinae . 2nd ed . new york—oxford : oxford university press . p . 26 the probability that all these scrolls came from one or more ancient manuscripts is debated . альбрехт , м . ( 2002 ) история римской литературы , т . 1 . греко-латинский кабинет . с . 502 there is also a unique scroll codex vaticanus 3864 , known as '' v '' . it includes only speeches and letters from catiline , jugurtha and histories . the creator of this manuscript changed the original word order and replaced archaisms with more familiar words . the '' v '' scroll also includes two anonymous letters to caesar probably from sallust , but their authenticity is debated ( see above ) . several fragments of sallust 's works survived in papyri of the second to fourth centuries ad . many ancient authors cited sallust , and sometimes their citations of histories are the only source for reconstruction of this work . but the significance of these citations for the reconstruction is uncertain , because occasionally the authors cited sallust from memory , and some distortions were possible . ramsey j . t . ( 2007 ) sallust 's bellum catilinae , 2nd ed . new york—oxford : oxford university press . p . 15 . translations . the conspiracie of cateline and the warre of jugurth ( trans . thomas heywood , 1608 ) . new york : ams press , 1967 ( among other modern printings ) . loeb classical library , vol . 116 ( trans . j.c . rolfe ) . cambridge , ma : hup , 1921 . catiline 's war , the jugurthine war , histories ( trans . a.j . woodman ) . london : penguin , 2007 . ( page xxvii , '' when sallust died , probably in 35 . '' ) catiline 's conspiracy , the jugurthine war , histories ( trans . william w . batstone ) . oxford : oup , 2010 . see also . list of historians roman historiography unity makes strength animus in consulendo liber