Battle of Vimeiro

prelude . : after roliça , wellesley had established a position near vimeiro . by holding the village , plus some ridges to the west , the british commander covered a beachhead at maceira bay a little further to the west . since most of his reinforcements had arrived by 20 august , wellesley planned to advance south on lisbon . eight independent infantry brigades under rowland hill , ronald craufurd ferguson , miles nightingall , barnard foord bowes , catlin craufurd , henry fane , robert anstruther and wroth acland formed the core of wellesley 's forces . rounding out his force were 17 cannons , 240 light cavalry led by c . d . taylor and about 2,000 portuguese troops under nicholas trant , giving a total of 20,000 men . junot organised his 14,000-man force into two infantry divisions and a cavalry division under pierre margaron . henri françois delaborde 's infantry division contained two brigades under antoine françois brenier and jean guillaume barthélemy thomières , while louis henri loison 's division included two brigades commanded by jean-baptiste solignac and hugues charlot . in addition , françois étienne de kellermann commanded a 2,100-man reserve made up of four converged grenadier battalions . these units were created by taking the grenadier company from each of junot 's infantry battalions . the french took 23 cannons into battle with them . wellesley placed anstruther 's and fane 's brigades in front of vimeiro , with acland 's men in support . at first , his five remaining brigades held only the western ridge . junot planned to send thomières , solignac and charlot 's infantry brigades to capture vimeiro , while brenier 's 4,300-man brigade and some dragoons swung in a wide flanking manoeuvre to seize an empty ridge to the northeast of the village . wellesley detected brenier 's move and switched nightingall , ferguson and bowes to the northeastern ridge . once junot realised that british troops occupied the ridge , he sent solignac 's brigade to the right to assist brenier 's attack . the french commander decided to launch his attack on the town immediately , instead of waiting for his flanking move to develop . battle . all the preliminary moves and countermoves caused a series of uncoordinated french attacks . first , thomières ' 2,100-man brigade approached the british position . supported by three cannons and screened by skirmishers , the brigade was formed into a column of companies . the first company of 120 men formed in a three-deep line would have a front rank 40 men wide . all the other companies formed behind the first company , making the entire brigade about 40 files wide and 48 ranks deep . according to french doctrine , as soon as the enemy main position was found , the companies would peel off to the right or left to form a firing line many companies wide and only three files deep . on the other hand , french commanders often pressed home attacks while in column , depending entirely upon their skirmishers and artillery to provide the necessary fire support . to counter the french skirmishers , fane detached four companies of riflemen ( 60th regiment of foot & 95th rifles ) . these outnumbered and outfought the french skirmishers , who fell back to the sides of the brigade column . without their skirmishers in front of them , the french column blundered into the 945 men of the 50th regiment . at , the british , formed into a two-deep line , opened fire . several companies of the 50th began wheeling inward toward both flanks of the hapless french column . unable to properly deploy into firing line and unwilling to face the deadly enfilade fire , the french infantry suddenly bolted to the rear , leaving their three cannons to be captured . soon after , a similar fate overtook charlot 's brigade . in a very narrow column , it struck one battalion of anstruther 's brigade , which had been hidden behind a crest . before they could deploy , the french were taken in flank by a second battalion . unable to effectively reply to the devastating british volley fire , charlot 's men soon ran away . seeing the battle going against him , junot committed his grenadier reserve to the attack . the first two battalions attacked the same area as the previous units and were thrown back . kellermann swung the final two grenadier battalions wide to the right and succeeded in breaking into vimeiro . but , counterattacked by units from anstruther and acland , these frenchmen also fell back . colonel taylor 's 20th light dragoons pounced on kellermann 's retreating grenadiers and routed them . excited by their easy success , the british horsemen charged out of control . they soon came up against margaron 's french cavalry division and were routed in their turn . taylor was killed and the british horsemen lost about one man in four . as brenier 's men had been delayed by taking a longer road to circumvent the narrow ravines , solignac attacked the northeast ridge . this brigade changed tactics deploying in an attack formation with three battalions abreast . even so , each battalion formed a column one company wide and eight companies deep . if the french intended to form into line once the enemy position was detected , they waited too long . they marched into the volley fire of nightingall and ferguson 's brigades before they could deploy . smashed by british volleys , solignac 's men fled . brenier 's brigade , marching to the sound of battle , came on four battalions abreast . at first they enjoyed success when they surprised and drove back two british battalions . these units had let down their guard after overpowering solignac . victorious , the french pressed on in column , but soon ran into the 29th regiment in line and were stopped . the 29th was joined by the other two units , who had quickly rallied . together , the volley fire of the three british battalions soon routed brenier 's men . though wellesley urged him to pursue , burrard declined to interfere with the subsequent french retreat . general brenier was wounded in this attack and captured by the 71st highlanders . . aftermath . in hindsight , junot faced very long odds with only 14,000 frenchmen against 18,000 british and portuguese led by wellesley . junot correctly launched his heaviest attack on the weakest point in the british position , the unoccupied northeastern ridge . however , his attacks suffered by being badly coordinated . wellesley reacted quickly to counter junot 's flanking move . his forces overcame the french skirmishers by using superior numbers of their own skirmishers . two of wellesley 's brigades never got into action , but the rest were used economically to defeat each french attack . after the comprehensive french defeat , junot offered complete capitulation . nevertheless , dalrymple gave the french far more generous terms than they could have hoped for . under the terms of the convention of sintra , the defeated army was transported back to france by the british navy , complete with its guns and equipment and the loot it had taken from portugal . the convention of sintra caused a massive outcry in britain and , following an official enquiry , both dalrymple and burrard were blamed . wellesley , who had opposed the agreement , was exonerated . nevertheless , the dispatch of so many troops to portugal had ensured that there would be a considerable delay before operations could commence in spain . there were also serious problems with the spaniards : inherent in the sudden spanish interest in british troops , for example , lay the desire not just to receive assistance but also to obtain command over them . equally a desire was beginning to emerge amongst the british to further their influence in spain and to impose their own political solutions . with the british army in the hands of an officer who was not only highly ambitious but deeply frustrated , at odds with the ministry , notoriously suspicious of the government 's representatives abroad , and possessed of a prickly disposition , trouble was certain , and all the more so given the thunderbolt that was being prepared across the river ebro . . references . bibliography . weller , jac , wellington in the peninsula , london : nicholas vane , 1969 . zimmermann , dick , '' the battle of vimeiro , '' wargamer 's digest , october 1983 . . external links .