The Hundred and One Dalmatians

plot . pongo and missis are a pair of dalmatians who live with the newly married mr . and mrs . dearly and their two nannies , nanny cook and nanny butler . mr . dearly is a '' financial wizard '' who has been granted lifelong tax exemption and lent a house on the outer circle in regent 's park in return for wiping out the government debt . the dogs consider the humans their pets , but allow the humans to think that they are the owners . one day , while walking pongo and missis , mr . and mrs . dearly have a chance meeting with an old schoolmate of mrs . dearly : cruella de vil , a very wealthy woman so fixated on fur clothing that she married a furrier and forces him to keep his fur collection in their home so she can wear the pieces whenever she likes . she admires the two dogs and expresses a desire to have a dalmatian-skin coat . later , missis gives birth to a litter of 15 puppies . concerned that missis will not be able to feed them all , the humans join in to help . as mrs . dearly looks for a canine wet nurse , she finds an exhausted liver-spotted dalmatian in the middle of the road in the pouring rain . she has the dog treated by a vet , learns that she has recently given birth , and names her perdita ( meaning '' lost '' ) . perdita helps to nurse the pups and becomes a member of the family . she tells pongo about her lost love prince and the resulting litter of puppies , which were sold by her neglectful owner . she had run away looking for those puppies . cruella happened to be in the house when the puppies started to arrive , and had expressed a desire to buy them , which was rebuffed . after she pays a second visit to the house and is told again that the dearlys have no intention of putting the puppies up for sale , she hires thieves to steal them for her . the humans fail to trace them , but through the '' twilight barking '' , a forum of communication in which dogs can relay messages to each other across the country , the dogs track them down to '' hell hall '' , the ancestral home of the de vil family in suffolk . pongo and missis try to tell their owners the word '' suffolk '' , but they can not make the '' s '' sound . the dogs decide to find the puppies themselves , leaving perdita to look after the dearlys . after an eventful journey across the english countryside , with food and accommodation along the way arranged by dogs through the barking network , they meet the colonel , an old english sheepdog . he shows them hell hall and tells them its history . they get inside the mansion , and discover that there are 97 puppies in hell hall , including pongo and missis ' own 15 . fearing police investigation , cruella de vil arrives and tells the baddun brothers , whom she left in charge of hell hall , that they must slaughter and skin the dogs as soon as possible . pongo and missis realize they must rescue all of the puppies immediately , and they escape the night before christmas eve . one puppy , cadpig , is a runt and too weak to walk the long distance from suffolk to london , so tommy , the colonel 's two-year-old owner , lends her a toy farm cart . one litter of eight puppies is just the right age for two of its members to fit its shaft , so they pull it in shifts . they are nearly captured by gypsies , and one of the barking network dogs points out how conspicuous they are and helps them break into a chimney sweep 's establishment , where they roll in soot to disguise themselves . they travel across the fields and spend part of an evening in a cathedral ; cruella nearly overtakes them when they are forced to return to the road , but they hide in an empty removal van at the invitation of a staffordshire terrier whose '' pets '' own the van and are returning to london that night . once the dogs arrive in london , cruella 's persian cat , who has been longing to avenge her many litters of kittens ( all of which cruella drowned ) , sees an opportunity and lets the dogs into cruella 's house , where they destroy her whole stock of unpaid-for furs . the dalmatians then return to the dearlys ' house . pongo and missis bark until mr . dearly opens the door , whereupon the whole mass of puppies streams inside and rolls on the carpet to remove the soot from their coats . the dearlys recognize them and send out for steaks to feed them . the litter that pulled cadpig 's cart are proven to be perdita 's litter by prince . mr . dearly finds out where the puppies had been when he discovers a label on the toy cart , which contains tommy 's name and address . the dearlys also place advertisements seeking the owners of the other puppies , but it turns out that they had all been bought , rather than stolen as the dearlys ' were . perdita 's former owner , who never really cared for her , is happy to sell her to the dearlys upon hearing the story . cruella 's now-homeless cat drops by ( and is invited to stay ) with the news that the destruction of her husband 's fur business has forced cruella to leave the country and put hell hall up for sale . when the dearlys visit suffolk to return tommy 's cart , they realize that , with 97 puppies and three adult dalmatians , a larger home would be a good idea , so mr . dearly buys the hall with money he has been given by the government for sorting out another tax problem . he proposes to use it to start a '' dynasty of dalmatians '' ( and a '' dynasty of dearlys '' to take care of them ) . finally , perdita 's lost love , prince , turns up . his owners see his love for perdita , and allow him to stay with the dearlys and become their '' one hundred and oneth '' dalmatian . adaptations . disney adapted the novel into an animated film , released to cinemas on 25 january 1961 as one hundred and one dalmatians . it became the tenth highest-grossing film of 1961 , and one of the studio 's most popular films of the decade . it was re-issued to cinemas four times , in 1969 , 1979 , 1985 and 1991 . the 1991 reissue was the twentieth highest earning film of the year for domestic earnings . it was remade into a live action movie years later . in both the live-action and animated adaptations , the nannies were reduced to one single housekeeper , missis was renamed perdita , and other characters , such as many of the other dogs , prince , tommy , cruella 's cat , and cruella 's husband , were omitted . in the animated film , pongo and missis ' owners ' last names were changed to '' radcliffe '' from '' dearly '' , and in the live-action film , cruella ( portrayed by glenn close ) appears as the spoiled magnate of an haute couture fashion house , '' house of devil '' . disney kept the book 's characters horace and jasper baddun in both versions , but represented them as the thieves hired by cruella to steal pongo and missis ' puppies . in the novel , horace is named saul , and they are merely caretakers , the puppies having been stolen by hired professional thieves some days before . disney later created an 101 dalmatians : the series starring three of the puppies ( lucky , rolly and cadpig ) , and a second series that stars mostly descendants of pongo and perdita . disney also released a sequel film for each of their film versions ( one hundred and one dalmatians ii and 102 dalmatians ) . however , both were largely criticized for poor story and lack of originality . the novel has been adapted for the stage by debbie isitt for the belgrade theatre in 2000 ( followed by productions at the royal & derngate in 2007 and birmingham repertory theatre in 2017 ) , by bryony lavery for the chichester youth theatre in 2014 and was devised by the company ( directed by sally cookson ) for tobacco factory theatres in 2014 . the novel was also adapted into a 2009 musical which opened in minneapolis prior to a us tour . another stage musical adaptation was due to open at regent 's park open air theatre in 2020 , before being postponed to 2021 due to the covid-19 pandemic . in 1996 , the bbc adapted dodie smith 's novel into a full-cast musical audiobook , starring patricia hodge as cruella . this version is very faithful to the source material , in that it has all the characters . however , events are slightly changed - cruella 's husband argues with her more than in the novel , and they do not leave london after the destruction of the fur stocks , nor do the dearlys ever find out she was the mastermind . furthermore , perdita and prince 's story is greatly abridged , mrs . willow helps the colonel attack the badduns to prevent them following the dalmatians , and the white cat does not join the family until after the move to suffolk . amazon audible later released this production as an audiobook , available for streaming online or through the app . . reception . the book gained a positive response from critics . . references .