McLaughlin Motor Car Company

history . mclaughlin carriage works . '' mclaughlin carriage company '' began building carriages in 1867 beside the sled and wagons in robert mclaughlin 's blacksmith 's shop in enniskillen , a small village northeast of oshawa . in need of more workers to build his horse-drawn carriages , staunch presbyterian mclaughlin moved to oshawa , ontario in 1876 . mclaughlin developed , and in the early 1880s , patented a fifth-wheel mechanism which greatly improved comfort and safety . attracting a great deal of demand he ignored tempting offers and elected to sell the mechanism to his competitors rather than license other manufacturers . this enthusiasm , now for his complete carriages , spread across canada and before the end of the century there was a mclaughlin sales office in london , england . oakley h bush , the mclaughlin carriage company . the carriage journal : vol 21 no 1 summer 1983 . the carriage association of america inc . , salem , new jersey on december 7 , 1899 the carriage works was completely destroyed by fire . '' we were helpless , '' samuel mclaughlin later told maclean 's , '' we could only stand and watch our life 's work go up in flames . not only we mclaughlins , but the six hundred men who depended for a living on the carriage works . '' the city of oshawa lent mclaughlin 50,000 to rebuild . '' robert samuel mclaughlin '' . the canadian encyclopedia . margaret e . mccallum , 06/04/2008 '' mclaughlin carriage company of canada limited '' was incorporated in 1901 and production numbers that year topped 25,000 units , and included 140 different models and sales exceeded one million dollars . by 1915 mclaughlin was making one carriage every ten minutes . this was the year mclaughlin carriage company was sold to carriage factories limited of orillia , ontario . the major carriage manufacturers did not close their doors but switched to automobile bodies . some of the automobiles even retained whipsockets . . automobile manufacturing . . mclaughlin-buick . around 1905 , robert 's son , samuel mclaughlin , became interested in manufacturing automobiles and traveled to jackson , michigan to purchase a jackson vehicle . while in jackson , sam bumped into billy durant who was at the time manufacturing in that city . sam and billy had become acquainted as both been affiliated with the carriage manufacturing business . durant offered to make a deal . to better understand the product , mclaughlin purchased a buick from a dealer in toronto and before he was halfway to oshawa ( approximately a 30 mile drive ) , mclaughlin knew he preferred the design of the buick to the jackson automobile . he and durant , however , were unable to reach a deal to combine manufacturing operations . instead , mclaughlin decided to form his own enterprise . in 1907 '' the mclaughlin motor car company limited '' was formed . an american engineer by the name of arthur milbrath was hired to design the model a automobile . buick , the times friday , jul 01 , 1927 ; pg . vii ; issue 44622 '' we brought him milbrath to oshawa , '' sam later recounted , '' and installed him in one of our buildings , on the west side of mary street , which had been set aside as the automobile shop . we equipped it with automatic lathes an other machine tools , planers and shapers - dozens of machines . from a cleveland firm we ordered cylinders , pistons and crankshafts to our own specifications , and engine castings to be worked in our own shop . the car was to be more powerful than the buick . '' shortly thereafter , operations came to a stand-still when milbrath fell ill with pleurisy and the vehicle could not be completed . it has been suggested that milbraith 's ailment was actually a case of '' diplomatic flu '' which gave the mclaughlins an excuse to partner up with durant and build buicks . milbrath later founded the wisconsin motor manufacturing company . when mclaughlin wired durant for assistance , in september 1907 , the next day , durant and william h . little , another buick executive arrived in oshawa . the two carriage men , durant and mclaughlin , hammered out a fifteen-year contract under which mclaughlin would buy drive trains from buick motors . these cars were sold with the brand-name mclaughlin though the name mclaughlin-buick also appeared on some vehicles . this alliance with buick controlled by sam mclaughlin 's friend william c . durant was confirmed by an exchange of a large parcel of mclaughlin stock for a corresponding amount of buick stock . durant was a partner in durant-dort and like sam mclaughlin had been the largest carriage manufacturer in his country . in 1908 , the mclaughlins manufactured 154 vehicles , the same year that durant leveraged buick to form general motors . durant borrowed heavily and bought other automotive businesses for his general motors including oldsmobile , cadillac and oakland ( pontiac ) but vehicle sales collapsed , factories were closed for twelve months and more and in 1910 durant lost his control of general motors company to his bankers . the mclaughlin shares that durant held were placed in a trust company in new york , with the exception of one share that was sold to charles williams nash and one to thomas neal . with sam mclaughlin 's financial help , durant started a new business in partnership with racing driver louis chevrolet . durant took control of chevrolet and sold stock in a new business , chevrolet canada . in 1916 durant regained control of general motors and in 1916 general motors corporation was formed with sam mclaughlin director and vice president . mclaughlin began manufacturing chevrolet automobiles for durant and general motors . by 1914 mclaughlin had built about 1,100 of his own cars . . general motors of canada limited . general motors of canada limited was incorporated in 1918 and bought mclaughlin and chevrolet canada '' eye candy : 1918 mclaughlin buick '' toronto star , november 19 , 2016 , donald cruickshank , page w2 . financial post september 23 , 1933 page 9 and general motors corporation spent 10 million building a walkerville , ontario plant and establishing canadian products . in 1923 the name of the canadian-bodied model was officially changed to '' mclaughlin-buick '' and cars with this name continued to be produced until 1942 . later production was labelled buick without the addition of mclaughlin or canada . mclaughlin remained chairman of the board of general motors of canada as well as vice-president and executive director of the parent company until his death , aged 100 , in 1972 . the automobiles . the first mclaughlin automobile was the 1908 model f . until 1914 , the cars were finished with the same paints and varnishes used on carriages . this meant each vehicle required up to fifteen coats of paint . in 1927 two identical specially designed four-door touring cars were built for the royal tour of canada , one to be shipped ahead to the next city while the other was in use . in 1936 a mclaughlin-buick was purchased by the prince of wales . in 1936 the dunsmuirs , a coal magnate family in victoria , british columbia , ordered 3 special order 1936 buick-mclaughlin phaetons for 3 of their daughters . in 1937 the phaeton roadster bought for elinor dunsmuir was used to drive us president franklin roosevelt around victoria , bc during his state visit . this is verified by photos appearing in the daily colonist and the victoria times newspapers oct 1 , 1937 because each of the dunsmuir phaetons was unique . two mclaughlin-buick phaetons were built for the 1939 royal tour . one of these later carried prince charles and diana , princess of wales , during their 1986 visit to canada . . duties and other import taxes . residents of other rapidly developing countries living under conditions not unlike us and canada had a strong preference for well-engineered and robust american cars . the countries of the british empire & nbsp ; – england , india , south africa , australia and others & nbsp ; – gave preference by charging much lower import taxes on goods from another member of the empire , such as canada . taxes were adjusted to the proportion of canadian content . canada made and supplied general motors vehicles to those countries also fitting them with right-hand drive . during world war & nbsp ; i britain erected high tariff barriers to protect their own industry from america 's low-priced mass-produced but good-quality cars . by 1923 canada had the world 's second-largest automotive industry . these exports fell to a trickle after world war & nbsp ; ii '' helped along by this proximity , windsor & nbsp ; – and southern ontario more generally & nbsp ; – became the canadian extension of detroit with the help of two policies . first , there was a 35 per cent national policy tariff on cars entering canada . this protectionist tax was designed to encourage canadian production by making canadian goods less expensive than their foreign ( mostly american-sourced ) competitors . second , since canada was part of the british empire , canadian-made goods could be shipped to many countries in the empire ( later , the british commonwealth ) at a lower tariff rate than other countries , namely the united states . '' ( quoted from the canadian encyclopedia , automotive industry accessed 8 july 2017 ) because canada was part of the dollar area and therefore set apart from the british empire 's sterling area . the british were struggling to repay us war loans and unwilling to allow their businesses unrestricted access to canada 's currency to buy canadian cars . see also . general motors canada list of automobile manufacturers reynolds-alberta museum canadian automotive museum 1928 mclaughlin buick automobile video and essay in the virtual museum of canada mclaughlin motor car showroom . bibliography . heather robertson , driving force , the mclaughlin family and the age of the car , mcclelland & stewart inc . , 1995 , . notes . references . external links . ingenium canada 's museum of science and technology mclaughlin family fonds , archives of ontario