Daily Mail

anthony weiner scandal . in september 2016 , the mail online published a lengthy interview and screenshots from a 15-year-old girl who claimed that the american politician anthony weiner had sent her sexually explicit images and messages . the revelation led to weiner and his wife huma abedin – an aide of hillary clinton – separating . weiner pleaded guilty in may 2017 to sending obscene material to a minor , and in september he was jailed for 21 months . . campaigns against plastic pollution . the paper has campaigned against plastic pollution in various forms since 2008 . the paper called for a levy on single use plastic bags . the daily mail 's work in highlighting the issue of plastic pollution was praised by the head of the united nations environment program , erik solheim at a conference in kenya in 2017 . emily maitlis , the newscaster , asked green party leader caroline lucas on newsnight , 'is the biggest friend to the environment at the moment the daily mail ? ' in reference to the paper 's call for a ban on plastic microbeads and other plastic pollution , and suggested it had done more for the environment than the green party . environment group clientearth has also highlighted the paper 's role in drawing attention to the plastic pollution problem along with the blue planet ii documentary . . gary mckinnon deportation . attempts by the united states government to extradite gary mckinnon , a british computer hacker , were campaigned against by the paper . in 2002 , mckinnon was accused of perpetrating the '' biggest military computer hack of all time '' although mckinnon himself states that he was merely looking for evidence of free energy suppression and a cover-up of ufo activity and other technologies potentially useful to the public . the daily mail began to support mckinnon 's campaign in 2009 – with a series of front-page stories protesting against his deportation . on 16 october 2012 , after a series of legal proceedings in britain , home secretary theresa may withdrew her extradition order to the united states . gary mckinnon 's mother janis sharp praised the paper 's contribution to saving her son from deportation in her book in which she said : 'thanks to theresa may , david cameron and the support of david burrowes and so many others – notably the daily mail – my son was safe , he was going to live . ' . abd ali hameed al-waheed . in december 2017 the daily mail published a front-page story entitled '' another human rights fiasco ! '' , with the subheading '' iraqi 'caught red-handed with bomb ' wins £33,000 – because our soldiers kept him in custody for too long '' . the story related to a judge 's decision to award money to abd ali hameed al-waheed after he had been unlawfully imprisoned . the headline was printed despite the fact that during the trial itself the judge concluded that claims that al-waheed had been caught with a bomb were '' pure fiction '' . in july 2018 the independent press standards organisation ordered the paper to publish a front-page correction after finding the newspaper had breached rules on accuracy in its reporting of the case . the daily mail reported that a major internal investigation was conducted following the decision to publish the story , and as a result , '' strongly worded disciplinary notes were sent to seven senior members of staff '' , which made it clear '' that if errors of the same nature were to happen again , their careers would be at risk '' . . libel lawsuits . 2017 , daily mail editor paul dacre threatened byline investigates with legal action and insisted on the removal of three articles about the daily mail 's use of private investigator steve whittamore . 2019 , on 15 november 2019 byline investigates published court documents of a lawsuit filed by meghan markle against the daily mail in which she accuses the newspaper of a campaign of '' untrue '' stories . . successful lawsuits against the mail . 2001 , february : businessman alan sugar was awarded £100,000 in damages following a story commenting on his stewardship of tottenham hotspur football club . daniel rogers sugar wins libel battle , 16 february 2001 , the guardian 2003 , october : actress diana rigg awarded £30,000 in damages over a story commenting on aspects of her personality . ciar byrne rigg wins case against associated , 20 october 2003 , the guardian 2006 , may : £100,000 damages for elton john , following false accusations concerning his manners and behaviour . jacqueline maley , elton john gets £100,000 for daily mail libel , 25 may 2006 , the guardian 2009 , january : £30,000 award to dr austen ivereigh , who had worked for cormac murphy-o'connor , following false accusations made by the newspaper concerning abortion . oliver luft and agencies , daily mail pays out after alleging former catholic pr man was hypocrite , 29 january 2009 , the guardian 2010 , july : £47,500 award to parameswaran subramanyam for falsely claiming that he secretly sustained himself with hamburgers during a 23-day hunger strike in parliament square to draw attention to the protests against the sri lankan civil war in 2009 . daily mail and sun pay out to tamil hunger striker , 29 july 2010 , the guardian 2011 , november : the former lifestyle adviser carole caplin received damages over claims in the mail that she would reveal intimate details about former clients . '' blair adviser carole caplin wins daily mail libel damages '' , bbc news , 1 november 2011 2014 , may : author j . k . rowling received '' substantial damages '' and the mail printed an apology . the newspaper had made a false claim about rowling 's story written for the website of gingerbread , a single parents ' charity . 2017 , april : first lady of the united states , melania trump , received an undisclosed settlement over claims in the mail that she had worked as an escort in the 1990s . in september 2016 , she began litigation against the daily mail for an article which discussed escort allegations . the article included rebuttals and said that there was no evidence to support the allegations . the mail regretted any misinterpretation that could have come from reading the article , and retracted it from its website . melania trump filed a lawsuit in maryland , suing for 150 & nbsp ; million . on 7 february 2017 , the lawsuit was re-filed in the correct jurisdiction , new york , where the daily mails parent company has offices , seeking damages of at least 150 & nbsp ; million . . unsuccessful lawsuits . 1981 , april : the daily mail won £750,000 from the unification church , which had sued for libel due to articles about the church 's recruitment methods . margaret singer , professor of psychiatry at the university of california , berkeley , testified that the mails accounts of these methods were accurate . the trial lasted over five months , one of britain 's longest-ever civil trials . 2012 , february : nathaniel philip rothschild lost his libel case against the daily mail , after the high court agreed that he was indeed the '' puppet master '' for peter mandelson , that his conduct had been '' inappropriate in a number of respects '' and that the words used by the daily mail were '' substantially true '' . 2012 , may : carina trimingham , the partner of former secretary of state for energy and climate change chris huhne , was ordered to pay more than £400,000 after she lost her high court claims for damages for alleged breach of privacy and harassment against the daily mail . huhne , whilst married , had an affair with trimingham – who herself was in a lesbian civil partnership – and then later left his wife vicky pryce for trimingham . this and a series of other events involving pryce and huhne led to his resignation from the cabinet , and to both of them being arrested for perverting the course of justice and the criminal prosecution r v huhne and pryce . . criticism . racism accusations . there have been accusations of racism against the daily mail . in 2012 , in an article for the new yorker , former mail reporter brendan montague criticised the mails content and culture , stating : '' none of the front-line reporters i worked with were racist , but there 's institutional racism at the daily mail '' . in august 2020 a group of palm islanders in queensland , australia , lodged a complaint with the australian human rights commission under section 18c of the racial discrimination act 1975 against the daily mail and 9news , alleging that they had broadcast and published reports that were inaccurate and racist about the indigenous australian recipients of compensation after the palm island class action . . homophobia accusations . after high court judges ruled in 2016 that parliamentary approval must be sought for activation of article 50 , the leading headline on the mails front page read '' enemies of the people '' . the paper 's front page and other coverage drew much criticism from the legal world , as well as from high-ranking politicians . on its website , the mail described one of the judges as '' openly gay . '' critics accused the mail of unnecessarily highlighting the judge 's sexual orientation due to anti-gay motives . the mail later removed the description . one law professor commented : '' i have never seen this kind of invective against judges , either here or abroad , in the national media . '' . sexism accusations . in 2014 , after emma watson spoke at the launch of the united nations heforshe campaign , the mail was criticised for focusing its coverage on watson 's dress and appearance , rather than the content of her speech , in which watson complained how media had sexualised her in their coverage from when she was 14 . the mail was much criticised for running the front-page headline '' never mind brexit , who won legs-it '' , accompanying a photograph of theresa may meeting with nicola sturgeon in march 2017 , running more than a page of coverage on the two leaders ' appearance . jeremy corbyn , the leader of the labour party , tweeted '' it 's 2017 . this sexism must be consigned to history . shame on the daily mail . '' the international business times quoted an unnamed daily mail staff member describing the headline as '' moronic '' , and out of touch with the daily mails largely female readership . . paying for footage under investigation . in 2015 , following the november 2015 paris attacks , the french police viewed the footage of the attacks from the cctv system of la casa nostra . after making a copy on a usb flash drive , the police ordered a technician from the cctv company that installed the system to encrypt the footage , saying 'this now falls under the confidentiality of the investigation , it must remain here ' . freelance journalist djaffer ait aoudia told the guardian that he secretly filmed a daily mail representative negotiating with the owner to sell the cctv footage of the attacks . the café owner agreed to supply the footage for €50,000 and asked an it technician to make the footage accessible again . the daily mail responded : '' there is nothing controversial about the mail 's acquisition of this video , a copy of which the police already had in their possession . '' the guardian also , briefly , embedded the footage on their own website before removing it . . byline removal . in 2017 evoke.ie , the daily mail 's showbiz site , was reported to the internship program of dublin city university after the bylines of hundreds of articles written by students were changed . . sensationalism . the daily mail is said to have an '' ongoing project to divide all the inanimate objects in the world into ones that either cause or prevent cancer '' . it has also been criticised for their extent of coverage of celebrities , the children of celebrities , property prices , and the depiction of asylum seekers , the latter of which was discussed in the parliament 's joint committee on human rights in 2007 . . reliability . the daily mails medical and science journalism has been criticised by some doctors and scientists , accusing it of using minor studies to generate scare stories or being misleading . in 2011 , the daily mail published an article titled '' just one cannabis joint 'can cause psychiatric episodes similar to schizophrenia ' as well as damaging memory '' . dr . matt jones , the lead author of the study that is cited in the article was quoted by cannabis law reform as saying : '' this study does not say that one spliff will bring on schizophrenia '' . carbon brief complained to the press complaints commission about an article published in the daily mail titled '' hidden green tax in fuel bills : how a £200 stealth charge is slipped on to your gas and electricity bills '' because the £200 figure was unexplained , unreferenced and , according to ofgem , incorrect . the daily mail quietly removed the article from their website . in 2013 , the met office criticised an article about climate change in the daily mail by james delingpole for containing '' a series of factual inaccuracies '' . the daily mail in response published a letter from the met office chairman on its letters page , as well as offering to append the letter to delingpole 's article . in february 2017 , the daily mail became the first source to be deprecated as an '' unreliable source '' for use as a reference on english wikipedia . its use as a reference is now '' generally prohibited , especially when other more reliable sources exist '' . support for the ban centred on '' the daily mail 's reputation for poor fact checking , sensationalism , and flat-out fabrication '' . though the daily mail strongly contested this decision by the community , wikipedia 's co-founder jimmy wales backed the community 's choice , stating : '' i think what the daily mail has done brilliantly in this ad funded world ( is ) they 've mastered the art of click bait , they 've mastered the art of hyped up headlines , they 've also mastered the art of , i 'm sad to say , of running stories that simply are n't true . and that 's why wikipedia decided not to accept them as a source anymore . it 's very problematic , they get very upset when we say this , but it 's just fact . '' an editorial in the times commenting on the ban stated that '' newspapers make errors and have the responsibility to correct them . wikipedia editors ' fastidiousness , however , appears to reflect less a concern for accuracy than dislike of the daily mails opinions . '' in august 2018 , the mail online deleted a lengthy news article titled '' powder keg paris '' by journalist andrew malone which focused on '' illegal migrants '' living in the paris suburb of saint denis , after a string of apparent inaccuracies were highlighted on social media by french activist marwan muhammad , including mistaking saint-denis , the city , for seine-saint-denis , the department northeast of paris . local councillor majid messaoudene said that the article had set out to '' stigmatise '' and '' harm '' the area and its people . the journalist , andrew malone , subsequently deleted his twitter account . in 2019 , the ipso ruled against the daily mail and confirmed in its ruling that the article was inaccurate . in early 2019 , the mobile version of the microsoft edge internet browser started warning visitors to the mailonline site , via its newsguard plugin , that '' this website generally fails to maintain basic standards of accuracy and accountability '' and '' has been forced to pay damages in numerous high-profile cases '' . in late january 2019 , the status of the mailonline was changed by the newsguard plugin from red to green , updating its verdict to '' this website generally maintains basic standards of accuracy and accountability '' . an editors note from newsguard stated that '' this label now has the benefit of the dailymail.co.uk 's input and our view is that in some important respects their objections are right and we were wrong '' . . supplements and features . city & finance : the business part of the daily mail , featuring city news and the results from the london stock exchange . it also has its own award-winning website called this is money , which describes itself as the '' money section of the mailonline . '' travelmail : contains travel articles , advertisements etc . femail : femail is an extensive part of the daily mails newspaper and website , being one of four main features on mailonline others being news , tv & showbiz and sport . it is designed for women . weekend : the daily mail weekend is a tv guide published by the daily mail , included free with the mail every saturday . weekend magazine , launched in october 1993 , is issued free with the saturday daily mail . the guide does not use a magazine-type layout but chooses a newspaper style similar to the daily mail itself . in april 2007 , the weekend had a major revamp . a feature changed during the revamp was a dedicated freeview channel page . regular cartoon strips . garfield i do n't believe it ( discontinued ) odd streak the strip show chloe and co . ( by knight features ) up and running ( by knight features ) fred basset up and running is a strip distributed by knight features and fred basset has followed the life of the dog of the same name in a two-part strip in the daily mail since 8 july 1963 . the long-running teddy tail cartoon strip , was first published on 5 april 1915 and was the first cartoon strip in a british newspaper . rickards , maurice ; twyman , michael ( 2000 ) . the encyclopaedia of ephemera : a guide to the fragmentary documents of everyday life for the collector , curator , and historian . routledge . p . 103 . it ran for over 40 years to 1960 , spawning the teddy tail league children 's club and many annuals from 1934 to 1942 and again from 1949 to 1962 . teddy tail was a mouse , with friends kitty puss ( a cat ) , douglas duck and dr . beetle . teddy tail is always shown with a knot in his tail . . year book . the daily mail year book first appeared in 1901 , summarizing the news of the past year in one volume of 200 to 400 pages . among its editors were percy l . parker ( 1901–1905 ) , david williamson ( 1914–1951 ) , g . b . newman ( 1955–1977 ) , mary jenkins ( 1978–1986 ) , p.j . failes ( 1987 ) , and michael and caroline fluskey ( 1991 ) . online media . the majority of content appearing in the daily mail and mail on sunday printed newspapers also forms part of that included in the mailonline website . mailonline is free to read and funded by advertising . in 2011 mailonline was the second most visited english-language newspaper website worldwide . it has since then become the most visited newspaper website in the world , with over 189.5 & nbsp ; million visitors per month , and 11.7 & nbsp ; million visitors daily , as of january 2014 . newspaper abcs : digital statistics for january 2014 20 february 2014 thailand 's military junta blocked the mailonline in may 2014 after the site revealed a video of thailand 's crown prince and his wife , princess srirasmi , partying . the video appears to show the allegedly topless princess , a former waitress , in a tiny g-string as she feeds her pet dog cake to celebrate its birthday . . the daily mail in literature . the daily mail has appeared in a number of novels . these include evelyn waugh 's 1938 novel scoop which was based on waugh 's experiences as a writer for the daily mail . in the book the newspaper is renamed the daily beast . katharine bail hoskins , today the struggle : literature and politics in england during the spanish civil war ( austin : university of texas press , 2014 ) p . 32 the newspaper was also the subject of a parody song by the irish volunteers during the tan war , and popularized by the band '' the irish brigade '' in 2004 . in the song , they were mocked as being sensationalist of nationalist activities ( lyric : and the ira just sent me a time bomb in the mail , and i 'm shaking in my shoes as i 'm typing out the news ) , as well as being portrayed as out-of-touch and delusional ( lyric : every hen is laying hand grenades ) . the newspaper appeared in nicci french 's 2008 novel the memory game , a psychological thriller . nicci french , the memory game ( london : penguin books , 2008 ) in 2015 , it featured in laurence simpson 's comic novel about the tabloid media , according to the daily mail . laurence simpson , according to the daily mail ( london : matador , 2015 ) and in 2017 , a thinly-disguised version of the daily mail , called simply the mail appears in michael paraskos 's dark satire based on the donald trump presidency , rabbitman , in which the newspaper 's fictional editor is subjected to a lobotomy in a dystopian post-brexit britain to try and cure him of '' nasty little paranoid thoughts about scroungers , traitors and foreigners . '' michael paraskos , rabbitman ( london : friction fiction , 2017 ) p.62 . editors . source : d . butler and a . sloman , british political facts , 1900–1975 , p . & nbsp ; 378 . 1896 : s . j . pryor 1899 : thomas marlowe 1922 : w . g . fish 1930 : oscar pulvermacher 1930 : william mcwhirter 1931 : w . l . warden 1935 : arthur cranfield 1939 : bob prew 1944 : sidney horniblow 1947 : frank owen 1950 : guy schofield 1955 : arthur wareham 1959 : william hardcastle 1963 : mike randall 1966 : arthur brittenden 1971 : david english 1992 : paul dacre 2018 : geordie greig . see also . 1910 london to manchester air race ideal home show daily chronicle , a newspaper which merged with the daily news to become the news chronicle and was finally absorbed by the daily mail . references . further reading . addison , adrian . mail men : the unauthorized story of the daily mail-the paper that divided and conquered britain ( atlantic books , 2017 ) . bingham , adrian . '' 'the paper that foretold the war ' : the daily mail and the first world war . '' history today 63 ( 2013 ) : 34+ . bingham , adrian , and martin conboy . tabloid century : the popular press in britain , 1896 to the present ( 2015 ) bingham , adrian : '' the voice of 'middle england ' ? the daily mail and public life . '' daily mail historical archive 1896-2004 ( cengage learning , 2013 ) mckenzie , fred arthur . the mystery of the daily mail , 1896-1921 ( 1921 ) . taylor , s . j . the great outsiders : northcliffe , rothermere and the daily mail ( 1996 ) . external links .