Araucaria araucana

description . the leaf are thick , tough , and scale-like , triangular , long , broad at the base , and with sharp edges and tips , rather similar to the leaves of the unrelated succulent plant , crassula muscosa . according to lusk , the leaves have an average lifespan of 24 years and so cover most of the tree except for the older branches . it is usually dioecious , with the male and female cones on separate trees , though occasional individuals bear cones of both sexes . the male ( pollen ) cones are oblong and cucumber-shaped , long at first , expanding to long by broad at pollen release . it is wind pollinated . the female ( seed ) cones , which mature in autumn about 18 months after pollination , are globose , large , in diameter , and hold about 200 seeds . the cones disintegrate at maturity to release the long nut-like seeds . the thick bark of araucaria araucana may be an adaptation to wildfire . . habitat . its native habitat is the lower slopes of the chilean and argentine south-central andes , typically above . juvenile trees exhibit a broadly pyramidal or conical habit which naturally develops into the distinctive umbrella form of mature specimens as the tree ages . it prefers well-drained , slightly acidic , volcanic soil , but will tolerate almost any soil type provided it drains well . seed dispersal . araucaria araucana is a masting species , and rodents are important consumers and dispersers of its seeds . the long-haired grass mouse , abrothrix longipilis , is the most important animal responsible for dispersing the seeds of a.araucana . this rodent buries seeds whole in locations favorable for seed germination , unlike other animals . shepherd , j.d . & r.s . ditgen , 2013 . rodent handling of araucaria araucana seeds . austral ecology , 38 : 23–32 . . threats . logging , long a major threat , was finally banned in 1990 . large fires burned thousands of acres of araucaria forest in 2001–2002 , and areas of national parks have also burned , destroying trees over 1300 years old . overgrazing and invasive trees are also threats . extensive human harvesting of piñones ( araucaria seeds ) can prevent new trees from growing . a global trees campaign project that planted 2000 trees found a 90percent 10-year survival rate . . cultivation and uses . araucaria araucana is a popular garden tree , planted for the unusual effect of its thick , '' reptilian '' branches with very symmetrical appearance . it prefers temperate climates with abundant rainfall , tolerating temperatures down to about . it is far and away the hardiest member of its genus , and can grow well in western and central europe ( north to the faroe islands and smøla in western norway ) , the west coast of north america ( north to baranof island in alaska ) , and locally on the east coast , as far north as long island , and in new zealand and southeastern australia . it is tolerant of coastal salt spray , but does not tolerate exposure to pollution . its piñones , or seeds , are edible , similar to large pine nuts , and are harvested by indigenous peoples in argentina and chile . gallo , l . , f . izquierdo , l.j . sanguinetti , a . pinna , g . siffredi , j . ayesa , c . lopez , a . pelliza , n . strizler , m . gonzales peñalba , l . maresca and l . chauchard . 2004 . araucaria araucana forest genetic resources in argentina . pages 105-132 in barbara vinceti , weber amaral and brien meilleur ( eds ) . challenges in managing forest genetic resources for livelihoods : examples from argentina and brazil . international plant genetic resources institute . 271 pp . the tree has some potential to be a food crop in other areas in the future , thriving in climates with cool oceanic summers , e.g . , western scotland , where other nut crops do not grow well . a group of six female trees with one male for pollination could yield several thousand seeds per year . since the cones drop , harvesting is easy . the tree , however , does not yield seeds until it is around 30 to 40 years old , which discourages investment in planting orchards ( although yields at maturity can be immense ) ; once established , it can live possibly as long as 1,000 years . ( gymnosperm database ) . pest losses to rodents and feral sus scrofa limits the yields for human consumption and forage fattening of livestock by a . araucana mast . a . araucana has a high degree of inter-year variability in mast volume , and this variation is synchronous within a given area . this evolved to take advantage of predator satiety . once valued because of its long , straight trunk , its current rarity and vulnerable status mean its wood is now rarely used ; it is also sacred to some members of the mapuche native american tribe . before the tree became protected by law in 1971 , lumber mills in araucanía region specialized in chilean pine . this species is listed in the cites appendix i as an endangered species . the gemstone whitby jet is fossilized wood from tree species similar to araucaria araucaria . naming . first identified by europeans in chile in the 1780s , the tree was first mentioned in 1780 by the spaniard francisco dendariarena . see : , see p . 341 . however , there are claims that the monkey puzzle tree was introduced to europe after dutch expedition to valdivia see : devon gardens trust , see p . 69 . it was named pinus araucana by molina in 1782 . available at : real jardín botánico ( royal botanical garden ) , csic , madrid , spain . in 1789 , de jussieu erected a new genus called araucaria based on the species , and in 1797 , pavón published a new description of the species which he called araucaria imbricata ( an invalid name , as it did not use molina 's older species epithet ) . ; see p . 199 . finally , in 1873 , after several further redescriptions , koch published the combination araucaria araucana , validating molina 's species name . the name araucana is derived from the native mapuche who used the nuts ( seeds ) of the tree in chile . a group of araucanians living in the andes , the pehuenches , owe their name to their diet based on the harvesting of the a . araucaria seeds . pehuen means araucaria and che means people in mapudungun . the origin of the popular english language name '' monkey puzzle '' derives from its early cultivation in britain in about 1850 , when the species was still very rare in gardens and not widely known . sir william molesworth , the owner of a young specimen at pencarrow garden near bodmin in cornwall , was showing it to a group of friends , when one of them – the noted barrister and benthamist charles austin – remarked , '' it would puzzle a monkey to climb that '' . as the species had no existing popular name , first '' monkey puzzler '' , then '' monkey puzzle '' stuck . . relatives . the nearest extant relative is araucaria angustifolia , a south american araucaria from brazil which differs in the width of the leaves . members of the genus araucaria in the pacific islands and australia include araucaria cunninghamii , hoop pine , araucaria heterophylla , the norfolk island pine and araucaria bidwillii , bunya pine . the recently found 'wollemi pine ' , wollemia , discovered in southeast australia , is classed in the plant family araucariaceae . their common ancestry dates to a time when australia , antarctica , and south america were linked by land – all three continents were once part of the supercontinent known as gondwana . gallery . file : araucaria araucana playa.jpg araucaria araucana in the andes file : conguillio national park.jpg bark of a tree in conguillío national park , chile file : araucaria araucana cones.jpg female cones file : araucaria araucana0.jpg male cones file : araucaria araucana2.jpg part of a branch of a cultivated tree file : araucaria araucana 03.jpg a . araucana , botanical garden , wrocław , poland file : araucaria araucana-branch.jpg a . araucana branch file : araucaria araucana1.jpg monkey puzzle trees are popularly grown as ornamental trees . file : monkey puzzle tree in snow at kew.jpg juvenile tree in winter file : p.n.nahuelbuta2.jpg mixed forest of araucaria and coigüe in nahuelbuta national park , chile araucaria araucana ( 8 ) . jpg araucaria araucana in botanical garden jevremovac ( belgrade )