Ronald McNair

background . mcnair was born october 21 , 1950 , in lake city , south carolina , to pearl m . and carl c . mcnair . he had two brothers , carl and eric a . mcnair . in the summer of 1959 , he refused to leave the segregated lake city public library without being allowed to check out his books . after the police and his mother were called , he was allowed to borrow books from the library , which is now named after him . a children 's book , ron 's big mission , offers a fictionalized account of this event . his brother , carl also wrote the official biography , in the spirit of ronald e . mcnair—astronaut : an american hero . mcnair graduated as valedictorian of carver high school in 1967 . in 1971 , he received a bachelor of science degree in engineering physics , magna cum laude , from the north carolina agricultural and technical state university in greensboro , north carolina . in 1976 , he received a ph.d . degree in physics from the massachusetts institute of technology under the guidance of michael feld , becoming nationally recognised for his work in the field of laser physics . after graduation from mit ( receiving four honorary doctorates , a score of fellowships and commendations while achieving a 6th-degree black belt in taekwondo ) , he became a staff physicist at the hughes research lab in malibu , california . mcnair was a member of the omega psi phi fraternity and a member of the baháʼí faith . . astronaut career . in 1978 , mcnair was selected as one of thirty-five applicants from a pool of ten thousand for the nasa astronaut program . he flew as a mission specialist on sts-41-b aboard challenger from february 3 to february 11 , 1984 , becoming the second african american to fly in space . challenger disaster . following the sts-41-b mission , mcnair was selected for sts-51-l as one of three mission specialists in a crew of seven . the mission launched on january 28 , 1986 . he was killed when challenger disintegrated nine miles above the atlantic ocean 73 seconds after liftoff.the explosion also killed six other crew members . he was initially buried at rest lawn memorial park in lake city , south carolina . his remains were disinterred in 2004 and moved to ronald e . mcnair memorial park , located elsewhere in lake city . . music in space . mcnair was an accomplished saxophonist . before his last fateful space mission , he had worked with the composer jean-michel jarre on a piece of music for jarre 's then-upcoming album rendez-vous . it was intended that he would record his saxophone solo onboard the challenger , which would have made mcnair 's solo the first original piece of music to have been recorded in space ( although the song '' jingle bells '' had been played on a harmonica during an earlier gemini 6 spaceflight ) . however , the recording was never made , as the flight ended in the disaster and the deaths of its entire crew . the final track on rendez-vous , '' last rendez-vous , '' has the subtitle '' ron 's piece , '' and the liner notes include a dedication from jarre : '' ron was so excited about the piece that he rehearsed it continuously until the last moment . may the memory of my friend the astronaut and the artist ron mcnair live on through this piece . '' ron mcnair was supposed to have taken part in jarre 's rendez-vous houston concert through a live feed from the orbiting shuttlecraft . public honors . mcnair was posthumously awarded the congressional space medal of honor in 2004 , along with all crew members lost in the challenger and columbia disasters . a variety of public places , people and programs have been renamed in honor of mcnair . the crater mcnair on the moon is named in his honor . the mcnair building at mit ( a.k.a . building 37 ) , his alma mater , houses the kavli institute for astrophysics and space research . the mcnair science center at francis marion university in florence , south carolina . the mcnair center for aerospace innovation and research at the university of south carolina is named in his honor . watson chapel jr . high was renamed the r . mcnair jr . high school in his honor . ronald mcnair boulevard in lake city , south carolina , is named in his honor and lies near other streets named for astronauts who perished in the challenger crash . the u.s . department of education offers the trio ronald e . mcnair post-baccalaureate achievement program for students with low income , first generation students , and/or underrepresented students in graduate education for doctorate education . on january 29 , 2011 , the lake city , south carolina , library was dedicated as the ronald mcnair life history center . when ronald mcnair was nine , the police and his mother were called because he wished to check out books from this library , which served only white patrons before he arrived . he said , '' i 'll wait , '' to the lady and sat on the counter until the police and his mother arrived , and the officer said , '' why do n't you just give him the books ? '' which the lady behind the counter reluctantly did . he said , '' thank you , ma'am , '' as he got the books . the episode as recalled by his brother carl mcnair has been depicted in a short animated film . popova , maria , '' eyes on the stars : astronaut ronald mcnair , who perished in the challenger disaster , remembered by his brother in an affectionate animated short film '' , brain pickings . several k-12 schools have also been named after mcnair . mcnair memorial park in el lago , texas , is named in his honor . , last accessed september 16 , 2013 . ronald e . mcnair middle school in lake city , south carolina , was renamed from carver high school in his honor ( he was a high school graduate of the facility ) . dr . ronald e . mcnair academic high school in jersey city , new jersey hague , jim . '' in a class by itself '' . jersey city magazine , spring & summer 2011 , p . 55 . ronald mcnair elementary school currently under construction in greensboro , north carolina ronald mcnair elementary school in germantown , maryland ronald e . mcnair prince hall masonic lodge no . 146 is named in his honor in suitland , maryland mcnair high school ( georgia ) in dekalb county , georgia , near decatur ronald e . mcnair middle school , san antonio , texas – southwest isd ronald mcnair middle school in dekalb county , georgia , near decatur ronald mcnair middle school in college park , georgia ronald e . mcnair administrative center in university city , missouri ronald e . mcnair elementary school in hazelwood , missouri ronald ervin mcnair elementary school in denton , texas ( denton isd ) ronald mcnair middle school in rockledge , florida ronald e . mcnair elementary school in dallas , texas ( dallas isd ) ronald e . mcnair academic center in chicago , illinois ronald e . mcnair junior high school in huntsville , alabama los robles ronald mcnair academy los robles ronald mcnair academy , accessed january 28 , 2011 . in east palo alto , california ronald e . mcnair high school in stockton , california ps 5 , dr . ronald mcnair school in brooklyn , new york ps/ms 147 ronald mcnair in cambria heights queens , new york mcnair elementary school in compton , california . ronald e . mcnair building : lycée français de la nouvelle-orléans , new orleans , louisiana ronald e . mcnair building : kipp believe college prep . new orleans , louisiana a building on the willowridge high school campus in houston , texas , is named in honor of mcnair . dr . ronald mcnair junior high school in pearland , texas ( alvin independent school district ) , is named in honor dr . mcnair . '' alvin isd board members approve new facility name '' , alvin independent school district . there is a memorial in the ronald mcnair park in brooklyn , new york , in his honor . walsh , kevin '' dr . ronald e . mcnair park , prospect heights '' forgotten-ny january 28 , 2018 the dr . ronald e . mcnair playground in east harlem , new york city , is named after him . the ronald e . mcnair space theater inside the davis planetarium in downtown jackson , mississippi , is named in his honor . the naval rotc building on the campus of southern university and a & m college in baton rouge , louisiana is named in his honor . the engineering building at north carolina a & t state university in greensboro , nc , is named in his honor . the mcnair post-baccalaureate achievement program , which operates at 179 campuses in the u.s . ( april 7 ) , awards research money and internships to first-generation and otherwise underrepresented students in preparation for graduate work . mcnair was portrayed by joe morton in the 1990 tv movie challenger . the song '' a drop of water , '' recorded by japanese jazz artist keiko matsui , with vocals by the late carl anderson , was written in tribute to mcnair . the jean michel jarre track '' last rendez-vous '' was re-titled '' ron 's piece '' in his honor . mcnair was originally due to record the track in space aboard challenger , and then perform it via a live link up in jarre 's rendez-vous houston concert . there are over 150 federally funded mcnair scholars/achievement programs across the united states designed to encourage juniors and seniors who are first-generation and low-income , or members of groups that are underrepresented in graduate education college to enter doctoral study . michigan state university and washington state university are two examples of these programs and both offer summer research opportunity program as additional program components . . see also . list of african-american astronauts space shuttle challenger disaster rendez-vous houston ronald mcnair : 2nd african american in space . references . external links . mcnair foundation to encourage and mentor science , mathematics and technology students spacefacts biography of ronald mcnair ronald e . mcnair post – baccalaureate achievement program official nasa bio ronald e . mcnair postbaccalaureate achievement program storycorps : astronaut 's brother recalls a man who dreamed big ron 's big mission – a story about an event in ron 's childhood