Baháʼí House of Worship

description . the bahá ' í house of worship was first mentioned in baháʼu'lláh 's book of laws , the kitáb-i-aqdas , as the mas͟hriqu ' l-ad͟hkár '' dawning-place of the remembrance of god '' ) , and the details of the institution were then elaborated by both baháʼu'lláh and his successor , ʻabdu ' l-bahá . baháʼí literature directs that a house of worship should be built in each city and town , and emphasizes that its doors must be open to all regardless of religion , or any other distinction . the bahá ' í laws emphasize that the spirit of the house of worship must be a gathering place where people of all religions may worship god without denominational restrictions . the bahá ' í laws also stipulate that only the holy scriptures of the bahá ' í faith and other religions can be read or chanted inside in any language ; while readings and prayers may be set to music by choirs , no musical instruments may be played inside . furthermore , no sermons may be delivered , and no ritualistic ceremonies practiced . all bahá ' í temples share certain architectural elements , some of which are specified by bahá ' í scripture . ʻabdu ' l-bahá stipulated that an essential architectural character of a house of worship be that it requires to have a 9 ( number ) shape ( nonagon ) . while all current bahá ' í houses of worship have a dome , they are not regarded as an essential part of their architecture . shoghi effendi to an individual believer , pg 311 lights of divine guidance ( volume 1 ) . bahá ' í scripture also states that no pictures , statues or images may be displayed within the house of worship and no pulpits or altars incorporated as an architectural feature ( readers may stand behind simple portable lectern ) . to date all the houses of worship built or planned have a single , undivided room under their dome . furthermore , in all ten , the seats in the auditorium face the shrine of baháʼu'lláh in acre , israel . while each of the houses of worship is unique , the designs , through the selection of materials , landscaping and architecture , reflect the indigenous cultural , social and environmental elements of their location , to a greater or lesser degree . bahá ' í literature also stipulates that the houses of worship be surrounded by a complex of humanitarian , educational , and charitable institutions such as schools , hospitals , homes for the elderly , universities , hostels , and other social and humanitarian institutions to serve the areas in which they stand . shoghi effendi , head of the religion in the first half the 20th century , stated that the functions of the house of worship would be complementary to those of the haziratu ' l-quds bahá ' í centres ) , and that it would be desirable if both these buildings would be on the same site . he also describes the future interaction between the mas͟hriqu ' l-ad͟hkár ( worship ) and its dependencies ( service ) as '' capable of removing the ills that have so long and so grievously afflicted humanity '' . the ten existing houses of worship were built as the bahá ' í community could support their construction through voluntary contributions . there are no collections during services and only bahá'ís are permitted to contribute to the bahá ' í funds , including funds for the construction and maintenance of the house of worship . the houses of worship are administered and maintained by the national spiritual assembly of the bahá'ís of the country in which they are located . the shrine of the báb and other buildings at the baháʼí world centre are not houses of worship , although tourists often mistakenly refer to the shrine as a bahá ' í temple . destroyed house of worship in turkmenistan . the first bahá ' í house of worship was built in the city of ashgabat , then ruled by russia and now the capital of turkmenistan . it was started in 1902 and completed in 1908 . the design was prepared by ostad ali-akbar banna , and the construction was supervised by vakílu'd-dawlih , later named one of the nineteen apostles of baháʼu'lláh . ʻishqábád is located in the desert plain of western turkmenistan near the foothills of the alborz mountains . under the protection and freedom given by the russian authorities , the number of bahá'ís there rose to over 1,000 and for the first time anywhere in the world a true bahá ' í community was established , with its own schools , medical facilities , cemetery , etc . eventually the bahá'ís in ʻishqábád decided to build the institution of the spiritual and social heart of the bahá ' í community : the mas͟hriqu ' l-ad͟hkár . the house of worship itself was surrounded by gardens . at the four corners of the garden were four buildings : a school , a hostel where travelling bahá'ís were entertained , a small hospital , and a building for groundskeepers . the bahá'ís lived as much as possible in proximity to the house of worship . it was the centre of the community materially , as well as spiritually . the house of worship in ʻishqábád has been the only house of worship thus far to have the humanitarian subsidiaries associated with the institution built alongside it . after serving the community for two decades , the house of worship was expropriated by the soviet authorities in 1928 and leased back to the bahá'ís . this lasted until 1938 , when it was fully secularized and turned into an art museum . the 1948 ashgabat earthquake seriously damaged the building and rendered it unsafe ; the heavy rains of the following years weakened the structure , and it was demolished in 1963 and the site converted into a public park . . continental houses of worship . there are currently ten bahá ' í houses of worship . the newest bahá ' í house of worship , located in the municipality of villa rica in the cauca department , colombia , opened its doors on july 23 , 2018 . wilmette , illinois , u.s . the cornerstone for the bahá ' í house of worship in wilmette , illinois was brought to the site by nettie tobin and accepted in 1912 by ʻabdu ' l-bahá during his only visit to the united states and canada . construction began in 1921 and was completed in 1953 , with a delay of several years during the great depression and world war ii . the wilmette house of worship is the largest and the oldest surviving bahá ' í house of worship . known by baha'is as the '' mother temple of the west '' and formally as the '' bahá ' í house of worship for the north american continent '' , it stands in north suburban cook county , on the shores of lake michigan , at . the cladding is made of white portland cement concrete with both clear and white quartz aggregate . it has received numerous design awards , and is a prominent chicago-area landmark . in 1978 , it was added to the national register of historic places . the height of the auditorium is 138 feet ( 42 m ) , and the diameter of the dome is 90 feet ( 27.5 m ) . from ground level , which is 597 feet above sea level just on the west side of sheridan road , the building stands approximately 164 feet tall above ground level . the auditorium seats 1,192 visitors . visitor 's center brochure , october 2007 . like some other bahá ' í temples , it has a gallery balcony from which choirs or soloists may perform . no instrumental music is allowed during services in the auditorium , although all kinds of music may be performed in the meeting room below . in general , no videography , photography , or any other activity inconsistent with quiet meditation is allowed in the auditorium . devotional programs are held daily at 9:15 & nbsp ; a.m . and 12:30 & nbsp ; p.m . whitmore ( 1984 ) . the bahá ' í house of worship is a place of worship for all people . the only decorative art inside and out involves shapes and designs made by intersecting lines . there are no images of people or places . the building itself is decorated inside and out with verses from the baha ' i writings , all of them by baháʼu'lláh . as there are nine entrances to the building , there are nine verses above the doors and nine inside the buildings above the alcoves . the verses outside are engraved into the stone , in large legible letters . above the doors are small engraved versions of the '' greatest name '' , one of several baháʼí symbols and an elaborate decorative design that includes the letters abha , representing the prayer '' alláh u abhá '' ( god is most glorious ) in arabic . it is the numerical value of these four letters in the words abha and baha ( for baháʼu'lláh ) that add up to total nine , one of reasons bahá ' í houses of worship are nine-sided . the most decorative element on the outside of the building is the tracery on the nine towers . these are intertwined with the generally recognized symbols of many world religions , including the cross , the star and crescent , the star of david , and the original swastika design , an ancient symbol having arms bent at right angles , used for thousands of years as a representative symbol of world religions such as hinduism , buddhism , and jainism . the only decorative symbol inside the auditorium is a large , lighted version of the greatest name in the exact center of the inside of the dome . for many years the bahá ' í house of worship was associated with a '' home for the aged '' , operated by the u.s . bahá ' í community . the bahá ' í home has since closed , although the building remains in use for a local baha ' i school and regional training center . on april 30 , 2007 , the bahá ' í house of worship was named one of the seven wonders of illinois by the illinois bureau of tourism representing the chicago metropolitan area . . . kampala , uganda . the mother temple of africa is situated on kikaaya , in kawempe division , in northern kampala , uganda 's capital and largest city . it was designed by mason remey . its foundation stone was laid in january 1958 , and it was dedicated on january 13 , 1961 . the building is more than 130 feet ( 39 m ) high , and over 100 meters in diameter at the base . the dome , composed of lace-like tiles , rises over 124 feet ( 37 m ) high and is 44 feet ( 13 m ) in diameter . the foundation goes 10 feet ( 3 m ) underground to protect it from earthquakes common in this part of the world . the green dome is made of fixed mosaic tiles from italy , and the lower roof tiles are from belgium . the walls of the temple are of precast stone quarried in uganda . the colored glass in the wall panels was brought from germany . the timber used for making the doors and benches was from uganda . the property includes the house of worship , extensive gardens , a guest house , and an administrative center . ugpulse uganda . sydney ( ingleside ) , new south wales , australia . the temple in ingleside in the northern suburbs of sydney was dedicated on september 17 , 1961 and opened to the public after four years of construction . the initial design by mason remey was approved in 1957 , and given to sydney architect john brogan to develop and complete . construction materials include local hardwoods and concrete surmounted by a dome , with seating for six hundred people . the building stands 38 metres in height , has a diameter at its widest point of 20 metres , and is a highly visible landmark from sydney 's northern beaches . the surrounding gardens contain native plants including waratahs , several grevillea including the unique caleyi , the native pea , wattle and woody pear , plus three species of eucalypts . other buildings located on the site include a visitor 's centre , bookshop , picnic area , hostel , caretaker 's cottage , and the administrative offices of the australian baha ' i community . the property is set high in a natural bushland setting of 380,000 square metres ( 38 hectares ) in ingleside , overlooking the pacific ocean . this temple serves as the '' mother temple of the antipodes '' . . hofheim-langenhain , germany . the mother temple of europe is located at the foot of the taunus mountains of germany , in the village of langenhain , a suburb of hofheim , hesse near frankfurt . it was designed by teuto rocholl . the temple was dedicated on july 4 , 1964 , after three and a half years of construction , including a performance by maria montana . it is made of steel , aluminum , and glass . 540 diamond-shaped windows give the dome an optical lightness and permit the sunlight to play in it . diameter of the central hall area is 25 meters , while the diameter of the outside ambulatory area is 48 meters . height from ground level is 28 meters . the outstanding characteristic acoustics of this setting are created by the reverberation within the dome and the resonance of its myriad window ledges . choirs here sometimes sing while standing around the circumference of the temple floor , with the audience in the center . panama city , panama . the bahá ' í temple in panama city , dedicated april 29–30 , 1972 , designed by peter tillotson . it serves as the mother temple of latin america . it is perched on a high cliff , '' cerro sonsonate '' ( '' singing hill '' ) , overlooking the city , and is constructed of local stone laid in a pattern reminiscent of native american fabric designs . the dome is covered with thousands of small oval tiles , and the entrance gates of the temple are constructed in a unique three-dimensional design each consisting of an equilateral triangle of three vertical posts with multiple rows of bars stretching between them at various angles , each row of which gradually changes from vertical to horizontal . tiapapata , samoa . the bahá ' í house of worship in tiapapata , 8 & nbsp ; km from apia , samoa , was dedicated on september 1 , 1984 , having been completed at a cost of 6,500,000 . it serves as the mother temple of the pacific islands . the temple was designed by hossein amanat , and was dedicated by malietoa tanumafili ii , the reigning o le ao o le malo of samoa baha ' i house of worship samoa . ( 1913–2007 ) and the world 's first bahá ' í head of state . its 30-meter domed structure is open to the public for individual prayer , commemoration of baha ' i holy days , and weekly devotional meetings . the structure is completely open to the island breezes . delhi , india . . inspired by the lotus flower , its design is composed of 27 free-standing , marble-clad '' petals '' arranged in clusters of three to form nine sides . architecture of the baháʼí house of worship . nine doors open on to a central hall , capable of holding up to 2,500 people . slightly more than 40 meters tall , its surface shining white marble , the temple at times seems to float above its 26-acre ( 105,000 m 2 ; 10.5 ha ) nine surrounding ponds . the site is in the village of bahapur , in the national capital territory of delhi . the major part of the funds needed to buy this land was donated by ardishír rustampúr from hyderabad , sindh ( pakistan ) , who gave his entire life savings for this purpose in 1953 . this house of worship is generally referred to as the '' lotus temple '' by bahá'ís and non-bahá'ís alike . in india , during the hindu festival durga puja , several times a replica of the lotus temple has been made as a pandal , a temporary structure set up to venerate the goddess durga . . santiago , chile . in late 2002 , the national spiritual assembly of the bahá'ís of chile and the universal house of justice announced a competition for the design of the mother temple of south america , to be built in santiago . the chosen design was by siamak hariri of hariri pontarini architects in toronto , ontario , canada . scott , alec ( july 13 , 2006 ) . '' higher power : toronto architect siamak hariri ascends to architectural greatness '' , cbc.ca arts . the construction completed in october , 2016 , with doors opening on october 19 , 2016 . the temple 's sides and dome are composed of nine wings , each one consisting of a steel space frame with panels of translucent marble and cast glass cladding . official temple website : architecture . the construction phase started in november 2010 . bwns : excavation work commences for chile 's '' temple of light '' . 28 november 2010 . see also baháʼí faith in chile . it has won a range of canadian and international architectural awards . . local and national houses of worship . in 2012 the universal house of justice announced plans for the first local and national bahá ' í houses of worship to be built . the first two national houses of worship would be in the democratic republic of congo and papua new guinea , while the first five local houses of worship battambang , cambodia ; bihar sharif , india ; matunda soy , kenya ; cauca , colombia ; and tanna ( island ) . the universal house of justice characterized the bahá ' í communities chosen to host these new temples as unique in the world : the mashriqu ' l-adhkár , described by ʻabdu ' l-bahá as “ one of the most vital institutions of the world ” , weds two essential , inseparable aspects of bahá ' í life : worship and service . the union of these two is also reflected in the coherence that exists among the community-building features of the plan , particularly the burgeoning of a devotional spirit that finds expression in gatherings for prayer and an educational process that builds capacity for service to humanity . the correlation of worship and service is especially pronounced in those clusters around the world where bahá ' í communities have significantly grown in size and vitality , and where engagement in social action is apparent . it is within these clusters that , in the coming years , the emergence of a local mashriqu ' l-adhkár can be contemplated . . battambang , cambodia . the battambang , cambodia temple was the world 's first local bahá ' í house of worship to be completed . the temple was designed by cambodian architect sochet vitou tang , who is a practicing buddhist , and integrates distinctive cambodian architectural principles . a dedication ceremony and official opening conference took place on september 1–2 , 2017 , attended by cambodian dignitaries , locals , and representatives of bahá ' í communities throughout southeast asia . . see also . list of baháʼí houses of worship . notes . references . . . further reading . boyles , ann . for the betterment of the world , to the glory of god - the emergence of bahá ' í houses of worship . research department of the universal house of justice ( 2017 ) . the mashriqu ' l-adhkár . ( statement and compilation ) . external links . bahai.org : the mashriqu ' l-adhkár mashriqul-adhkar.com - an online compilation ( archived ) the bahá ' í houses of worship around the world as seen from google earth official website of the bahá ' í house of worship in australia official website bahá ' í house of worship in chile bahá ' í world news service : translucent temple for chile official website bahá ' í house of worship in germany bahá ' í chants at the european house of worship official website bahá ' í house of worship in india the official website bahá ' í house of worship in samoa royal welcome at jubilee gathering in samoa baha ' i community of uganda celebrates its 50th anniversary the baha ' i house of worship in uganda official website of the bahá ' í house of worship in the united states video of the bahá ' í house of worship in the united states chronology and related documents on bahá ' í library online related articles on baha ' i world news service