Attractor

motivation of attractors . a dynamical system is generally described by one or more differential or difference equations . the equations of a given dynamical system specify its behavior over any given short period of time . to determine the system 's behavior for a longer period , it is often necessary to integral the equations , either through analytical means or through iteration , often with the aid of computers . dynamical systems in the physical world tend to arise from dissipative system : if it were not for some driving force , the motion would cease . ( dissipation may come from friction , thermodynamics , or loss of material , among many causes . ) the dissipation and the driving force tend to balance , killing off initial transients and settle the system into its typical behavior . the subset of the phase space of the dynamical system corresponding to the typical behavior is the attractor , also known as the attracting section or attractee . invariant sets and limit sets are similar to the attractor concept . an invariant set is a set that evolves to itself under the dynamics . attractors may contain invariant sets . a limit set is a set of points such that there exists some initial state that ends up arbitrarily close to the limit set ( i.e . to each point of the set ) as time goes to infinity . attractors are limit sets , but not all limit sets are attractors : it is possible to have some points of a system converge to a limit set , but different points when perturbed slightly off the limit set may get knocked off and never return to the vicinity of the limit set . for example , the damped pendulum has two invariant points : the point of minimum height and the point of maximum height . the point is also a limit set , as trajectories converge to it ; the point is not a limit set . because of the dissipation due to air resistance , the point is also an attractor . if there was no dissipation , would not be an attractor . aristotle believed that objects moved only as long as they were pushed , which is an early formulation of a dissipative attractor . some attractors are known to be chaotic ( see strange attractor ) , in which case the evolution of any two distinct points of the attractor result in exponentially chaos theory , which complicates prediction when even the smallest noise is present in the system . . mathematical definition . let t represent time and let f ( t , • ) be a function which specifies the dynamics of the system . that is , if a is a point in an n-dimensional phase space , representing the initial state of the system , then f ( 0 , a ) a and , for a positive value of t , f ( t , a ) is the result of the evolution of this state after t units of time . for example , if the system describes the evolution of a free particle in one dimension then the phase space is the plane r 2 with coordinates ( x , v ) , where x is the position of the particle , v is its velocity , a & nbsp ; & nbsp ; ( x , v ) , and the evolution is given by : f ( t , ( x , v ) ) ( x+tv , v ) . \ an attractor is a subset a of the phase space characterized by the following three conditions : a is forward invariant under f : if a is an element of a then so is f ( t , a ) , for all & nbsp ; t & nbsp ; > & nbsp ; 0 . there exists a neighborhood of a , called the basin of attraction for a and denoted b ( a ) , which consists of all points b that '' enter a in the limit t & nbsp ; → & nbsp ; ∞ '' . more formally , b ( a ) is the set of all points b in the phase space with the following property : : : for any open neighborhood n of a , there is a positive constant t such that f ( t , b ) ∈ n for all real t > t . there is no proper ( non-empty ) subset of a having the first two properties . since the basin of attraction contains an open set containing a , every point that is sufficiently close to a is attracted to a . the definition of an attractor uses a metric on the phase space , but the resulting notion usually depends only on the topology of the phase space . in the case of r n , the euclidean norm is typically used . many other definitions of attractor occur in the literature . for example , some authors require that an attractor have positive measure ( preventing a point from being an attractor ) , others relax the requirement that b ( a ) be a neighborhood . . types of attractors . attractors are portions or subsets of the phase space of a dynamical system . until the 1960s , attractors were thought of as being geometric primitive of the phase space , like points , lines , surfaces , and simple regions of three-dimensional space . more complex attractors that can not be categorized as simple geometric subsets , such as topology wild sets , were known of at the time but were thought to be fragile anomalies . stephen smale was able to show that his horseshoe map was robust and that its attractor had the structure of a cantor set . two simple attractors are a fixed point and the limit cycle . attractors can take on many other geometric shapes ( phase space subsets ) . but when these sets ( or the motions within them ) can not be easily described as simple combinations ( e.g . intersection and union ) of geometric primitive ( e.g . lines , surfaces , spheres , toroids , manifolds ) , then the attractor is called a strange attractor . fixed point . a fixed point of a function or transformation is a point that is mapped to itself by the function or transformation . if we regard the evolution of a dynamical system as a series of transformations , then there may or may not be a point which remains fixed under each transformation . the final state that a dynamical system evolves towards corresponds to an attracting fixed point of the evolution function for that system , such as the center bottom position of a damped pendulum , the level and flat water line of sloshing water in a glass , or the bottom center of a bowl contain a rolling marble . but the fixed point ( s ) of a dynamic system is not necessarily an attractor of the system . for example , if the bowl containing a rolling marble was inverted and the marble was balanced on top of the bowl , the center bottom ( now top ) of the bowl is a fixed state , but not an attractor . this is equivalent to the difference between stable and unstable equilibria . in the case of a marble on top of an inverted bowl ( a hill ) , that point at the top of the bowl ( hill ) is a fixed point ( equilibrium ) , but not an attractor ( stable equilibrium ) . in addition , physical dynamic systems with at least one fixed point invariably have multiple fixed points and attractors due to the reality of dynamics in the physical world , including the nonlinear dynamics of stiction , friction , surface roughness , deformation ( both elastic and plasticity ) , and even quantum mechanics . in the case of a marble on top of an inverted bowl , even if the bowl seems perfectly hemispherical , and the marble 's sphere shape , are both much more complex surfaces when examined under a microscope , and their shapes change or deform during contact . any physical surface can be seen to have a rough terrain of multiple peaks , valleys , saddle points , ridges , ravines , and plains . there are many points in this surface terrain ( and the dynamic system of a similarly rough marble rolling around on this microscopic terrain ) that are considered stationary or fixed points , some of which are categorized as attractors . finite number of points . in a discrete-time system , an attractor can take the form of a finite number of points that are visited in sequence . each of these points is called a periodic point . this is illustrated by the logistic map , which depending on its specific parameter value can have an attractor consisting of 1 point , 2 points , 2 n points , 3 points , 3×2 n points , 4 points , 5 points , or any given positive integer number of points . limit cycle . a limit cycle is a periodic orbit of a continuous dynamical system that is isolated . examples include the swings of a pendulum clock , and the heartbeat while resting . ( the limit cycle of an ideal pendulum is not an example of a limit cycle attractor because its orbits are not isolated : in the phase space of the ideal pendulum , near any point of a periodic orbit there is another point that belongs to a different periodic orbit , so the former orbit is not attracting ) . limit torus . there may be more than one frequency in the periodic trajectory of the system through the state of a limit cycle . for example , in physics , one frequency may dictate the rate at which a planet orbits a star while a second frequency describes the oscillations in the distance between the two bodies . if two of these frequencies form an irrational number ( i.e . they are incommensurate ) , the trajectory is no longer closed , and the limit cycle becomes a limit torus . this kind of attractor is called an -torus if there are incommensurate frequencies . for example , here is a 2-torus : a time series corresponding to this attractor is a quasiperiodic series : a discretely sampled sum of periodic functions ( not necessarily sine waves ) with incommensurate frequencies . such a time series does not have a strict periodicity , but its power spectrum still consists only of sharp lines . strange attractor . an attractor is called strange if it has a fractal structure . this is often the case when the dynamics on it are chaotic , but strange nonchaotic attractors also exist . if a strange attractor is chaotic , exhibiting sensitive dependence on initial conditions , then any two arbitrarily close alternative initial points on the attractor , after any of various numbers of iterations , will lead to points that are arbitrarily far apart ( subject to the confines of the attractor ) , and after any of various other numbers of iterations will lead to points that are arbitrarily close together . thus a dynamic system with a chaotic attractor is locally unstable yet globally stable : once some sequences have entered the attractor , nearby points diverge from one another but never depart from the attractor . the term strange attractor was coined by david ruelle and floris takens to describe the attractor resulting from a series of bifurcations of a system describing fluid flow . strange attractors are often differentiable in a few directions , but some are like a cantor dust , and therefore not differentiable . strange attractors may also be found in the presence of noise , where they may be shown to support invariant random probability measures of sinai–ruelle–bowen type . examples of strange attractors include the double scroll attractor , hénon map , rössler attractor , and lorenz attractor . attractors characterize the evolution of a system . the parameters of a dynamic equation evolve as the equation is iterated , and the specific values may depend on the starting parameters . an example is the well-studied logistic map , x_ in terms of square matrix a will have all elements of the dynamic vector diverge to infinity if the largest eigenvalue of a is greater than 1 in absolute value ; there is no attractor and no basin of attraction . but if the largest eigenvalue is less than 1 in magnitude , all initial vectors will asymptotically converge to the zero vector , which is the attractor ; the entire n-dimensional space of potential initial vectors is the basin of attraction . similar features apply to linear differential equations . the scalar equation dx/dt ax causes all initial values of x except zero to diverge to infinity if a > 0 but to converge to an attractor at the value 0 if a dx/dt ax gives divergence from all initial points except the vector of zeroes if any eigenvalue of the matrix a is positive ; but if all the eigenvalues are negative the vector of zeroes is an attractor whose basin of attraction is the entire phase space . nonlinear equation or system . equations or systems that are nonlinear can give rise to a richer variety of behavior than can linear systems . one example is newton 's method of iterating to a root of a nonlinear expression . if the expression has more than one real root , some starting points for the iterative algorithm will lead to one of the roots asymptotically , and other starting points will lead to another . the basins of attraction for the expression 's roots are generally not simple & mdash ; it is not simply that the points nearest one root all map there , giving a basin of attraction consisting of nearby points . the basins of attraction can be infinite in number and arbitrarily small . for example , dence , thomas , '' cubics , chaos and newton 's method '' , mathematical gazette 81 , november 1997 , 403–408 . for the function f ( x ) x^3-2x^2-11x+12 , the following initial conditions are in successive basins of attraction : :2.35287527 converges to 4 ; :2.35284172 converges to −3 ; :2.35283735 converges to 4 ; :2.352836327 converges to −3 ; :2.352836323 converges to 1 . newton 's method can also be applied to complex analysis to find their roots . each root has a basin of attraction in the complex plane ; these basins can be mapped as in the image shown . as can be seen , the combined basin of attraction for a particular root can have many disconnected regions . for many complex functions , the boundaries of the basins of attraction are fractals . partial differential equations . parabolic partial differential equations may have finite-dimensional attractors . the diffusive part of the equation damps higher frequencies and in some cases leads to a global attractor . the ginzburg–landau , the kuramoto–sivashinsky , and the two-dimensional , forced navier–stokes equations are all known to have global attractors of finite dimension . for the three-dimensional , incompressible navier–stokes equation with periodic boundary conditions , if it has a global attractor , then this attractor will be of finite dimensions . geneviève raugel , global attractors in partial differential equations , handbook of dynamical systems , elsevier , 2002 , pp . 885–982 . . cellular automata . in his work on cellular automata , stephen wolfram classified four classes which , for any given rule and initial condition , the system ’ s long term behavior can be said to belong to . this means that after transients have decayed the system can be said to obey one of 4 behavior classes . since these classes describe the behavior of the system over long times , after transients have passed , we can create an analogy to the attractors defined above . while continuous systems like a pendulum may get exponentially close to an attractor , cellular automata can reach attractors in finite time . the classes are : class 1 : nearly all initial patterns evolve quickly into a uniform final state . this can be thought of as analogous to a fixed point attractor . class 2 : a myriad of final states can be said to be class 2 , although all consist of just a certain set of simple structures which either remain constant forever or repeat every few steps . the simplicity , and almost periodicity of these systems is analogous to limit cycles . class 3 : chaotic behavior emerges , which appears random , but always incorporates small-scale structures such as triangles . this behavior can be thought of as similar to a strange attractor , due to its chaotic nature and potential to create fractional dimensional shapes . class 4 : these systems mix order with randomness ; they generate localized structures which can move and interact with each other in complicated ways . a famous example is conway ’ s game of life . the undecidability of cellular automaton classes means that , for some cases , it is computationally impossible to determine to which class a given system belongs ( see also : undecidability in the game of life ) . this can be thought of as analogous to the non-integrability of systems which generate strange attractors , most notably the lorenz system . in hidden attractor is solved . see the talk page for more information . numerical localization ( visualization ) of attractors : self-excited and hidden attractors . file : chua-chaotic-hidden-attractor.jpg thumb chaotic hidden attractor ( green domain ) in chua 's system . trajectories with initial data in a neighborhood of two saddle points ( blue ) tend ( red arrow ) to infinity or tend ( black arrow ) to stable zero equilibrium point ( orange ) . from a computational point of view , attractors can be naturally regarded as self-excited attractors or hidden attractors . self-excited attractors can be localized numerically by standard computational procedures , in which after a transient sequence , a trajectory starting from a point on an unstable manifold in a small neighborhood of an unstable equilibrium reaches an attractor , such as the classical attractors in the van der pol , belousov–zhabotinsky , lorenz , and many other dynamical systems . in contrast , the basin of attraction of a hidden attractor does not contain neighborhoods of equilibria , so the hidden attractor can not be localized by standard computational procedures . -- >