Vermicompost

overview . vermicomposting has gained popularity in both industrial and domestic settings because , as compared with conventional composting , it provides a way to treat organic wastes more quickly . in manure composting , it also generates products that have lower salinity levels . the earthworm species ( or composting worms ) most often used are red wigglers ( eisenia fetida or eisenia andrei ) , though european nightcrawlers ( eisenia hortensis , synonym dendrobaena veneta ) and red earthworm ( lumbricus rubellus ) could also be used . red wigglers are recommended by most vermicomposting experts , as they have some of the best appetites and breed very quickly . users refer to european nightcrawlers by a variety of other names , including dendrobaenas , dendras , dutch nightcrawlers , and belgian nightcrawlers . containing water-soluble nutrients , vermicompost is a nutrient-rich organic fertilizer and soil conditioner in a form that is relatively easy for plants to absorb . worm castings are sometimes used as an organic fertilizer . because the earthworms grind and uniformly mix minerals in simple forms , plants need only minimal effort to obtain them . the worms ' digestive systems create environments that allow certain species of microbes to thrive to help create a '' living '' soil environment for plants . the fraction of soil which has gone through the digestive tract of earthworms is called the drilosphere . organic phosphorus in the environment , turner , et al . , page 91 . 2005 . design considerations . suitable worm species . all worms make compost but some species are not suitable for this purpose . species most often used for composting include : eisenia fetida , the red wiggler or tiger worm ( eisenia andrei ) lumbricus rubellus , does not adapt as well to the shallow compost bin as does eisenia fetida eisenia hortensis , european nightcrawlers , aka dendrobaenas , dendras , and nightcrawlers eudrilus eugeniae , african nightcrawlers perionyx excavatus , blueworms may be used in the tropics . these species commonly are found in organic-rich soils throughout europe and north america and live in rotting vegetation , compost , and manure piles . they may be an invasive species in some areas . as they are shallow-dwelling and feed on decomposing plant matter in the soil , they adapt easily to living on food or plant waste in the confines of a worm bin . composting worms are available to order online , from nursery mail-order suppliers or angling shops where they are sold as bait . they can also be collected from compost and manure piles . these species are not the same worms that are found in ordinary soil or on pavement when the soil is flooded by water . lumbricus terrestris ( a.k.a . canadian nightcrawlers ( us ) or common earthworm ( uk ) ) are not recommended , since they burrow deeper than most compost bins can accommodate . . large scale . large-scale vermicomposting is practiced in canada , italy , japan , india , malaysia , the philippines , and the united states . the vermicompost may be used for farming , landscaping , to create compost tea , or for sale . some of these operations produce worms for bait and/or home vermicomposting . there are two main methods of large-scale vermicomposting , windrow and raised bed . some systems use a windrow , which consists of bedding materials for the earthworms to live in and acts as a large bin ; organic material is added to it . although the windrow has no physical barriers to prevent worms from escaping , in theory they should not , due to an abundance of organic matter for them to feed on . often windrows are used on a concrete surface to prevent predators from gaining access to the worm population . the windrow method and compost windrow turners were developed by fletcher sims jr . of the compost corporation in canyon , texas . the windrow composting system is noted as a sustainable , cost-efficient way for farmers to manage dairy waste . the second type of large-scale vermicomposting system is the raised bed or flow-through system . here the worms are fed an inch of '' worm chow '' across the top of the bed , and an inch of castings are harvested from below by pulling a breaker bar across the large mesh screen which forms the base of the bed . because red worms are surface dwellers constantly moving towards the new food source , the flow-through system eliminates the need to separate worms from the castings before packaging . flow-through systems are well suited to indoor facilities , making them the preferred choice for operations in colder climates . small scale . for vermicomposting at home , a large variety of bins are commercially available , or a variety of adapted containers may be used . they may be made of old plastic containers , wood , styrofoam , or metal containers . the design of a small bin usually depends on where an individual wishes to store the bin and how they wish to feed the worms . some materials are less desirable than others in worm bin construction . metal containers often conduct heat too readily , are prone to rusting , and may release heavy metals into the vermicompost . styrofoam containers may release chemicals into the organic material . some cedrus , yellow cedar , and redwood contain resinous oils that may harm worms , although western red cedar has excellent longevity in composting conditions . tsuga is another inexpensive and fairly rot-resistant wood species that may be used to build worm bins . bins need holes or mesh for aeration . some people add a spout or holes in the bottom for excess liquid to drain into a tray for collection . the most common materials used are plastic : recycled polyethylene and polypropylene and wood . worm compost bins made from plastic are ideal , but require more drainage than wooden ones because they are non-absorbent . however , wooden bins will eventually decay and need to be replaced . small-scale vermicomposting is well-suited to turn kitchen waste into high-quality soil amendments , where space is limited . worms can decompose organic matter without the additional human physical effort ( turning the bin ) that composting requires . composting worms which are detritivorous ( eaters of trash ) , such as the red wiggler eisenia fetida , are epigeic ( surface dwellers ) and together with symbiotic associated microbes are the ideal vectors for decomposing food waste . common earthworms such as lumbricus terrestris are anecic ( deep burrowing ) species and hence unsuitable for use in a closed system . other soil species that contribute include insects , other worms and molds . . climate and temperature . there may be differences in vermicomposting method depending on the climate . it is necessary to monitor the temperatures of large-scale bin systems ( which can have high heat capacity properties ) , as the raw materials or feedstocks used can compost , heating up the worm bins as they decay and killing the worms . the most common worms used in composting systems , redworms ( eisenia fetida , eisenia andrei , and lumbricus rubellus ) feed most rapidly at temperatures of 15–25 & nbsp ; °c ( 59-77 & nbsp ; °f ) . they can survive at 10 & nbsp ; °c ( 50 & nbsp ; °f ) . temperatures above 30 & nbsp ; °c ( 86 & nbsp ; °f ) may harm them . appelhof , p . 3 this temperature range means that indoor vermicomposting with redworms is possible in all but tropical climates . other worms like perionyx excavatus are suitable for warmer climates . appelhof , p . 41 if a worm bin is kept outside , it should be placed in a sheltered position away from direct sunlight and insulated against frost in winter . feedstock . there are few food wastes that vermicomposting can not compost , although meat waste and dairy products are likely to putrefy , and in outdoor bins can attract vermin . green waste should be added in moderation to avoid heating the bin . small-scale or home systems . such systems usually use kitchen and garden waste , using '' earthworms and other microorganisms to digest organic wastes , such as kitchen scraps '' . this includes : all fruits and vegetables ( including citrus , in limited quantities ) vegetable and fruit peels and ends coffee grounds and filters tea bags ( even those with high tannin levels ) grains such as bread , cracker and cereal ( including moldy and stale ) eggshells ( rinsed off ) leaves and grass clippings ( not sprayed with pesticides ) newspapers ( most inks used in newspapers are not toxic ) paper toweling ( which has not been used with cleaners or chemicals ) . large-scale or commercial . such vermicomposting systems need reliable sources of large quantities of food . systems presently operating latest developments in mid-to-large-scale vermicomposting use : dairy cow or pig manure sewage sludge brewery waste cotton mill waste agricultural waste food processing and grocery waste cafeteria waste grass clippings and wood chips . harvesting . vermicompost is ready for harvest when it contains few-to-no scraps of uneaten food or bedding . there are several methods of harvesting from small-scale systems : '' dump and hand sort '' , '' let the worms do the sorting '' , '' alternate containers '' and '' divide and dump . '' appelhof , pp . 79-86 these differ on the amount of time and labor involved and whether the vermicomposter wants to save as many worms as possible from being trapped in the harvested compost . the pyramid method of harvesting worm compost is commonly used in small-scale vermicomposting , and is considered the simplest method for single layer bins . in this process , compost is separated into large clumps , which is placed back into composting for further breakdown , and lighter compost , with which the rest of the process continues . this lighter mix is placed into small piles on a tarp under the sunlight . the worms instinctively burrow to the bottom of the pile . after a few minutes , the top of the pyramid is removed repeatedly , until the worms are again visible . this repeats until the mound is composed mostly of worms . when harvesting the compost , it is possible to separate eggs and cocoons and return them to the bin , thereby ensuring new worms are hatched . cocoons are small , lemon-shaped yellowish objects that can usually be seen with the naked eye . the cocoons can hold up to 20 worms ( though 2-3 is most common ) . cocoons can lay dormant for as long as two years if conditions are not conducive for hatching . . properties . vermicompost has been shown to be richer in many nutrients than compost produced by other composting methods . it has also outperformed a commercial plant medium with nutrients added , but levels of magnesium required adjustment , as did ph . however , in one study it has been found that homemade backyard vermicompost was lower in microbial biomass , soil microbial activity , and yield of a species of ryegrass than municipal compost . it is rich in microbial life which converts nutrients already present in the soil into plant-available forms . unlike other compost , worm castings also contain mucus which helps prevent nutrients from washing away with the first watering and holds moisture better than plain soil . nancarrow , loren ; taylor , janet hogan ( 1998 ) . the worm book : the complete guide to gardening and composting with worms ten speed press . p . 4 . increases in the total nitrogen content in vermicompost , an increase in available nitrogen and phosphorus , as well as the increased removal of heavy metals from sludge and soil have been reported . the reduction in the bioavailability of heavy metals has been observed in a number of studies . . benefits . soil improves soil aeration enriches soil with micro-organisms ( adding enzymes such as phosphatase and cellulase ) microbial activity in worm castings is 10 to 20 times higher than in the soil and organic matter that the worm ingests attracts deep-burrowing earthworms already present in the soil improves water holding capacity appelhof , p . 111 plant growth enhances germination , plant growth , and crop yield it helps in root and plant growth enriches soil with micro-organisms ( adding plant hormones such as auxins and gibberellic acid ) economic biowastes conversion reduces waste flow to landfills elimination of biowastes from the waste stream reduces contamination of other recyclables collected in a single bin ( a common problem in communities practicing single-stream recycling ) creates low-skill jobs at local level low capital investment and relatively simple technologies make vermicomposting practical for less-developed agricultural regions environmental helps to close the '' metabolic gap '' through recycling waste on-site large systems often use temperature control and mechanized harvesting , however other equipment is relatively simple and does not wear out quickly production reduces greenhouse gas emissions such as methane and nitric oxide ( produced in landfills or incinerators when not composted ) . uses . soil conditioner . vermicompost can be mixed directly into the soil , or mixed with water to make a liquid fertilizer known as worm tea . the dark brown waste liquid , or leachate , that drains into the bottom of some vermicomposting systems is not to be confused with worm tea . it is an uncomposted byproduct from when water-rich foods break down and may contain pathogens and toxins . it is best discarded or applied back to the bin when added moisture is needed for further processing . the ph , nutrient , and microbial content of these fertilizers varies upon the inputs fed to worms . pulverized limestone , or calcium carbonate can be added to the system to raise the ph . operation and maintenance . smells . when closed , a well-maintained bin is odorless ; when opened , it should have little smell—if any smell is present , it is earthy . appelhof , p . 113 the smell may also depend on the type of composted material added to the bin . an unhealthy worm bin may smell , potentially due to low oxygen conditions . worms require gaseous oxygen . appelhof , p . 92 oxygen can be provided by airholes in the bin , occasional stirring of bin contents , and removal of some bin contents if they become too deep or too wet . if decomposition becomes anaerobic from excess wet feedstock added to the bin , or the layers of food waste have become too deep , the bin will begin to smell of ammonia . moisture . moisture must be maintained above 50 % , as lower moisture content will not support worm respiration and can increase worm mortality . operating moisture-content range should be between 70-90 % , with a suggested content of 70-80 % for vermicomposting operations . if decomposition has become anaerobic , to restore healthy conditions and prevent the worms from dying , excess waste water must be reduced and the bin returned to a normal moisture level . to do this , first reduce addition of food scraps with a high moisture content and second , add fresh , dry bedding such as shredded newspaper to your bin , mixing it in well . nancarrow , loren ; taylor , janet hogan ( 1998 ) . the worm book : the complete guide to gardening and composting with worms ten speed press . p . 70 . . pest species . pests such as rodents and flies are attracted by certain materials and odors , usually from large amounts of kitchen waste , particularly meat . eliminating the use of meat or dairy product in a worm bin decreases the possibility of pests . predatory ants can be a problem in african countries . in warm weather , fruit and vinegar flies breed in the bins if fruit and vegetable waste is not thoroughly covered with bedding . this problem can be avoided by thoroughly covering the waste by at least of bedding . maintaining the correct ph ( close to neutral ) and water content of the bin ( just enough water where squeezed bedding drips a couple of drops ) can help avoid these pests as well . worms escaping . worms generally stay in the bin , but may try to leave the bin when first introduced , or often after a rainstorm when outside humidity is high . compost worm escape maintaining adequate conditions in the worm bin and putting a light over the bin when first introducing worms should eliminate this problem . can you do vermicomposting in an apartment ? . nutrient levels . commercial vermicomposters test and may amend their products to produce consistent quality and results . because the small-scale and home systems use a varied mix of feedstocks , the nitrogen , phosphorus , and potassium ( npk ) content of the resulting vermicompost will also be inconsistent . npk testing may be helpful before the vermicompost or tea is applied to the garden . in order to avoid over-fertilization issues , such as nitrogen burn , vermicompost can be diluted as a tea 50:50 with water , or as a solid can be mixed in 50:50 with potting soil . additionally , the mucous layer created by worms which surrounds their castings allows for a '' time release '' effect , meaning not all nutrients are released at once . this also reduces the risk of burning the plants , as is common with the use and overuse of commercial fertilizers . . application examples . vermicomposting is widely used in north america for on-site institutional processing of food scraps , such as in hospitals , universities , shopping malls , and correctional facilities . vermicomposting is used for medium-scale on-site institutional organic material recycling , such as for food scraps from universities and shopping malls . it is selected either as a more environmentally friendly choice than conventional disposal , or to reduce the cost of commercial waste removal . researchers from the pondicherry university discovered that worm composts can also be used to clean up heavy metals . the researchers found substantial reductions in heavy metals when the worms were released into the garbage and they are effective at removing lead , zinc , cadmium , copper and manganese . . see also . fertilizer home composting maggot farming mary arlene appelhof vermifilter vermiponics , use of wormbin leachate in hydroponics waste management . references . further reading . . external links .