Echinacea

description . thumbimage : yellow coneflower echinacea paradoxa closeup bee 3008px.jpg thumb right a bee on an echinacea paradoxa head ( inflorescence ) thumb echinacea species are herbaceous , drought-tolerant perennial plants growing up to 140 & nbsp ; cm or 4 feet , 32 in height . they grow from taproots , except e . purpurea , which grows from a short caudex with fibrous roots . they have erect stems that in most species are unbranched . both the basal and cauline ( stem ) leaves are arranged alternately . the leaves are normally hairy with a rough texture , having uniseriate trichomes ( 1–4 rings of cells ) but sometimes they lack hairs . the basal leaves and the lower stem leaves have petioles , and as the leaves progress up the stem the petioles often decrease in length . the leaf blades in different species may have one , three or five nerves . some species have linear to leaf shape leaves , and others have leaf shape ; often the leaves decrease in size as they progress up the stems . leaf bases gradually increase in width away from the petioles or the bases are leaf shape . most species have leaf margins that are entire , but sometimes they are leaf shape . the flowers are collected together into single rounded heads at the ends of long peduncles . the inflorescences have crateriform to hemispheric shaped involucres which are 12–40 & nbsp ; mm wide . the phyllary , or bracts below the flower head , are persistent and number 15–50 . the phyllaries are produced in a 2–4 series . the receptacles are hemispheric to conic . the paleae ( chaffs on the receptacles of many asteraceae ) have orange to reddish purple ends , and are longer than the disc corollas . the paleae bases partially surrounding the cypselae , and are keeled with the apices abruptly constricted to awn-like tips . the ray florets number 8–21 and the petal are dark purple to pale pink , white , or yellow . the tubes of the corolla are hairless or sparsely hairy , and the leaf are spreading , reflexed , or drooping in habit and leaf shape . the abaxial faces of the leaf are glabrous or moderately hairy . the flower heads have typically 200–300 fertile , bisexual disc florets but some have more . the petal are pinkish , greenish , reddish-purple or yellow and have tubes shorter than the throats . the pollen is normally yellow in most species , but usually white in e . pallida . the three or four-angled fruits ( cypselae ) , are tan or bicolored with a dark brown band distally . the pappi are persistent and variously crown-shaped with 0 to 4 or more prominent teeth . x 11 . like all asteraceae , the flowering structure is a composite inflorescence , with rose-colored ( rarely yellow or white ) flower arranged in a prominent , somewhat cone-shaped head – '' cone-shaped '' because the petals of the outer ray florets tend to point downward ( are reflexed ) once the flower head opens , thus forming a cone . plants are generally long lived , with distinctive flowers . the common name '' cone flower '' comes from the characteristic center '' cone '' at the center of the flower head . the generic name echinacea is rooted in the greek word ἐχῖνος ( echinos ) , meaning hedgehog , in reference to the spiky appearance and feel of the flower heads . species . dna analysis is applied to determine the number of echinacea species , allowing clear distinctions among species based on chemical differences in root metabolites . perry , ann . 2010 . exploring echinacea ’ s enigmatic origins . united states department of agriculture , agricultural research service the research concluded that of the 40 genetically diverse populations of echinacea studied , there were ten distinct species . species : the plant list search for echinacea echinacea angustifolia & ndash ; narrow-leaf coneflower echinacea atrorubens & ndash ; topeka purple coneflower echinacea laevigata & ndash ; smooth coneflower , smooth purple coneflower echinacea pallida & ndash ; pale purple coneflower echinacea paradoxa & ndash ; yellow coneflower , bush 's purple coneflower echinacea purpurea & ndash ; purple coneflower , eastern purple coneflower echinacea sanguinea & ndash ; sanguine purple coneflower echinacea serotina & ndash ; narrow-leaved purple coneflower echinacea simulata & ndash ; wavyleaf purple coneflower echinacea tennesseensis & ndash ; tennessee coneflower . research . echinacea products vary widely in composition . they contain different species ( e . purpurea , e . angustifolia , e . pallida ) , different plant segments ( roots , flowers , extracts ) , different preparations ( extracts and expressed juice ) , and different chemical compositions which complicate understanding of a potential effect . well-controlled clinical trials are limited and low in quality . although there are multiple scientific reviews and meta-analysis published on the supposed immunological effects of echinacea , there are significant variability of products used among studies leading to limited conclusions about effects and safety . consequently , regulatory authorities such as the united states food and drug administration have not approved echinacea safe and effective for any health or medical purposes . . common cold . while one 2014 systematic review found that echinacea products are not effective to treat or prevent the common cold , a 2016 meta-analysis found tentative evidence that use of echinacea extracts reduced the risk of repeated respiratory infections . a 2015 monograph by the european medicines agency stated that oral consumption of '' expressed juice '' or dried expressed juice of echinacea could prevent or reduce symptoms of a common cold at its onset . as of 2017 , the benefit , if any , appears to be small and thus of little utility . . cancer . according to cancer research uk , '' there is no scientific evidence to show that echinacea can help treat , prevent or cure cancer in any way . some therapists have claimed that echinacea can help relieve side effects from cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy , but this has not been proven either . '' . covid-19 . based on in-vitro studies , extracts of e . purpurea ( echinaforce® ) showed virucidal activity against coronaviruses , including sars-cov-2 . because existing data is solely derived from cell cultures , and antiviral effects in humans have not been elucidated , regulatory agencies have not recommended the use of echinacea preparations for the prophylaxis and treatment of covid-19 . '' echinacea als vermeintliches mittel gegen das neue coronavirus '' swissmedic.ch . retrieved 18 september 2020 . . side effects . when taken by mouth , echinacea does not usually cause side effects , but may have undesirable interactions with various drugs prescribed for diseases , such as heart disease , bleeding , and autoimmune diseases , such as rheumatoid arthritis , lupus , or psoriasis . although there are no specific case reports of drug interactions with echinacea , safety about taking echinacea supplements is not well-understood , with possibilities that it may cause side effects , such as nausea , stomach upset or diarrhea , and that it may have adverse reactions with other medications . one of the most extensive and systematic studies to review the safety of echinacea products concluded that overall , '' adverse events are rare , mild and reversible , '' with the most common symptoms being '' gastrointestinal and skin-related . '' such side effects include nausea , abdominal pain , diarrhea , itch , and rash . echinacea has also been linked to allergic reactions , including asthma , shortness of breath , and one case of anaphylaxis . muscle and joint pain has been associated with echinacea , but it may have been caused by cold or flu symptoms for which the echinacea products were administered . there are isolated case reports of rare and idiosyncratic reactions including thrombocytopenic purpura , leucopenia , hepatitis , kidney failure , and atrial fibrillation , although it is not clear that these were due to echinacea itself . up to 58 drugs or supplements may interact with echinacea . as a matter of manufacturing safety , one investigation by an independent-consumer testing laboratory found that five of eleven selected retail echinacea products failed quality testing . four of the failing products contained levels of phenols below the potency level stated on the labels . one failing product was contaminated with lead . . children under 12 years old . the european herbal medicinal products committee ( hmpc ) and the uk herbal medicines advisory committee ( hmac ) recommended against the use of echinacea-containing products in children under the age of 12 . manufacturers re-labelled all oral echinacea products that had product licenses for children with a warning that they should not be given to children under 12 as a precautionary measure . . pregnancy . although research has not found increased risk of birth defects associated with use of echinacea during the first trimester , it is recommended that pregnant women should avoid echinacea products until stronger safety supporting evidence becomes available . . lactation . it is recommended that women breastfeeding should use caution with echinacea products due to insufficient safety information available . . general precaution . the u.s . food and drug administration recommends precaution about using dietary supplements because some products may not be risk free under certain circumstances or may interact with prescription and over-the-counter medicines . as with any herbal preparation , individual doses of echinacea may vary significantly in chemical composition . inconsistent process control in manufactured echinacea products may involve poor inter- and intra-batch homogeneity , species or plant part differences , variable extraction methods , and contamination or adulteration with other products , leading to potential for substantial product variability . . other uses . some species of echinacea , notably e . purpurea , e . angustifolia , and e . pallida , are grown as ornamental plants in gardens . '' a comprehensive echinacea germplasm collection located at the north central regional plant introduction station '' , usda many cultivars exist , and many of them are asexually propagated to keep them true to type . echinacea extracts inhibited growth of three species of trypanosomatids : leishmania donovani , leishmania major , and trypanosoma brucei . . history . echinacea angustifolia was widely used by the north american indigenous peoples as folk medicine . according to wallace sampson , its modern use for the common cold began when a swiss herbal supplement maker was told that echinacea was used for cold prevention by native american tribes who lived in the area of south dakota . study : echinacea cuts colds by half webmd health news , june 26 , 2007 some plains tribes did use echinacea for cold symptoms . the kiowa used it for coughs and sore throats , the cheyenne for sore throats , the pawnee for headaches , and many tribes including the lakota used it as a analgesic .