Cathay Pacific

livery . before november 1994 , all cathay pacific aircraft used a '' green lettuce '' livery and carried the british flag on the empennage . after the handover , aircraft carry the brand hong kong logo and with hong kong or in chinese 香港 under or beside the brand hong kong logo instead of using the hong kong special administrative region ( hksar ) flag . the hksar flag has never appeared on any aircraft . all cathay pacific aircraft carry the following livery , logos and trademarks : the '' brushwing '' livery on the body and on the vertical stabiliser , introduced in the early 1990s , and was first deployed on a boeing 747-400 ( vr-hot , re-registered as b-hot ) , ahead of the launch of airbus a340 service for cathay pacific . it also features the '' asia 's world city '' brandline , the brand hong kong logotype and the dragon symbol ; the oneworld logo and the swire group logo . the brushwing logo consists of a calligraphic stroke against a green background ; the stroke is intended to appear like the wing of a bird . the previous logo , consisting of green and white stripes , was in place from the early 1970s until 1994 . '' cathay pacific takes to the sky with new logo . '' new sunday times . 15 september 1994 . page 18 . retrieved from google news ( 10 of 51 ) on 9 december 2011 . in november 2015 , the airline revealed a refreshed version of its previous livery , featuring a simpler paint scheme while maintaining their trademark brushwing on an all-green tail . it was first unveiled on a boeing 777-300er ( b-kpm ) , in preparation for the delivery of the first airbus a350 for cathay pacific . livery launch : a new era for the airline . cathay pacific . the second aircraft was a freighter aircraft , boeing 747-400erf ( b-lia ) . senior leadership . chairman : patrick healy ( since november 2019 ) chief executive : augustus tang ( since august 2019 ) . list of former chairmen . c . c . roberts ( 1948–1952 ) j.a . blackwood ( 1952–1957 ) w . c . g . knowles ( 1957–1964 ) john bremridge ( 1973–1980 ) duncan bluck ( 1981–1984 ) michael miles ( 1984–1988 ) david gledhill ( 1988–1992 ) peter sutch ( 1992–1999 ) james hughes-hallett ( 1999–2005 ) david turnbull ( 2005–2006 ) christopher pratt ( 2006–2014 ) john slosar ( 2014–2019 ) . list of former chief executive 's . chief executive officers were referred to as managing directors before 1 july 1998 . sydney de kantzow ( 1946–1948 ) m . s . cumming ( 1948–1950 ) w . c . g . knowles ( 1950–1957 ) h . j . c . browne ( 1957–1958 ) w . b . rae-smith ( 1958–1960 ) h . j . c . browne ( 1960–1961 ; second term ) john bremridge ( 1961–1971 ) duncan bluck ( 1971–1978 ) michael miles ( 1979–1984 ) peter sutch ( 1984–1992 ) rod eddington ( 1992–1996 ) david turnbull ( 1996–2005 ) philip chen ( 2005–2007 ) tony tyler ( 2007–2011 ) john slosar ( 2011–2014 ) ivan chu ( 2014–2017 ) rupert hogg ( 2017–2019 ) . destinations . cathay pacific serves 81 destinations ( including cargo ) , but not including codeshare in 46 countries and territories on five continents , with a well-developed asian network . the airline serves many gateway cities in north america and europe , with easy connections with its oneworld and codeshare partners , american airlines and british airways via los angeles and london , respectively . also , the airline serves ten french cities via a codeshare partnership with french national rail operator , sncf , from paris . codeshare agreements . cathay pacific has codeshare agreements with the following airlines : alliance and partnerships . cathaypacific.com . retrieved on 9 june 2020 . air astana air canada ( selected connecting routes ) air canada and cathay pacific to introduce codeshare services and reciprocal mileage accrual and redemption benefits in strategic cooperation . aircanada.com . retrieved on 22 december 2016 . air china air new zealand alaska airlines american airlines austrian airlines bangkok airways british airways brussels airlines comair fiji airways finnair hk express ( subsidiary ) iberia japan airlines latam airlines group lufthansa . lufthansagroup.com . retrieved on 27 march 2016 . malaysia airlines miat mongolian airlines cathay pacific announces new codeshare agreement with miat mongolian airlines . cathaypacific.com . retrieved on 28 june 2017 . philippine airlines qantas qatar airways customers to benefit from cathay pacific / qatar airways strategic agreement between hong kong and doha . cathaypacific.com . retrieved on 16 may 2014 . s7 airlines shenzhen airlines swiss international air lines vietnam airlines westjet the airline also has a codeshare agreement with french high speed trains ( sncf ) from tgv station at paris-charles de gaulle airport to ten french cities . as well as codeshare agreement with ferry operators - cotai water jet and chu kong passenger transport co . , ltd to connect passengers from hong kong to macao , zhuhai , shenzhen , shekou and guangzhou in the greater bay area . in addition , there is a codeshare agreement with bahrain limo for bus services between bahrain and dammam . fleet . cathay pacific operates narrow-body , wide-body , twin-engine commercial fleet composed of airbus a320neo , airbus a330 , airbus a350 and boeing 777 aircraft . and a boeing 747 cargo fleet . the airline also has more airbus a320neo , airbus a350 and boeing 777x aircraft on order . loyalty programs . cathay pacific has two loyalty programs : the loyalty program marco polo club and asia miles , the travel reward program . members of marco polo are automatically enrolled as asia miles members . marco polo club . the marco polo club is divided into four tiers , green ( entry level ) , silver , gold , and diamond , based on the member 's past travel . a joining fee of us 100 is applicable for a marco polo club membership . members earn club points on eligible fare classes with cathay pacific and oneworld member airlines . these are used to calculate the member 's eligibility for membership renewal , upgrade or downgrade during the membership year . higher-tiered members are provided with increased travel benefits such as guaranteed economy class seat , additional baggage allowance , priority flight booking and airport lounge access . the marco polo club membership is terminated after 12 months of inactivity or failure to meet minimum travel criteria as outlined in the membership guide and will be downgraded to asia miles member . ; green the green tier is the entry level to the marco polo club . benefits include dedicated 24-hour club service line for flight reservations , designated marco polo check-in counters , excess baggage allowance and lounge access redemption , and priority boarding . one business class lounge voucher will be issued for the member or their travelling companion at reaching 200 club points members are required to earn 20 club points or pay us 100 for membership renewal . ; silver silver tier level is achieved or retained when the member earns 300 club points during the membership year . additional benefits for silver card members include advanced seat reservations , priority waitlisting , business class check-in counters , extra baggage allowance , priority baggage handling , and business class lounge access when flying cathay pacific operated flights . additionally , members are eligible to use the frequent visitor e-channels for seamless self-service immigration clearance at hong kong international airport . at 450 club points , members will be issued two business class lounge vouchers for their travelling companions . also , members are entitled to apply for at most three membership holidays in their lifetime , retaining their status for one year for each application . marco polo club silver tier status is equivalent to oneworld ruby tier status , which entitles members to oneworld ruby benefits when travelling on a oneworld member airline . ; gold gold tier level is achieved or retained when the member earns 600 club points during the membership year . additional benefits for gold card members includes a guaranteed economy class seat on cathay pacific flights booked 72 hours before departure , or one piece of extra baggage allowance , business class lounge access with one accompanying guest when flying cathay pacific and oneworld-operated flights and arrival lounge access when flying cathay pacific-operated and marketed flights . two business class lounge vouchers will be issued for their travelling companions or members on their asia miles redemption list at reaching 800 club points . at reaching 1000 club points , four cabin upgrade vouchers ( for cathay pacific-operated short-haul or medium-haul routes ) will be issued to members and their travelling companions . marco polo club gold tier status is equivalent to oneworld sapphire tier status , which entitles members to oneworld sapphire benefits when travelling on a oneworld member airline . ; diamond the second-highest tier in the marco polo club . diamond tier level is achieved or retained when the member earns 1200 club points during the membership year . additional benefits for diamond card members include top priority waitlisting , guaranteed economy class or business class seat on cathay pacific flights booked 24 hours before departure , first class check-in counters , or one piece of extra baggage allowance , first priority baggage handling , first class lounge access with two guests when flying cathay pacific-operated flights , one guest when flying oneworld operated flights and business class lounge access with two guests when flying on any airline . at 1400 club points , members will be issued with two first or business lounge vouchers for their travelling companions or members on their asia miles redemption list . at 1600 club points , four cabin upgrade vouchers ( for any cathay pacific-operated routes ) will be issued to members , travelling companions and members on their asia miles redemption list . at 1800 club points , members can nominate one member for marco polo gold tier membership . marco polo club diamond tier status is equivalent to oneworld emerald tier status , which entitles members to oneworld emerald benefits when travelling on a oneworld member airline . ; diamond plus the highest tier in the marco polo club . diamond plus tier level offered annually to the top one percent ( measured by revenue , not flight miles ) of diamond members worldwide '' in recognition of their exceptional and consistent travel performance and their contribution to cathay pacific . '' diamond plus and diamond members are '' considered in the same tier in every aspect '' . however , diamond plus get extra perks consisting of '' nomination of one companion to the diamond tier '' , and '' access to cathay pacific first class lounges regardless of which airline they are flying '' . marco polo club diamond plus tier status is equivalent to oneworld emerald tier status , which entitles members to oneworld emerald benefits when travelling on a oneworld member airline . . asia miles . asia miles is a loyalty and frequent-flyer program where members can earn asia miles with more than 500 partners in 9 categories : airlines , hotels , finance & insurance , dining & banquets , retail , travel & leisure , cars & transport , telecoms and professional services . members can also earn miles when shopping online through ishop which offers a variety of products and brands . members can use the miles to redeem travel , electronic items , culinary items , concert tickets , and other lifestyle awards . it was named '' best frequent flyer program '' at the 2011 business traveller asia-pacific travel awards ceremony . . services . ground handling . beginning in 2007 , cathay pacific launched more methods to check in for flights . among them were self-check-in using a kiosk at hong kong international airport and other select destinations and checking in via a mobile phone . cathay pacific also launched a mobile application on app store and google play , formerly named cx mobile . passengers can use the application to check flight arrivals and departures , check in for their flights and read about the destinations they are flying to using city guides . the app has become a hit with passengers , making cathay pacific one of the industry leaders in offering mobile services to users of smartphones . cathay pacific is also now following a trend among many airlines to improve its brand image to customers and shareholders with social media , and is ranked fourth worldwide . the airline now uses a range of social media tools including facebook , flickr , twitter , instagram , youtube and blogging to share ideas with customers . in addition , it has launched a virtual tour to enable passengers to experience cathay pacific 's new cabins and services without having to step aboard the aircraft . on 4 january 2011 , the cargo division of the airline , cathay pacific cargo , became the first airline operating out of hong kong to fully switch to e-air waybill . this eliminates the need for all paper documents when issuing air waybills . the international air transport association ( iata ) selected nine countries and territories and airlines in which to run the e-awb pilot program , including hong kong and cathay pacific . . cabin . . first class . first class is available solely on board select boeing 777 aircraft , and features 6 seats in a 1-1-1 configuration . the first-class seats can be converted into fully lie-flat beds measuring . the seats include a massage function , a personal closet , an ottoman for stowage or guest seating , and adjustable , hd personal televisions ( ptv ) . . business class . cathay pacific introduced a new business class seat in 2011 , featuring reverse herringbone seating in a 1-2-1 configuration . each seat converts into a fully flat bed of length 82 inches ( 208 & nbsp ; cm ) , with a width of up to 21 inches ( 53 & nbsp ; cm ) . each seat features a small enclosed side cabinet , and an adjustable 18.5 in ( 47 & nbsp ; cm ( personal television . in 2016 , upon delivery of brand new airbus a350s , cathay pacific introduced a refreshed reverse herringbone seat designed by porsche design , with hd personal televisions and additional enclosed storage space on the side . the new regional business class is provided on cathay pacific 's regionally configured boeing 777s ( excluding the 777-300er ) and selected airbus a330-300s . regional business class seats have width and recline to of pitch and feature electrical recline and leg rest . a ptv is located in the seat back offers avod . . premium economy class . cathay pacific introduced a premium economy in march 2012 . the seat pitch is 38 & nbsp ; inches – six inches more than economy class – and the seat itself is wider and have a bigger recline . it has a large meal table , cocktail table , footrest , a 10.6-inch personal television , an in-seat power outlet , a multi-port connector for personal devices , and extra personal storage space . the premium economy class seat offers a higher level of comfort with more living space in a separate cabin before the economy class zone . in 2016 , on delivery of the airbus a350-900 fleet , cathay pacific introduced a new premium economy seat , which features a 12.1 in ( 31 & nbsp ; cm ) hd ptv , and improved pitch of 40 inches ( 102 & nbsp ; cm ) . the new seats are configured in a 2-4-2 configuration , with a width of 18.5 in ( 47 & nbsp ; cm ) . . economy class . cathay pacific introduced a new economy class in march 2012 . they have a six-inch recline ( two inches over the current long-haul economy seat ) . these seats are in width and have of pitch . the old economy class seats , offered on aircraft outfitted with the refurbished long-haul interiors , were designed by be aerospace and introduced in july 2008 . these seats include a fixed back design ( shell ) that allows passengers to recline without intruding on those seated behind , a ptv providing avod , ac power located behind a larger tray table , a coat hook and a literature pocket that has been relocated to below the seat cushion to create more legroom . the fixed shell of these seats has been criticised . the previous economy class seats each feature ptvs with a choice of 25 channels . these seats are in width and have of pitch . these seats have been replaced with the new economy class seats on aircraft receiving the cathay pacific 's new long-haul interior configuration , where some regional aircraft continue to offer the old shell seats . since 2017 , all boeing 777s are retrofitted from 9 abreast to 10 abreast , increasing the economy class seats on board the -300 from 356 to 396 seats & the -300er from 182/268 seats to 201/296 seats . all new seats feature new 11.6-inch touch screens , usb ports , & improved seat pitch . the seat width is . in-flight entertainment . studiocx , cathay pacific 's in-flight entertainment system , equipped with personal televisions ( ptvs ) in every seat , offers movies , asian and western tv programs , music and games . also , the airline provides a range of different newspapers and magazines from around the world , including the airline 's in-flight magazine discovery . passengers with visual impairment can request for hong kong 's south china morning post in braille to be available on board . studiocx provides video on demand ( avod ) for every passenger and offers up to 100 movies , 350 tv programs , about 1000 cd albums in 25 different genres , 25 radio channels and more than 70 interactive games . the '' new regional product '' includes studiocx . . catering . food and beverages are complimentary on all flights , with two hot meals generally served on each flight for long haul flights , along with free alcoholic beverages . foods served on flights from hong kong are provided by cathay pacific catering services ( cpcs ) facilities in hong kong . cls catering services limited , a joint venture with lsg sky chefs , provides the inflight catering from toronto and vancouver airports ; while vietnam air caterers , a joint venture between cpcs and vietnam airlines , provides the inflight catering for flights from ho chi minh city . for manila-hong kong , they usually serve snacks in a snack bag , called a complimentary snack and drink . it contains a pastry or wrap in a box or a paper bag , an anzac cookie , an antiseptic towelette and a nestea lemon tea for taipei flights and a sunkist mango juice or a bottled water for manila flights . for flights to and from taipei , a simplified lunch with hot rice is served , and the four varieties are served in rotation on flights . accidents and incidents . cathay pacific had eight incidents and accidents over its history , although none have resulted in a hull loss or loss of life since 1972 . on 16 july 1948 , miss macao , a cathay pacific-subsidiary-operated pby catalina ( vr-hdt ) from macau to hong kong was hijacked by four men , who killed the pilot after take-off . the aircraft crashed in the pearl river delta near zhuhai . twenty-six people died , leaving only one survivor , a hijacker . this was the first hijacking of a commercial airliner in the world . on 24 february 1949 , a cathay pacific douglas dc-3 ( vr-hdg ) from manila to hong kong , crashed near braemar reservoir after a go-around in poor weather . all 23 people on board died . on 13 september 1949 , a cathay pacific douglas dc-3 ( vr-hdw ) departing from anisakan , burma , crashed on take-off when the right-hand main gear leg collapsed . there were no reported fatalities . on 23 july 1954 , a cathay pacific douglas dc-4 ( vr-heu ) from bangkok to hong kong was shot down by aircraft of the people 's liberation army air force in the south china sea near hainan island . ten people died , leaving nine survivors . after the incident , cathay pacific received an apology and compensation from the people 's liberation army air force . it was apparently mistaken for a nationalist chinese military aircraft . on 5 november 1967 , cathay pacific flight 33 , operated by a convair 880 ( vr-hfx ) from hong kong to saigon , overran the runway at kai tak airport . one person was killed and the aircraft was written off . on 15 june 1972 , cathay pacific flight 700z , operated by a convair 880 ( vr-hfz ) from bangkok to hong kong , disintegrated and crashed while the aircraft was flying at over pleiku , vietnam after a bomb exploded in a suitcase placed under a seat in the cabin , killing all 81 people on board . on 13 april 2010 , cathay pacific flight 780 , an airbus a330-342 ( b-hll ) from surabaya juanda international airport to hong kong landed safely after both engines failed due to contaminated fuel . 57 passengers were injured in the ensuing slide evacuation . its two pilots received the polaris award from the international federation of air line pilots ' associations , for their heroism and airmanship . on 15 august 2018 , a cathay pacific boeing 777 ( b-kpy ) damaged the edge of its right wing during pushback , by hitting a floodlight pole in rome–fiumicino airport , causing severe damage . no injuries were reported .