Chūya Nakahara

early life . chūya nakahara was born in yamaguchi , where his father , kensuke kashimura , was a highly decorated army doctor . kensuke married fuku nakahara and was adopted by the nakahara family shortly after the birth of their son , officially changing their last name to nakahara . in nakahara 's earliest years , his father was sent to hiroshima and kanazawa where the family followed , only returning to yamaguchi in 1914 . in 1917 , kensuke established his own clinic in the location where nowadays stands the nakahara chūya memorial hall . since his parents had not been blessed with children for six years after their marriage , and because they had no children in the nakahara family 's hometown , they were delighted with the birth of their first son and celebrated it for three days . . education and literary beginnings . as the eldest son of a prominent doctor , nakahara was expected to become one himself . due to the high expectations of his father , nakahara was given a very strict education , which also prevented him from enjoying an ordinary childhood . worried about the public morals of the town , kensuke forbid his son from playing outside with children from a different class to their own . another example of these restrictions is that , unlike his younger brothers , he was not allowed to bathe in the river for fear that he would drown . as he grew up , severe punishments were inflicted upon him ; a common one was being made to stand upright facing the wall . any sudden move would cause to receive a burn in the heel with a cigarette ember . however , the biggest punishment was being confined to sleep in the barn , which chūya received dozens of times compared to his brothers . this was intended to prepare him to follow kensuke 's footsteps and to become the head of the family . as a primary schooler , nakahara had excellent grades and was called a prodigy child . it was the death of his younger brother tsugurō in 1915 , when he was 8-years-old , what awakened him to literature . grief-driven , he turned to composing poetry . he submitted his first three verses to a women 's magazine and local newspaper in 1920 , when he was still in elementary school . in the same year , he passed the entrance examination to yamaguchi junior high school with brilliant results . it was from this point onwards when he started to rebel against his father 's strictness . he no longer studied and his grades began to drop as he became increasingly absorbed by literature . kensuke was extremely afraid of the influence of literature on his son . once , having found a literary book nakahara had hidden , he severely scolded him and , once again , confined him in the barn . it was around this time when nakahara also began to drink and smoke , making his grades go even lower . in 1923 , he failed his third-year examination . it is said that nakahara invited a friend to his study room , broke the answer sheet and chanted '' hurrah '' . the failure seems to have been deliberate . for as long as he did not fail , he was bound to remain under his strict parents ' surveillance . on the other hand , kensuke received the news with utter shock at what meant to him a deep humiliation . he resorted once more to striking his son and keeping him in the barn in the cold night of march . regardless of this , nakahara insisted on not going back to this school . this culminated in his father 's defeat , which ultimately led to an apology for his “ educational policy ” . in the light of these events , he was transferred to the ritsumeikan middle school in kyoto , where nakahara begin to live alone but still , and until the end of his days , at the expense of his family . in kyoto he found many of the influences that would ultimately shape him as a poet . he read shinkichi takahashi 's dadaist poetry , which shocked him into starting to write again . this artistic movement became a part of his poetic and life styles and later earned him the nickname “ dada-san ” . in winter he met the actress yasuko hasegawa , three years his senior , and in april 1924 they began living together . it is also in this very year when chūya became friends with fellow poet tominaga tarō . after completing junior high school , chūya and yasuko decided to follow tominaga to tokyo , on the basis of attending university there . as he was unable to take the exam due to lack of documents or being late , he was sent out by his family on the condition that he would go to a preparatory school instead . after dropping the preparatory course in 1926 , of which his parents were not informed , he started studying french at the athénée français . literary career . his verse has been considered somewhat obscure , confessional and giving a general impression of pain and melancholy , emotions which were a constant throughout the poet 's life . initially , nakahara favored poetry in the japanese traditional tanka format , but he was later ( in his teens ) attracted to the modern free verse styles advocated by dadaist poet shinkichi takahashi and by tominaga tarō . after he moved to tokyo , he met kawakami tetsutaro and shōhei ōoka , with whom he began publishing a poetry journal , hakuchigun ( group of idiots ) . he was befriended by the influential literary critic kobayashi hideo , who introduced him to the french symbolist poets arthur rimbaud and paul verlaine , whose poems he translated into japanese . the influence of rimbaud went beyond just his poetry , and nakahara came to be known for his '' bohemian '' lifestyle . nakahara adapted the traditional counts of five and seven used in japanese haiku and tanka , but frequently tripped these counts with variations , in order to obtain a rhythmical , musical effect . several of his poems were used as lyrics in songs , so this musical effect may have been carefully calculated from the start . chūya 's works were rejected by many publishers , and he found acceptance primarily with the smaller literary magazines , including yamamayu , which he launched together with hideo kobayashi , ( although on occasion shiki and bungakukai would condescend to publish one of his works ) . he remained close friends with kobayashi all of his life , despite the fact that in november 1925 yasuko hasegawa left nakahara and began living with kobayashi hideo instead . this event took place right after the loss of his friend tominaga . in december 1927 , he met composer saburō moroi , who later adapted a number of his verses to music , such as “ morning song ” and “ the hour of death ” . in april 1931 , chūya was admitted to the tokyo foreign language college in kanda to study the french language , where he remained until march 1933 . nakahara married takako ueno ( a distant relative ) in december 1933 , and his first son , fumiya , was born in october 1934 . however , the death of his son in november 1936 , due to tuberculosis , sent him into a nervous breakdown . nakahara never fully recovered from this , despite the birth of his second son in december . many of his later poems seem like remembrances and attempts to mitigate this enormous pain . nakahara was hospitalized in chiba sanatorium in january 1937 . in february , he was released and moved back to kamakura , as he could not stand to continue living in the house which contained the memories of fumiya . he left a number of his works with kobayashi , and was making plans to return to his home town of yamaguchi when he died in october 1937 , at the age of 30 , of tubercular meningitis . shortly after , his second son died of the same illness . his grave is at his hometown of yamaguchi . this is the very family grave which appears in his uncollected poem “ cicadas ” . legacy . only one of his poetry anthologies , yagi no uta ( '' goat songs '' , 1934 ) was published while he was alive ( in a self-financed edition of two hundred copies ) . he had edited a second collection , arishi hi no uta ( '' songs of bygone days '' ) just before his death . during his lifetime , nakahara was not counted among the mainstream of poets . however , the emotional and lyrical nature of his verses have a wide and increasing following even to this day , especially among young people . nakahara is now a subject of classroom study in japanese schools , and his portrait in a hat with a vacant stare is well known . kobayashi hideo , to whom nakahara entrusted the manuscript for arishi hi no uta on his deathbed , was responsible for the posthumous promotion of his works . so was ooka shohei for collecting and editing the complete works of nakahara chūya , a collection containing the poet 's uncollected poems , his journals , and many letters . a literary award , the nakahara chūya prize , was established in 1996 by yamaguchi city ( with the support of publishers seidosha and kadokawa shoten ) in chūya 's memory . the award is presented annually to an outstanding collection of contemporary poetry characterized by a '' fresh sensibility '' . the winner receives a cash award of 1 million yen , and for several years , the winning collection was also published in an english language translation , but in recent years , the administrations of the award have stopped translating the winner . the acid-folk singer kazuki tomokawa recorded two albums entitled ore no uchide nariymanai uta and nakahara chuya sakuhinnshu , using nakahara 's poems as lyrics . see also . japanese literature list of japanese authors . references . nakahara , chuya . ( beville , ry . trans . ) , poems of days past ( arishi hi no uta ) . american book company ( 2005 ) . nakahara , chuya . ( beville , ry . trans . ) , poems of the goat . american book company ( 2002 ) . nakahara , chuya , ( paul mackintosh , maki sugiyama.trans ) the poems of nakahara chūya ( 1993 ) . kurahashi , ken ’ ichi . shinso no jojo : miyazawa kenji to nakahara chuya ( miyazawa kenji ron sosho ) . yadate shuppan ; ( 1992 ) . ( japanese ) thunman , noriko . nakahara chuya and french symbolism . university of stockholm ( 1983 ) . shohei , ooka . nakahara chuya . kodansha ( 1989 ) . ( japanese ) ken , aoki . nakahara chuya - eternal autumn . kawade shobo shinsha ( 2004 ) . ( japanese ) nakahara , kurō . sea journey . shōwa shuppan ( 1976 ) ( japanese ) . external links . fan page in english and japanese nakahara chūya memorial museum in yamaguchi ( japanese site ) e-texts of chūya 's works at aozora bunko ( japanese site ) nakahara chuya chuya nakahara poems