Xanthippe

name . xanthippe means '' yellow horse '' , from '' blond '' and '' horse '' . hers is one of many greek personal names with a horse theme ( cf . philippos '' friend of horses '' , hippocrates '' horse-tamer '' etc . ) . the hippos in an ancient greek name often suggested aristocratic heritage . aristophanes , clouds 60–64 . xanthippus , e.g . , was the father of pericles . also , hippeis , literally '' horsemen '' or '' knights '' , was the name of one of the highest socio-economic classes of athens . one additional reason for thinking xanthippe 's family was socially prominent was that her eldest son was named lamprocles instead of '' sophroniscus '' after socrates ' father sophroniscus : the ancient greek custom was to name one 's first child after the more illustrious of the two grandfathers . xanthippe 's father is believed to have been named lamprocles . if he was even more well-established in athenian aristocracy than was socrates ' father , his name would have been the preferred choice for the name of the first-born son . john burnet 1911 , plato : phaedo , p . 12 . . character . plato 's portrayal of xanthippe in the phaedo suggests that she was a devoted wife and mother ; plato . phaedo , 60a–b , 116b she is mentioned nowhere else in plato . xanthippe does receive mention in two short , apocryphal pieces within the literature ascribed traditionally to plato but considered generally by scholars to be inauthentic . these come in the halcyon and the epigrams . xenophon , in his memorabilia , portrays her in much the same light , although he does make lamprocles complain of her harshness . xenophon , memorabilia , 2.2.7–9 it is only in xenophon 's symposium where we have socrates agree that she is ( in antisthenes ' words ) '' the hardest to get along with of all the women there are . '' xenophon , symposium , 2.10 nevertheless , socrates adds that he chose her precisely because of her argumentative spirit : it is the example of the rider who wishes to become an expert horseman : '' none of your soft-mouthed , docile animals for me , '' he says ; '' the horse for me to own must show some spirit '' in the belief , no doubt , if he can manage such an animal , it will be easy enough to deal with every other horse besides . and that is just my case . i wish to deal with human beings , to associate with man in general ; hence my choice of wife . i know full well , if i can tolerate her spirit , i can with ease attach myself to every human being else . xenophon , symposium 17–19 2.10 perhaps this picture of xanthippe originated with the historical antisthenes , one of socrates ' pupils , since xenophon initially puts this view into his mouth . aelian also depicts her as a jealous shrew in his description of an episode in which she tramples underfoot a large and beautiful cake sent to socrates by alcibiades . aelian , varia hist . xi.12 diogenes laërtius tells of other stories involving xanthippe 's supposed abusiveness . diogenes laërtius 2.36–37 it seems that xenophon 's portrayal of her in his symposium has been the most influential : diogenes laërtius , for example , seems to quote the symposium passage , though he does not mention xenophon by name , and the term '' xanthippe '' has now come to mean any nagging scolding person , especially a shrewish wife . later writers , such as diogenes laërtius who cite aristotle as the earliest source , say that socrates had a second wife called myrto . plutarch tells of a similar story , reporting that it comes from a work entitled on good birth , but he expresses doubt as to whether it was written by aristotle . plutarch , aristides xxvii . 3–4 in plutarch 's version of the story , socrates , who was already married , attended to myrto 's financial concerns when she became a widow ; this does not entail marriage . we have no more reliable evidence on this issue . for the relevant quotes from diogenes and plutarch , see the complete works of aristotle , edited by jonathan barnes , vol . 2 , p . 2423 . an unconfirmed anecdote purports that xanthippe was once so enraged with her husband that she took a chamber pot and poured it out over socrates ' head , which & nbsp ; – according to the tale & nbsp ; – the philosopher accepted with the allegory : '' after thunder comes the rain . '' the widely cited quote from socrates about xanthippe , '' by all means , marry . if you will get for yourself a good wife , you will be happy forever after ; and if by chance you will get a common scold like my xanthippe — why then you will become a philosopher . '' is misattributed . . literary references . in william shakespeare 's the taming of the shrew , petruchio compares katherina '' as socrates ' xanthippe or a worse '' in act 1 scene 2 . ( read here ) addison discusses matrimony in the spectator no . 482 , dated friday 12 september 1712 : the novelist henry fielding describes the shrewish mrs . partridge thus : the english victorian poet amy levy wrote a dramatic monologue called '' xantippe '' . in his poem '' an acrostic '' , edgar allan poe makes references to her although he ( allegedly purposely ) misspells her name and instead writes 'zantippe ' . frank osbaldistone , the first-person narrator of rob roy by sir walter scott ( 1817 ) , records this event : '' while i trembled lest the thunders of their wrath might dissolve in showers like that of xantippe , mrs flyter herself awoke , and began , in a tone of objurgation not unbecoming the philosophical spouse of socrates , to scold one or two loiterers in her kitchen . '' ( book 2 , chapter 7 ) in doctor thorne by anthony trollope , the author says of wives 'there may possibly have been a xantippe here and there , but imogenes are to be found under every bush . ' salomon maimon refers to a woman 's '' xanthippe-like character '' in chapter 10 of his autobiography . ( '' a widow , celebrated for her superior talents , as well as for her xanthippe-like character , kept a public house at the extremity of one of the suburbs . she had a daughter who yielded to her in none of the above-mentioned qualities , and who was indispensable to her in the management of the house . '' in episode 9 of james joyce 's ulysses ( '' scylla and charybdis '' ) john eglinton ask stephen dedalus , ″what useful discovery did socrates learn from xanthippe ? ″ ulysses , james joyce , p . 170 . wordsworth classics edition . notes for james joyce 's ulysses , don gifford with robert j seidman , revised and expanded edition , university of california press , 1988 . in his essay '' the case for xanthippe '' ( 1960 ) , robert graves suggested that the stereotype of xanthippe as a misguided shrew is emblematic of an ancient struggle between masculinity ( rationality , philosophy ) and femininity ( intuition , poetry ) , and that the rise of philosophy in socrates ' time has led to rationality and scientific pursuit coming to exercise an unreasonable dominance over human life and culture . in popular culture . xanthippe has a fairly important role in maxwell anderson 's 1951 play barefoot in athens . in the 1966 hallmark hall of fame television production , she was played by geraldine page opposite peter ustinov as socrates . in cynthia ozick 's 1997 novel , the puttermesser papers , ruth puttermesser creates a golem who insists on being called xanthippe . a fictional account of xanthippe 's relationship with her husband is presented in the play xanthippe by the british author and playwright deborah freeman . xanthippe was first produced at the brockley jack theatre , london , in 1999 . xanthippe plays a minor role in the 2018 videogame assassin 's creed : odyssey , in which socrates states that her argumentative nature is what attracted him to her , rather than her looks . in the television sitcom , unbreakable kimmy schmidt , jacqueline white 's stepdaughter is called xanthippe voorhees . honours . asteroid 156 xanthippe is named in her honour . in 1995 , p . naskrecki and r.k . colwell naskrecki , p . and r.k . colwell . 1995 . a new genus and two new species of melicharini from venezuela ( acari : mesostigmata : ascidae ) . annals of the entomological society of america 88:284–293 . gave the patronym xanthippe to a genus of flower mite that inhabits flowers of palms of the genus socratea and is probably phoretic on the beetles that pollinate the palm . a species of african white-toothed shrew was described by wilfred hudson osgood in 1910 as crocidura xantippe , common name '' xanthippe 's shrew . '' . see also . list of speakers in plato 's dialogues . references . external links .