Halifax Explosion

background . dartmouth lies on the east shore of halifax harbour , and halifax is on the west shore . by 1917 , '' halifax 's inner harbour had become a principal assembly point for merchant convoys leaving for britain and france . '' halifax and dartmouth had thrived during times of war ; the harbour was one of the british royal navy 's most important bases in north america , a centre for wartime trade , and a home to privateers who harried the british empire 's enemies during the american revolution , the napoleonic wars , and the war of 1812 . the completion of the intercolonial railway and its deep water terminal in 1880 allowed for increased steamship trade and led to accelerated development of the port area , but halifax faced an economic downturn in the 1890s as local factories lost ground to competitors in central canada . the british garrison left the city in late 1905 and early 1906 . the canadian government took over the halifax dockyard ( now cfb halifax ) from the royal navy . this dockyard later became the command centre of the royal canadian navy upon its founding in 1910 . just before the world war i , the canadian government began a determined , costly effort to develop the harbour and waterfront facilities . the outbreak of the war brought halifax back to prominence . as the royal canadian navy had virtually no seaworthy ships of its own , the royal navy assumed responsibility for maintaining atlantic trade routes by re-adopting halifax as its north american base of operations . in 1915 , management of the harbour fell under the control of the royal canadian navy under the supervision of captain superintendent edward harrington martin ; by 1917 there was a growing naval fleet in halifax , including patrol ships , tugboats , and minesweepers . the population of halifax/dartmouth had increased to between 60,000 and 65,000 people by 1917 . convoys carried men , animals , and supplies to the european theatre of war . the two main points of departure were in nova scotia at sydney , on cape breton island , and halifax . hospital ships brought the wounded to the city , and a new military hospital was constructed in the city . the success of german u-boat attacks on ships crossing the atlantic ocean led the allies to institute a convoy system to reduce losses while transporting goods and soldiers to europe . merchant ships gathered at bedford basin on the northwestern end of the harbour , which was protected by two sets of anti-submarine nets and guarded by patrol ships of the royal canadian navy . the convoys departed under the protection of british cruisers and destroyers . a large army garrison protected the city with forts , gun battery , and anti-submarine nets . these factors drove a major military , industrial , and residential expansion of the city , and the weight of goods passing through the harbour increased nearly ninefold . all neutral ships bound for ports in north america were required to report to halifax for inspection . . disaster . the norwegian ship had sailed from the netherlands en route to new york to take on relief supplies for belgium , under the command of haakon from . the ship arrived in halifax on 3 december for neutral inspection and spent two days in bedford basin awaiting refuelling supplies . though she had been given clearance to leave the port on 5 december , imos departure was delayed because her coal load did not arrive until late that afternoon . the loading of fuel was not completed until after the anti-submarine nets had been raised for the night . therefore , the vessel could not weigh anchor until the next morning . the french cargo ship arrived from new york late on 5 december , under the command of aimé le medec . the vessel was fully loaded with the explosives tnt and picric acid , the highly flammable fuel benzol and guncotton . she intended to join a slow convoy gathering in bedford basin readying to depart for europe but was too late to enter the harbour before the nets were raised . ships carrying dangerous cargo were not allowed into the harbour before the war , but the risks posed by german submarines had resulted in a relaxation of regulations . navigating into or out of bedford basin required passage through a strait called the narrows . ships were expected to keep close to the lateral mark situated on their starboard ( '' right '' ) , and pass oncoming vessels '' port to port '' , that is to keep them on their '' left '' side . ships were restricted to a speed of within the harbour . collision and fire . first rescue efforts came from surviving neighbours and co-workers who pulled and dug out victims from buildings . the initial informal response was soon joined by surviving policemen , firefighters and military personnel who began to arrive , as did anyone with a working vehicle ; cars , trucks and delivery wagons of all kinds were enlisted to collect the wounded . a flood of victims soon began to arrive at the city 's hospitals , which were quickly overwhelmed . the new military hospital , camp hill , admitted approximately 1,400 victims on 6 december . firefighters were among the first to respond to the disaster , rushing to mont-blanc to attempt to extinguish the blaze before the explosion even occurred . they also played a role after the blast , with fire companies arriving to assist from across halifax , and by the end of the day from as far away as amherst , nova scotia , and moncton , new brunswick , on relief trains . halifax fire department 's west street station 2 was the first to arrive at pier 6 with the crew of the patricia , the first motorized fire engine in canada . in the final moments before the explosion , hoses were being unrolled as the fire spread to the docks . nine members of the halifax fire department lost their lives performing their duty that day . royal navy cruisers in port sent some of the first organized rescue parties ashore . hms highflyer , along with the armed merchant cruisers hms changuinola , hms knight templar and hms calgarian , sent boats ashore with rescue parties and medical personnel and soon began to take wounded aboard . a us coast guard cutter , , also sent a rescue party ashore . out at sea , the american cruiser uss tacoma and armed merchant cruiser uss von steuben ( formerly ss kronprinz wilhelm ) were passing halifax en route to the united states . tacoma was rocked so severely by the blast wave that her crew went to general quarters . spotting the large and rising column of smoke , tacoma altered course and arrived to assist rescue at 2 & nbsp ; pm . von steuben arrived a half-hour later . the american steamship old colony , docked in halifax for repairs , suffered little damage and was quickly converted to serve as a hospital ship , staffed by doctors and orderlies from the british and american navy vessels in the harbour . dazed survivors immediately feared that the explosion was the result of a bomb dropped from a german plane . troops at gun batteries and barracks immediately turned out in case the city was under attack , but within an hour switched from defence to rescue roles as the cause and location of the explosion were determined . all available troops were called in from harbour fortifications and barracks to the north end to rescue survivors and provide transport to the city 's hospitals , including the two army hospitals in the city . adding to the chaos were fears of a potential second explosion . a cloud of steam shot out of ventilators at the ammunition magazine at wellington barracks as naval personnel extinguished a fire by the magazine . the fire was quickly put out ; the cloud was seen from blocks away and quickly led to rumours that another explosion was imminent . uniformed officers ordered everyone away from the area . as the rumour spread across the city , many families fled their homes . the confusion hampered efforts for over two hours until fears were dispelled by about noon . many rescuers ignored the evacuation , and naval rescue parties continued working uninterrupted at the harbour . surviving railway workers in the railyards at the heart of the disaster carried out rescue work , pulling people from the harbour and from under debris . the overnight train from saint john was just approaching the city when hit by the blast but was only slightly damaged . it continued into richmond until the track was blocked by wreckage . passengers and soldiers aboard used the emergency tools from the train to dig people out of houses and bandaged them with sheets from the sleeping cars . the train was loaded with injured and left the city at 1:30 with a doctor aboard , to evacuate the wounded to truro . led by lieutenant governor maccallum grant , leading citizens formed the halifax relief commission at around noon . the committee organized members in charge of organizing medical relief for both halifax and dartmouth , supplying transportation , food and shelter , and covering medical and funeral costs for victims . the commission would continue until 1976 , participating in reconstruction and relief efforts and later distributing pensions to survivors . men and women turned out to serve as everything from hospital aides to shelter staff , while children contributed to the relief effort by carrying messages from site to site . community facilities like the ymca were rapidly converted to emergency hospital facilities with medical students providing care . rescue trains were dispatched from across atlantic canada , as well as the northeastern united states . the first left truro around 10 & nbsp ; am carrying medical personnel and supplies , arrived in halifax by noon and returned to truro with the wounded and homeless by 3 & nbsp ; pm . the track had become impassable after rockingham , on the western edge of bedford basin . to reach the wounded , rescue personnel had to walk through parts of the devastated city until they reached a point where the military had begun to clear the streets . by nightfall , a dozen trains had reached halifax from the nova scotian towns of truro , kentville , amherst , stellarton , pictou , and sydney and from the new brunswick towns of sackville , moncton and saint john . relief efforts were hampered the following day by a blizzard that blanketed halifax with of heavy snow . trains en route from other parts of canada and from the united states were stalled in snowdrifts , and telegraph lines that had been hastily repaired following the explosion were again knocked down . halifax was isolated by the storm , and rescue committees were forced to suspend the search for survivors ; the storm aided efforts to put out fires throughout the city . . destruction and loss of life . the exact number killed by the disaster is unknown . the halifax explosion remembrance book , an official database of the nova scotia archives and records management , identified 1,782 victims . as many as 1,600 people died immediately in the blast , tsunami , and collapse of buildings . the last body , a caretaker killed at the exhibition grounds , was not recovered until the summer of 1919 . an additional 9,000 were injured . 1,630 homes were destroyed in the explosion and fires , and another 12,000 damaged ; roughly 6,000 people were left homeless and 25,000 had insufficient shelter . the city 's industrial sector was in large part gone , with many workers among the casualties and the dockyard heavily damaged . a mortuary committee chaired by alderman r . b . coldwell was quickly formed at halifax city hall on the morning of the disaster . the chebucto road school ( now the maritime conservatory of performing arts ) in west end , halifax was chosen as a central morgue . a company of the royal canadian engineers ( rce ) repaired and converted the basement of the school to serve as a morgue and classrooms to serve as offices for the halifax coroner . trucks and wagons soon began to arrive with bodies . coroner arthur s . barnstead took over from coldwell as the morgue went into operation and implemented a system to carefully number and describe bodies ; it was based on the system developed by his father , john henry barnstead , to identify victims in 1912 . many of the wounds inflicted by the blast were permanently debilitating , such as those caused by flying glass or by the flash of the explosion . thousands of people had stopped to watch the ship burning in the harbour , many from inside buildings , leaving them directly in the path of glass fragments from shattered windows . roughly 5,900 eye injuries were reported , and 41 people lost their sight permanently . an estimated c 35 million in damage resulted ( c million today ) . about 30 million in financial aid was raised from various sources , including 18 million from the federal government , over 4 million from the british government , and 750,000 from the commonwealth of massachusetts . . dartmouth . dartmouth was not as densely populated as halifax and was separated from the blast by the width of the harbour , but still suffered heavy damage . almost 100 people were estimated to have died on the dartmouth side . windows were shattered and many buildings were damaged or destroyed , including the oland brewery and parts of the starr manufacturing company . nova scotia hospital was the only hospital in dartmouth and many of the victims were treated there . mi'kmaq settlement . there were small enclaves of mi'kmaq in and around the coves of bedford basin on the dartmouth shore . directly opposite to pier 9 on the halifax side sat a community in tufts cove , also known as turtle grove . the settlement , dating back to the 18th century , had been a subject of controversy because white settler landowners wanted to remove the mi'kmaq residents . in the years and months preceding the explosion , the department of indian affairs had been actively trying to force the mi'kmaq to give up their land , but this had not occurred by the time of the explosion . the fire aboard mont-blanc drew the attention of many onlookers on both sides of the harbour . the physical structures of the settlement were obliterated by the explosion and tsunami . a precise mi'kmaq death toll is unknown ; records show that nine bodies were recovered , and the settlement was not rebuilt in the wake of the disaster . the halifax remembrance book lists 16 members of the tufts cove community as dead ; not all the dead listed as in tufts cove were indigenous . survivors were housed in a racially segregated building under generally poor conditions and eventually dispersed around nova scotia . . africville . the black community of africville , on the southern shores of bedford basin adjacent to the halifax peninsula , was spared the direct force of the blast by the shadow effect of the raised ground to the south . africville 's small and frail homes were heavily damaged by the explosion . families recorded the deaths of five residents . a combination of persistent racism and a growing conviction that africville should be demolished to make way for industrial development resulted in the people of africville receiving no police or fire protection ; they had to make do without water mains and sewer lines , despite paying city taxes . africville received little of the donated relief funds and none of the progressive reconstruction invested in other parts of the city after the explosion . . investigation . many people in halifax at first believed the explosion to be the result of a german attack . the halifax herald continued to propagate this belief for some time , for example reporting that germans had mocked victims of the explosion . while john johansen , the norwegian helmsman of imo , was being treated for serious injuries sustained during the explosion , it was reported to the military police that he had been behaving suspiciously . johansen was arrested on suspicions of being a german spy when a search turned up a letter on his person , supposedly written in german . it turned out that the letter was actually written in norwegian . immediately following the explosion , most of the german survivors in halifax had been rounded up and imprisoned . eventually the fear dissipated as the real cause of the explosion became known , although rumours of german involvement persisted . a judicial inquiry known as the wreck commissioner 's inquiry was formed to investigate the causes of the collision . proceedings began at the halifax court house on 13 december 1917 , presided over by justice arthur drysdale . the inquiry 's report of 4 february 1918 blamed mont-blancs captain , aimé le médec , the ship 's pilot , francis mackey , and commander f . evan wyatt , the royal canadian navy 's chief examining officer in charge of the harbour , gates and anti-submarine defences , for causing the collision . drysdale agreed with dominion wreck commissioner l . a . demers ' opinion that '' it was the mont-blancs responsibility alone to ensure that she avoided a collision at all costs '' given her cargo ; he was likely influenced by local opinion , which was strongly anti-french , as well as by the '' street fighter '' style of argumentation used by imo lawyer charles burchell . according to crown counsel w . a . henry , this was '' a great surprise to most people '' , who had expected the imo to be blamed for being on the wrong side of the channel . all three men were charged with manslaughter and criminal negligence at a preliminary hearing heard by stipendiary magistrate richard a . mcleod , and bound over for trial . a nova scotia supreme court justice , benjamin russell , found there was no evidence to support these charges . mackey was discharged on a writ of habeas corpus and the charges dropped . because the pilot and the captain were arrested on the same warrant , the charges against le médec were also dismissed . on 17 april 1918 , a jury acquitted wyatt in a trial that lasted less than a day . drysdale also oversaw the first civil litigation trial , in which the owners of the two ships sought damages from each other . his decision ( 27 april 1918 ) found mont-blanc entirely at fault . subsequent appeals to the supreme court of canada ( 19 may 1919 ) , and the judicial committee of the privy council in london ( 22 march 1920 ) , determined mont-blanc and imo were equally to blame for navigational errors that led to the collision . no party was ever convicted for any crime or otherwise successfully prosecuted for any actions that precipitated the disaster . . reconstruction . efforts began shortly after the explosion to clear debris , repair buildings , and establish temporary housing for survivors left homeless by the explosion . by late january 1918 , around 5,000 were still without shelter . a reconstruction committee under colonel robert low constructed 832 new housing units , which were furnished by the massachusetts-halifax relief fund . partial train service resumed from a temporary rail terminal in the city 's south end on 7 december . full service resumed on 9 december when tracks were cleared and the north street station reopened . the canadian government railways created a special unit to clear and repair railway yards as well as rebuild railway piers and the naval dockyard . most piers returned to operation by late december and were repaired by january . the north end halifax neighbourhood of richmond bore the brunt of the explosion . in 1917 , richmond was considered a working-class neighbourhood and had few paved roads . after the explosion , the halifax relief commission approached the reconstruction of richmond as an opportunity to improve and modernize the city 's north end . english town planner thomas adams and montreal architectural firm ross and macdonald were recruited to design a new housing plan for richmond . adams , inspired by the victorian garden city movement , aimed to provide public access to green spaces and to create a low-rise , low-density and multifunctional urban neighbourhood . the planners designed 326 large homes that each faced a tree-lined , paved boulevard . they specified that the homes be built with a new and innovative fireproof material , blocks of compressed cement called hydrostone . the first of these homes was occupied by march 1919 . once finished , the hydrostone neighbourhood consisted of homes , businesses and parks , which helped create a new sense of community in the north end of halifax . it has now become an upscale neighbourhood and shopping district . in contrast , the equally poor and underdeveloped area of africville was not included in reconstruction efforts . every building in the halifax dockyard required some degree of rebuilding , as did hmcs niobe and the docks themselves ; all of the royal canadian navy 's minesweepers and patrol boats were undamaged . prime minister robert borden pledged that the government would be '' co-operating in every way to reconstruct the port of halifax : this was of utmost importance to the empire '' . captain symington of uss tacoma speculated that the port would not be operational for months , but a convoy departed on 11 december and dockyard operations resumed before christmas . legacy . the halifax explosion was one of the largest artificial non-nuclear explosions . an extensive comparison of 130 major explosions by halifax historian jay white in 1994 concluded that it '' remains unchallenged in overall magnitude as long as five criteria are considered together : number of casualties , force of blast , radius of devastation , quantity of explosive material , and total value of property destroyed . '' for many years afterward , the halifax explosion was the standard by which all large blasts were measured . for instance , in its report on the atomic bombing of hiroshima , time wrote that the explosive power of the little boy bomb was seven times that of the halifax explosion . the many eye injuries resulting from the disaster led to better understanding on the part of physicians of how to care for damaged eyes , and '' with the recently formed canadian national institute for the blind , halifax became internationally known as a centre for care for the blind '' , according to dalhousie university professor victoria allen . the lack of coordinated pediatric care in such a disaster was also noted by william ladd , a surgeon from boston who had arrived to help . his insights from the explosion are generally credited with inspiring him to pioneer the specialty of pediatric surgery in north america . the halifax explosion also inspired a series of health reforms , including around public sanitation and maternity care . the event was traumatic for the whole surviving community , so the memory was largely suppressed . after the first anniversary , the city stopped commemorating the explosion for decades . the second official commemoration did not take place before the 50th anniversary in 1967 , and even after that , the activities stopped again . construction began in 1964 on the halifax north memorial library , designed to commemorate the victims of the explosion . the library entrance featured the first monument built to mark the explosion , the halifax explosion memorial sculpture , created by artist jordi bonet . the sculpture was dismantled by the halifax regional municipality in 2004 and largely destroyed while in storage . in 2015 , the remaining fragments were shipped to bonet 's family in montreal despite a public campaign to return the sculpture to memorial display . '' mainstreet '' , cbc radio , 7 february 2018 the halifax explosion memorial bells were built in 1985 , relocating memorial carillon bells from a nearby church to a large concrete sculpture on fort needham hill , facing the '' ground zero '' area of the explosion . the bell tower is the location of an annual civic ceremony every 6 december . a memorial at the halifax fire station on lady hammond road honours the firefighters killed while responding to the explosion . fragments of mont-blanc have been mounted as neighbourhood monuments to the explosion at albro lake road in dartmouth , at regatta point , and elsewhere in the area . simple monuments mark the mass graves of explosion victims at the fairview lawn cemetery and the bayers road cemetery . a memorial book listing the names of all the known victims is displayed at the halifax north memorial library and at the maritime museum of the atlantic , which has a large permanent exhibit about the halifax explosion . harold gilman was commissioned to create a painting memorializing the event ; his work , halifax harbour at sunset , '' tells very little about the recent devastation , as the viewpoint is set back so that the harbour appears undisturbed '' . hugh maclennan 's novel barometer rising ( 1941 ) is set in halifax at the time of the explosion and includes a carefully researched description of its impact on the city . following in maclennan 's footsteps , journalist robert macneil penned burden of desire ( 1992 ) and used the explosion as a metaphor for the societal and cultural changes of the day . maclennan and macneil 's use of the romance genre to fictionalize the explosion is similar to the first attempt by lieutenant-colonel frank mckelvey bell , author of the short novella a romance of the halifax disaster ( 1918 ) . this work follows the love affair of a young woman and an injured soldier . keith ross leckie scripted a miniseries entitled shattered city : the halifax explosion ( 2003 ) , which took the title but has no relationship to janet kitz 's non-fiction book shattered city : the halifax explosion and the road to recovery ( 1990 ) . the film was criticized for distortions and inaccuracies . in 1918 , halifax sent a christmas tree to the city of boston in thanks and remembrance for the help that the boston red cross and the massachusetts public safety committee provided immediately after the disaster . that gift was revived in 1971 by the lunenburg county christmas tree producers association , which began an annual donation of a large tree to promote christmas tree exports as well as acknowledge boston 's support after the explosion . the gift was later taken over by the nova scotia government to continue the goodwill gesture as well as to promote trade and tourism . the tree is boston christmas tree and is lit on boston common throughout the holiday season . in deference to its symbolic importance for both cities , the nova scotia department of natural resources has specific guidelines for selecting the tree and has tasked an employee to oversee the selection . . see also . list of accidents and incidents involving transport or storage of ammunition black tom explosion of 1916 port chicago disaster in world war ii bombay explosion ( 1944 ) , explosion on a ship in bombay harbour texas city disaster , involving a french-registered ship carrying explosive cargo explosion of the rfa bedenham , explosion of an ammunition ship in the port of gibraltar ripple rock . footnotes . general . . further reading . . external links . heritage minutes : halifax explosion the maritime museum of the atlantic halifax explosion web page a vision of regeneration , the explosion and reconstruction by the nova scotia archives podcast from library and archives canada think like a historian : the halifax explosion historica canada video series . eyewitness account of the halifax explosion the washington times december 19,1917 p.8