Tibullus

life . tibullus 's chief friend and patron was marcus valerius messalla corvinus , himself an orator and poet as well as a statesman and a commander . messalla , like gaius maecenas , was at the centre of a literary circle in rome . this circle had no relationship with the court , and the name of augustus is found nowhere in the writings of tibullus . about 30 bc messalla was dispatched by augustus to gaul to quell a rising in aquitania and restore order in the country , and tibullus may have been in his retinue . on a later occasion , probably in 28 , he would have accompanied his friend who had been sent on a mission to the east , but he fell sick and had to stay behind in corcyra . tibullus had no liking for war , and though his life seems to have been divided between rome and his country estate , his own preferences were wholly for the country life . the loss of tibullus 's landed property is attested by himself ( i.1 , 19 ) , as a farmer '' felicis quondam , nunc pauperis agri '' ( '' of a once fruitful , now impoverished field '' ; cf . 41 , 42 ) . its cause is only an inference , though a very probable one . that he was allowed to retain a portion of his estate with the family mansion is clear from ii.4 , 53 . tibullus may have been messalla 's contubernalis in the aquitanian war ( vita tib . and tib . i.7 , 9 seq . , a poem composed for messalla 's triumph ) , and may have received dona militaria ( vita tib . ) . tibullus died prematurely , probably in 19 , and almost immediately after virgil . his death made a deep impression in rome , as is clear from his contemporary , domitius marsus , and from the elegy in which ovid ovid , amores , iii.9 . enshrined the memory of his predecessor . extant works . first book of poetry . tibullus 's first book consists of poems written at various times between 30 and 26 . his first love , the subject of book i . , is called delia in the poems , but apuleius apuleius , apol . 10 . reveals that her real name was plania . as regards her station , it should be noticed that she was not entitled to wear the stola , the dress of roman matrons ( i . 6 , 68 ) . her husband is mentioned as absent ( i . 2 , 67 seq . ) . she eludes the custodes placed over her ( i . 2 , 15 and 6 , 7 ) . tibullus 's suit was favoured by delia 's mother , of whom he speaks in very affectionate terms ( i . 6 , 57 seq . ) . for tibullus 's illness at corcyra , see i . 3 , i seq . , 55 seq . the fifth elegy was written during estrangement ( discidium ) , and the sixth after the return of the husband and during delia 's double infidelity . it is impossible to give an exact account of the intimacy . the poems which refer to her are arranged in no chronological order . sometimes she appears as single , sometimes as married ; but we hear nothing either of her marriage or of her husband 's death . yet it is clear that it was the absence of her husband on military service in cilicia which gave tibullus the opportunity to see her , and he continued to do so when the husband returned . delia was clever in deception—too clever , as tibullus saw when he found that he was not the only lover . his entreaties and appeals were of no avail ; and after the first book no more is heard of delia . in addition , several elegies in book i concern themselves with tibullus 's love for a boy , who is named marathus . . the marathus cycle . the three poems centered on marathus constitute the longest poetic project in roman literature having homosexual love as theme . the first of these poems , 1.4 , begins with an imprecation of the poet to the god priapus , asking for advice on how to win over beautiful boys . the god advises patience and that the man in love yield to the beloved boy 's every whim and perform a series of services if the boy demands it ( 1.4.15–53 ) . at first the narrator of the poem presents himself as someone who is simply asking for advice from the god on behalf of a friend who fell in love with a boy but whose wife forbids such affairs ( 1.4.73 ) . he later portrays himself as a teacher in the affairs of love , declaring that the doors of his house are open for other men in love with boys to ask his advice ( 1.4.78 ) . in the end lines , however , he confesses to loving a boy named marathus , who tortures him with '' love 's delay '' ( 1.4.81 ) and whom the narrator can not conquer with his arts , causing other men to laugh at his lessons ( 1.4.83 ) . the cycle is resumed in poem 1.8 , in which the narrator learns that marathus is in love with a girl . the narrator advises the girl to treat marathus with more leniency than marathus treated the narrator himself ( 1.8.49 ) . the narrator accompanies marathus to the girl 's house , carrying a torch to light the path at night , bribes her so that she meets marathus , and talks the boy up to the girl ( this is described in more detail the next poem , 1.9 , lines 41–44 ) . this poem can be seen as part of the narrator 's efforts to win marathus ' goodwill by performing a series of humiliating tasks for him , exceeding the god 's counsel to perform hard physical labors for the lad , by also helping him carry on an affairs with someone else . in the poem that ends the cycle , 1.9 , the narrator discovers that marathus is in a relationship with a much older married man who buys the young man 's affections through expensive gifts . initially , the narrator asks the gods for compassion towards marathus ( 1.9.5–6 ) , who betrayed a promise he had made to the narrator , but soon love yields to bitterness , and he begins to express the desire that the gifts of the rival lover turn to ashes ( 1.9.11–12 ) and that the same happen to the poems that the narrator wrote to marathus to win him over ( 1.9.48–49 ) , of which he is now ashamed . he turns to the rival , taking revenge on him for having stolen her boyfriend by describing in detail the affair that the rival 's wife is herself having with another boy ( 1.9.54–58 and 65–74 ) . finally , the poet addresses marathus , telling him that he will cry when he sees the poet fall in love with another capricious lad ( 1.9.79–80 ) , but declaring himself , for the moment being , finally released from unfaithful love . second book of poetry . about the second book , scholars can only say that in all likelihood it was published before the poet 's death in 19 bc . it is very short , containing only 428 verses , and apparently incomplete . in the second book the place of delia is taken by '' nemesis '' , which is also a fictitious name . nemesis ( like the cynthia of propertius ) was probably a courtesan of the higher class ; and she had other admirers besides tibullus . he complains bitterly of his bondage , and of her rapacity and hard-heartedness . in spite of all , however , she seems to have retained her hold on him until his death . ovid , writing at the time of tibullus 's death , says : ovid , amores , iii.9 , 31-32 . '' sic nemesis longum , sic delia nomen habebunt , / altera cura recens , altera primus amor . '' ( '' thus nemesis and delia will be long remembered : one tibullus ' recent love , the other his first . '' ) . nemesis is the subject of book ii.3 , 4 , 6 . the mention of a una ( ii.6 ) settles her position . the connection had lasted a year when ii.5 was written ( see ver . 109 ) . it is worth noticing that martial selects nemesis as the source of tibullus 's reputation . martial , viii.73 , 7 ; cf . xiv.193 . . style of writing . though the character of tibullus the historical man is unclear , the character of his poetic persona is reflected in his works . he was an amiable man of generous impulses and unselfish disposition , loyal to his friends to the verge of self-sacrifice ( as is shown by his leaving delia to accompany messalla to asia ) , and apparently constant to his mistresses . his tenderness towards them is enhanced by a refinement and delicacy which are rare among the ancients . when treated cruelly by his love , he does not invoke curses upon her head . instead he goes to her little sister 's grave , hung so often with his garlands and wet with his tears , to bemoan his fate . his ideal is a quiet retirement in the country with the loved one at his side . he has no ambition and not even a poet 's yearning for immortality . in an age of crude materialism and gross superstition , he was religious in the old roman way . his clear , finished and yet unaffected style made him a great favourite and placed him , in the judgment of quintilian , ahead of other elegy writers . for natural grace and tenderness , for exquisiteness of feeling and expression , he stands alone . he rarely overloads his lines with alexandrian learning . however , his range is limited . tibullus is smoother and more musical , but liable to become monotonous ; propertius , with occasional harshnesses , is more vigorous and varied . in many of tibullus 's poems a symmetrical composition can be traced . specimens of tibullus at his best may be found in i . i , 3 , 89-94 ; 5 , 19-36 ; 9 , 45-68 ; ii . 6 . quintilian says , quintilian , institutio oratoria x . i , 93 . '' elegia quoque graecos provocamus , cuius mihi tersus atque elegans maxime videtur auctor tibullus ; sunt qui propertium malint ; ovidius utroque lascivior , sicut durior gallus . '' ( '' in elegy as well we rival the greeks ; of whom for me the author tibullus seems the most polished and elegant ; there are those who prefer propertius ; ovid is more wanton than either , just as gallus is more stern . '' ) . questionable attributions . some of the genuine poems of tibullus have been lost . on the other hand , much of the work attributed to him is that of others . only the first and second books can uncontroversially claim his authorship . in both books occur poems which give evidence of internal disorder ; but scholars can not agree upon the remedies to be applied . third book of poetry . the third book , which contains 290 verses , is by a much inferior hand . the writer calls himself lygdamus and the love that he sings of neaera . he has little poetical power , and his style is meagre and jejune . he has a good many reminiscences and imitations of tibullus , propertius propertius , iii . 5 , 1520 . and ovid , ovid , ars . am . ii . 669 seq . ; tr . iv . 10 , 6 ; and am . xi . 14 , 23 seq . and they are not always happy . it is unknown when his poems were added to the genuine poems of tibullus . fourth book of poetry . the separation of the fourth book from the third has no ancient authority . it dates from the revival of letters , and is due to the italian scholars of the 15th century . the fourth book consists of poems of very different quality . the first is a composition in 211 hexameters on the achievements of messalla , and is very poor . the author is unknown ; but he was certainly not tibullus . the poem itself was written in 31 , the year of messalla 's consulship . the next eleven poems relate to the loves of sulpicia and cerinthus . sulpicia was a roman lady of high station and , according to moritz haupt 's conjecture , the daughter of valeria , messalla 's sister . the sulpicia elegies divide into two groups . the first comprises iv . 2-6 , containing ninety-four lines , in which the theme of the attachment is worked up into five graceful poems . the second , iv . 8-12 , consists of sulpicia 's own letters . they are very short , only forty lines in all ; but they have a unique interest as being the only love poems by a roman woman that have survived . their frank and passionate outpourings remind us of catullus . the style and metrical handling was originally understood to be that of a novice , or a male poet appropriating female form . later analysis has concluded that sulpicia is an adept poet with a very high level of skill , playing upon gender norms in the celebration of her erotic relationship and play upon her '' fama '' as a poet and a woman of high status . the thirteenth poem ( twenty-four lines ) claims to be by tibullus ; but it is hardly more than a cento from tibullus and propertius . the fourteenth is a little epigram of four lines with nothing to determine its authorship . last of all comes the epigram or fragment of domitius marsus already referred to . some scholars attribute iii . 8-12 - iv . 2-6 to tibullus himself ; but the style is different , and it is best to answer the question , as biihrens does , with a non liquet . the direct ascription of iii . 19 - iv . 13 ( verse 13 , '' nunc licet e caelo mittatur amica tibullo '' - '' now grant that a lover be sent from heaven to tibullus '' ) to tibullus probably led to its inclusion in the collection and later on to the addition of the third book to the two genuine ones . for the evidence against the ascription , see postgate . postgate , selections , app . c . to sum up : the third and fourth books appear in the oldest tradition as a single book , and they comprise pieces by different authors in different styles , none of which can be assigned to tibullus with any certainty . the natural conclusion is that a collection of scattered compositions , relating to messalla and the members of his circle , was added as an appendix to the genuine relics of tibullus . when this '' messalla collection '' was made can not be exactly determined ; but it was definitely not till after the death of tibullus , 19 bc , and perhaps as late as the late 1st century ad . besides the foregoing , two pieces in the collection called priapea ( one an epigram and the other a longer piece in iambics ) have been attributed to tibullus ; but there is little external and no internal evidence of his authorship . cf . hiller in hermes , xviii . 343–349 . charisius charisius , pp . & nbsp ; 66 and 105 . quotes part of a hexameter which is not found in the extant poems of tibullus . the vita tibulli . the value of the short vita tibulli , found at the end of the ambrosian , vatican and inferior manuscripts , has been much discussed . there is little in it that we could not infer from tibullus himself and from what horace says about albius , though it is possible that its compiler may have taken some of his statements from suetonius 's book de poetis . it is another moot question of some importance whether our poet should be identified with the albius of horace , horace , od . i . 33 and epist . i . 4 . as is done by the horatian commentator pomponius porphyrion ( ad 200-250 ) in his scholia . porphyrio 's view was examined by postgate . postgate , selections from tibullus , appendix a . . manuscripts . the best manuscript of tibullus is the ambrosianus ( a ) , which has been dated , whose earliest known owner was the humanist coluccio salutati . two early 15th-century manuscripts are paris lat . 7989 ( written in florence in 1423 ) and the vatican ms . ottob . lat . 1202 ( also written in florence , 1426 ) . these form only a small share of the over 100 renaissance manuscripts . there are also a number of extracts from tibullus in florilegium gallicum , an anthology from various latin writers collected in the mid-twelfth century , and a few extracts in the excerpta frisingensia , preserved in a manuscript now at munich . also excerpts from the lost fragmentum cuiacianum , made by scaliger , and now in the library at leiden are of importance for their independence of a . it contained the part from 3.4.65 to the end , useful as fragments go as the other manuscripts lack 3.4.65 . the codex cuiacianus , a late manuscript containing catullus , tibullus and propertius , is still extant . editions . tibullus was first printed with catullus , propertius , and the silvae of statius by vindelinus de spira ( venice , 1472 ) , and separately by florentius de argentina , probably in the same year . amongst other editions are those by scaliger ( with catullus and propertius , 1577 , etc . ) , broukhusius ( 1708 ) , vulpius ( 1749 ) , heyne ( 1817 , 4th ed . by wunderlich , with supplement by dissen , 1819 ) , huschke ( 1819 ) , lachmann ( 1829 ) , dissen ( 1835 ) . among more modern editions emil baehrens ( 1878 , the first of the modern critical editions ) has outlived his contemporaries lucian müller ( 1870 ) , heinrich dittrich ( 1881 ) , edward hiller ( 1885 ) and john percival postgate ( 1905 ) . guy lee 's edition and translation of books 1-2 ( cambridge , 1975 ) is based on a fresh collation of a . of the commentaries heyne 's and huschke 's are still of value . the greater part of the poems are included in postgate 's selections ( with english notes , 1903 ) . a history of later contributions is given in augustin cartault 's a propos du corpus tibullianum ( 1906 ; not quite complete ) ; see also his tibulle et les auteurs du corpus tibullianum ( paris , 1909 ) . for further information see the accounts in teuffel 's history of roman literature ( translated by warr ) , martin schanz 's geschichte der romischen litteratur , and f . marx 's article s.v . '' albius '' , in pauly-wissowa 's realencyclopädie . critiques . scholar francis cairns regards tibullus as '' a good poet but not a great one '' ; dorothea wender similarly calls him a minor poet but argues there is '' grace and polish and symmetry '' to his work .