Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer

publication history . robert l . may created rudolph in 1939 as an assignment for chicago-based montgomery ward . the retailer had been buying and giving away coloring books for christmas every year and it was decided that creating their own book would save money . robert may considered naming the reindeer '' rollo '' or '' reginald '' before deciding upon using the name '' rudolph '' . may said his daughter liked reindeer , and he said he was treated like rudolph as a child . in its first year of publication , montgomery ward distributed 2.4 million copies of rudolph 's story . the story is written as a poem in anapestic tetrameter , the same meter as '' a visit from st . nicholas '' ( also known as '' 't was the night before christmas '' ) . publication and reprint rights for the book rudolph the red-nosed reindeer are controlled by pearson plc . while may was pondering how best to craft a christmas story about a reindeer , while staring out his office window in downtown chicago , a thick fog from lake michigan blocked his view—giving him a flash of inspiration . '' suddenly i had it ! '' he recalled . '' a nose ! a bright red nose that would shine through fog like a spotlight . '' the cultural significance of a red nose has changed since the story 's publication . in 1930s popular culture , a bright red nose was closely associated with chronic alcoholism and drunkards , so the story idea was initially rejected . may asked his illustrator friend at montgomery ward , denver gillen , to draw '' cute reindeer '' , using zoo deer as models . the alert , bouncy character gillen developed convinced management to support the idea . maxton books published the first mass-market edition of rudolph in 1947 and a sequel , rudolph the red-nosed reindeer shines again , in 1954 . in 1992 , applewood books published rudolph 's second christmas , an unpublished sequel that robert may wrote in 1947 . in 2003 , penguin books issued a reprint version of the original rudolph the red-nosed reindeer with new artwork by lisa papp . penguin also reprinted may 's sequels , rudolph shines again and rudolph 's second christmas ( now retitled rudolph to the rescue ) . . story . the story chronicles the experiences of rudolph , a youthful reindeer buck ( male ) who possesses an unusual luminous red nose . mocked and excluded by his peers because of this trait , rudolph proves himself one christmas eve with poor visibility due to inclement weather . after santa claus catches sight of rudolph 's nose and asks rudolph to lead his sleigh for the evening , rudolph agrees and is finally favored by his fellow reindeer for his heroism and accomplishment . in media . theatrical cartoon short ( 1948 ) . rudolph made his first screen appearance in 1948 , in a cartoon short produced by max fleischer for the jam handy corporation that was more faithful to may 's original story than marks ' song , which had not yet been written . it was reissued in 1951 with the song added . . song ( 1949 ) . may 's brother-in-law , johnny marks , adapted the story of rudolph into a song . gene autry 's recording of the song hit no . 1 on the billboard pop singles chart the week of christmas 1949 . autry 's recording sold 2.5 million copies the first year , eventually selling a total of 25 million , and it remained the second best-selling record of all time until the 1980s . . comic books ( beginning in 1950 ) . dc comics , then known as national periodical publications , published a series of 13 annuals titled rudolph the red-nosed reindeer from 1950 to 1962 . and rube grossman drew most of the 1950s stories . in 1972 , dc comics published a 14th edition in an extra-large format . subsequently , they published six more in that format : limited collectors ' edition c-24 , c-33 , c-42 , c-50 limited collectors ' edition c-20 , c-24 , c-33 , c-42 , and c-50 at the grand comics database and all-new collectors ' edition c-53 , c-60 . all-new collectors ' edition c-53 and c-60 at the grand comics database additionally , one digest format edition was published as the best of dc 4 ( march–april 1980 ) . the 1970s rudolph stories were written and drawn by sheldon mayer . . children 's book ( 1958 ) . in 1958 , little golden books published an illustrated storybook , adapted by barbara shook hazen and illustrated by richard scarry . the book , similar in story to the max fleischer cartoon short , is no longer in print , but a revised little golden books version of the storybook was reissued in 1972 . . stop-motion animation television special ( 1964 ) and sequels ( 1976–1979 ) . perhaps the most well-known version of all the rudolph adaptations is new york-based rankin/bass productions ' christmas television special in 1964 . filmed in stop-motion '' animagic '' at tadahito mochinaga 's mom productions in tokyo , japan , with the screenplay written by romeo muller and all sound recordings ( with supervision by bernard cowan ) done at the rca studios in toronto , ontario , canada , the show premiered on nbc . as the producers of the special , arthur rankin , jr . and jules bass , only had the song as source material and did not have a copy of the original book , they interpolated an original story around the central narrative of the song , one that differed from the book . this re-telling chronicles rudolph 's social rejection among his peers and his decision to run away from home . rudolph is accompanied by a similarly outcast elf named hermey , who skipped elf practice to become a dentist , along with a loud , boisterous , eager prospector named yukon cornelius who was in search of wealth . additional original characters include rudolph 's love interest , clarice ; the antagonistic '' abominable snow monster of the north '' ; and , as narrator , sam the living snowman , voiced by burl ives . in the 1964 stop-motion movie , rudolph is born to donner the reindeer and donner 's wife . he is discovered by santa to have a shiny , glowing red nose . for a while he hides this quality that makes him different , but when his nose is discovered and he is ostracized , rudolph runs away with hermey , an elf who also considers himself a misfit . on their aimless journey , they run into yukon cornelius , and attempt to stay away from the bumble , a huge yeti . their journey leads them to the island of misfit toys , where sentient but unorthodox toys go when they are abandoned by their owners . when rudolph returns , he discovers his family went to look for him and must be rescued . then santa announces that due to bad weather christmas must be cancelled . santa changes his mind when he notices rudolph 's red nose and asks rudolph to lead the sleigh team , which he happily accepts . after the story 's initial broadcast , its closing credits were revised . images of wrapped presents being dropped from santa 's sleigh were replaced by a scene in which santa stops to pick up the misfit toys and delivers them to the homes of children below via umbrellas ( with the exception of the misfit toy bird that swims but does n't fly who is dropped to its destruction ) . the changes were prompted by viewer feedback pleading for a happy ending for the misfits toys as well . the special now airs annually on cbs , rather than nbc , and is hailed as a classic by many . the special 's original assortment of characters have acquired iconic status , and an uncertainty surrounding an error in the special 's copyright has allowed the special to be widely parodied and imitated in the decades since its original airing . the success of the special led to two sequels rudolph 's shiny new year ( 1976 ) which continued the reindeer 's journeys , and the series was made into a trilogy with the feature-length film rudolph and frosty 's christmas in july ( 1979 ) , which integrated the rudolph universe into that of rankin/bass 's adaptation of frosty the snowman ( 1969 ) . being one of the most popular rankin/bass characters , rudolph also made his cameo appearances in two '' animagic '' specials santa claus is comin ' to town ( 1970 ) and nestor , the long–eared christmas donkey ( 1977 ) , and in the easter television special the first easter rabbit ( 1976 ) with cel animation by toru hara 's topcraft . animated feature-length films . rudolph the red-nosed reindeer : the movie ( 1998 ) is an 2d-animated feature film presented by goodtimes entertainment and golden books family entertainment ( now western publishing ) , and produced by tundra productions in hollywood , california . it received only a limited theatrical release before debuting on home video . its inclusion of a villain , a love interest , a sidekick , and a strong protector are more derivative of the rankin/bass adaptation of the story than the original tale and song ( the characters of stormella , zoey , arrow , slyly , and leonard parallel the rankin/bass characters of the bumble , clarice , fireball , hermey , and yukon , respectively ) . the movie amplifies the early backstory of rudolph 's harassment by his schoolmates ( primarily his cousin arrow ) during his formative years . it was produced and directed by william r . kowalchuk , and written by michael aschner , with music and songs by al kasha and michael lloyd , and with most of the casting being assembled at blt productions in vancouver , british columbia . the film 's recording facilities were pinewood sound in vancouver , schwartz sound in new york , and wally burr in hollywood . among the all-star cast of voices were american actors john goodman , whoopi goldberg , debbie reynolds , richard simmons and bob newhart , british actor eric idle , and canadian actress kathleen barr as rudolph . animation production services for the film were outsourced to colorland animation productions in hong kong . goodtimes entertainment , the producers of rudolph the red-nosed reindeer : the movie , brought back most of the same production team for a cgi animated sequel , rudolph the red-nosed reindeer and the island of misfit toys ( 2001 ) . unlike the previous film , the sequel featured the original characters from the rankin/bass special ( as goodtimes soon learned that rankin/bass had made a copyright error that made the characters unique to their special free to use ) . homages in media . film . in the dr . seuss ' how the grinch stole christmas ( 2000 film ) ( 2000 ) , the grinch disguises his dog , max , as rudolph for his plan to disguise himself as santa claus and steal everything in each house in whoville , to stop christmas from coming . he also changes rudolph 's story saying , he hates christmas and is gon na steal it . he then yells '' action ! '' through a megaphone . but max takes off the fake red nose the grinch had put on him . in the film fred claus ( 2007 ) , rudolph is mentioned and briefly seen , although his red nose is not glowing . during a fly-by shot of fred ( vince vaughn ) piloting nick 's sleigh , rudolph can be seen , and nine reindeer can be counted . in the same film , a billboard advertisement for pepsi cola , which features rudolph , can be seen as fred crashes through it . games . rudolph is mentioned in the video game army of two ( 2008 ) during a tutorial video about the use of the game 's aggro feature . in guild wars nightfall ( 2006 ) , player characters are accompanied by a reindeer named rudy whose nose begins to glow red when coming into range of presents that the player is tasked to find in a holiday themed quest . also a video game by high voltage software . music . rudolph is mentioned in the beach boys ' song '' little saint nick '' ( 1963 ) in the following lyric : '' now haulin ' through the snow at a frightening speed with a half a dozen deer with rudy to lead . '' '' run rudolph run '' ( 1958 ) is a christmas song by chuck berry and sometimes credited to johnny marks and marvin brodie and published by st . nicholas music ( ascap ) . the song was released as a single on chess records ( label no . 1714 ) and has since been covered by numerous other artists , sometimes under the title '' run , run , rudolph '' . the song is a 12-bar blues and has a clear musical parallel to chuck berry 's popular and recognizable song , '' johnny b . goode '' ( 1958 ) ; it is also melodically identical to berry 's '' little queenie '' ( 1959 ) . in ray stevens ' novelty song '' santa claus is watching you '' ( 1962 ) , rudolph is replaced on santa 's team by '' clyde the camel '' , a character from steven 's earlier hit , '' ahab the arab '' . in the original version , aimed at children in a similar fashion to '' santa claus is coming to town '' , rudolph was said to be recuperating from an injury sustained during '' a twist contest '' ; a later version , warning a lover away from infidelity because santa is watching , has rudolph on a '' stakeout at ( the lover 's ) house '' . television and webisodes . in the doctor who promotional mini-webisode , '' songtaran carols '' ( 2012 ) , the sontaran warrior-nurse-detective , strax , stated : '' rudolph the red-nosed reindeer , had a very shiny nose . it proved to be a tactical disadvantage , because it enabled me to punch him in the dark . '' rudolph along with donder and blitzen appear in the doctor who christmas special , last christmas . the anime and manga series one piece has a main character called tony tony chopper , a shapeshifter born on christmas eve , who was often discriminated against because of his blue nose . however his background and story is otherwise very different . madtv featured rudolph in a parody of the 1964 rankin-bass special called raging rudolph . rudolph is beaten up for his red nose , and decides to get revenge on santa claus with hermie the elf by hiring yukon cornelius ( a hitman in the special ) to kill and decapitate santa . rudolph then takes over the north pole . a sequel to the skit , the reinfather , shows rudolph exacting revenge for his hitman 's death in a nod to the godfather . in the tv film once upon a christmas ( 2000 ) , rudolph makes an appearance when kathy ireland 's character , kristin , goes on a sleigh ride with rudolph leading it . kristin 's sister , rudolpha , is also mentioned to be named after rudolph . in the lifetime christmas movie becoming santa ( 2015 ) , rudolph is mentioned several times as worrying mrs . claus every christmas because he always shows up to lead the sleigh at the last possible moment . in the last moments of the film , rudolph shows up right before the sleigh is ready to leave . relatives in different adaptations . parents . robert l . may 's original book does not name rudolph 's parents . the animated specials produced by both rankin/bass and goodtimes entertainment have given rudolph different sets of parents : in the rankin/bass holiday special , his father is donner and his mother is a tan doe who is called mrs . donner . in the goodtimes retelling , rudolph 's father is blitzen , and his mother is named mitzi , although many believe the true mother should be vixen . offspring . three bbc animations carry on the legend by introducing rudolph 's son , robbie the reindeer . however , rudolph is never directly mentioned by name ( references are replaced by the first and second films ' villain blitzen interrupting with the phrase , '' do n't say that name ! '' , or something similar , presumably for copyright reasons . ) . siblings . rudolph is also given a younger brother , rusty reindeer , in the american special , holidaze : the christmas that almost did n't happen ( 2006 ) . like in the '' robbie the reindeer '' cartoons , rudolph 's name is not said in the film nor does he make a physical appearance . however , he does appear on a poster and one scene in the film shows a cardboard cutout and toys of rudolph . unlike previous versions of the character , this rudolph has a black nose , which is only red when lit up . michael fry and t . lewis have given rudolph another brother in a series of over the hedge comic strips : an overweight , emotionally damaged reindeer named ralph , the infra-red nosed reindeer , who is referred to as rudolph 's older brother . ralph 's red nose is good for defrosting santa 's sleigh and warming up toast and waffles ; he enviously complains about his brother rudolph 's publicity and his own anonymity . aunts , uncles , and cousins . rudolph has a cousin , leroy , in joe diffie 's 1995 song , '' leroy the redneck reindeer '' ( 1995 ) , which tells the story of leroy 's joining the sleigh team to substitute for rudolph , who was ill . in goodtimes ' retelling , three of santa 's reindeer ( dasher , comet , and cupid ) are his uncles , and cupid 's son arrow is rudolph 's cousin and rival . see also . santa claus santa 's reindeer rudolph the red-nosed reindeer video game . references . external links . manuscript of the montgomery ward book official licensor for rudolph the red-nosed reindeer official cbs website for rudolph the red-nosed reindeer rudolph the red nosed reindeer ( 1948 ) rudolph the red nosed reindeer ( 1948 ) full film ( public domain footage ) rudolph the red-nosed reindeer ( 1964 ) on imdb