Man with a Movie Camera

overview . the film has an unabashedly avant-garde style , and emphasizes that film can go anywhere . for instance , the film uses scenes such as superimposing a shot of a cameraman setting up his camera atop a second , mountainous camera , superimposing a cameraman inside a beer glass , filming a woman getting out of bed and getting dressed , filming a woman giving birth , and the baby being taken away to be bathed . the film features a few obvious stagings such as the scene of a woman getting out of bed and getting dressed and the shot of chess pieces being swept to the center of the board ( a shot spliced in backwards so the pieces expand outward and stand in position ) . the film was criticized for both the stagings and the stark experimentation , possibly as a result of its director 's frequent assailing of fiction film as a new '' opiate of the masses '' . . vertov 's intentions . thumb vertov was an early pioneer in documentary film-making during the late 1920s . he belonged to a movement of filmmakers known as the kinoks , or kino-oki ( kino-eyes ) . vertov , along with other kino artists declared it their mission to abolish all non-documentary styles of film-making , a radical approach to movie making . most of vertov 's films were highly controversial , and the kinok movement was despised by many filmmakers . vertov 's crowning achievement , man with a movie camera , was his response to critics who rejected his previous film , a sixth part of the world . critics had declared that vertov 's overuse of '' intertitles '' was inconsistent with the film-making style to which the '' kinoks '' subscribed . working within that context , vertov dealt with a lot of fear in anticipation of the film 's release . he requested a warning to be printed in the soviet central communist newspaper pravda , which spoke directly of the film 's experimental , controversial nature . vertov was worried that the film would be either destroyed or ignored by the public . upon the official release of man with a movie camera , vertov issued a statement at the beginning of the film , which read : the film man with a movie camera represents an experimentation in the cinematic communication of visual phenomena without the use of intertitles ( a film without intertitles ) without the help of a scenario ( a film without a scenario ) without the help of theatre ( a film without actors , without sets , etc . ) this new experimentation work by kino-eye is directed towards the creation of an authentically international absolute language of cinema on the basis of its complete separation from the language of theatre and literature . this manifesto echoes an earlier one that vertov wrote in 1922 , in which he disavowed popular films he felt were indebted to literature and theater . . stylistic aspects . working within a marxist ideology , vertov strove to create a futuristic city that would serve as a commentary on existing ideals in the soviet world . this artificial city 's purpose was to awaken the soviet citizen through truth and to ultimately bring about understanding and action . the kino 's aesthetic shone through in his portrayal of electrification , industrialization , and the achievements of workers through hard labour . this could also be viewed as early modernism in film . some have mistakenly stated that many visual ideas , such as the quick editing , the close-ups of machinery , the store window displays , even the shots of a typewriter keyboard are borrowed from walter ruttmann 's berlin : symphony of a great city ( 1927 ) , which predates man with a movie camera by two years , but as vertov wrote to the german press in 1929 , dziga vertov . letter from berlin page 101 , in annette michelson ed . kevin o'brien tr . kino-eye : the writings of dziga vertov , university of california press , 1995 . these techniques and images had been developed and employed by him in his kino-pravda newsreels and documentaries for previous ten years , all of which predate berlin . vertov 's pioneering cinematic concepts actually inspired other abstract films by ruttmann and others , including writer , translator , filmmaker and critic liu na'ou ( 1905–1940 ) , whose the man who has a camera ( 1933 ) pays explicit homage to vertov 's man with a movie camera . rhythmic movement , the city symphony and transcultural transmediality : liu na'ou and the man who has a camera ( 1933 ) ling zhang a department of cinema and media studies , the university of chicago , classics 305 , 1010 e . 59th street , chicago , il 60637 , usa journal of chinese cinemas volume 9 , issue 1 , 2015 , pages 42-61 . published online : 11 march 2015 . man with a movie cameras usage of double exposure and seemingly '' hidden '' cameras made the movie come across as a surreal montage rather than a linear motion picture . many of the scenes in the film contain people , which change size or appear underneath other objects ( double exposure ) . because of these aspects , the movie is fast-moving . the sequences and close-ups capture emotional qualities that could not be fully portrayed through the use of words . the film 's lack of '' actors '' and '' sets '' makes for a unique view of the everyday world ; one that , according to a title card , is directed toward the creation of a new cinematic language that is '' separated from the language of theatre and literature '' . production . it was filmed over a period of about 3 years . three soviet cities – kyiv , moscow and odessa – were the shooting locations . . reception . initial . man with a movie camera was not always a highly regarded work . vertov 's soviet contemporaries criticized its focus on form over content , with sergei eisenstein even deriding the film as '' pointless camera hooliganism '' . the work was largely dismissed in the west as well . documentary filmmaker paul rotha said that in britain , vertov was '' regarded really as rather a joke , you know . all this cutting , and one camera photographing another camera – it was all trickery , and we did n't take it seriously . '' the pace of the film 's editing – more than four times faster than a typical 1929 feature , with approximately 1,775 separate shots – also perturbed some viewers , including the new york times reviewer mordaunt hall : the producer , dziga vertov , does not take into consideration the fact that the human eye fixes for a certain space of time that which holds the attention . . reevaluation . man with a movie camera is now regarded by many as one of the greatest films ever made , ranking 8th in the 2012 sight & sound poll of the world 's best films . in 2009 , roger ebert wrote : '' it made explicit and poetic the astonishing gift the cinema made possible , of arranging what we see , ordering it , imposing a rhythm and language on it , and transcending it . '' . analysis . man with a movie camera has been interpreted as an optimistic work . jonathan romney called it '' an exuberant manifesto that celebrates the infinite possibilities of what cinema can be '' . peter bradshaw of the guardian wrote that the work '' is visibly excited about the new medium ’ s possibility , dense with ideas , packed with energy : it echoes un chien andalou , anticipates vigo 's à propos de nice and the new wave generally , and even riefenstahl 's olympia '' . . soundtracks . the film , originally released in 1929 , was silent and accompanied in theaters with live music . it has since been released a number of times with different soundtracks : 1983 – a new composition . was performed by un drame musical instantané , based on vertov 's writings , among which was his ear laboratory . electronic sounds , ambiences , voices were mixed to the 15-piece orchestra . an lp was issued in 1984 on grrr records . 1995 – a new composition was performed by the alloy orchestra of cambridge , massachusetts , based on notes left by vertov . it incorporates sound effects such as sirens , babies crying , crowd noise , etc . readily available on several different dvd versions . . 1996 – norwegian composer geir jenssen ( aka biosphere ) was commissioned by the tromsø international film festival to write a new soundtrack for the movie , using the director 's written instructions for the original accompanying piano player . jenssen wrote half of the soundtrack , turning the other half to per martinsen ( aka mental overdrive ) . it was used for the norwegian version at the 1996 tiff . this version of the film has not been re-released elsewhere , but the soundtrack was released separately with jenssen 's contributions on substrata 2 in 2001 and martinsen 's on an album of the same name in 2012 . 1999 – in the nursery band made a version , man with a movie camera '' score by in the nursery . for the bradford international film festival . currently available on some dvd versions , often paired with the alloy orchestra score as an alternate soundtrack . 2001 – steve jansen and claudio chianura recorded a live soundtrack for a showing of the film at the palazzina liberty , in milan on 11 december 1999 . this was subsequently released on cd as the album kinoapparatom in 2001 . 2002 – a version was released with a soundtrack composed by jason swinscoe and performed by the british jazz and electronic outfit the cinematic orchestra ( see man with a movie camera ( the cinematic orchestra album ) ) . originally made for the porto 2000 film festival . it was also released on dvd in limited numbers by ninja tune . 2002 – a score for the film by michael nyman was premiered performed by the michael nyman band on 17 may 2002 at london 's royal festival hall . a british film institute dvd of the film was released with nyman 's score . this score is readily available on several different dvd editions . it has not been issued on cd , but some of the score is reworked from material nyman wrote for the sega saturn video game enemy zero , which had a limited cd release , and nyman performs a brief excerpt '' odessa beach '' on his album the piano sings . 2003 june – american multi-theremin ensemble the lothars performed a semi-improvised soundtrack accompanying a screening of the film at the coolidge corner theatre in brookline , massachusetts . they repeated their performance three years later , in december 2006 at the galapagos art space in brooklyn , new york . 2006 absolut medien , berlin released a dvd with the 3soundtracks from michael nyman , in the nursery , and a new soundtrack from werner cee . november 2007 – france based group art zoyd presented a scenic version of the film with an additional video by artist cecile babiole . a studio recording of the soundtrack was released on cd in 2012 . eyecatcher/man with a movie camera . 2008 – norwegian electronic jazz trio halt the flux performed their interpretation of the soundtrack [ at the bergen international film festival . october 2008 – london based cinematic orchestra undertook a show featuring a screening of vertov 's film , which preceded the re-issue of the man with a movie camera dvd , in november . 30 november 2008 – american tricks of the light orchestra accompanied a screening of the film on sunday at brainwash cafe in san francisco . july 2009 ; mexican composer alex otaola performed a new soundtrack live at mexico 's national cinematheque , aided by the '' ensamble de cámara/acción '' . 2009 - the american voxare string quartet performed music by soviet modernist composers to accompany a screening of the film . august 2010 – irish instrumental post-rock band 3epkano accompanied a screening of the film with an original live soundtrack in fitzwilliam square in dublin july 2010 – ukrainian guitarist and composer vitaliy tkachuk performed his own soundtrack for the film , with his quartet , at a ukrainian silent cinema festival '' mute nights '' in odessa , the city where this movie was made . 20 may 2011 : the french pianist yann le long , the violoncellist philippe cusson and the percussionist stéphane grimalt performed , for the first time , the soundtrack written by le long for the film at the centre culturel du vieux couvent , muzillac , france . march 2014 : sarodist , beat maker , and multi-instrumentalist composer james whetzel performed live a 51-piece new all-original soundtrack to '' man with a movie camera '' at siff cinema uptown in seattle , wa , usa . soundtrack features sarod , electric sarod , analog synthesizers , accordion , mandolin , bass , guitar , dhol , dholak , darbouka , bendir , rumba box , electronic drums , and 41 other pieces of percussion . whetzel successfully completed a kickstarter project for the soundtrack in july . 2014 - spanish band caspervek trio premiered a new soundtrack for the film at la galería jazz club , vigo , with further performances in gijón , ourense and sigulda ( latvia ) . september 2014 : swedish indie rock band bob hund premiered a new soundtrack at cinemateket in stockholm , with subsequent performances in helsinki , luleå , gothenburg and malmö . . references . further reading . annette michelson ed . kevin o'brien tr . kino-eye : the writings of dziga vertov , university of california press , 1995 . john mackay , '' man with a movie camera : an introduction '' feldman , seth r . dziga vertov . a guide to references and resources . boston : g . k . hall , 1979 . devaux , frederique . l'homme et la camera : de dziga vertov . crisnèe , belgique : editions yellow now , 1990 . nowell-smith , geoffrey . the oxford history of world cinema . oxford ; new york : oxford university press , 1996 . roberts , graham . the man with the movie camera . london : i.b.tauris , 2000 . tsivian , yuri . lines of resistance : dziga vertov and the twenties . edited and with an introduction by yuri tsivian ; russian texts translated by julian graffy ; filmographic and biographical research , aleksandr deriabin ; co-researchers , oksana sarkisova , sarah keller , theresa scandiffio . gemona , udine : le giornate del cinema muto , 2004 . manovich , lev . '' database as a symbolic form '' . cambridge : mit press , 2001 . richard bossons , 'notes on neglected aspects of man with a movie camera ' , 2021 . external links . man with a movie camera ( alternative soundtracks ) on discogs man with a movie camera on the reviews of the rare and obscure by john debartolo man with a movie camera – roland fischer-briand on the film 's storyboard man with a movie camera on great movies list by roger ebert man with a movie camera : the global remake participatory video inviting people globally to record images interpreting the original script of the original vertov film