Kalpana Chawla

early life . kalpana chawla was born on 17 march 1962 , in karnal of present-day haryana , india , but her official date of birth was altered to 1 july 1961 , to allow her to become eligible for the matriculation exam . as a child , she was fascinated by aeroplanes and flying . she went to local flying clubs and watched planes with her father . after getting a bachelor of engineering degree in aeronautical engineering from punjab engineering college , india , she moved to the united states in 1982 and obtained a master of science degree in aerospace engineering from the university of texas at arlington in 1984 . chawla went on to earn a second masters in 1986 and a phd in aerospace engineering in 1988 from the university of colorado boulder . chawla was married to jean-pierre harrison . kalpana chawla : biography & columbia disaster space.com , 20 december 2017 . columbia shuttle mission imagery nasa , 16 april 2003 . 10 years after columbia disaster , family members remember denver post , 30 january 2013 . '' her husband jean-pierre harrison remarried and has a young son . he runs a publishing company in los gatos , calif . '' . career . in 1988 , she began working at nasa ames research center , where she did computational fluid dynamics ( cfd ) research on v/stol ( v/stol ) concepts . much of chawla 's research is included in technical journals and conference papers . in 1993 , she joined overset methods , inc . as vice president and research scientist specializing in simulation of moving multiple body problems . chawla held a certificated flight instructor rating for airplanes , gliders and commercial pilot licenses for single and multi-engine airplanes , seaplanes and gliders . after becoming a naturalized u.s . citizen in april 1991 , chawla applied for the nasa astronaut corps . she joined the corps in march 1995 and was selected for her first flight in 1996 . first space mission . her first space mission began on 19 november 1997 , as part of the six-astronaut crew that flew the space shuttle columbia flight sts-87 . chawla was the first indian woman to go in space . she spoke the following words while traveling in the weightlessness of space , '' you are just your intelligence . '' on her first mission , chawla traveled over 10.4 million miles ( 16737177.6 & nbsp ; km ) in 252 orbits of the earth , logging more than 372 hours ( 15 days and 12 hours ) in space . during sts-87 , she was responsible for deploying the spartan satellite which malfunctioned , necessitating a spacewalk by winston scott and takao doi to capture the satellite . a five-month nasa investigation fully exonerated chawla by identifying errors in software interfaces and the defined procedures of the flight crew and ground control . after the completion of sts-87 post-flight activities , chawla was assigned to technical positions in the astronaut office to work on the space station . second space mission . in 2001 , chawla was selected for her second flight as part of the crew of sts-107 . this mission was repeatedly delayed due to scheduling conflicts and technical problems such as the july 2002 discovery of cracks in the shuttle engine flow liners . on 16 january 2003 , chawla finally returned to space aboard space shuttle columbia on the ill-fated sts-107 mission . the crew performed nearly 80 experiments studying earth and space science , advanced technology development , and astronaut health and safety . during the launch of sts-107 , columbias 28th mission , a piece of foam insulation broke off from the space shuttle external tank and struck the left-wing of the orbiter . previous shuttle launches had seen minor damage from foam shedding , but some engineers suspected that the damage to columbia was more serious . nasa managers limited the investigation , reasoning that the crew could not have fixed the problem if it had been confirmed . when columbia re-entered the atmosphere of earth , the damage allowed hot atmospheric gases to penetrate and destroy the internal wing structure , which caused the spacecraft to become unstable and break apart . after the disaster , space shuttle flight operations were suspended for more than two years , similar to the aftermath of the challenger disaster . construction of the international space station ( iss ) was put on hold ; the station relied entirely on the russian roscosmos state corporation for resupply for 29 months until shuttle flights resumed with sts-114 and 41 months for crew rotation . chawla died on 1 february 2003 , in the space shuttle columbia disaster , along with the other six crew members , when the columbia disintegrated over texas during re-entry into the earth 's atmosphere , shortly before it was scheduled to conclude its 28th mission , sts-107 . her remains were identified along with those of the rest of the crew members and were cremated and scattered at zion national park in utah in accordance with her wishes . . honors and recognition . the cygnus ng-14 mission delivering supplies to the iss was named the '' s.s . kalpana chawla '' after her . asteroid 51826 kalpanachawla , one of seven named after the columbias crew . on 5 february 2003 , the prime minister of india , atal bihari vajpayee announced that the meteorological series of satellites , metsat , was to be renamed '' kalpana '' . the first satellite of the series , '' metsat-1 '' , launched by india on 12 september 2002 was renamed '' kalpana-1 '' . 74th street in the '' little india '' of jackson heights , queens , new york city , new york , united states has been renamed '' kalpana chawla way '' in her honor . the kalpana chawla award was instituted by the government of karnataka in 2004 to recognize young women scientists . nasa has dedicated a supercomputer to chawla . one of florida institute of technology 's student apartment complexes , columbia village suites , has halls named after each of the astronauts , including chawla . the nasa mars exploration rover mission has named seven peaks in a chain of hills , named the columbia hills , after each of the seven astronauts lost in the columbia shuttle disaster . one of them is chawla hill , named after chawla . steve morse from the band deep purple created the song '' contact lost '' in memory of the columbia tragedy . chawla knew morse and took the band ’ s machine head ( album ) , featuring the song space truckin ’ with her on the mission . morse ’ s tribute song can be found on the album bananas . novelist peter david named a shuttlecraft , the chawla , after the astronaut in his 2007 star trek novel , star trek : the next generation : before dishonor . david , peter ; star trek : next generation : before dishonor ; page 24 . the kalpana chawla isu scholarship fund was founded by alumni of the international space university ( isu ) in 2010 to support indian women 's participation in international space education programs . kalpana chawla international space university scholarship the kalpana chawla memorial scholarship program was instituted by the indian students association ( isa ) at the university of texas at el paso ( utep ) in 2005 for meritorious graduate students . the kalpana chawla outstanding recent alumni award at the university of colorado , given since 1983 , was renamed after chawla . the university of texas at arlington , where chawla obtained a master of science degree in aerospace engineering in 1984 , opened a dormitory named kalpana chawla hall in 2004 . . the girls ' hostel at punjab engineering college is named after chawla . in addition , an award of inr twenty-five thousand , a medal , and a certificate is instituted for the best student in the aeronautical engineering department . the government of haryana established the kalpana chawla planetarium in jyotisar , kurukshetra . the indian institute of technology , kharagpur , named the kalpana chawla space technology cell in her honor . delhi technological university named a girls ' hostel block after chawla . a military housing development at naval air station patuxent river , maryland , has been named columbia colony and includes a street named chawla way . a hostel block in pondicherry university has been named after chawla . kalpana chawla government medical college ( kcgmc ) is a medical college located in karnal , haryana , india named after chawla . the national institute of technology kurukshetra named a girls ' hostel after chawla . the national institute of technology bhopal named girl 's hostel named kalpana chawla bhawan . . see also . list of female spacefarers . references . further reading . among the stars ! : life and dreams of kalpana chawla by gurdeep pandher india 's 50 most illustrious women by indra gupta kalpana chawla : a life by anil padmanabhan the edge of time : the authoritative biography of kalpana chawla by jean-pierre harrison . external links . nasa biography