Nostalgia

functions . nostalgia 's definition has changed greatly over time . consistent with its greek word roots meaning '' homecoming '' and '' pain , '' nostalgia was for centuries considered a potentially debilitating and sometimes fatal medical condition expressing extreme homesickness . the modern view is that nostalgia is an independent , and even positive , emotion that many people experience often . occasional nostalgia has been found to have many functions , such as to improve mood , increase social connectedness , enhance positive self-regard , and provide existential meaning . many nostalgic reflections serve more than one function , and overall seem to benefit those who experience them . such benefits may lead to a chronic disposition or personality trait of '' nostalgia proneness . '' vanessa köneke : more bitter than sweet - are nostalgic people rather sad than happy after all ? grin verlag gmbh , münchen 2010 , . nostalgia has also been associated with learning and memory consolidation . . improve mood . although nostalgia is often triggered by negative feelings , it results in increasing one 's mood and heightening positive emotions , which can stem from feelings of warmth or coping resulting from nostalgic reflections . one way to improve mood is to effectively cope with problems that hinder one 's happiness . batcho ( 2013 ) found that nostalgia proneness positively related to successful methods of coping throughout all stages—planning and implementing strategies , and reframing the issue positively . these studies led to the conclusion that the coping strategies that are likely among nostalgia prone people often lead to benefits during stressful times . nostalgia can be connected to more focus on coping strategies and implementing them , thus increasing support in challenging times . batcho , k . i . ( 2013 ) . '' nostalgia : retreat or support in difficult times ? '' the american journal of psychology , . increase social connectedness . nostalgia also sometimes involves memories of people you were close to , and thus it can increase one 's sense of social support and connections . nostalgia is also triggered specifically by feelings of loneliness , but counteracts such feelings with reflections of close relationships . according to zhou et al . ( 2008 ) , lonely people often have lesser perceptions of social support . loneliness , however , leads to nostalgia , which actually increases perceptions of social support . thus , zhou and colleagues ( 2008 ) concluded that nostalgia serves a restorative function for individuals regarding their social connectedness . . enhance positive self-regard . nostalgia serves as a coping mechanism and helps people to feel better about themselves . vess et al . ( 2012 ) found that the subjects who thought of nostalgic memories showed a greater accessibility of positive characteristics than those who thought of exciting future experiences . additionally , in a second study conducted , some participants were exposed to nostalgic engagement and reflection while the other group was not . the researchers looked again at self-attributes and found that the participants who were not exposed to nostalgic experiences reflected a pattern of selfish and self-centered attributes . vess et al . ( 2012 ) , however , found that this effect had weakened and become less powerful among the participants who engaged in nostalgic reflection . . provide existential meaning . nostalgia helps increase one 's self-esteem and meaning in life by buffering threats to well-being and also by initiating a desire to deal with problems or stress . routledge ( 2011 ) and colleagues found that nostalgia correlates positively with one 's sense of meaning in life . the second study revealed that nostalgia increases one 's perceived meaning in life , which was thought to be mediated by a sense of social support or connectedness . thirdly , the researchers found that threatened meaning can even act as a trigger for nostalgia , thus increasing one 's nostalgic reflections . by triggering nostalgia , though , one 's defensiveness to such threat is minimized as found in the fourth study . the final two studies found that nostalgia is able to not only create meaning , but buffer threats to meaning by breaking the connection between a lack of meaning and one 's well-being . follow-up studies also completed by routledge in 2012 not only found meaning as a function of nostalgia , but also concluded that nostalgic people have greater perceived meaning , search for meaning less , and can better buffer existential threat . . promote psychological growth . nostalgia makes people more willing to engage in growth-oriented behaviors and encourages them to view themselves as growth-oriented people . baldwin & landau ( 2014 ) found that nostalgia leads people to rate themselves higher on items like '' i am the kind of person who embraces unfamiliar people , events , and places . '' nostalgia also increased interest in growth-related behavior such as '' i would like to explore someplace that i have never been before . '' in the first study , these effects were mediation ( statistics ) by nostalgia-induced positive affect—the extent to which nostalgia made participants feel good . in the second study , nostalgia led to the same growth outcomes but the effects were statistically mediated by nostalgia-induced self-esteem . . as a deception . one recent study critiques the idea of nostalgia , which in some forms can become a defense mechanism by which people avoid the historical facts . hook , d . ( 2012 ) '' screened history : nostalgia as defensive formation . '' peace and conflict : journal of peace psychology , vol 18 ( 3 ) , aug , 2012 . special issue : of narratives and nostalgia . pp . 225–239 this study looked at the different portrayals of apartheid in south africa and argued that nostalgia appears as two ways , boym , s . ( 2001 ) . the future of nostalgia . new york , ny : basic books 'restorative nostalgia ' a wish to return to that past , and 'reflective nostalgia ' which is more critically aware . as a comfort . reliving past memories may provide comfort and contribute to mental health . one notable recent medical study has looked at the physiological effects thinking about past 'good ' memories can have . they found that thinking about the past 'fondly ' actually increased perceptions of physical warmth . . as a political tool . in a 2014 study conducted by routledge , he and a team observed that the more people reported having major disruptions and uncertainties in their lives , the more they nostalgically longed for the past . routledge suggests that by invoking the idea of an idealized past , politicians can provoke the social and cultural anxieties and uncertainties that make nostalgia especially attractive—and effective—as a tool of political persuasion . . other aspects . as a medical condition . the term was coined in 1688 by johannes hofer ( 1669–1752 ) in his basel dissertation . hofer introduced nostalgia or mal du pays '' homesickness '' for the condition also known as mal du suisse '' swiss illness '' or schweizerheimweh '' swiss homesickness '' , because of its frequent occurrence in swiss mercenaries who in the plains of lowlands france or italy were pining for their native mountain landscapes . symptoms were also thought to include fainting , high fever , indigestion , stomach pain , and death . military physicians hypothesized that the malady was due to damage to the victims ' brain cells and ear drums by the constant clanging of cowbells in the pastures of switzerland . english homesickness is a loan translation of nostalgia . joseph banks used the word in his journal during the first voyage of captain cook . on 3 september 1770 he stated that the sailors '' were now pretty far gone with the longing for home which the physicians have gone so far as to esteem a disease under the name of nostalgia '' , but his journal was not published in his lifetime ( see john beaglehole ( ed . ) . the endeavour journal of joseph banks 1768–1771 , public library of new south wales/angus and robertson , sydney , 1962 , vol . ii , p . & nbsp ; 145 ) . cases resulting in death were known and soldiers were sometimes successfully treated by being discharged and sent home . receiving a diagnosis was , however , generally regarded as an insult . in 1787 robert hamilton ( 1749–1830 , physician of ipswich ) described a case of a soldier suffering from nostalgia , who received sensitive and successful treatment : in the eighteenth century , scientists were looking for a locus of nostalgia , a nostalgic bone . by the 1850s nostalgia was losing its status as a particular disease and coming to be seen rather as a symptom or stage of a pathological process . it was considered as a form of melancholia and a predisposing condition among suicides . nostalgia was , however , still diagnosed among soldiers as late as the american civil war . wisconsin public radio , to the best of our knowledge , '' svetlana boym on nostalgia '' , 2002 november 3 by the 1870s interest in nostalgia as a medical category had almost completely vanished . nostalgia was still being recognized in both the first and second world wars , especially by the american armed forces . great lengths were taken to study and understand the condition to stem the tide of troops leaving the front in droves ( see the bbc documentary century of the self ) . nostalgia is triggered by something reminding an individual of an event or item from their past . the resulting emotion can vary from happiness to sorrow . the term of '' feeling nostalgic '' is more commonly used to describe pleasurable emotions associated with and/or a longing to go back to a particular period of time , although the former may also be true . romanticism . swiss nostalgia was linked to the singing of kuhreihen , which were forbidden to swiss mercenaries because they led to nostalgia to the point of desertion , illness or death . the 1767 dictionnaire de musique by jean-jacques rousseau claims that swiss mercenaries were threatened with severe punishment to prevent them from singing their swiss songs . it became somewhat of a topos in romantic literature , and figures in the poem der schweizer by achim von arnim ( 1805 ) and in clemens brentano 's des knaben wunderhorn ( 1809 ) as well as in the opera le chalet by adolphe charles adam ( 1834 ) which was performed for queen victoria under the title the swiss cottage . the romantic connection of nostalgia , the kuhreihen and the swiss alps was a significant factor in the enthusiasm for switzerland , the development of early tourism in switzerland and alpinism that took hold of the european cultural elite in the 19th century . german romanticism coined an opposite to heimweh , fernweh '' far-sickness , '' '' longing to be far away , '' like wanderlust expressing the romantic desire to travel and explore . music . hearing an old song can bring back memories for a person . a song heard once at a specific moment and then not heard again until a far later date will give the listener a sense of nostalgia for the date remembered and events which occurred then . however , if it is heard throughout life , it may lose its association with any specific period or experience . . books . a person can deliberately trigger feelings of nostalgia by listening to familiar music , looking at old photos , or visiting comforting environments of the past . with this knowledge widely available , many books have been published specifically to evoke the feeling of nostalgia . books are just one of many media used in the monetization of nostalgia nostalgia industry . as an advertising tool . in media and advertising , nostalgia-evoking images , sounds , and references can be used strategically to create a sense of connectedness between consumers and products with the goal of convincing the public to consume , watch , or buy advertised products . modern technology facilitates nostalgia-eliciting advertising through the subject , style , and design of an advertisement . the feeling of longing for the past is easily communicated through social media and advertising because these media require the participation of multiple senses , are able to represent their ideas entirely , and therefore become more reminiscent of reality . due to efficient advertising schemes , consumers need not have experienced a specific event or moment in time in order to feel nostalgic for it . this is due to a phenomenon referred to as vicarious nostalgia . vicarious nostalgia is a feeling of wistful yearning for a moment that occurred prior to , or outside of , the span of one 's memory , but is relatable ( has sentimental value ) due to repeated mediated exposure to it . the constant propagating of advertisements and other media messages makes vicarious nostalgia possible , and changes the ways we understand advertisements and subsequently , the way consumers use their purchasing power . examples of nostalgia used to provoke public interest include nostalgia-themed websites including the nostalgia machine and doyouremember ? , revamps of old movies , tv shows , and books . vintage , rustic and old-fashioned design styles can also be seen in nostalgia-based ad campaigns that companies such as coca-cola and levi strauss & co . use . . see also . americana declinism golden age ( metaphor ) hauntology historic preservation mono no aware nostalgia industry nostalgia for the soviet union old-time radio ostalgie recency bias retro style rosy retrospection saudade sehnsucht solastalgia vaporwave vintage ( design ) yugo-nostalgia . references . further reading . bartholeyns , g . ( 2014 ) . '' the instant past : nostalgia and digital photo retro photography . '' media and nostalgia . yearning for the past , present and future , ed . k . niemeyer ( palgrave macmillan ) : 51–69 . simon bunke : heimweh . studien zur kultur- und literaturgeschichte einer tödlichen krankheit . ( homesickness . on the cultural and literary history of a lethal disease ) . freiburg 2009 . 674 pp . boulbry , gaëlle and borges , adilson . évaluation d ’ une échelle anglo-saxonne de mesure du tempérament nostalgique dans un contexte culturel français ( evaluation of an anglo-saxon scale of measurement of nostalgic mood in a french cultural context ) dominic boyer , '' ostalgie and the politics of the future in eastern germany . '' public culture 18 ( 2 ) :361-381 . simon bunke : heimweh . in : bettina von jagow / florian steger ( eds . ) : literatur und medizin im europäischen kontext . ein lexikon . göttingen : vandenhoeck & ruprecht 2005 . sp . 380–384 . niemeyer , katharina ( ed . 2014 ) , media and nostalgia . yearning for the past , present and future ' ( palgrave macmillan . coromines i vigneaux , joan . diccionari etimològic i complementari de la llengua catalana barcelona , curial edicions catalanes , 1983 davis , fred yearning for yesterday : a sociology of nostalgia . new york : free press , 1979 . freeman , lindsey a . , longing for the bomb : oak ridge and atomic nostalgia . chapel hill : university of north carolina press , 2015 . hofer , johannes , '' medical dissertation on nostalgia . '' bulletin of the institute of the history of medicine . trans . carolyn kiser anspach 2.6 ( ( 1688 ) aug . 1934 ) : 376–91 . hunter , richard and macalpine , ida . three hundred years of psychiatry:1535–1860 , hartsdale , ny , carlisle publishing , inc , 1982 linda hutcheon '' irony , nostalgia , and the postmodern '' thurber , christopher a . and marian d . sigman , '' preliminary models of risk and protective factors for childhood homesickness : review and empirical synthesis . '' child development 69:4 ( aug . 1998 ) : 903–34 . dylan trigg , the aesthetics of decay : nothingness , nostalgia , and the absence of reason ( new york : peter lang , 2006 ) linda m . austin , 'emily brontë 's homesickness ' , victorian studies , 44:4 ( summer 2002 ) : 573–596 . simon bunke : heimwehforschung.de bbc four documentaries - the century of the self rieter , o . , köneke , v . ( 2010 ) . more bitter than sweet - are nostalgic people rather sad than happy after all ? grin verlag gmbh , munich , germany . isbn gilad padva , queer nostalgia in cinema and pop culture ( basingstock , uk and new york : palgrave macmillan , 2014 ) . 254 pp . bo : ཁྱིམ་དྲན་སེམས་ནད།