Columbia Pictures

sony era ( 1989–present ) . the columbia pictures empire was sold on september 28 , 1989 , to the electronics giant sony for the amount of 3.4 billion , one of several japanese asset price bubble . the sale netted coca-cola a profit from its investment in the studio . sony then hired two producers , peter guber and jon peters , to serve as co-heads of production when sony also acquired the guber-peters entertainment company ( the former game show production company , barris industries , inc . ) for 200 million on september 29 , 1989 . guber and peters had just signed a long-term contract with warner bros . in 1989 , having been with the company since 1983 . to extricate them from this contract , steve ross , who at the time the ceo of warner bros . 's then-corporate parent warner communications , sued sony for 1 billion . sony completed cpe 's acquisition on november 8 and the guber-peters acquisition was completed on the following day . on december 1 , 1989 , guber and peters hired a longtime lawyer of gpec , alan j . levine , to the post of president and coo of columbia 's newly formed company filmed entertainment group ( feg ) . feg consisted of columbia pictures , tri-star pictures , triumph releasing , columbia pictures television , columbia pictures television distribution , merv griffin enterprises , rca/columbia pictures home video ( internationally known as rca/columbia pictures international video ) , guber-peters entertainment company , and ancillary and distribution companies . 1990s . in 1990 , sony ended up paying hundreds of millions of dollars , gave up a half-interest in its columbia house mail-order business , and bought from time warner the former metro-goldwyn-mayer studio lot in culver city , which warner communications had acquired in its takeover of lorimar-telepictures in 1989 , thus ending the burbank studios partnership . initially renamed columbia studios , sony spent 100 million to refurbish the rechristened sony pictures studios lot . guber and peters set out to prove they were worth this fortune , but though there were to be some successes , there were also many costly flops . the same year , frank price was made as the chairman of columbia pictures . his company price entertainment , inc . that he founded in 1987 , was merged with columbia in march 1991 . price left columbia on october 4 , 1991 and was replaced by warner bros . executive mark canton and reactivated price entertainment as price entertainment company with a non-exclusive deal with spe . alan citron '' los angeles times '' october 4 , 1991 columbia pictures wraps up deal to make canton chairman articles.latimes.com , retrieved on february 25 , 2013 peters was fired by his partner guber in 1991 , but guber later resigned in 1994 to form mandalay entertainment the following year . the entire operation was reorganized and renamed sony pictures entertainment ( spe ) on august 7 , 1991 , '' she holds torch for sony pictures entertainment '' . los angeles times and at the same time , tristar ( which had officially lost its hyphen ) relaunched its television division in october . in december 1991 , spe created sony pictures classics for arthouse fare and was headed by michael barker , tom bernard , and marcie bloom , alt url whom previously operated united artists and orion classics . publicly humiliated , sony suffered an enormous loss on its investment in columbia , taking a 2.7-billion write-off in 1994 . john calley took over as spe president in november 1996 , installing amy pascal as columbia pictures president and chris lee as president of the production at tristar . by the next spring , the studios were clearly rebounding , setting a record pace at the box office . on december 7 , 1992 , sony pictures acquired the barry & enright game show library . '' highbeam research '' sony pictures ' secret : goodson 's price is right . ( sony pictures entertainment inc . 's licensing deal with mark goodson productions ) highbeam.com december 7 , 1992 , retrieved on january 21 , 2013 on february 21 , 1994 , columbia pictures television and tristar television merged to form columbia tristar television ( ctt ) , '' ebsco host connection '' feltheimer heads new columbia tristar tv connection.ebscohost.com , retrieved on december 18 , 2012 including the rights to wheel of fortune and jeopardy ! after ctt folded merv griffin enterprises in june . '' los angeles times '' company town annex articles.latimes.com , retrieved on july 1 , 2013 that same year , the company also purchased stewart television . on july 21 , 1995 , sony pictures teamed up with the jim henson company and created the joint venture jim henson pictures . brian henson and stephanie allain to chat on entertainment tonight online thefreelibrary.com , retrieved on august 28 , 2013 claudia eller the los angeles times july 21 , 1995 company town : muppets cut deal with sony pictures articles.latimes.com , retrieved on august 28 , 2013 in the 1990s , columbia announced plans of a rival james bond franchise , since they owned the rights of casino royale and were planning to make a third version of thunderball with kevin mcclory . mgm and danjaq , owners of the franchise , sued sony pictures in 1997 , with the legal dispute ending two years later in an out-of-court settlement . sony traded the casino royale rights for 10 million , and the spider-man filming rights . the superhero has since become columbia 's most successful franchise , with the first movie coming out in 2002 and having since gained two sequels , with plans for three more . between the releases of the first and second sequels in 2004 and 2007 , sony led a consortium that purchased mgm – giving it distribution rights to the james bond franchise . in 1997 , columbia pictures ranked as the highest-grossing movie studio in the united states with a gross of 1.256 billion . in 1998 , columbia and tristar merged to form the columbia tristar motion picture group ( a.k.a . columbia tristar pictures ) , though both studios still produce and distribute under their own names . pascal retained her position as president of the newly united columbia pictures , while lee became the combined studio 's head of production . '' sony hitches tristar to col '' , variety , march 31 , 1998 . on december 8 , 1998 , sony pictures entertainment relaunched the screen gems brand as a horror and independent film distribution company after shutting down triumph films . '' los angeles times '' sony forms new movie division articles.latimes.com december 8 , 1998 , retrieved on 4 april 2016 in 1999 , tristar television was folded into ctt . two years later , cpt was folded into ctt as well . 2000s . in the 2000s , sony broadened its release schedule by backing revolution studios , the production/distribution company headed by joe roth . on october 25 , 2001 , ctt and cttd merged to form columbia tristar domestic television . '' the free library '' sony pictures entertainment unveils realignment of columbia tristar domestic television operations . thefreelibrary.com , retrieved on july 3 , 2012 on september 16 , 2002 , columbia tristar domestic television was renamed sony pictures television . sony pictures entertainment renames television operations ; domestic and international divisions take sony name , prnewswire.com also in 2002 , columbia broke the record for biggest domestic theatrical gross , with a tally of 1.575 billion , coincidentally breaking its own record of 1.256 billion set in 1997 , which was raised by such blockbusters as spider-man , men in black ii and xxx . the studio was also the most lucrative of 2004 , with over 1.338 billion in the domestic box office with movies such as spider-man 2 , 50 first dates , and the grudge , and in 2006 , columbia , helped with such blockbusters as : the da vinci code , the pursuit of happyness , casino royale , and open season , not only finished the year in first place , but it reached an all-time record high sum of 1.711 billion , which was an all-time yearly record for any studio until warner bros . surpassed it in 2009 . . 2010s . on october 29 , 2010 , matt tolmach , the co-president of columbia pictures , stepped down in order to produce the amazing spider-man and its sequel . doug belgrad , the other co-president of columbia was promoted as sole president of the studio . belgrad and tolmach had been co-presidents of the studio since 2008 and had been working together as a team in 2003 . borys kit matt tolmach steps down from columbia pictures to produce spider-man hollywoodreporter.com , retrieved on november 27 , 2013 the same day , hanna minghella was named president of production of columbia . on november 18 , 2012 , sony pictures announced it has passed 4 billion worldwide with the success of columbia 's releases : skyfall , the amazing spider-man , 21 jump street , men in black 3 , and hotel transylvania and screen gems ' releases : underworld : awakening , the vow , and resident evil : retribution . '' hollywood deadline '' ‘ skyfall ’ s 669.2m global helps sony pictures post best ever 4b worldwide deadline.com , retrieved on november 19 , 2012 on july 16 , 2014 , doug belgrad was named a president of the sony pictures entertainment motion picture group . he exited the post in june , 2016 . on june 2 , sanford panitch , who had been the head of international local language production at the studio , was named president of columbia pictures . saba hamedy '' los angeles times '' july 16 , 2014 doug belgrad named sony motion picture group president latimes.com , retrieved on july 16 , 2014 . logo . the columbia pictures logo , featuring a woman carrying a torch and wearing a drape ( representing columbia , a personification of the united states ) , has gone through five major changes . . everything you wanted to know about american film company logos but were afraid to ask , hollywood lost and found it has often been compared to the statue of liberty , to which was an inspiration to the columbia pictures logo . originally in 1924 , columbia pictures used a logo featuring a female roman soldier holding a shield in her left hand and a stick of wheat in her right hand . the logo changed in 1928 with a new woman ( columbia , the female representative of america ) wearing a draped flag and torch . the woman wore the stola and carried the palla of ancient rome , and above her were the words '' a columbia production '' ( '' a columbia picture '' or '' columbia pictures corporation '' ) written in an arch . the illustration was based upon the actress evelyn venable , known for providing the voice of the blue fairy in walt disney 's pinocchio . in 1936 , the logo was changed : the torch lady now stood on a pedestal , wore no headdress , and the text '' columbia '' appeared in chiseled letters behind her ( pittsburgh native jane chester bartholomew , whom harry cohn discovered , portrayed the torch lady in the logo ) . there were several variations to the logo over the years—significantly , a color version was done in 1943 for the desperadoes . two years earlier , the flag became just a drape with no markings . the latter change came after a federal law was passed making it illegal to wear an american flag as clothing . 1976 's taxi driver was one of the last films to use the '' torch lady '' in her classic appearance until 2019 's once upon a time in hollywood , which used the classic appearance of the '' torch lady '' ( with a minor alteration to add a sony byline to the logo ) to match the year ( 1969 ) the film takes place in . from 1976 to 1993 , columbia pictures used two logos . the first , from 1976 to 1981 ( 1976 to 1982 for international territories ) used just a sunburst representing the beams from the torch . the score accompanying the first logo was composed by suzanne ciani . the studio hired visual effects pioneer robert abel to animate the first logo . the woman returned in 1981 , but in a much smoother form described as resembling a coke bottle . the current logo was created in 1992 ( same time as the television version ’ s debut ) , and started its use in films the year after , when scott mednick and the mednick group was hired by peter guber to create logos for all the entertainment properties then owned by sony pictures . mednick hired new orleans artist michael deas , michael deas , columbia pictures logo , oil on panel , 18 x 32 . to digitally repaint the logo and return the woman to her '' classic '' look . michael deas hired jennifer joseph , a graphics artist for the times-picayune , as a model for the logo . roger ebert ( october 31 , 2004 ) . '' hail , columbia ! mystery solved '' . chicago sun-times . retrieved march 14 , 2011 . due to time constraints , she agreed to help out on her lunch break . the animation was created by synthespian studios in 1993 by jeff kleiser and diana walczak , who used 2d elements from the painting and converted it to 3d . synthespian studios , columbia pictures logo in 2012 , jennifer joseph gave an interview to wwl-tv : “ so we just scooted over there come lunchtime and they wrapped a sheet around me and i held a regular little desk lamp , a side lamp , ” she said , “ and i just held that up and we did that with a light bulb . '' deas went on to say , '' i never thought it would make it to the silver screen and i never thought it would still be up 20 years later , and i certainly never thought it would be in a museum , so it ’ s kind of gratifying . ” . filmography . see also . cohn-brandt-cohn ( cbc ) film sales corporation columbia pictures television columbia tristar television sony pictures sony pictures television major film studios . references . footnotes . . bibliography . . further reading . . external links . official sony pictures website sonypictures.net ( list of worldwide sites ) columbia pictures cartoons from the big cartoon database columbia pictures at reel classics : the history of a logo – the lady with the torch columbia pictures still photographer contract 1945 at the ned scott archive