Symphony No. 1 (Mahler)

incorporation of german lied . one of the most important marks that mahler left on the symphony as a genre is the incorporation of another important genre of the 19th century ; the lied . in his first symphony , mahler borrowed material from his song cycle lieder eines fahrenden gesellen , thus innovating the symphonic form and potentially answering questions about programmatic and personal elements in the music . although some of mahler 's symphonic predecessors experimented with lyricism in the symphony , mahler 's approach was much more far-reaching . through the use of the second of his lieder eines fahrenden gesellen cycle , '' '' , we can see how the composer manipulates the song 's form to accommodate the symphonic form . within the symphonic movement , the '' '' melody is a bright exposition in contrast with the slower and darker introduction . although the song plays a similar role in the song cycle , being surrounded by darker-themed songs , mahler changes the order of the strophes as originally found in the song . of the three verses , the more relaxed third verse is used at the beginning of the exposition , whereas the more chromatic and rhythmically active first and second verses are found in the closing section , helping build the energy to the end of the exposition . raymond knapp , symphonic metamorphoses . ( middletown , ct : wesleyan university press , 2003 ) , 154–5 , 179–180 , 191–2 . the entire section on lieder is based on this source . in the third movement of the symphony , the quotation of the lied '' '' demonstrates the subtlety with which mahler combined the two genres . within this funeral march , we can see the composer 's union of form and meaning , and also elements of a programme . in the last verse of the song cycle , the speaker acknowledges the painlessness of death , saying , '' under the linden tree i knew not how life fared , there all was good again ! '' this melody is employed as a countermelody to the '' frère jacques '' theme in the minor mode , but the counterpoint that mahler uses is unconventional , and the two melodies are never properly consolidated . this unresolved counterpoint has been interpreted as a conflict between the '' frère jacques '' theme 's catholic implications and the jewish klezmer qualities of the '' '' theme , thus alluding to a social conflict of which mahler was very aware . the subtlety and implications of mahler 's incorporation of the song into the funeral march bring us to the issue of programme . the composer 's ideas about programmatic content are not concrete . the matter of subjectivity comes up when discussing what meanings mahler intended the lieder to bring to the orchestral work . looking at the programmes that he provided , one can see many connections between the song cycle and the symphony 's programmatic elements , but then it must also be taken into consideration that mahler later removed the programmes . among this uncertainty though , it is clear that some narrative elements that are associated with the poet and composer of a lied were transferred from the song cycle to the symphony . the lack of words , makes it much more difficult for the composer to be subjective in the symphony , so a more universal message must be found . the composer 's comments about the '' world '' that a symphony creates seems to reinforce this idea . blumine . blumine is the title of the rejected tempo second movement of the symphony . it was first named blumine in 1893 . however it was not discarded until after the first three performances , where it remained the second movement . after the 1894 performance ( where it was called , the piece received harsh criticism , especially regarding the second movement . in the berlin premiere in 1896 , blumine was cut out , along with the title titan and the programme of the symphony . shortly after this , the symphony was published without the blumine movement and in the subsequent versions of the symphony it was gone . blumine originates from some incidental music mahler wrote for joseph victor von scheffel 's dramatic poem . the trumpet serenade was used for blumine with little change . it was originally scored for a small orchestra and this is how it appears in blumine , which is in contrast to the large orchestra used in the rest of the symphony . the movement is a short lyrical piece with a gentle trumpet solo , similar to the posthorn solos in symphony no . 3 . even though it was cut from the symphony , there are still traces of its influence in the rest of the movements . blumine translates to '' floral '' , or '' flower '' , and some believe this movement was written for johanna richter , with whom mahler was infatuated at the time . the style of this movement has much in common with mahler 's earlier works but also shows the techniques and distinct style of his later compositions . it was rediscovered by donald mitchell in 1966 , while doing research for his biography on mahler in the osborn collection at yale university , in a copy of the hamburg version of the symphony . apparently , mahler had given it to a woman he tutored at the vienna conservatory . it was passed on to her son , who then sold it to james osborn , who then donated it to yale university . benjamin britten gave the first performance of the reconstructed hamburg version in 1967 , after it had been lost for over seventy years . after this discovery , other people performed this movement , some simply inserting the blumine into the 1906 version . however , many people did not agree about playing this music as part of the symphony . mahler had rejected it from his symphony , they reasoned , so it should not be played as part of it . famous mahler conductors such as leonard bernstein , georg solti and bernard haitink never performed it . others perform blumine before or after the symphony , while still others have performed it on its own or alongside mahler 's other works . premières . 1889 – 20 november , world première : budapest , budapest philharmonic orchestra conducted by the composer 1893 – 27 october , german première : hamburg , conducted by the composer 1894 – 3 june , weimar , conducted by the composer 1896 – 16 march , berlin , conducted by the composer 1899 – 8 march , frankfurt , conducted by the composer 1898 – 3 march , czech première : prague , conducted by the composer 1900 – 18 november , austrian première : vienna , conducted by the composer 1903 – 21 october , english première : london as part of a proms concert , conducted by henry wood 1903 – 25 october , dutch première : amsterdam , with the composer conducting the concertgebouw orchestra . 1909 – 16 december , american première : new york city , the new york philharmonic conducted by the composer . published editions . 1899 february , vienna , 1906 may , vienna , universal edition 1967 vienna , universal edition ( critical edition ) . references . external links . mahler - symphony no . 1 ( '' titan '' ) - a beginners ' guide - overview , analysis and the best recordings - the classic review the music of mahler : a catalogue of manuscript and printed sources the entry for the first symphony outlines the work 's history , provides a list of performances up to 1911 , a discography of early recordings , and detailed descriptions of the surviving manuscript and printed sources . discography ( french only ) 1st movement ( extract ) , 4th movement ( extract ) . london symphony orchestra , valery gergiev ( conductor ) . recorded 13 january 2008 , barbican , london . discovering music , bbc radio 3 .