Masinissa

early life . masinissa was the son of the chieftain gaia of a numidian tribal group , the massylii . he was brought up in carthage , an ally of his father . at the start of the second punic war , masinissa fought for carthage against syphax , the king of the masaesyli of western numidia ( present day algeria ) , who had allied himself with the romans . masinissa , then about 17 years old , led an army of numidian troops and carthaginian auxiliaries against syphax 's army and won a decisive victory ( 215–212 bc ) . he was betrothed to the daughter of the carthaginian general hasdrubal gisgo . after his victory over syphax , masinissa commanded his skilled numidian cavalry against the romans in spain , where he was involved in the carthaginian victories of castulo and ilorca in 211 bc . after hasdrubal barca departed for italy , masinissa was placed in command of all the carthaginian cavalry in spain , where he fought a successful guerrilla warfare against the roman general scipio africanus ( scipio africanus ) throughout 208 and 207 , while mago barca and hasdrubal gisgo levied and trained new forces . in c.206 bc , with fresh reinforcements , mago and hasdrubal gisgo—supported by masinissa 's numidian cavalry—met scipio at the battle of ilipa , where carthage 's power over hispania was forever broken in arguably scipio africanus 's most brilliant victory . when gaia died in 206 bc , his son masinissa and his brother oezalces quarreled about the inheritance , and syphax was able to conquer considerable parts of eastern numidia . meanwhile , with the carthaginians having been driven from hispania , masinissa concluded that rome was winning the war against carthage and therefore decided to defect to rome . he promised to assist scipio in the invasion of carthaginian territory in africa . this decision was aided by the move by scipio africanus to free masinissa 's nephew , massiva , whom the romans had captured when he had disobeyed his uncle and ridden into battle . having lost the alliance with masinissa , hasdrubal started to look for another ally , which he found in syphax , who married sophonisba , hasdrubal 's daughter , who until the defection had been betrothed to masinissa . the romans supported masinissa 's claim to the numidian throne against syphax , who was nevertheless successful in driving masinissa from power until scipio invaded africa in 204 . masinissa joined the roman forces and participated in the victorious battle of the great plains ( 203 ) . at the battle of bagbrades ( 203 ) , scipio overcame hasdrubal and syphax and , while the roman general concentrated on carthage , gaius laelius and masinissa followed syphax to cirta , where he was captured and handed over to scipio . after the defeat of syphax , masinissa married syphax 's wife sophonisba , but scipio , suspicious of her loyalty , demanded that she be taken to rome and appear in the triumphal parade . to save her from such humiliation , masinissa sent her poison , with which she killed herself . masinissa was now accepted as a loyal ally of rome , and was confirmed by scipio as the king of the massylii . at the battle of zama , masinissa commanded the cavalry ( 6,000 numidian and 3,000 roman ) on scipio 's right wing , scipio delayed the engagement long enough to allow for masinissa to join him . with the battle hanging in the balance , masinissa 's cavalry , having driven the fleeing carthaginian horsemen away , returned and immediately fell onto the rear of the carthaginian lines . this decided the battle and at once hannibal 's army began to collapse . the second punic war was over and for his services masinissa received the kingdom of syphax , and became king of numidia . masinissa was now king of both the massylii and the masaesyli . he showed unconditional loyalty to rome , and his position in africa was strengthened by a clause in the peace treaty of 201 between rome and carthage prohibiting the latter from going to war even in self-defense without roman permission . this enabled masinissa to encroach on the remaining carthaginian territory as long as he judged that rome wished to see carthage further weakened . later life . with roman backing , masinissa established his own kingdom of numidia , west of carthage , with cirta — present day constantine — as its capital city . all of this happened in accordance with roman interest , as they wanted to give carthage more problems with its neighbours . masinissa ’ s chief aim was to build a strong and unified state from the semi-nomadic numidian tribes . to that end , he introduced carthaginian agricultural techniques and forced many numidians to settle as peasant farmers . masinissa and his sons possessed large estates throughout numidia , to the extent that roman authors attributed to him , quite falsely , the sedentarization of the numidians . major towns included capsa , thugga ( modern dougga ) , bulla regia and hippo regius . all through his reign , masinissa extended his territory , and he was cooperating with rome when , towards the end of his life , he provoked carthage to go to war against him . any hopes he may have had of extending his rule right across north africa were dashed , however , when a roman commission headed by the elderly cato the elder ( cato the elder ) came to africa about 155 bc to decide a territorial dispute between masinissa and carthage . animated probably by an irrational fear of a carthaginian revival , but possibly by suspicion of masinissa ’ s ambitions , cato thenceforward advocated , finally with success , the destruction of carthage . based on descriptions from livy , the numidians began raiding around seventy towns in the southern and western sections of carthage 's remaining territory . outraged with their conduct , carthage went to war against them , in defiance of the roman treaty forbidding them to make war on anyone , thus precipitating the third punic war ( 149–146 bc ) . masinissa showed his displeasure when the roman army arrived in africa in 149 bc , but he died early in 148 bc without a breach in the alliance . ancient accounts suggest masinissa lived beyond the age of 90 and was apparently still personally leading the armies of his kingdom when he died . after his death , micipsa succeeded to the throne , micipsa had two sons , hiempsal i and adherbal , who took the power for a short period before being overthrown by their cousin jugurtha . some of his descendants were the elder juba i of numidia ( 85 bc–46 bc ) and younger juba ii ( 52 bc & ndash ; ad 24 ) . in literature , art and film . africa ( late 1330s ) , an epic poem by petrarch sophonisbe ( 1680 ) , a german mourning play by daniel casper von lohenstein cabiria ( 1914 ) , classic italian silent film directed by giovanni pastrone . masinissa is portrayed by vitale di stefano . pride of carthage ( 2005 ) , a novel by david anthony durham file : scipio at the deathbed of masinissa ( c20 ) . jpg scipio at the deathbed of masinissa file : central wall depicting sophonisba requesting help from massinissa ( c16 ) . jpg central wall depicting sophonisba requesting help from massinissa file : giovanni battista tiepolo - scipio africanus freeing massiva - google art project.jpg scipio the african freeing massiva . see also . list of kings of numidia . references . bibliography . livy ( trans . aubrey de sélincourt ) ( 1965 ) . the war with hannibal . new york : penguin classics . external links . massinissa livius.org : massinissa