Nicholas Negroponte

early life . negroponte was born to dimitrios negrepontis , a greek shipping magnate and alpine skier , and grew up in new york city 's upper east side . he has three brothers . his elder one , john negroponte , is the former united states deputy secretary of state . michael negroponte is an emmy award-winning filmmaker . george negroponte is an artist and was president of the drawing center from 2002 to 2007 . he attended buckley school in new york , fay school in massachusetts , le rosey in switzerland , and the choate school ( now choate rosemary hall ) in wallingford , connecticut , from which he graduated in 1961 . subsequently , he studied at mit as both an undergraduate and graduate student in architecture where his research focused on issues of computer-aided design . he earned a master 's degree in architecture from mit in 1966 . despite his accomplished academic career , negroponte has spoken publicly about his dyslexia and his difficulty in reading . . career . mit . negroponte joined the faculty of mit in 1966 . for several years thereafter he divided his teaching time between mit and several visiting professorships at yale , michigan and the university of california , berkeley . in 1967 , negroponte founded mit 's architecture machine group , a combination lab and think tank which studied new approaches to human-computer interaction . in 1985 , negroponte created the mit media lab with jerome b . wiesner . as director , he developed the lab into a pre-eminent laboratory for new media and a high-tech playground for investigating the human-computer interface . negroponte also became a proponent of intelligent agents and personalized online newspaper , for which he popularized the term the daily me . wired . in 1992 , negroponte became involved in the creation of wired magazine as the first investor . from 1993 to 1998 , he contributed a monthly column to the magazine in which he reiterated a basic theme : '' move bits , not atoms . '' negroponte expanded many of the ideas from his wired columns into a bestselling book being digital ( 1995 ) , which made famous his forecasts on how the interactive world , the entertainment world and the information world would eventually merge . being digital was a bestseller and was translated into some forty languages . negroponte is a digital optimist who believed that computers would make life better for everyone . hirst , martin and harrison , john ( 2007 ) communication and new media , oxford university press , p . 20 however , critics such as cass sunstein sunstein , c.r . ( 2001 ) republic.com princeton university press have criticised his techno-utopian ideas for failing to consider the historical , political and cultural realities with which new technologies should be viewed . in the 1980s negroponte predicted that wired technologies such as telephones would become unwired by using airwaves instead of wires or fiber optics , and that unwired technologies such as televisions would become wired—a prediction commonly referred to as the negroponte switch . speaking at a northern telecom meeting in the mid-80s with george gilder . negroponte called it '' trading places '' gilder called it '' the negroponte switch '' . from being digital , 1995 , negroponte , n . p 24 . . later career . in 2000 , negroponte stepped down as director of the media lab as walter bender took over as executive director . however , negroponte retained the role of laboratory chairman . when frank moss was appointed director of the lab in 2006 , negroponte stepped down as lab chairman to focus more fully on his work with one laptop per child ( olpc ) although he retains his appointment as professor at mit ( professor post-tenure of media arts and sciences ) . person overview ‹ nicholas negroponte – mit media lab , at media.mit.edu ( mit.edu ) image : kaye negroponte.jpg thumb right mary lou jepsen , alan kay and nicholas negroponte unveil the 100 laptop in november 2005 . in november 2005 , at the world summit on the information society held in tunis , negroponte unveiled the concept of a 100 laptop computer , the children 's machine , designed for students in the developing world . the price has increased to us 180 , however . the project is part of a broader program by one laptop per child , a nonprofit organization started by negroponte and other media lab faculty to extend internet access in developing countries . negroponte is an active angel investor and has invested in over 30 startup companies over the last 30 years , including zagats , wired , ambient devices , skype and velti . he has sat on several boards , including motorola ( listed on the new york stock exchange ) and velti ( listed on the nasdaq and formerly on the london stock exchange ) . he is also on the advisory board of tti/vanguard . in august 2007 , he was appointed to a five-member special committee with the objective of assuring the continued journalistic and editorial integrity and independence of the wall street journal and other dow jones & company publications and services . the committee was formed as part of the merger of dow jones with news corporation . wall street journal , august 1 , 2007 . '' text of dow jones editorial agreement '' . online edition . retrieved october 21 , 2007 . negroponte 's fellow founding committee members are louis boccardi , thomas bray , jack fuller , and the late former congresswoman jennifer dunn . negroponte has influenced modern day futurists such as david houle . epstein controversy . according to reporting from the mit technology review , in response to the controversy of the mit media lab accepting funding from jeffrey epstein five years after epstein 's conviction for sex trafficking minors , negroponte told mit staff , '' if you wind back the clock , i would still say , 'take it . ' '' mit technology review , september 4 , 2019 . '' mit media lab founder : taking jeffrey epstein ’ s money was justified '' . online edition . retrieved september 7 , 2019 . negroponte was reported to have said that in the fund-raising world these types of occurrences were not out of the ordinary , and they shouldn ’ t be reason enough to cut off business relationships . his comments supporting the donation from a convicted child sex offender reportedly left some of his listeners '' stunned '' and reduced one person present to tears . . references . external links . ( november 2009 ) c-span q & a interview with negroponte , november 25 , 2007 nicholas negroponte keynote at netevents , hong kong inc . first production olpc laptop december 2006 nicholas negroponte q & a at netevents , hong kong december 2006 nicholas negroponte about books and olpc on necn microsoft and intel help deliver a 100 windows 8.1 tablet nicholas negroponte keynote at netevents , hong kong inc . first production olpc laptop december 2006