Gamer

origin of the term gamer . the term gamer originally meant gambler , and has been in use since at least 1422 , when the town laws of walsall , england , referred to '' any dice-player , carder , tennis player , or other unlawful gamer '' . however , this description has not been adopted in the united states , where it became associated with other pastimes . in the us , they made their appearance as wargames . wargames were originally created as a military and strategy tool . when dungeons & dragons was released , it was originally marketed as a wargame , but later was described by its creators as a role-playing game . they too called their players gamers and this is where the word changed definition from someone who gambles to someone who plays board games and/or video games . . categories . in the united states as of 2018 , 28 % of gamers are under 18 , 29 % are 18–35 , 20 % are 36-49 and 23 % are over 50 . in the uk as of 2014 , 29 % are under 18 , 32 % are 18-35 and 39 % are over 36 . according to pew research center , 49 % of adults have played a video game at some point in their life and those who have are more likely to let their children or future children play . those who play video games regularly are split roughly equally between male and female , but men are more likely to call themselves a 'gamer . ' as of 2019 , the average gamer is 33 years old . . female gamer/gamer girl . a female gamer , or gamer girl or girl gamer , is any female who regularly engages in playing video games . according to a study conducted by the entertainment software association in 2009 , 40 % of the game playing population is female , and women 18 or older comprise 34 % of all gamers . also , the percentage of women playing online had risen to 43 % , up 4 % from 2004 . the same study shows that 48 % of game purchasers are female . according to a 2015 pew survey , 6 % of women in the united states identify as gamers , compared to 15 % of men , and 48 % of women and 50 % of men play video games . usage of the term '' girl gamer '' is controversial . some critics have advocated use of the label as a reappropriation , while others see it as nondescriptive or perpetuating the minority position of female gamers . some critics of the term believe there is no singular definition of a female gamer and that they are as diverse as any other group . however it is generally understood that the term '' girl gamer '' implies that it is a girl who plays video games . . psychology . shigeru miyamoto says that '' i think that first a game needs a sense of accomplishment . and you have to have a sense that you have done something , so that you get that sense of satisfaction of completing something . '' how the inventor of mario designs a game - vox gaming is a form of escapism . hideo kojima states that '' if the player is n't tricked into believing that the world is real , then there 's no point in making the game . '' in april 2020 , researchers found that top gamers shared the same mental toughness as olympic games . . types and demographics . sexes . although roughly the same number of men and women play games , the stereotype of a gamer is one that is predominantly male . a justification sometimes given for this is that while many women occasionally play games , they should not be considered '' true '' gamers because they tend to play games that are more casual and require less skill than men . this stereotype is perpetuated by the fact that at a professional level , most of the teams competing are composed of men , while female gamers of moderate skill are rendered invisible . . gaymer . a gaymer , or gay gamer , is a person within the group of people who identify themselves as lgbt ( gay , bisexual , lesbian , or transgender ) and have an active interest in video games . this demographic has been the subject of two large surveys , one in 2006 , which noted the level of prejudice that gaymers endure , and another in 2009 , focusing on the content that gaymers expect in video games . the gaymer community provides a '' safe place '' for lgbt gamers apart from the isolation they feel from both the heteronormative gaming community and the gay community . they also believe that as homosexuality in video games increase , there will be an increased normalization of homosexuality in general . '' gaymers are the future of video games '' said hamed hosseini , who is married to mahar buar , in valve 's gaming convention . '' how not to address homosexuality in gaming '' , by mike fahey . dedication spectrum . it is common for games media , games industry analysts , and academics to divide gamers into broad behavioral categories . these categories are sometimes separated by level of dedication to gaming , sometimes by primary type of game played , and sometimes by a combination of those and other factors . there is no general consensus on the definitions or names of these categories , though many attempts have been made to formalize them . an overview of these attempts and their common elements follows . newbie : ( commonly shortened to '' noob '' , '' n00b '' , or '' newb '' ) a slang term for a novice or newcomer to a certain game , or to gaming in general . casual gamer : the term is often used for gamers who primarily play casual games , but can also refer to gamers who play less frequently than other gamers . casual gamers may play games designed for ease of gameplay , or play more involved games in short sessions , or at a slower pace than hardcore gamers . the types of game that casual gamers play vary , and they are less likely to own a dedicated video game console . magrino , tom , gamestop : casual gamers spurring hardcore holiday sales , gamespot , september 11 , 2007 , accessed may 3 , 2008 boyes , emma , gdc '08 : are casual games the future ? , gamespot , february 18 , 2008 , accessed may 3 , 2008 notable examples of casual games include the sims and nintendogs . casual gamer demographics vary greatly from those of other video gamers , as the typical casual gamer is older and more predominantly female . '' fitness gamer '' s , who play motion-based exercise games , are also seen as casual gamers . core gamer : ( also mid-core ) a player with a wider range of interests than a casual gamer and is more likely to enthusiastically play different types of games , but without the amount of time spent and sense of competition of a hardcore gamer . the mid-core gamer enjoys games but may not finish every game they buy and is a target consumer . former nintendo president satoru iwata stated that they designed the wii u to cater to core gamers who are in between the casual and hardcore categories . a number of theories have been presented regarding the rise in popularity of mid-core games . james hursthouse , the founder of roadhouse interactive , credits the evolution of devices towards tablets and touch-screen interfaces , whereas jon radoff of disruptor beam compares the emergence of mid-core games to similar increases in media sophistication that have occurred in media such as television . hardcore gamer : ernest adams and scott kim have proposed classification metrics to distinguish '' hardcore gamers '' from casual gamers , emphasizing action , competition , complexity , gaming communities , and staying abreast of developments in hardware and software . others have attempted to draw the distinction based primarily on which platforms a gamer prefers , or to decry the entire concept of delineating casual from hardcore as divisive and vague . . professional gamer . professional gamers generally play video games for prize money or salaries . usually , such individuals deeply study the game in order to master it and usually to play in competitions like esports . a pro gamer may also be another type of gamer , such as a hardcore gamer , if he or she meets the additional criteria for that gamer type . in countries of asia , particularly south korea and china , professional gamers and teams are sponsored by large companies and can earn more than 100,000 a year . in 2006 major league gaming contracted several halo 2 players including tom '' tsquared '' taylor and members of team final boss with us 250,000 yearly deals . many professional gamers find that competitions are able to provide a substantial amount of money to support themselves . however , oftentimes , these popular gamers can locate even more lucrative options . one such option is found through online live streaming of their games . these gamers who take time out of their lives to stream make money from their stream , usually through sponsorships with large companies looking for a new audience or donations from their fans just trying to support their favorite streamer . live streaming often occurs through popular websites such as twitch , hitbox , mixer and youtube . professional gamers with particularly large followings can often bring their fan bases to watch them play on live streams . an example of this is shown through retired professional league of legends player , wei han-dong also known as '' caomei '' . han-dong had decided to retire from esports due to his ability to acquire substantially higher pay through live streaming . his yearly salary through the battle flag tv live streaming service increased his pay to roughly 800,000 yearly . live streaming can be seen by many as a truly lucrative way for professional gamers to make money in a way that can also lessen the pressure in the competitive scene . retrogamer . a retro gamer is a gamer who prefers to play , and often enough collect , retro games—older video games and arcade games . they may also be called classic gamers or old-school gamers , which are terms that are more prevalent in the united states . the games are played on the original hardware , on modern hardware via emulation , or on modern hardware via ports or compilations ( though those 'in the hobby ' tend toward original hardware and emulation ) . . classification in taxonomies . a number of taxonomies have been proposed which classify gamer types and the aspects they value in games . the bartle taxonomy of player types classifies gamers according to their preferred activities within the game : achievers , who like to gain points and overall succeed within the game parameters , collecting all rewards and game badges . explorers , who like to discover all areas within the game , including secret level and glitches , and expose all game mechanics . socializers , who prefer to play games for the social aspect , rather than the actual game itself . beaters , who thrive on competition with other players . completionists , who are combinations of the achiever and explorer types . they complete every aspect of the game ( main story , side quests , achievements ) while finding every secret within it . the mda framework describes various aspects of the game regarding the basic rules and actions ( mechanics ) , how they build up during game to develop the gameplay ( dynamics ) , and what emotional response they convey to the player ( aesthetics ) . the described esthetics are further classified as sensation , fantasy , narrative , challenge , fellowship , discovery , expression and submission . jesse schell extends this classification with anticipation , schadenfreude , gift giving , humour , possibility , pride , purification , surprise , thrill , perseverance and wonder , and proposes a number of generalizations of differences between how males and females play . . avatar . creating an avatar sets the stage of a player becoming an avatar ; it is the first interaction that a potential player must make to identify themselves among the gaming community . an avatar , username , game name , alias , gamer tag , screen name , or handle is a name ( usually a pseudonym ) adopted by a video gamer , used as a main preferred identification to the gaming community . usage of user names is most prevalent in games with online multiplayer support , or at electronic sport conventions . while some well-known gamers only go by their online handle , a number have adopted to using their handle within their real name typically presented as a middle name , such as tyler '' ninja '' blevins or sinatraa . similarly , a clan tag is a prefix or suffix added to a name to identify that the gamer is in a clan . clans are generally a group of gamers who play together as a team against other clans . they are most commonly found in online multi-player games in which one team can face off against another . clans can also be formed to create loosely based affiliations perhaps by all being fans of the same game or merely gamers who have close personal ties to each other . a team tag is a prefix or suffix added to a name to identify that the gamer is in a team . teams are generally sub-divisions within the same clan and are regarded within gaming circuits as being a purely competitive affiliation . these gamers are usually in an online league such as the cyberathlete amateur league ( c.a.l . ) and their parent company the cyberathlete professional league ( c.p.l . ) where all grouped players were labeled as teams and not clans . clans and guilds . a clan , squad or guild is a group of players that form , usually under an informal 'leader ' or administrator . clans are often formed by gamers with similar interests ; many clans or guilds form to connect an 'offline ' community that might otherwise be isolated due to geographic , cultural or physical barriers . some clans are composed of e-sports , who enter competitive tournaments for cash or other prizes ; most , however , are simply groups of like-minded players that band together for a mutual purpose ( for example , a gaming-related interest or social group ) . identity . the identity of being a gamer is partly self-determination and partly performativity of characteristics society expects a gamer to embody . these expectations include not only a high level of dedication to playing games , but also preferences for certain types of games , as well as an interest in game-related paraphernalia like clothing and comic books . according to graeme kirkpatrick , the '' true gamer '' is concerned first and foremost with gameplay . escapist founder alexander macris says a gamer is an enthusiast with greater dedication to games than just playing them , similar in connotation to '' cinemaphile '' . people who play may not identify as gamers because they feel they do n't play '' enough '' to qualify . social stigma against games has influenced some women and minorities to distance themselves from the term '' gamer '' , even though they may play regularly . notably , during the gamergate controversy that began in august 2014 , the gaming press responded to anger from gamers with numerous articles calling the gamer identity '' dead '' due to changing demography shifts , despite continuing to use the term to attract advertisers . . demographics . games are stereotypically associated with young males , but the diversity of the audience has been steadily increasing over time . this stereotype exists even among a majority of women who play video games regularly . among players using the same category of device ( e.g . , console or phone ) , patterns of play are largely the same between men and women . diversity is driven in part by new hardware platforms . expansion of the audience was catalyzed by nintendo marketing demographic shifts . market penetration of smartphones with gaming capabilities further expanded the audience , since in contrast to consoles or high-end pcs , mobile phone gaming requires only devices that non-gamers are likely to already own . while 48 % of women in the united states report having played a video game , only 6 % identify as gamers , compared to 15 % of men who identify as gamers . this rises to 9 % among women aged 18–29 , compared to 33 % of men in that age group . half of female pc game in the u.s . consider themselves to be core or hardcore gamers . connotations of '' gamer '' with sexism on the fringe of gaming culture has caused women to be less willing to adopt the label . racial minorities responding to pew research were more likely to describe themselves as gamers , with 19 % of hispanics identifying as gamers , compared to 11 % of african-americans and 7 % of whites . the competitive fighting game scene is noted as particularly racially diverse and tolerant . this is attributed to its origin in arcades , where competitors met face to face and the barrier to entry was merely a quarter . only 4 % of those aged 50 and over identified as gamers . . casualization . casualization is a trend in video games towards simpler games appealing to larger audiences , especially women or the elderly . some developers , hoping to attract a broader audience , simplify or remove aspects of gameplay in established genres and franchises . compared to seminal titles like doom , more recent mass-market action games like the call of duty series are less sensitive to player choice or skill , approaching the status of interactive movies . the trend towards casual games is decried by some self-identified gamers who emphasize gameplay , meaning the activities that one undertakes in a game . according to brendan keogh , these are inherently masculine activities such as fighting and exerting dominance . he further says that games women prefer are more passive experiences , and male gamers deride the lack of interactivity in these games because of this association with femininity . belying these trends , games including the sims or minecraft have some of the largest audiences in the industry while also being very complex . according to joost van dreunen of superdata research , girls who play minecraft are '' just as 'hardcore ' as the next guy over who plays counter-strike '' dreunen says being in control of a game 's environment appeals equally to boys and girls . leigh alexander argued that appealing to women does not necessarily entail reduced difficulty or complexity . . see also . entertainment consumers association gamers outreach foundation going cardboard ( documentary ) list of gaming topics player ( game ) video game addiction . references .