Mutts

characters and story . frame the friendship of mooch and earl focuses on the differences between cats and dogs as human companions and as friends with each other : earl is friendly , loves the company of his human companion and likes to play outside ; mooch is often indifferent to his human companions , except for being fed , and prefers to stay inside or is often seen with earl , his best friend . both animals frequently express themselves through thought balloons when their owners are present . earl . earl is an innocent black jack russell terrier who lives with his human companion ozzie , a bachelor . they love spending time together and taking frequent walks . earl often howls in loneliness when ozzie is away from home . earl spends much of his free time with mooch , either inside or wandering around town visiting other domesticated and wild animals . he loves to eat both human food and his own dog food . it is revealed in a 2011 valentine 's day strip that earl was adopted by ozzie from a shelter . mooch . mooch is a curious tuxedo cat with a large nose who lives next door to earl with his human companions millie ( who often calls him '' moochie , '' '' moo moo cakes , '' or '' shmoochums , '' and he calls her '' shmillie '' ) and frank , a goldfish named sid , and a snail named little earl . mooch is somewhat reclusive , sometimes preferring to stay inside and nap , or play with his little pink sock , rather than go outside with earl . he has a speech impediment that causes him to insert an sh into words , such as yesh ( yes ) , shmilk ( milk ) and shmousie ( mousie ) . he frequently snubs his cat food , much to millie 's chagrin , dislikes car rides , and , like earl , he eats human food at every opportunity . he frequently uses a little girl 's bobbie doll toy car . for years , mooch thought that earl was a '' weird-looking cat '' and did n't realize he was a dog . in 2005 , earl and mooch appeared as guests in blondie and dagwood 's 75th anniversary in the comic strip blondie . in 2004 , pearls before swine crossed over with mutts . in that strip , rat goes to comics re-education camp , where earl and mooch try to teach rat to be a lovable comic strip character . in another strip , frank and mooch are hanging out with many old comic strip characters , including but not limited to : dick tracy , peanuts , and little nemo . other characters . humans . ozzie & nbsp ; – earl 's owner , a 30-something bachelor millie & nbsp ; – mooch 's owner , a middle-aged housewife , married to frank frank & nbsp ; – retired , married to millie butchie & nbsp ; – owner of fatty snax deli , who tries to stop mooch and earl from eating his food . formerly a butcher , the character became a vegan in june 2020 . doozy & nbsp ; – a little girl who loves animals , she gives guard dog food bushy & nbsp ; – doozy 's best friend and a hero to tom-tom ms . lulu & nbsp ; – pet psychic sourpuss 's owner & nbsp ; – sourpuss 's owner , also a friend of millie . animals . bip and bop & nbsp ; – two squirrels who like bonking ground-dwellers with nuts ( described as the antagonists of the strip ) crabby & nbsp ; – an unhappy crab who speaks with frequent expletives ( denoted by stars and typographical symbols ) ; he claims to have gone on many adventures , such as on a pirate ship , inside a whale , and even meeting the popeye cast . guard dog & nbsp ; – a fierce-looking bulldog , perpetually chained in his yard king crab & nbsp ; – the crabbiest of them all , ruler of all he sees ( since he is at the bottom of the ocean , however , he can not see anything ) lollipop & nbsp ; – crabby 's soft-shell wife mcgarry & nbsp ; – a bird who lives at the shore and tries to get crabby not to swear mussels marinara & nbsp ; – a mussel that 's always talking about its muscles ; crabby 's buddy noodles & nbsp ; – an alley cat friend of shtinky's philippe & nbsp ; – a bird always wooing his love , phoebe shnelly & nbsp ; – the house cat for whose love mooch and noodles fight ; only the tip of her ears are seen through her owner 's window shtinky puddin ( a.k.a . jules ) & nbsp ; – a little kitten with a short memory and a very wealthy human companion , he wants to save the world and often speaks out about animal rights , especially saving the tigers sid & nbsp ; – a fish who lives in a goldfish bowl in mooch 's house , and wishes to be free little earl ( a.k.a . '' speed-o '' ) & nbsp ; – mooch 's pet snail obsessed with '' walking '' mooch sourpuss & nbsp ; – an unhappy cat who hates mondays and usually stands on the porch of his house , complaining . woofie & nbsp ; – the big , energetic dog that '' wuvs '' everything and everyone , especially mooch , who does not appreciate the '' wuv '' chippy and monk & nbsp ; – two chipmunks , also sarcastic and spunky members of the mutts book club . lamont & nbsp ; – a groundhog , featured in groundhog day strips moe – a mole , stand in for lamont ; not working sundays . robert & nbsp ; – a bird , friend of earl and mooch wuzzy & nbsp ; – a bear who mooch tries to hibernate with in the winter loretta & nbsp ; – a squirrel who is the '' wife '' of bip and bop shmousie & nbsp ; – a mouse who mooch ( and sometimes earl ) try to get out of his hole so they can catch him . recurring storylines . from time to time there are special sets of daily comic strips , such as shelter stories ( which focus on animals in shelters ) and animal idol ( a parody of american idol ) . more recently , some strips have served as an homage of sorts for the big lebowski , featuring mooch as the dude , with different characters quoting lines from other characters from the film . every summer , earl and mooch and their families visit the jersey shore , where they are joined by crabby , mussels marinara , and mcgarry . from time to time , mooch drapes a towel over his head and delivers oracles or answers to chipmunk 's questions as the shphinx . in the fall , bip and bop embark on their campaign of bonking ground-dwellers ' heads with nuts . occasionally mooch can be seen playing with his little pink sock . mooch also does the mutts book club , where he sits on a rock and reads books to chippy and monk . in the winter , earl and mooch try to hibernate for the winter . at thanksgiving , the characters talk about what they are thankful for . on groundhog day lamont talks to earl and mooch about seeing his shadow or not . for valentine 's day , the spring , thanksgiving , and christmas , they have quotes from people on occasion , and sometimes guard dog sings to the man on the moon who comments on his song . sometimes shtinky puddin ' will hold a sign , then a group of people walk by and the sign will be different . during farm animal awareness week , earl and mooch visit a farm animal sanctuary . every so often , the characters will encounter lifelike drawings of animals . often , mooch can be seen riding doozy 's electric car . animal welfare and animal rights . on occasion , mcdonnell devotes the strip for a week or so to animal welfare issues , especially the adoption of pets from animal shelters . themes include farm animal awareness week and shelter stories , where pet adoption as well as pet shelter life is focused on . mcdonnell also created artwork for the second generation new jersey animal friendly specialty license plate first issued in 2001 . a portion of the revenue from the plates goes to the new jersey state department of health 's animal population control program . also , he speaks out ( usually using shtinky ) about numerous animal rights causes , including seal clubbing , whale hunting , and most of all , saving the tigers . he has also produced several short animated public service announcements advocating animal adoption from shelters . one week there was a reference to the sea shepherd conservation society . . sunday title panels . sunday strips are in color and their title panels are sometimes a tribute to a famous comic strip , a work of art , or another subject , including flash 1 , dalí 's the persistence of memory , elvis presley , trout mask replica , and magritte 's golconda . . setting . mutts is set in new jersey . mutts books . annual collections . black-and-white reproductions of full year 's strips ( until 2005 ) . mutts ( july 1996 ) cats & dogs ( october 1997 ) more shtuff ( september 1998 ) yesh ! ( april 1999 ) our mutts ( august 2000 ) a little look-see ( april 2001 ) what now ( september 2002 ) i want to be the kitty ! ( april 2003 ) dog-eared ( september 2004 ) who let the cat out ? ( april 2005 ) . sundays collections . large-format color reproductions of sunday strips ( until 2005 ) . mutts sundays ( september 1999 ) sunday mornings ( august 2001 ) sunday afternoons ( april 2004 ) sunday evenings ( september 2005 ) . treasury collections . large-format , dailies in black-and-white , sunday in color ( after 2005 ) . everyday mutts : a comic strip treasury ( 2006 ) animal friendly : a mutts treasury ( 2007 ) call of the wild : a mutts treasury ( 2008 ) stop and smell the roses ( 2009 ) earl and mooch ( 2010 ) our little kat king ( 2011 ) bonk ! : a mutts treasury ( 2012 ) cat crazy : a mutts treasury ( 2013 ) living the dream : a mutts treasury ( 2014 ) playtime : a mutts treasury ( 2015 ) year of yesh : a mutts treasury ( 2016 ) lovemutts : a mutts treasury ( 2017 ) you have those wild eyes again , mooch : a new mutts treasury ( 2018 ) hot dogs , hot cats : a new mutts treasury ( 2020 forthcoming ) . miscellaneous . mutts little big book ( 1998 ) mutts : the comic art of patrick mcdonnell ( 2003 ) ( retrospective ) mutts : the gift of nothing ( 2005 ) mutts : just like heaven ( 2005 ) mutts : hug time ( 2007 ) the best of mutts ( 2007 ) shelter stories : love . guaranteed . ( 2008 ) south ( 2008 ) a shtinky little christmas by patrick mcdonnell darling , i love you : poems from the hearts of our glorious mutts and all our animal friends by daniel ladinsky , illustrated by patrick mcdonnell wag ! by patrick mcdonnell . mutts in other languages . iceland : kjölturakkar ( '' lap animals '' ) denmark : mis og fister sweden : morrgan & klös norway : pels og poter ( '' fur and paws '' ) finland : kamut ( '' pals '' ) austria : milou & filou brazil : os vira-latas ( '' the stray dogs '' or '' the mutts '' ) estonian : krantsid ( '' dogs '' ) france : earl & mooch german : mutts - tiere sind auch nur menschen ( '' animals are just people , too '' ) . cancelled film . in july 2011 , it was reported that 20th century fox animation and blue sky studios were developing a feature-length animated film based on the comic . patrick mcdonnell and his brother robert mcdonnell were hired to write the script , while patrick would also executive produce . in late 2014 , patrick delivered the final draft of the film script , which was then , according to him , on a drawing board . the production studio was closed in 2021 . . references . external links . king features : mutts mutts official site