Aphrodite's Child

history . origins . papathanassiou and roussos had already been successful in greece ( playing in the bands the forminx and idols respectively ) when they got together with sideras and koulouris ( born 26 january 1947 , piraeus , greece ) to form a new band . their band 's name was derived from the title of a track from another mercury act , dick campbell , from his sings where it 's at album . their first recording as a band was for george romanos ' album in concert and in studio where they played on four songs and were credited as '' vangelis and his orchestra '' . in the same year , they recorded a two-song demo and submitted it to philips records . it was probably vangelis 's idea that the still-anonymous band should be relocated to london , which would be a more suitable environment for their music , as their country had entered a right-wing dictatorship in 1967 . this decision , however , was not problem-free . koulouris had to stay in greece to fulfill his military service , while the band , on their way to london , got stuck in paris partly because they did not have the correct work permits and partly because of the strikes associated with the may 1968 events . paris , and first album . in paris the band signed to mercury records and were christened '' aphrodite 's child '' by lou reizner , releasing their second single '' rain and tears '' , a reworking of pachelbel 's canon in d major . with this song the band became an overnight sensation in france and several other european countries in which the single charted well , despite the song being sung in english . it sold over one million copies , and was awarded a gold disc . in october of the same year , the band released their first album end of the world . the album contained equal amounts of psychedelic pop songs and ballads in the vein of procol harum or the moody blues . the band began touring around europe , and in january 1969 they recorded a single in italian for the sanremo festival , in which they did not participate . their next hit single was '' i want to live '' , an arrangement of the song '' plaisir d'amour '' . recording in london and second album . for their second album , the band traveled to london to record at the trident studios . the first single from the album , '' let me love , let me live '' was released in november , while the album it 's five o'clock came out in january 1970 . it featured more successful ballads ( like the title song ) , but also songs that crossed many musical genres including country rock . after their second album , the band began touring again , this time without vangelis who preferred to stay in paris and record the music for henry chapier 's film , sex power . vangelis was replaced on stage by harris halkitis . the year 1970 went by with the band promoting their latest album and vangelis working on his first film project . to keep the steady flow of hits , the band released another single in august 1970 , '' spring , summer , winter and fall '' . third album – 666 , and breakup . the band began to record , late in 1970 , a musical adaptation of the bible book of revelation , entitled 666 . koulouris , having finished his greek army duty , rejoined the band . however , relations between the band members were declining , and things continued to worsen during the methodically slow recording process . essentially , the ambitious double album was vangelis 's concept , created with an outside lyricist , costas ferris . the music vangelis composed was much more psychedelic and progressive rock oriented than anything the band had done before . this did not sit well with the other band members , who wished to continue in the pop direction that had brought them success . furthermore , roussos was being groomed for a solo career , having recorded and released his first solo single '' we shall dance '' ( with sideras on drums ) and his first solo album on the greek side of my mind . meanwhile , vangelis turned his attention to recording the score for the 1970 french tv documentary l'apocalypse des animaux , and worked on a single with his then-girlfriend vilma ladopoulou , performing with koulouris under the pseudonym '' alpha beta '' . by the time 666 was finally released almost two years later in june 1972 , the band had already split up , despite having sold over 20 million albums and remaining popular throughout europe . both vangelis and roussos pursued successful solo careers : roussos had a thriving solo career as a pop singer , and vangelis went on to become a highly regarded electronic music artist . vangelis 's work composing film score brought him much success for the next three decades , including an oscar for chariots of fire . vangelis 's other soundtracks include ridley scott 's blade runner ( 1982 ) , to which roussos contributed vocals , 1492 : conquest of paradise ( 1992 ) and oliver stone 's alexander ( 2004 ) . roussos died in 2015 . koulouris worked with both roussos and vangelis on occasion , while sideras pursued a less successful solo career , releasing two albums and four singles after the break-up . as of 2017 , sideras still lived in greece and performed with his band . influence and legacy . despite their short existence and lack of hit singles outside of europe , the band is still regarded as a cult band . their album 666 is often considered their masterpiece , in addition to being one of rock music 's first concept albums . the album caught the attention of many musicians in the progressive rock field , including yes frontman jon anderson , who would later collaborate with vangelis ( as jon and vangelis ) . contemporary progressive rock acts such as astra have also cited the band as an influence . covers and samples . covers . in 2001 , the german heavy metal band axxis included a cover on their album eyes of darkness . in 2004 , gregorian released a cover of '' the four horsemen '' on their album the dark side . in 2005 , german dance group scooter released a techno version of '' the four horsemen '' called the leading horse on their album who 's got the last laugh now ? . in 2015 , the greek band cyanna mercury ( formerly known as cyanna ) covered '' the four horsemen '' on the death roots syndicate compilation the end . '' the four horsemen '' has proven an especially popular cover among european heavy metal bands . bands that have covered the song include the italian band death ss ( on their 2006 album the 7th seal ) , the swedish doom metal band griftegård ( on an ep released through ván records in 2015 ) , and the greek black metal band rotting christ ( on their 2016 album rituals ) . samples . in 1990 , several tracks from the 666 album were sampled for the first enigma album , mcmxc a.d . the verve 's song '' the rolling people '' ( from their 1997 album urban hymns ) borrows its title from '' altamont '' , while also containing musical elements of '' the four horsemen '' . frontman richard ashcroft reportedly mentioned 666 as a strong influence on his music . beck 's song '' chemtrails '' ( from his 2008 album modern guilt ) also resembles '' the four horsemen '' . discography . albums . end of the world ( october 1968 ) it 's five o'clock ( january 1970 ) 666 ( june 1972 ) . singles . . compilation albums . reflection ( 1971 ) best of aphrodite 's child ( 1975 ) aphrodite 's child 's greatest hits ( 1995 ) the singles ( 1995 ) the complete collection ( 1996 ) babylon the great：an introduction to aphrodite 's child ( 2002 ) the singles+ ( 2003 ) . bibliography . dinos dimatatis , get that beat : to elliniko rock , 1960s–1970s . thessaloniki : katsanos , 1998 . references . external links . aphrodite 's child world discography at www.demisroussos.org