Carmarthenshire

history . stone tools found in coygan cave , near laugharne indicate the presence of hominins , probably neanderthals , at least 40,000 years ago , though , as in the rest of the british isles , continuous habitation by modern humans is not known before the end of the younger dryas , around 11,500 years bp . pettitt and white , pp . 489 , 497 before the romans arrived in britain , the land now forming the county of carmarthenshire was part of the kingdom of the demetae who gave their name to the county of dyfed ; it contained one of their chief settlements , moridunum , now known as carmarthen . the romans established two forts in south wales , one at caerwent to control the southeast of the country , and one at carmarthen to control the southwest . the fort at carmarthen dates from around 75 ad , and there is a roman amphitheatre nearby , so this probably makes carmarthen the oldest continually occupied town in wales . carmarthenshire has its early roots in the region formerly known as ystrad tywi ( '' vale of the river tywi '' ) and part of the kingdom of deheubarth during the high middle ages , with the court at dinefwr . after the normans had subjugated england they tried to subdue wales . carmarthenshire was disputed between the normans and the welsh lords and many of the castles built around this time , first of wood and then stone , changed hands several times . following the conquest of wales by edward i , the region was reorganized by the statute of rhuddlan in 1284 into carmarthenshire . edward i made carmarthen the capital of this new county , establishing his courts of chancery and his exchequer there , and holding the court of great sessions in wales in the town . the normans transformed carmarthen into an international trading port , the only staple port in wales . merchants imported food and french wines and exported wool , pelts , leather , lead and tin . in the late medieval period the county 's fortunes varied , as good and bad harvests occurred , increased taxes were levied by england , there were episodes of plague , and recruitment for wars removed the young men . carmarthen was particularly susceptible to plague as it was brought in by flea-infested rats on board ships from southern france . in 1405 , owain glyndŵr captured carmarthen castle and several other strongholds in the neighbourhood . however , when his support dwindled , the principal men of the county returned their allegiance to king henry v . during the english civil war , roundhead under colonel roland laugharne besieged and captured carmarthen castle but later abandoned the cause , and joined the cavalier . in 1648 , carmarthen castle was recaptured by the parliamentarians , and oliver cromwell ordered it to be slighted . the first industrial canal in wales was built in 1768 to convey coal from the gwendraeth valley to the coast , and the following year , the earliest tramroad bridge was on the tramroad built alongside the canal . during the napoleonic wars ( 1799–1815 ) there was increased demand for coal , iron and agricultural goods , and the county prospered . the landscape changed as much woodland was cleared to make way for more food production , and mills , power stations , mines and factories sprang up between llanelli and pembrey . carmarthenshire was at the centre of the rebecca riots around 1840 , when local farmers and agricultural workers dressed as women and rebelled against higher taxes and tolls . on 1 april 1974 , under the local government act 1972 , carmarthenshire joined cardiganshire and pembrokeshire in the new county of dyfed ; carmarthenshire was divided into three districts : carmarthen , llanelli and dinefwr . twenty-two years later this amalgamation was reversed when , under the local government ( wales ) act 1994 , the original county boundaries were reinstated . . geography . the county is bounded to the north by ceredigion , to the east by powys ( historic county brecknockshire ) , neath port talbot ( historic county glamorgan ) and swansea ( also glamorgan ) , to the south by the bristol channel and to the west by pembrokeshire . much of the county is upland and hilly . the black mountain range dominates the east of the county , with the lower foothills of the cambrian mountains to the north across the valley of the river towy . the south coast contains many fishing villages and sandy beaches . the highest point ( county top ) is the minor summit of fan foel , height , which is a subsidiary top of the higher mountain of fan brycheiniog , height ( the higher summit , as its name suggests , is actually across the border in brecknockshire/powys ) . carmarthenshire is the largest historic county by area in wales . the county is drained by several important rivers which flow southwards into the bristol channel , especially the river towy , and its several tributaries , such as the river cothi . the towy is the longest river flowing entirely within wales . other rivers include the loughor ( which forms the eastern boundary with glamorgan ) , the river gwendraeth and the river taf . the river teifi forms much of the border between carmarthenshire and ceredigion , and there are a number of towns in the teifi valley which have communities living on either side of the river and hence in different counties . carmarthenshire has a long coastline which is deeply cut by the estuaries of the loughor in the east and the gwendraeth , tywi and taf , which enter the sea on the east side of carmarthen bay . the coastline includes notable beaches such as pendine sands and cefn sidan sands , and large areas of foreshore are uncovered at low tide along the loughor and towy estuaries . the principal towns in the county are ammanford , burry port , carmarthen , kidwelly , llanelli , llandeilo , newcastle emlyn , llandovery , st clears , and whitland . the principal industries are agriculture , forestry , fishing and tourism . although llanelli is by far the largest town in the county , the county town remains carmarthen , mainly due to its central location . carmarthenshire is predominantly an agricultural county , with only the southeastern area having any significant amount of industry . the best agricultural land is in the broad tywi valley , especially its lower reaches . with its fertile land and agricultural produce , carmarthenshire is known as the '' garden of wales '' . the lowest bridge over the river is at carmarthen , and the towi estuary cuts the southwesterly part of the county , including llansteffan and laugharne , off from the more urban southeastern region . this area is also bypassed by the main communication routes into pembrokeshire . a passenger ferry service used to connect ferryside with llansteffan until the early part of the twentieth century . . economy . agriculture and forestry are the main sources of income over most of the county of carmarthenshire . on improved pastures , dairying is important and in the past , the presence of the railway enabled milk to be transported to the urban areas of england . the creamery at whitland is now closed but milk processing still takes place at newcastle emlyn where mozzarella cheese is made . on upland pastures and marginal land , livestock rearing of cattle and sheep is the main agricultural activity . the estuaries of the loughor and towy provide pickings for the cockle industry . llanelli , ammanford and the upper parts of the gwendraeth valley are situated on the south wales coalfield . the opencast mining activities in this region have now ceased but the old mining settlements with terraced housing remain , often centred on their nonconformist chapels . kidwelly had a tinning industry in the eighteenth century , with llanelli following not long after , so that by the end of the nineteenth century , llanelli was the world-centre of the industry . there is little trace of these industrial activities today . llanelli and burry port served at one time for the export of coal , but trade declined , as it did from the ports of kidwelly and carmarthen as their estuaries silted up . country towns in the more agricultural part of the county still hold regular markets where livestock is traded . in the north of the county , in and around the teifi valley , there was a thriving woollen industry in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . here water-power provided the energy to drive the looms and other machinery at the mills . the village of dre-fach felindre at one time contained twenty-four mills and was known as the '' huddersfield of wales '' . the demand for woollen cloth declined in the twentieth century and so did the industry . the woollen mills of wales , a leaflet from national museum wales . in 2014 , west wales was identified as the worst-performing region in the united kingdom along with the south wales valleys . the gross value added economic indicator showed a figure of £14,763 per head in these regions , as compared with a gva of £22,986 for cardiff and the vale of glamorgan . the welsh assembly government is aware of this , and helped by government initiatives and local actions , opportunities for farmers to diversify have emerged . these include farm tourism , rural crafts , specialist food shops , farmers ' markets and added-value food products . in 2015 , in an attempt to boost the local economy , carmarthenshire county council produced a fifteen-year plan that highlighted six projects which it hoped would create five thousand new jobs . the sectors involved would be in the '' creative industries , tourism , agri-food , advanced manufacturing , energy and environment , and financial and professional services '' . . local government . carmarthenshire became an administrative county with a county council taking over functions from the quarter sessions under the local government act 1888 . under the local government act 1972 , the administrative county of carmarthenshire was abolished on 1 april 1974 and the area of carmarthenshire became three districts within the new county of dyfed : carmarthen , dinefwr and llanelli . under the local government ( wales ) act 1994 , dyfed was abolished on 1 april 1996 and carmarthenshire was re-established as a county . the three districts united to form a unitary authority which had the same boundaries as the traditional county of carmarthenshire . in 2003 , the clynderwen community council area was transferred to the administrative county of pembrokeshire . . demography and the welsh language . prior to the industrial revolution , carmarthen and wrexham were the two most populous towns in wales . in 1931 , the county 's population was 171,445 and in 1951 , 164,800 . at the census in 2011 , carmarthenshire had a population of 183,777 . population levels have thus dipped and then increased again over the course of eighty years . the population density in carmarthenshire is 0.8 persons per hectare compared to 1.5 per hectare in as a whole . carmarthenshire was the most populous of the five historic counties of wales to remain majority welsh-speaking throughout the 20th century . according to the 1911 census , 84.9 per cent of the county 's population were welsh-speaking ( compared with 43.5 per cent in all of wales ) , with 20.5 per cent of carmarthenshire 's overall population being monolingual welsh-speakers . in 1931 , 82.3 per cent could speak welsh and in 1951 , 75.2 per cent . by the 2001 census , 50.3 per cent of people living in carmarthenshire could speak welsh , with 39 per cent being able to read and write the language as well . the 2011 census showed a further decline , with 43.9 per cent speaking welsh , making it a minority language in the county for the first time . however , the 2011 census also showed that 3,000 more people could understand spoken welsh than in 2001 and that 60 % of 5-14 year-olds could speak welsh ( a 5 % increase since 2001 ) . . landmarks . with its strategic location and history , the county is rich in archaeological remains such as forts , earthworks and standing stones . carn goch is one of the most impressive iron age forts and stands on a hilltop near llandeilo . the bronze age is represented by chambered cairns and menhir on mynydd llangyndeyrn , near llangyndeyrn . castles that can be easily accessed include carreg cennen , dinefwr , kidwelly , castle , llansteffan and newcastle emlyn castle . there are the ruinous remains of talley abbey , and the coastal village of laugharne is for ever associated with dylan thomas . stately homes in the county include aberglasney , golden grove and newton house . there are plenty of opportunities in the county for hiking , observing wildlife and admiring the scenery . these include brechfa forest , the pembrey country park , the millennium coastal park at llanelli , the wwt llanelli wetlands centre and the carmel national nature reserve . there are large stretches of golden sands and the wales coast path now provides a continuous walking route around the whole of wales . the national botanic garden of wales displays plants from wales and from all around the world , and the carmarthenshire county museum , the national wool museum , the parc howard museum , the pendine museum of speed and the west wales museum of childhood all provide opportunities to delve into the past . dylan thomas boathouse where the author wrote many of his works can be visited , as can the roman-worked dolaucothi gold mines . . sports and leisure . activities available in the county include rambling , cycling , fishing , kayaking , canoeing , sailing , horse riding , caving , abseiling and coasteering . carmarthen town a.f.c . plays in the cymru premier . they won the welsh football league cup in the 1995–96 season , and since then have won the welsh cup once and the welsh league cup twice . llanelli town a.f.c . play in the welsh football league division two . the club won the welsh premier league and loosemores challenge cup in 2008 and won the welsh cup in 2011 , but after experiencing financial difficulties , were wound up and reformed under the present title in 2013 . scarlets is the regional professional rugby union team that plays in the pro14 , they play their home matches at their ground , parc y scarlets . honours include winning the 2003/04 and 2016/17 pro12 . llanelli rfc is a semi-professional rugby union team that play in the welsh premier division , also playing home matches at parc y scarlets . among many honours , they have been wru challenge cup winners on fourteen occasions and frequently taken part in the heineken cup . west wales raiders , based in llanelli , represent the county in rugby league . some sporting venues utilise disused industrial sites . ffos las racecourse was built on the site of an open-pit mining after mining operations ceased . opened in 2009 , it was the first racecourse built in the united kingdom for eighty years and has regular race-days . machynys is a championship golf course opened in 2005 and built as part of the llanelli waterside regeneration plan . pembrey circuit is a motor racing circuit near pembrey village , considered the home of welsh motorsport , providing racing for cars , motorcycles , karts and trucks . it was opened in 1989 on a former airfield , is popular for testing and has hosted many events including the british touring car championship twice . the 2018 tour of britain cycling race started at pembrey on 2 september 2018 . . transport . carmarthenshire is served by the main line railway service operated by transport for wales rail which links london paddington , and to southwest wales . the main hub is carmarthen railway station where some services from the east terminate . the line continues westwards with several branches which serve pembroke dock , milford haven and fishguard harbour ( for the ferry to rosslare europort and connecting trains to dublin connolly ) . the heart of wales line takes a scenic route through mid-wales and links llanelli with craven arms , from where passengers can travel on the welsh marches line to shrewsbury . the a40 , a48 , a484 and a485 converge on carmarthen . the m4 route that links south wales with london , terminates at junction 49 , the pont abraham services , to continue northwest as the dual carriageway , and to finish with its junction with the a40 in carmarthen . llanelli is linked to m4 junction 48 by the a4138 . the a40 links carmarthen to llandeilo , llandovery and brecon to the east , and with st clears , whitland and haverfordwest to the west . the a484 links llanelli with carmarthen by a coastal route and continues northwards to cardigan , and via the a486 and a487 to aberystwyth , and the a485 links carmarthen to lampeter . there are local bus services between the main centres of population , and longer distance services to cardiff and beyond . a bus service known as '' bwcabus '' operates in the north of the county , offering customised transport to rural dwellers . two heritage railways , the gwili railway and the teifi valley railway , use the track of the carmarthen and cardigan railway that at one time ran from carmarthen to newcastle emlyn , but did not reach cardigan . . cuisine . carmarthenshire has rich , fertile farmland and a productive coast with estuaries providing a range of foods that motivate many home cooks and chefs . retrieved 7 august 2010 pressdee , c . , ‘ colin pressdee ’ s welsh coastal cookery , bbc books , 1995 , retrieved 7 august 2010