Musket

etymology . according to the etymology dictionary , firearms were often named after animals , and the word musket derived from the french word mousquette , which is a male sparrowhawk . an alternative theory is that derives from the 16th century french mousquet , -ette , from the italian moschetto , -etta , meaning the bolt of a crossbow . the italian moschetto is a diminutive of mosca , a fly . the concise oxford dictionary of english etymology , t f hoad , oxford university press , 1986 p.305 . . terminology . the first recorded usage of the term '' musket '' or moschetto appeared in europe in the year 1499 . evidence of the musket as a type of firearm does not appear until 1521 when it was used to describe a heavy arquebus capable of penetrating heavy armor . this version of the musket fell out of use after the mid-16th century with the decline of heavy armor ; however , the term itself stuck around as a general descriptor for 'shoulder arms ' fireweapons into the 19th century . the differences between the arquebus and musket post-16th century are therefore not entirely clear , and the two have been used interchangeably on several occasions . history . heavy arquebus . the heavy arquebus known as the musket appeared in europe by 1521 . in response to firearms , thicker armor was produced , from 15 & nbsp ; kg in the 15th century to 25 & nbsp ; kg in the late 16th century . armour that was 2 & nbsp ; mm thick required nearly three times as much energy to penetrate as armour that was only 1 & nbsp ; mm thick . during the siege of parma in 1521 , many spanish soldiers reportedly used an '' arquebus with rest '' , a weapon much larger and more powerful than the regular arquebus . however , at this point , long-barreled , musket-caliber weapons had been in use as wall-defence weapons in europe for almost a century . the musketeers were the first infantry to give up armour entirely . musketeers began to take cover behind walls or in sunken lanes and sometimes acted as skirmishers to take advantage of their ranged weapons . in england , the musket barrel was cut down from to around 1630 . c.h.firth 1972 4th ed . cromwell 's army p . 80 muskets of the 16th–19th centuries were accurate enough to hit a target of 50 centimetres in diameter at a distance of 100 metres . at the same distance , musket bullets could penetrate a steel bib about 4 millimetres thick , or a wooden shield about 130 millimetres thick . the maximum range of the bullet was 1100 metres . the speed of the bullets was between 450–540 m/s , and the kinetic energy was 3000–4000 j . robins , new principles of gunnery : containing the determination of the force of gun-powder . flintlock musket . the heavy musket went out of favor around the same time the snaphance flintlock was invented in europe , in 1550 . after the arrival of the snaphance , and then the '' true '' flintlock in the late 17th century , the arquebus died out as a term for firearms and flintlocks are not usually associated with arquebuses . the term '' musket '' itself however , stuck around as a general term for 'shoulder arms ' fireweapons into the 1800s . the differences between the arquebus and musket post-16th century are therefore not entirely clear , and the two have been used interchangeably on several occasions . the number of musketeers relative to pikemen increased partly because they were now more mobile than pikemen . e.g . in 1644 , in the english civil war the king escaping two parliamentary armies left all his pikemen behind in his fortress of oxford because of the need for speed . c.h.firth 1972 4th ed . cromwell 's army p78 an intermediate between the arquebus and the musket was the caliver , a standardized arquebus deriving from the english corruption of '' calibre '' ( spelled '' caliber '' in the us ) , which appeared in europe around 1567-9 . asia . matchlock firearms were used in india by 1500 , in đại việt by 1516 , and in southeast asia by 1540 . according to a burma source from the late 15th century , king meng khoum ii would not dare attack the besieged town of prome due to the defenders ' use of cannon and small arms that were described as muskets , although these were probably early matchlock arquebuses or wall guns . howard ricketts , firearms ( 1962 ) the portuguese may have introduced muskets to sri lanka during their conquest of the coastline and low lands in 1505 , as they regularly used short barreled matchlocks during combat . however , p.e.p.deraniyagala points out that the sinhalese term for gun , 'bondikula ' , matches the arabic term for gun , 'bunduk ' . also , certain technical aspects of the early sri lankan matchlock were similar to the matchlocks used in the middle east , thus forming the generally accepted theory that the musket was not entirely new to the island by the time the portuguese came . in any case , soon native sri lankan kingdoms , most notably the kingdom of sitawaka and the kandyan kingdom , manufactured hundreds of lankan muskets , with a unique bifurcated stock , longer barrel and smaller calibre , which made it more efficient in directing and using the energy of the gunpowder . these were mastered by native soldiers to the point where , according to the portuguese chronicler , queirós , they could '' fire at night to put out a match '' and '' by day at 60 paces would sever a knife with four or five bullets '' and '' send as many on the same spot in the target . '' perera , c . gaston . '' chapter v : weapons used , firearms . '' kandy fights the portuguese . colombo : vijitha yapa publications , 2007 . 83 to 102 . print . arquebuses were imported by the ming dynasty ( 1368–1644 ) at an uncertain point , but the ming only began fielding matchlocks in 1548 . the chinese used the term '' bird-gun '' to refer to arquebuses and turkish arquebuses may have reached china before portuguese ones . in zhao shizhen 's book of 1598 ad , the shenqipu , there were illustrations of ottoman turkish musketmen with detailed illustrations of their muskets , alongside european musketeers with detailed illustrations of their muskets . there was also illustration and description of how the chinese had adopted the ottoman kneeling position in firing while using european-made muskets , though zhao shizhen described the turkish muskets as being superior to the european muskets . the wu pei chih ( 1621 ) later described turkish muskets that used a rack-and-pinion mechanism , which was not known to have been used in any european or chinese firearms at the time . despite initial reluctance , the safavid empire of persia rapidly acquired the art of making and using handguns . a venetian envoy , vincenzo di alessandri , in a report presented to the council of ten on 24 september 1572 , observed : in the 18th century , regular light infantry began to emerge . in contrast to the front-line infantry , they fought in the loose formation , used natural shelters and terrain folds . in addition , they were better prepared to target single targets . this type of troops was designed to fight against irregular enemy troops , such as militia , guerrillas and natives . but at the beginning of the 19th century , the number of light infantry is increasing dramatically . in the french army , light infantry accounted for 25 % of the infantry . in the russian army , 50 light infantry regiments and one company in each battalion were formed , which accounted for about 40 % of light infantry in the entire infantry . british light infantry & rifle tactics of the napoleonic wars . attack column . in the 19th century , a new tactic was devised by the french during the french revolutionary wars . this was the colonne d'attaque , or attack column , consisting of one regiment up to two brigades of infantry . instead of advancing slowly all across the battlefield in line formations , the french infantry were brought forward in such columns , preceded by masses of skirmishers to cover and mask their advance . the column would then normally deploy into line right before engaging the enemy with either fire or bayonet . this allowed the french revolutionary and napoleonic infantry a much greater degree of mobility compared to their ancien régime opponents , and also allowed much closer cooperation of infantry with cavalry and artillery , which were free to move in between the infantry columns of the former rather than being trapped in between the linear formation of the latter . the 'colonne d'attaque ' was henceforth adopted by all european armies during and after the napoleonic wars . while some british historians , such as sir charles oman , have postulated that it was the standard french tactic to charge enemy lines of infantry head on with their columns , relying on the morale effect of the huge column , and hence were often beaten off by the devastating firepower of the redcoats , more current research into the subject has revealed that such occasions were far from the norm , and that the french normally tried deploying into lines before combat as well . . parts of a musket . center the phrase '' lock , stock , and barrel '' refers to the three main parts of a musket . '' dictionary of phrase and fable '' by ebenezer cobham brewer , published by cassell and company ltd , 1900 trigger guards began appearing in 1575 . bayonets were attached to muskets in several parts of the world from the late 16th to 17th centuries . locks came in many different varieties . early matchlock and wheel lock mechanisms were replaced by later flintlock mechanisms and finally percussion locks . in some parts of the world , such as china and japan , the flintlock mechanism never caught on and they continued using matchlocks until the 19th century when percussion locks were introduced . in the latter half of the 18th century , several improvements were added to the musket . in 1750 , a detent was added to prevent the sear from catching in the half-cock notch . a roller bearing was introduced in 1770 to reduce friction and increase sparks . in 1780 , waterproof pans were added . ammunition . the minié ball , which despite its name was actually bullet-shaped and not ball-shaped , was developed in the 1840s . the minié ball had an expanding skirt which was intended to be used with rifled barrels , leading to what was called the rifled musket , which came into widespread use in the mid-19th century . the minié ball was small enough in diameter that it could be loaded as quickly as a round ball , even with a barrel that had been fouled with black powder residue after firing many shots , and the expanding skirt of the minié ball meant that it would still form a tight fit with the barrel and impart a good spin into the round when fired . this gave the rifled musket an effective range of several hundred yards , which was a significant improvement over the smooth bore musket . for example , combat ranges of 300 yards were achievable using the rifled muskets of the american civil war . musketeers often used paper cartridges , which served a purpose similar to that of modern metallic cartridges in combining bullet and powder charge . a musket cartridge consisted of a pre-measured amount of black powder and ammunition such as a round ball , nessler ball or minié ball all wrapped up in paper . cartridges would then be placed in a cartridge box , which would typically be worn on the musketeer 's belt during a battle . unlike a modern cartridge , this paper cartridge was not simply loaded into the weapon and fired . instead , the musketeer would tear open the paper ( usually with his teeth ) , pour some of the powder into the pan and the rest into the barrel , follow it with the ammunition ( and the paper as wadding if not using a minié ball ) , then use the ramrod as normal to push it all into the barrel . while not as fast as loading a modern cartridge , this method did significantly speed up the loading process since the pre-measured charges meant that the musketeer did not have to carefully measure out the black powder with every shot . '' civil war weapons and equipment '' by russ a . pritchard , jr . , russ a . pritchard jr . , william davis , published by globe pequot , 2003 . accessories . thumb some ramrods were equipped with threaded ends , allowing different attachments to be used . one of the more common attachments was a ball screw or ball puller , which was a screw that could be screwed into the lead ball to remove it if it had become jammed in the barrel , similar to the way that a corkscrew is used to remove a wine cork . another attachment was called a worm , which was used to clear debris from the barrel , such as paper wadding that had not been expelled . some worm designs were sturdy enough that they could be used to remove stuck ammunition . the worm could also be used with a small piece of cloth for cleaning . a variation on the worm called the '' screw and wiper '' combined the typical design of a worm with a ball puller 's screw . '' images of the recent past : readings in historical archaeology '' by charles e . orser , published by rowman altamira , 1996 . see also . grenadier line infantry musketoon pike and shot . references . bibliography . . . . . . . . . hadden , r . lee . 2005 . '' confederate boys and peter monkeys . '' armchair general . january 2005 . adapted from a talk given to the geological society of america on 25 march 2004 . . . . . . . . . . . . . schmidtchen , volker ( 1977a ) , '' riesengeschütze des 15 . jahrhunderts . technische höchstleistungen ihrer zeit '' , technikgeschichte 44 ( 2 ) : 153–173 ( 153–157 ) schmidtchen , volker ( 1977b ) , '' riesengeschütze des 15 . jahrhunderts . technische höchstleistungen ihrer zeit '' , technikgeschichte 44 ( 3 ) : 213–237 ( 226–228 ) . . . external links . history of numerous muskets infantry tactics during the napoleonic wars – musketry the arquebus and matchlock musket page musket , bayonet and sword