Montgomery bus boycott

victory . pressure increased across the country . the related civil suit was heard in federal district court and , on june 5 , 1956 , the court ruled in browder v . gayle ( 1956 ) that alabama 's racial segregation laws for buses were unconstitutional . as the state appealed the decision , the boycott continued . the case moved on to the united states supreme court . on november 13 , 1956 , the supreme court upheld the district court 's ruling . the bus boycott officially ended december 20 , 1956 , after 381 days . the montgomery bus boycott resounded far beyond the desegregation of public buses . it stimulated activism and participation from the south in the national civil rights movement and gave king national attention as a rising leader . wright , h . r : the birth of the montgomery bus boycott , page 123 . charro book co . , inc . , 1991 . . aftermath . white backlash against the court victory was quick , brutal , and , in the short-term , effective . two days after the inauguration of desegregated seating , someone fired a shotgun through the front door of martin luther king 's home . a day later , on christmas eve , white men attacked a black teenager as she exited a bus . four days after that , two buses were fired upon by snipers . in one sniper incident , a pregnant woman was shot in both legs . on january 10 , 1957 , bombs destroyed five black churches and the home of reverend robert graetz , one of the few white montgomerians who had publicly sided with the mia . the city suspended bus service for several weeks on account of the violence . according to legal historian randall kennedy , '' when the violence subsided and service was restored , many black montgomerians enjoyed their newly recognized right only abstractly . in practically every other setting , montgomery remained overwhelmingly segregated . '' on january 23 , a group of klansmen ( who would later be charged for the bombings ) lynched a black man , willie edwards , on the pretext that he was dating a white woman . the city 's elite moved to strengthen segregation in other areas , and in march 1957 passed an ordinance making it '' unlawful for white and colored persons to play together , or , in company with each other . in any game of cards , dice , dominoes , checkers , pool , billiards , softball , basketball , baseball , football , golf , track , and at swimming pools , beaches , lakes or ponds or any other game or games or athletic contests , either indoors or outdoors . '' later in the year , montgomery police charged seven klansmen with the bombings , but all of the defendants were acquitted . about the same time , the alabama supreme court ruled against martin luther king 's appeal of his '' illegal boycott '' conviction . rosa parks left montgomery due to death threats and employment blacklisting . according to charles silberman , '' by 1963 , most negroes in montgomery had returned to the old custom of riding in the back of the bus . '' the national memorial for peace and justice contains , among other things , a sculpture '' dedicated to the women who sustained the montgomery bus boycott '' , by dana king , to help illustrate the civil rights period . the memorial opened in downtown montgomery , alabama on april 26 , 2018 . . participants . people . ralph abernathy hugo black james f . blake aurelia browder mary fair burks johnnie carr claudette colvin clifford durr mildred fahrni georgia gilmore robert graetz fred gray grover c . hall , jr . coretta scott king martin luther king jr . theodora lacey edgar nixon rosa parks mother pollard jo ann robinson bayard rustin nate singleton glenn smiley mary louise smith . organizations . committee for nonviolent integration fellowship of reconciliation georgia gilmore men of montgomery montgomery improvement association national association for the advancement of colored people women 's political council . see also . 1957 alexandra bus boycott boycott ( 2001 film ) bristol bus boycott , 1963 the legacy museum the long walk home ( 1990 film ) martin luther king and the montgomery story rosa parks act rosa parks museum . references . further reading . berg , allison , '' trauma and testimony in black women 's civil rights memoirs : the montgomery bus boycott and the women who started it , warriors do n't cry , and from the mississippi contributionsdelta '' , journal of women 's history , 21 ( fall 2009 ) , 84–107 . branch , taylor . parting the waters : america in the king years , 1954-63 ( 1988 ; new york : simon & schuster/touchstone , 1989 ) . carson , clayborne , et al . , editors , eyes on the prize civil rights reader : documents , speeches , and first hand accounts from the black freedom struggle ( new york : penguin books , 1991 ) . freedman , russell , '' freedom walkers : the story of the montgomery bus boycott '' garrow , david j . bearing the cross : martin luther king jr . and the southern christian leadership conference . ( 1986 ) garrow , david j . , editor , the montgomery bus boycott and the women who started it : the memoir of jo ann gibson robinson ( knoxville : the university of tennessee press , 1987 ) . king , martin luther , jr . , stride toward freedom . morris , aldon d . , the origins of the civil rights movement : black communities organizing for change ( new york : the free press , 1984 ) . raines , howell , my soul is rested : the story of the civil rights movement in the deep south . robnett , belinda . how long ? how long ? : african american women in the struggle for civil rights . oxford university press . ( 1997 ) thornton iii , j . mills . '' challenge and response in the montgomery bus boycott of 1955–1956 . '' alabama review 67.1 ( 2014 ) : 40-112 . thornton iii , j . mills . dividing lines : municipal politics and the struggle for civil rights in montgomery , birmingham , and selma ( 2002 ) excerpt walsh , frank , landmark events in american history : the montgomery bus boycott . williams , juan , eyes on the prize : america 's civil rights years , 1954-1965 ( new york : penguin books , 1988 ) . external links . alabama civil rights collection - jack rabin collection on alabama civil rights and southern activists , at penn state university , includes oral history interviews and materials concerning montgomery bus boycott montgomery bus boycott article , encyclopedia of alabama montgomery bus boycott - story of montgomery bus boycott encyclopedia entry on the montgomery bus boycott ~ includes cross-referenced text , historical documents and streaming audio , presented by the king research institute at stanford university the montgomery bus boycott - african-american history montgomery bus boycott ~ civil rights movement archive learning from rosa parks , the indypendent montgomery bus boycott - presented by the montgomery advertiser civil rights era mug shots , montgomery county sheriff 's office , alabama department of archives & history martin luther king and the '' montgomery story '' comic book - 1956 montgomery bus boycott documents online collection of original boycott documents and articles by participants ~ civil rights movement archive . montgomery bus boycott , civil rights digital library . the boycott , the rebellious life of mrs . rosa parks .