Juho Kusti Paasikivi

early life and political career . birth and childhood . paasikivi was born johan gustaf hellsten in 1870 at the smoke sauna of the kulma-seppälä house in the huljala village of koski hl ( today hämeenkoski ) in päijänne tavastia in southern finland , to tampere travelling merchant august hellsten and his wife , karolina wilhelmina , née selin . hellsten 's parents lived in tampere , but the son was born on their business trip to the lahti market . after returning home , hellsten was officially entered in tampere 's church books . hellsten 's mother died when he was four , and his father died in debt when hellsten was 14 . hellsten 's half-sister karolina died soon after . upon his father 's death , hellsten 's aunt , kaisa hagman , assumed responsibility for his raising . hellsten finnicized his name to juho kusti paasikivi in 1885 . . his surname literally means '' flagstone '' in both languages . education . the young paasikivi was an enthusiastic athlete and gymnast . his father had recognized his son 's academic talent and enrolled him at a top elementary school in hämeenlinna following brief attendance at hollola . paasikivi exhibited an early appetite for reading , and was the best pupil in his class . . he entered the university of helsinki in 1890 , graduating in may 1892 with a bachelor 's degree in russian language and literature , . a course of studies that proved useful in later life . the following winter , paasikivi changed his major to law , earning a master of laws degree and eventually , in 1902 , his doctor of law . during his schooling , paasikivi supported himself by working variously as a teacher , lecturer , court bailiff , and lawyer in private practice in lahti . it was also during his university studies , around 1894 , that paasikivi first became involved in the fennoman movement , assuming leadership roles in its student organization . . . first marriage and family . on 1 june 1897 paasikivi married swedish-born anna matilda forsman ( 1869–1931 ) . together they had four children , annikki ( 1898–1950 ) , wellamo ( 1900–1966 ) , juhani ( 1901–1942 ) , and varma ( 1903–1941 ) . upon earning his doctorate in law in 1901 , paasikivi took on an associate professorship of administrative law at helsinki university from 1902 to 1903 . . . introduction to politics . paasikivi left this post to become director-in-chief of treasury of the grand duchy of finland , a position he retained until 1914 . for practically all of his adult life , paasikivi moved in the inner circles of finland 's politics . he supported greater autonomy and an independent cabinet ( senate ) for finland , and resisted russia 's panslavic intentions to make russian the only official language everywhere in the russian empire . he belonged , however , to the more complying finnish party , opposing radical and potentially counter-productive steps which could be perceived as aggressive by the russians . paasikivi served as a finnish party member of parliament 1907–1909 and 1910–1913 . he served as a member of the senate 1908–1909 , as head of the finance division . independence and civil war . during the world war i paasikivi began to doubt the finnish party 's obedient line . in 1914 , after resigning his position at the treasury , and also standing down as a member of parliament , paasikivi left public life and office . he became chief general manager of the kansallis-osake-pankki ( kop ) bank , retaining that position until 1934 . paasikivi also served as a member of the helsinki city council 1915–1918 . after the 1917 february revolution in russia , paasikivi was appointed to the committee that began formulating new legislation for a modernized grand duchy . initially he supported increased autonomy within the russian empire , in opposition to the social democrats in the coalition-senate , who in vain strove for more far-reaching autonomy ; but after the bolshevik october revolution , paasikivi championed full independence—albeit in the form of constitutional monarchy . during the finnish civil war paasikivi stood firmly on the side of the white government . as prime minister from may until november 1918 , he strove for a continued constitutional monarchy with frederick charles of hesse , a german prince , as king , intending to ensure german support for finland against bolshevist russia . however , as germany lost the world war , the monarchy had to be scrapped for a republic more in the taste of the victorious entente . paasikivi 's senate resigned , and he returned to the kop bank . paasikivi 's senate was in power during the existence of the prison camps following the civil war in finland , where 12,000 prisoners died in total . starvation was seen as a principal cause of mortality in the camps which housed men and women who had fought on the side of the reds . jaakko paavolainen . suomen kansallinen murhenäytelmä : punainen ja valkoinen terrori ja vankileirit v.1918 . kustannusosakeyhtiö tammi , helsinki , 1974 . p 254-256 ( in english ) paasikivi , as a political conservatism , was a firm opponent of social democrats in the cabinet , or communists in the parliament . tentatively he supported the semi-fascist lapua movement , which requested radical measures against the political left . but eventually the lapua movement radicalized further , even assaulting ståhlberg , liberal former president of finland ; and paasikivi like many other supporters , turned away from the radical right . in 1934 he became chairman of the conservative national coalition party , as a champion of democracy , and successfully rehabilitated the party after its suspicious closeness to the lapua movement and the failed coup d'état , the mäntsälä rebellion . envoy in stockholm . widowed in 1931 , he married allina ( alli ) valve ( 1879–1960 ) in 1934 and resigned from politics . however , he was persuaded to accept the position of envoy to sweden , at the time regarded as finland 's most important foreign embassy post . authoritarian regimes seizing power in germany , poland , and estonia made finland increasingly isolated while the soviet union threatened . after the gradual dissolution of the league of nations , and france 's and the united kingdom 's lack of interest in supporting finland , sweden was the only regime left that possibly could give finland any support at all . since around the time of the failed lapua coup , paasikivi and mannerheim had belonged to a close circle of conservative finns discussing how sweden 's support could be obtained . in stockholm paasikivi strove for swedish defence guarantees , alternatively a defensive alliance or a defensive union between finland and sweden . since the civil war , relations between the swedes and finns had been frosty . the revolutionary turmoil at the end of world war i had led to parliamentarism in sweden , increased swedish democracy , and a dominant role for the swedish social democrats . in finland , however , the result had been a disastrous civil war and a total defeat for socialism . at the same time that paasikivi arrived in stockholm , it became known that finnish president svinhufvud retained his aversion to parliamentarism ; and ( after pressure from paasikivi 's national coalition party ) had declined to appoint a cabinet with social democrats as ministers . this did n't improve paasikivi 's reputation among the swedish social democrats dominating the government , who were sufficiently suspicious due to his association with finland 's monarchist orientation in 1918 , and the failed lapua coup in 1932 . things actually improved , partly due to paasikivi 's efforts , partly due to president kallio being elected . as president , kallio approved of parliamentarism and appointed social democrats to the cabinet . but the suspicions between finland and sweden were too strong : during the winter war sweden 's support for finland was considerable , but short of one critical feature : sweden neither declared war on the soviet union nor sent regular troops to finland 's defense . this made many finns , including paasikivi himself , judge his mission in stockholm a failure . envoy in moscow . prior to the winter war , paasikivi became the finnish representative in the negotiations in moscow . seeing that joseph stalin did not intend to change his policies , paasikivi supported compliance with some of the demands . when the war broke out , paasikivi was asked to enter risto ryti ’ s cabinet as a minister without portfolio—in practice in the role of a distinguished political advisor . he ended up in the cabinet 's leading triumvirate together with risto ryti and foreign minister väinö tanner ( chairman of the social democrats ) . paasikivi also led the negotiations for an armistice and peace , and continued his mission in moscow as envoy . in moscow he was necessarily isolated from the most secret thoughts in helsinki ; and when he found out that these thoughts ran in the direction of revanche , of retaking , with germany 's aid , territory lost in the winter war , he resigned . paasikivi retired for the second time . prime minister and president . in summer 1941 , when the continuation war began , paasikivi took up writing his memoirs . by 1943 he had concluded that germany was going to lose the war and that finland was in great danger as well . however , his initial opposition to the pro-german politics of 1940–1941 was too well known , and his first initiatives for peace negotiations were met with little support from either field marshal mannerheim or risto ryti , who now had become president . from prime minister to president ( 1946 ) . immediately after the war , mannerheim appointed paasikivi prime minister . for the first time in finland a communist , yrjö leino , was included in the cabinet . paasikivi 's policies were those of a realist , radically different from those of the previous 25 years . paasikivi sought to understand why moscow had ordered the invasion of finland in 1939 . his conclusions were that interwar finnish portrayals of the soviet union were heedlessly russophobic , and that the soviet attack was legitimate , strategic , and defensive rather than ideological or expansionist . consequently , he ensured that negative references to the soviet union were expunged from school textbooks and that books containing '' hostile '' representations of the soviet union were removed from public libraries . . paasikivi had to comply with many soviet demands , including the war crimes trial . his main effort was to prove that finland would present no threat to the soviet union , and that both countries would gain from confident peaceful relations . when mannerheim resigned , parliament selected paasikivi to succeed him as president of the republic . paasikivi was then age 75 . political evolution . paasikivi had thus come a long way from his earlier classical conservatism . he now was willing to co-operate regularly with the social democrats and when necessary , even with the communists , as long as they acted democratically . as president , he only once accepted his party , the conservatives , into the government ; and even that government lasted only about six months and was considered more a caretaker or civil-servant government than a regular parliamentary government . paasikivi even appointed a communist , people 's democrat mauno pekkala , as prime minister in 1946 . dealing with communists . paasikivi 's political flexibility had its limits , however ; this was shown at the time of the communists ' alleged coup attempt or coup plans in spring 1948 . he ordered some units of the army and navy to helsinki to defend the capital against a possible communist attack . any attempted takeover failed before it had even started , and the communists were defeated in the next parliamentary elections . most modern finnish historians deny that most communists wanted a violent coup , especially not without soviet support . later in the spring when the finnish parliament passed a no-confidence motion against communist interior minister leino because of controversy over leino 's treatment of some mostly white russian emigrant prisoners whom he had ordered deported to the soviet union , paasikivi had to dismiss leino when he refused to resign at once . after the 1948 parliamentary elections , when the communists dropped from the largest to the third largest party , paasikivi refused to let them into the government ; and the communists remained in opposition until 1966 . . the '' paasikivi doctrine '' . as president , paasikivi kept the foreign relations of finland in the foreground , trying to ensure a stable peace and wider freedom of action for finland . paasikivi concluded that , all the fine rhetoric aside , finland had to adapt to superpower politics and sign treaties with the soviet union to avoid a worse fate . thus he managed to stabilize finland 's position . this '' paasikivi doctrine '' was adhered to for decades , and was named finlandization in the 1970s . knowledge of russian helped . paasikivi 's ability to speak some russian helped his relations with the soviet leaders ; he did not have to use interpreters all the time , as his successor kekkonen did . having studied in russia as a young man , paasikivi also knew classic russian literature and russian culture . see , for example , '' the diaries of j.k . paasikivi '' , edited and published in finland around 1985–1986 ; sakari virkkunen , '' the finnish presidents ii '' ; '' the republic 's presidents 1940–1956 '' / tasavallan presidentit 1940–1956 , published in finland in 1993–1994 ; tuomo polvinen , '' j.k . paasikivi : the statesman 's work of life '' / j.k . paasikivi : valtiomiehen elämäntyö , published in several volumes in finland in the 1990s and 2000s . . 1950 presidential election . paasikivi stood for re-election in the presidential election of 1950 , and he won 171 out of the 300 electoral college votes . the priorities of his second term were centred largely on domestic politics , in contrast to his first term . joseph stalin 's death made paasikivi 's job easier . as a lover of sports , and a former athlete and gymnast , paasikivi had the great pleasure , during his second term of office , of opening the 1952 summer olympics held in helsinki . by the end of paasikivi 's six-year second term , finland had rid itself of the most urgent political problems resulting from the war . the karelian refugees had been resettled , the war reparations had been paid , rationing had ended , and in january 1956 the soviet union removed its troops from the porkkala naval base near helsinki . . last minute 1956 candidacy . paasikivi did not actively seek re-election from his second term ending 1 march 1956 , when he was age 85 . however , paasikivi was willing to serve as president for about two more years if a great majority of politicians asked him to do so . he appeared as a dark horse presidential candidate on the second ballot of the electoral college on 15 february 1956 , but was eliminated as the least popular candidate . his last-minute candidacy was based on a misunderstood message from some conservatives which made him believe that enough agrarians and social democrats would support him . after his unsuccessful last-minute presidential candidacy , paasikivi felt betrayed by those politicians who asked him to participate in the election . he even denied giving his consent to the presidential candidacy in a public statement . see , for example , pekka hyvärinen , '' finland 's man : urho kekkonen 's life '' / suomen mies : urho kekkosen elämä , published in finland in 2000 ; tuomo polvinen , '' j.k . paasikivi : the statesman 's work of life '' , final volume – years 1948–1956 he died in december , having not yet finished his memoirs . paasikivi on banknotes . paasikivi , who had a strong background in banking , has featured on various finnish banknotes . he is one of three finnish presidents whose portrait has appeared on markka-denominated banknotes of finland . the others were kaarlo juho ståhlberg , the first president of finland ; and urho kekkonen , paasikivi 's successor as president . cabinets . juho kusti paasikivi 's first senate paasikivi ii cabinet paasikivi iii cabinet . honours . awards and decorations . : grand cross of the order of the white rose ( finland ) : grand cross of the order of the lion of finland : grand cross of the order of the cross of liberty : grand cross with collar of the order of the falcon ( 24 april 1954 ) icelandic presidency website ( icelandic ) , order of the falcon , juho kusti paasikivi : knight of the royal order of the seraphim ( sweden ) : order of the polar star : grand cross of the order of st . olav : knight of the order of the elephant ( denmark ) : order of lenin : order of st . anna : iron cross : legion of honour : order of st stanislas