Simon Weston

early life . weston was born at caerphilly district miners hospital in caerphilly . he was brought up by his mother , pauline and adoptive father , '' lofty '' . his biological father served in the royal air force alongside his mother . simon lived in singapore and at raf hospital nocton hall in lincolnshire before returning to nelson at the age of around six or seven . he has one elder sister , helen , and three stepbrothers . at the age 14 , weston was given a police caution when he was caught as a passenger in a car stolen by his older friends . he joined the welsh guards in 1978 at the age of 16 at the insistence of his mother , after he '' got into bother '' . he served in berlin , northern ireland and kenya before being deployed to the falkland islands . . falklands war . on 8 june 1982 , weston was boarded with other members of his regiment on in port pleasant near fitzroy , just off the falkland islands . it was bombed and set on fire by the argentine skyhawk fighters during the bluff cove air attacks . his ship was carrying ammunition as well as phosphorus bombs and thousands of gallons of diesel and petrol . out of his platoon of 30 men , 22 were killed . the welsh guards lost a total of 48 men killed and 97 wounded aboard the sir galahad . weston survived with 46 % burns , following which his face was barely recognisable : he said : . recovery . weston endured years of reconstructive surgery , including over 96 major operations or surgical procedures . skin from his shoulders was used to make eyelids and his nose was grafted on in a later operation . he suffered psychological trauma , drinking heavily and becoming suicidal , and admits his behaviour during this time was '' terrible '' . he credits his mother with helping him to overcome this , in particular , her act of reuniting him with his old regiment , who refused to mollycoddle him ( especially glen white , who ran the welsh guards rugby side ) , forced him to '' face up to the unavoidable and to be positive about everything including especially my future '' . television and media . weston has made regular contributions to radio programmes and appeared on television , especially within wales . he has been the subject of several bbc documentaries and presented his own radio show face for the radio for bbc radio wales . he has been interviewed on many occasions for television news programmes and documentaries recounting his experiences , including appearances on 14 june 2007 , the 25th anniversary of the falklands war ending . he has also appeared on programmes such as this is your life ( appearing on 7 february 1990 ; aged still only 28 , weston was one of the show 's youngest ever guests ) this is your life ( 1969–1993 ) eofftv . eofftv.com . retrieved on 8 october 2012 . and later who wants to be a millionaire ? he was featured in a £7 million advertising campaign launched in 2000 aimed at boosting recruitment into the police force . he has written best-selling autobiographies as well as a series of novels . in 2003 he announced that he had been in talks over plans to make a film about his life . . charity work . in 1986 , weston undertook his first goodwill tour , to australia , at the request of the guards association of australasia . the resulting donations to children 's burns units made him begin to feel useful again . weston became patron of a number of charities that support people living with disfigurements , as well as the lead ambassador for the healing foundation . he also set up a national youth charity , weston spirit , in 1988 with paul oginsky and ben harrison , shortly after moving to liverpool . however , in 2008 , the charity suffered from financial difficulties and had to be shut down . . political activism . weston has campaigned in support of troops and veterans and against politicians ' alleged failure to support them adequately . he has spoken out against defence budget cuts and british troops allegedly being supplied with inadequate equipment , and about the lack of support , health care and adequate compensation for veterans . on 12 march 2007 he appeared on itv news , giving his opinion on the care of british soldiers in hospital . on 4 march 2008 , he appeared alongside conservative leader david cameron as he announced the formation of a commission to investigate ways to help restore the '' military covenant '' , which cameron called '' well and truly broken '' . it was intended that weston would take a non-partisan , advisory role to the commission ( headed by frederick forsyth ) , with his work taking a particular focus to the treatment of veterans and the compensation paid out to injured service personnel . it is stated that weston is a critic of the iraq war , believing tony blair 's argument for invasion were invalid . in february 2003 , in the run up to the war , he spoke out about '' politicians with so many different agendas , spin and bluff and throwing smoke in the air and i have to say even lies . so often that we are not sure what we are actually listening to now '' . weston also spoke to the ethical committee at london 's royal free hospital in 2006 to support the case for authorising full face transplants , even though he had previously been against the idea . in 2008 , weston criticised the then french president , nicolas sarkozy , for failing to attend a war ceremony . weston said , '' he should have got it right '' , '' we in wales have lost and sacrificed as much as anybody for different causes '' . showing his support for the british monarchy , weston added , '' not for a second would charles have disrespected the event . he has always acted with a great deal of reverence for the occasion . '' '' a snub or simply a mistake ? sarkozy 'disrespects ' wales . french president criticised for omission during war ceremony '' , the western mail . 13 november 2008 . p . 3 . in february 2012 weston was caught up in an angry exchange with actor sean penn , who said it was improper for prince william to be deployed to the falklands . weston was reported as saying , '' sean penn does not know what he is talking about and , frankly , he should shut up . his penn 's views are irrelevant and it only serves to fuel the fire of the argentinians and get them more pumped up . '' in 2012 , weston decided to stand for the post of elected police and crime commissioner for the south wales police . as part of the nomination process , he had to disclose the police caution he had received as a child and whether this caution disbarred him from standing became a matter of public debate . he withdrew from the process , citing this controversy and the perceived politicisation of the post ( some sources hold that a caution for a juvenile should not be grounds for disqualification ) . during a bbc radio interview on the subject of the disclosure of cautions to juveniles , weston pointed out that he has never sought to hide the caution . personal life . weston is married to lucy , with whom he has three children : james , stuart and caitlin . they met in liverpool when she was working for his charity , weston spirit . they were engaged on 8 june 1989 , exactly seven years after the attack on the sir galahad . they married on 12 may 1990 and now live in cardiff . weston has met and become friends with first lieutenant carlos cachon , the argentine pilot who dropped the bomb which caused his injuries . he was criticised for this by families of those who fought in the falklands war , which he dismissed by saying '' i do n't have a problem with other people criticising me for things i do , as long as people understand why i did them . then i do n't have a problem to walk away and say 'you 're entitled to your opinions ' . '' western mail . '' weston leads falklands return '' . 3 april 2002 , p . 2 . . honours and awards . the medals weston received for his military service include the general service medal with '' northern ireland '' clasp and the south atlantic medal with rosette . his courage and charity work have been recognised and honoured on a number of occasions . he was appointed officer of the order of the british empire ( obe ) in the 1992 birthday honours and commander of the order of the british empire ( cbe ) in the 2016 new year honours for charitable services . in 2002 he was awarded the freedom of the city of liverpool . in 2004 , he was named one of the top 100 welsh heroes . in 2005 he was made an honorary fellow of cardiff university . in 2006 weston and dual code ( rugby league and rugby union ) international david watkins were installed as patrons of the wales rugby league , in a ceremony held in the welsh assembly . in 2008 he received an honorary doctorate from heriot-watt university . in september 2009 he agreed to be president elect of the welsh scout council , and was formally introduced at the council 's annual general meeting at llandrindod wells on 31 october . . references . external links . simon weston cbe official website h talent management simon weston cbe client biography