Quark (Star Trek)

depiction . quark was introduced on television in 1993 , in the two-part season premiere star trek : deep space nine premiere '' emissary '' . talking about his depiction of quark , shimerman said the character developed significantly during the start of the sixth season of deep space nine , during a story arc in which the dominion took control of the deep space nine station : . career . before opening a bar , known as '' quark 's bar , grill , gaming house and holosuite arcade '' , quark served as a cook aboard a ferengi freighter for eight years , according to the star trek : deep space nine episode '' profit and loss '' . he came to the station while it was named terok nor during the cardassian occupation of bajor . originally , quark admired the cardassian race for their version of morality , but later he seemed to take pity on the downtrodden bajoran people , selling them food and equipment just above cost , which could have gotten him into serious trouble if the cardassians had found out . when the station changed hands at the end of the occupation , he decided to leave . commander sisko , feeling that quark 's bar ( which offered holosuites and gambling ) would encourage commercial tourism to boost the station 's economy , extorted quark into staying , using quark 's nephew nog as a bargaining chip , in the deep space nine pilot episode , '' emissary . '' quark engages in a variety of shady deals , but neither sisko nor odo , quark 's nominal nemesis and head of station security , take serious action against him , partially because his value outweighs his numerous illegal activities , which for the most part , harm no one . furthermore , the station 's status as , technically , the property of bajor and thus only nominally a federation station , sometimes prevented sisko from prosecuting quark to the full extent of federation law ; sisko was not allowed such latitude with criminals who were also federation citizens , such as his own lover , kasidy yates , whom sisko was once obliged to arrest for dealing in illicit replicators yet , on the same occasion , obliged to allow quark relative amnesty for dealing in illicit weapons . in the episode '' business as usual '' , sisko admits that he had '' cut quark a lot of slack in the past and even looked away once or twice when he could have come down hard . '' however , sisko 's leniency does not stop odo from regularly interfering with quark 's illegal doings . a shrewd businessman , quark often quotes the ferengi rules of acquisition . when the bajoran wormhole is discovered , quark helps broker deals between several gamma quadrant races and the ferengi . the alpha quadrant 's first knowledge of the dominion comes through his business dealings in the gamma quadrant with the karemma of the dominion . quark becomes grand nagus for a brief period when it appears that zek had died ; however , zek 's death turns out to be a ruse and quark is promptly deposed . along with commander sisko , quark is also among the first to encounter the genetically engineered soldiers of the dominion , the jem'hadar . quark repeatedly clashes with fca ( ferengi commerce authority ) liquidator brunt , who believes that quark is detrimental to ferengi society and beliefs . the two meet initially in a scandal involving quark 's mother ishka , who had earned profit despite this being illegal for a female . following this , brunt is responsible for quark receiving a savage beating at the hands of nausicaan thugs . the attack is meant to coerce quark into dissolving the employee union founded by his brother , rom . instead , quark secretly honors many of the union 's demands . later , when quark is falsely diagnosed with a fatal disease , brunt anonymously buys the ferengi bartender 's remains six days in advance . when quark discovers he is not dying and backs out of the contract , brunt revokes quark 's business license with glee , but quark 's friends supply him with all the equipment necessary to continue operating his bar anyway . ( the license is later reinstated as part of a deal between quark and brunt to break up zek and ishka , who had begun a relationship . ) when brunt almost becomes grand nagus , quark temporarily becomes a female named lumba to convince fca commissioner nilva that allowing ferengi females to wear clothing is an opportunity for profit . brunt does not believe the charade for a minute , but nilva is deceived and chases '' her '' amorously . quark , rom and nog do not understand or speak english/federation standard , but rather rely on universal translators implanted near their ears ( '' little green men '' ) . family , friends , and romantic interests . quark loved his brother rom , and occasionally even found him useful . nonetheless , in true ferengi fashion , he treated rom with little respect and ordered him about like a servant . quark was also fond of swindling rom out of his share of the bar 's profits . they were partners in many other business ventures , although quark routinely made sure to keep rom in the dark about the true nature of their dealings . quark 's nephew , nog , also briefly worked in his uncle 's bar , before departing for starfleet academy . rom eventually succeeded zek as grand nagus , largely through the machinations of ishka . quark 's relationship with his mother ishka was tumultuous at best . she drove him to distraction with her untraditional ways . ishka insisted upon wearing clothing and making profit . she was the financial mastermind in the family . however , quark 's father keldar refused to listen to her advice simply because she was female . ishka reluctantly revealed to quark that he was a lot like her , while rom was more like his father . she became zek 's lover and trusted advisor . throughout the series , quark was often locked in a battle of wits with station security chief odo , who regularly foiled quark 's criminal schemes . the two eventually developed a grudging respect for each other . when odo finally left the station to rejoin the great link at the end of the series , quark came to say goodbye , and made a toast to odo . quark also had a firm friendship with jadzia dax , with whom he often played tongo . although quark presented himself as amoral and ruthless , he deeply cared for his friends . in '' move along home '' when he was apparently forced to sacrifice one of four crew members ( sisko , dax , bashir and kira ) in a strange alien game , he refused to make a choice , begging for their lives . quark has a cousin , gaila , who is an arms dealer and has become successful enough to buy his own moon . gaila appears in two episodes , '' business as usual '' and '' the magnificent ferengi , '' portrayed by josh pais . quark has had his share of romances throughout the series . in the first season , he was involved with vash , a corrupt archaeologist first introduced in star trek : the next generation . he was married to ( and divorced from ) a klingon ( grilka ) in an incident that also garnered him considerable respect from the klingon community for his bravery , when he exposed how her husband 's rival had tried to attack his house through business measures rather than a straightforward duel and then provoked said rival into trying to kill quark in a duel when quark was unarmed and had freely acknowledged that he would lose . he had a recurring cardassian love interest ( natima lang ) , was shown on several occasions to be attracted to both major kira nerys and lieutenant commander jadzia dax , and once tried to seduce a vulcan member of the maquis ( although this may have been motivated by his own efforts to find out more about the group ) . he also had a platonic affair with pel , a female ferengi posing as a male in order to make profit . in the non-canon novels set after the series , quark starts a romantic relation with ro laren who has taken odo 's place as head of security . the mirror universe version of quark appeared only once , in the episode '' crossover '' . at first he appears much the same as his regular counterpart ( although mirror quark has no idea what 'gold pressed latinum ' - a staple of ferengi currency - is ) , but it 's soon revealed that mirror quark is actively helping terran slaves escape the cruelty of the klingon/cardassian alliance . this version of quark is eventually caught and executed when his activities are discovered . guest appearances . armin shimerman appeared as quark in the 7th-season star trek : the next generation episode '' firstborn '' , where in conversation it is clear riker already knew him , and in the star trek : voyager pilot episode '' caretaker '' . he is referenced in the star trek : picard episode '' stardust city rag '' as having settled on the planet '' freecloud '' in the alpha doradus system . he also played the character quark on the tonight show with jay leno and regis & kathie lee . expanded universe media . quark is featured in star trek novels published by pocket books . this includes books written by shimerman . . reception . in 2018 , the wrap ranked quark as the 25th best main cast character of star trek overall , calling him a '' valuable ally to sisko when the chips are down '' . one of the famous star trek episodes featuring quark is '' little green men '' ( s4e8 , november 13 , aired 1995 ) ranked by hollywood reporter in 2017 as the 18th best episode of star trek : deep space nine . in 2016 , screen rant rated quark as the 17th best character in star trek overall , highlighting the character as a commentary on the human condition . . see also . ferenginar . references . external links . quark at startrek.com