David Henry Hwang

early life . he was born in 1957 in los angeles , california to henry yuan hwang , the founder of far east national bank , and dorothy hwang , a piano teacher . the oldest of three children , he has two younger sisters . he received a bachelor 's degree in english from stanford university in 1979 and attended the yale school of drama between 1980 and 1981 , taking literature classes . he left once workshopping of new plays began , since he already had a play being produced in new york . his first play was produced at the okada house dormitory at stanford university , after he briefly studied playwriting with sam shepard and maría irene fornés . in summer 1978 , he studied playwriting with sam shepard and attended padua hills playwrights festival both of which led him to write his first plays such as fob . . career . left . trilogy of chinese america . hwang 's early plays concerned the role of the chinese american and asian american in the contemporary world . his first play , fob , explores the contrasts and conflicts between established asian americans and '' fresh off the boat '' new immigrants . the play was developed by the national playwrights conference at the eugene o'neill theater center and premiered in 1980 off-broadway at the joseph papp public theater . it won an obie award . papp produced four more of hwang 's plays , including two in 1981 : the dance and the railroad , which tells the story of a former chinese opera star working as a coolie laborer in the 19th-century american west ; and family devotions , a darkly comic take on the effects of western religion on a chinese-american family . this was nominated for the drama desk award . those three plays added up to what the author described as a '' trilogy of chinese america '' . . branching out / national success . after this , papp also produced the show sound and beauty , the omnibus title to two hwang one-act plays set in japan . at this time , hwang started to work on projects for the small screen . a television movie , blind alleys , written by hwang and frederic kimball and starring pat morita and cloris leachman , was produced in 1985 and followed a television version of the dance and the railroad . his next play rich relations , was his first full-length to feature non-asian characters . it premiered at the second stage theatre in new york . hwang 's best-known play was m . butterfly , which premiered on broadway in 1988 . the play is a deconstruction of giacomo puccini 's opera madama butterfly , alluding to news reports of the 20th-century relationship between french diplomat bernard boursicot and shi pei pu , a male chinese opera singer . shi purportedly convinced boursicot that he was a woman throughout their twenty-year relationship . the play won numerous awards for best play : a tony award ( which hwang was the first asian american to win ) , the drama desk award , the john gassner award , and the outer critics circle award . it was the first of three of his works to become a finalist for the pulitzer prize for drama . work post-butterfly . the success of m . butterfly prompted hwang 's interests in many other different directions , including work for opera , film , and the musical theatre . hwang became a frequent collaborator as a librettist with the world-renowned composer philip glass . one of m . butterflys broadway producers , david geffen , oversaw a film version of the play , which was directed by david cronenberg . hwang also wrote an original script , golden gate , which was produced by american playhouse . hwang wrote an early draft of a screenplay based upon a . s . byatt 's booker prize-winning novel possession , which was originally scheduled to be directed by sydney pollack . years later , director/playwright neil labute and laura jones would collaborate on the script for a 2002 film . throughout the 1990s , hwang continued to write for the stage , including short plays for the famed humana festival at the actors theatre of louisville . his full-length golden child , received its world premiere at south coast repertory in 1996 . golden child was later produced in new york city . it won a 1997 obie award for playwriting for hwang 's 1996 off-broadway production . in 1998 it was produced on broadway , and was nominated that year for a tony award for best play . . return to broadway with disney and rodgers & hammerstein . in the new millennium , hwang had two broadway successes back-to-back . he was asked by director robert falls to help co-write the book for the musical aida ( based upon the opera by giuseppe verdi ) . in an earlier version , it had failed in regional theatre tryouts . hwang and falls re-wrote a significant portion of the book ( by linda woolverton ) . aida ( with music and lyrics by elton john and tim rice ) opened in 2000 and proved highly profitable . his next project was a radical revision of richard rodgers , oscar hammerstein , ii , and joseph fields ' musical flower drum song . although successful when introduced in the 1950s and early 1960s , it had become dated . the civil rights movement and other cultural changes had disrupted continuing stereotypical portrayals of asian american communities . though it had never been a full critical success , the work inspired another generation of asian americans to re-imagine this musical . it was adapted from the novel the flower drum song by c . y . lee , and tells the culture clash encountered by a chinese family living in san francisco . the rodgers and hammerstein organization allowed hwang to significantly rework the plot , while retaining character names and songs . his 2002 version —both an homage to the original and a modern re-thinking— won him his third tony nomination . though flower drum song is often called the first musical with an all-asian cast , the original production had cast many non-asians in leading roles , including caucasians and an african-american ( juanita hall ) . but the 2002 revival was produced with an all-asian cast of actor-singers , and it toured nationally . . back to the public . hwang 's 2007 play yellow face relates to his play face value , which closed in previews on broadway in the early 1990s . he wrote it in response to a controversy about the casting of jonathan pryce in a eurasian role in miss saigon . face value , which included music and lyrics for a musical-within-a-play by hwang , lost millions of dollars . it was a stumbling block in the careers of hwang and producer stuart ostrow . in yellow face , hwang wrote a semi-autobiographical play , featuring him as the main character in a media farce about mistaken racial identity . this had been also an important element in face value . yellow face premiered in los angeles in 2007 at the mark taper forum as a co-production with east west players . it moved off-broadway to the joseph papp public theater , an important venue for hwang 's earlier work . it enjoyed an extended run at the papp , and won hwang his third obie award for playwriting . the play was a finalist for the pulitzer prize for drama . hwang also wrote a new short play , the great helmsman for the papp 's night of plays : ten . . opera . hwang has continued to work steadily in the world of opera and musical theatre , and has written for children 's theatre as well . hwang co-wrote the english-language libretto for an operatic adaptation of lewis carroll 's alice in wonderland with music ( and part of the libretto ) by the korean composer unsuk chin . it received its world premiere at the bavarian state opera in 2007 and was released on dvd in 2008 . hwang wrote the libretto to howard shore 's opera the fly , based on david cronenberg 's 1986 film of the same name . the opera premiered on july 2 , 2008 at the théâtre du châtelet in paris , france , with cronenberg as director and plácido domingo conducting . hwang wrote the libretto for tarzan , a musical based on a film by walt disney pictures , which was produced on broadway . hwang also collaborated on the multi-media event icarus at the edge of time , adapted from brian greene 's novel of the same name . it featured music by philip glass and a film by '' al and al . '' the piece premiered as part of the world science festival . after its major success at chicago 's goodman theatre , hwang 's play , chinglish , quickly made its way to broadway in october 2011 . it won the joseph jefferson award . chinglish was largely inspired by hwang 's frequent visits to china and his observations of interactions between chinese and american people . ticket sales of chinglish were conservative . hwang 's short play a very dna reunion was written for the evening of plays the dna trail , which was conceived by jamil khoury and premiered at the historic chicago temple building . . since 2010 . hwang worked on a theatrical commission for the oregon shakespeare festival and arena stage in washington , dc . this was a musical version of aimee mann 's album the forgotten arm , with mann and paul bryant . he also worked on screenplays for dreamworks animation and directors justin lin and jonathan caouette . in 2013 , a production of yellow face premiered on youtube . it was directed and adapted by jeff liu , and featured sab shimono among other actors . in 2014 two new hwang plays were premiered . the first , kung fu , about the life of bruce lee , premiered as part of his residency at the signature theatre off-broadway . the play opened february 24 , 2014 in a production directed by leigh silverman , and featuring cole horibe , who had gained fame in the tv series , so you think you can dance . the second was cain and abel , one of many plays included in the mysteries , a re-telling of bible stories . conceived by ed sylvanus iskander , the mysteries also featured the work of playwrights craig lucas , dael orlandersmith , jose rivera , and jeff whitty . in 2014 , hwang joined the playwriting faculty of the columbia university school of the arts theatre program . he was appointed the director of the playwriting concentration and will serve as an associate professor of theatre in playwriting . hilton als of the new yorker has described him as '' the most successful chinese american playwright this country has produced . '' in 2016 , hwang became a writer and consulting producer of the golden globe-winning television series the affair and in 2016 wrote a song '' solo '' in association with prince . in the fall of 2016 , the san francisco opera premiered dream of the red chamber , an opera by hwang and bright sheng , based on the eighteenth-century chinese novel of the same name . in the summer of 2016 , hwang became the chair of the board of the american theatre wing . in the spring of 2018 , hwang 's soft power premiered at the ahmanson theatre in los angeles , california . the music and additional lyrics are by jeanine tesori . its cast is largely asian . it transferred to off-broadway at the public theater in september 2019 ( previews ) . meyer , dan . '' david henry hwang and jeanine tesori ’ s soft power opens october 15 '' playbill , october 15 , 2019 in may 2020 , it was a finalist for the pulitzer prize for drama , making hwang the first person to be a three-time finalist without winning . works . plays . fob the dance and the railroad family devotions the house of sleeping beauties ( based on yasunari kawabata 's novella house of the sleeping beauties ) the sound of a voice as the crow flies rich relations m . butterfly bondage face value trying to find chinatown bang kok golden child peer gynt ( based on the play by henrik ibsen , co-written with stephan muller ) merchandising ( humana festival text shirt play ) jade flowerpots and bound feet tibet through the red box ( based on peter sis ' book ) the great helmsman yellow face a very dna reunion chinglish kung fu cain and abel . musical theater . book for aida ( music by elton john , lyrics by tim rice ; libretto co-written by linda woolverton and robert falls , based on the opera by giuseppe verdi ) revised book for a revival of flower drum song ( music by richard rodgers , lyrics by oscar hammerstein , ii , based upon the novel by c . y . lee and original book by joseph fields ) book for tarzan ( music and lyrics by phil collins , based on the novel by edgar rice burroughs and the walt disney pictures film ) book and lyrics for soft power ( music and additional lyrics by jeanine tesori ) . opera libretti . 1000 airplanes on the roof ( music by philip glass ) the voyage ( music by philip glass , libretto in english , latin , and spanish based on glass ' story ) the silver river ( music by bright sheng ) the sound of a voice ( music by philip glass , based on hwang 's plays ) ainadamar ( music by osvaldo golijov , libretto in spanish ) alice in wonderland ( music by unsuk chin , libretto co-written by chin , based on the books by lewis carroll ) the fly ( music by howard shore , based on the film by david cronenberg ) an american soldier ( music by huang ruo ) . film/television . the dance and the railroad ( source of adaptation only ) blind alleys ( with frederic kimball ) forbidden city , u . s . a . ( assistant only ) forbidden nights ( story , with tristine rainer , based on judith shapiro 's article '' the rocky course of love in china '' ) m . butterfly ( based on hwang 's play ) golden gate picture bride ( script advisor only ) the monkey king ( more commonly known as the lost empire ) possession ( with laura jones and neil labute , based on the novel by a . s . byatt ) sound of a voice ( source of adaptation only ) white frog ( executive producer and actor only ) the affair ( consulting producer , writer of episode '' 206 '' ) . other . yellow punk dolls ( live dance ; choreography by ruby shang , music by john zorn ) dances in exile ( dance film ; choreography by ruby shang , film by howard silver , music by david torn , for alive from off center ) come ( song '' solo ; '' co-written with prince ( musician ) ) after eros ( live dance ; choreography by maureen fleming , music by philip glass ) icarus at the edge of time ( multi-media presentation ; music by philip glass , film by al+al , co-written with brian greene , based on green 's novel ) yellow face ( youtube video ; source of adaptation only ) . appearances . maxine hong kingston : talking stories the chinese americans literary visions asian pride porn happy birthday oscar wilde hollywood chinese long story short joe papp in five acts invitation to world literature . forewords/introductions/other texts . red scarf girl : a memoir of the cultural revolution asian american drama : 9 plays from the multiethnic landscape robot stories and more screenplays the flower drum song the state of asian america : activism and resistance in the 1990s the monkey king ( source of adaptation only ) murder in san jose ( translation adaptation only ) . honors/recognition . hwang has been awarded numerous grants , including fellowships from the national endowment for the arts , the guggenheim and rockefeller foundations , the new york state council on the arts , and the pew charitable trusts . he has been honored with awards from the asian american legal defense and education fund , the association for asian pacific american artists , the museum of chinese in the americas , the east west players , the organization of chinese americans , the media action network for asian americans , the center for migration studies , the asian american resource workshop , the china institute , and the new york foundation for the arts . in 1998 , the nation 's oldest asian american theatre company , the east west players , christened its new mainstage the david henry hwang theatre . hwang was featured in an autobiographical series by boise state university with a summary of his early work , as part of the western writers series , written by douglas street . in 2011 , hwang received the pen/laura pels international foundation for theater award as a grand master of american theater . in 2012 , he was awarded the william inge award for distinguished achievement in the american theatre , the asia society cultural achievement award , the china institute blue cloud award , and the steinberg distinguished playwright award . in 2014 , he received the doris duke artist award . in 2015 , he received the 2015 ispa distinguished artist award . mr . hwang sits on the boards of the dramatists guild , young playwrights inc . , and the museum of chinese in the americas ( moca ) . he conducts interviews on arts-related topics for the national pbs cable television show asian america . from 1994–2001 , he served by appointment of president bill clinton on the president 's committee on the arts and the humanities . hwang holds honorary degrees from columbia college chicago , the american conservatory theater , lehigh university , university of southern california and state university of new york at purchase . in 2012 , hwang was named a fellow of united states artists . in 2015 , hwang was named a ford foundation art of change fellow . in 2018 , hwang earned induction into the american theater hall of fame . . personal life . he lives in new york city with his wife , actress kathryn layng , and their children , noah david and eva veanne . in november 2015 , hwang was the victim of a stabbing near his home in fort greene , brooklyn . the assailant stabbed hwang in the neck , severing his vertebral artery , before running from the scene . hwang was seriously injured and underwent surgery before being discharged from the hospital . the attack appeared to be random , as nothing was taken ; the assailant was never found . hwang wrote about the experience in the new york times . andy mai , greg b . smith , joe dziemianowicz & joseph stepansky , 'm . butterfly ' playwright david henry hwang slashed in neck near brooklyn home , new york daily news ( december 3 , 2015 ) . retrieved february 27 , 2019 . the stabbing also inspired a semi-autobiographical portion of '' soft power , '' in which the lead character , also named david henry hwang , is the victim of a random stabbing . selected published work . broken promises , new york : avon , 1983 . ( out-of-print ; includes fob , the dance and the railroad , family devotions , and the house of sleeping beauties ) m . butterfly , new york : plume , 1988 . ( acting edition published by dramatists play service , inc . ; audio version available from l . a . theatre works ; film version available from warner bros . ) 1,000 airplanes on the roof , salt lake city : peregrine smith , 1989 . ( original music recording available from virgin records ) between worlds : contemporary asian-american plays , new york : theatre communications group , 1990 . ( includes hwang 's as the crow flies and the sound of a voice ) fob and other plays , new york : new american library , 1990 . ( out-of-print ; includes fob , the dance and the railroad , the house of sleeping beauties , the sound of a voice , rich relations and 1,000 airplanes on the roof ) golden child , new york : theatre communications group , 1998 . ( acting edition published by dramatists play service , inc . ) trying to find chinatown : the selected plays , new york : theatre communications group , 1999 . ( includes fob , the dance and the railroad , family devotions , the sound of a voice , the house of sleeping beauties , bondage , the voyage , and trying to find chinatown ) humana festival 1999 : the complete plays , new hampshire : smith and kraus , 1999 . ( include hwang 's merchandising ) rich relations , new york : playscripts , inc . , 2002 . flower drum song , music by richard rodgers , lyrics by oscar hammerstein ii , book by david henry hwang ; based upon the libretto by oscar hammerstein , ii and joseph fields and the novel the flower drum song by c . y . lee ; new york : theatre communications group , 2003 . ( broadway cast recording available from drg ) 2004 : the best ten-minute plays for two actors , new hampshire : smith and kraus , 2003 . ( includes hwang 's jade flowerpots and bound feet ) peer gynt ( with stephan muller ) , based upon the play by henrik ibsen ; new york : playscripts , inc . , 2006 . tibet through the red box , based upon the book by peter sis ; new york : playscripts , inc . , 2006 . 2007 : the best ten-minute plays for three or more actors , new hampshire : smith and kraus , 2008 . ( includes hwang 's the great helmsman ) yellow face ; theatre communications group , 2009 . ( acting edition published by dramatists play service , inc . ) chinglish ; theatre communications group , 2012 . ( acting edition published by dramatists play service , inc . see also . chinese americans in new york city . references . further reading . boles , william . '' understanding david henry hwang . '' columbia : university of south carolina press , 2013 . chen , barbara . yolk . 2001 . issue 8.1 ( kelly hu ) . external links . david henry hwang at internet off-broadway database david henry hwang at playscripts , inc .