London and Birmingham Railway

construction . image : wolverton viaduct.jpg thumb making the embankment - wolverton valley ( great ouse ) , 28 june 1837 . peter lecount , an assistant engineer of the london and birmingham railway , produced a number of - possibly hyperbolic - comparisons in an effort to demonstrate that the london and birmingham railway was '' the greatest public work ever executed either in ancient or modern times '' . in particular , he suggested that the effort to build the great pyramid of giza amounted to the lifting of of stone by . the railway , excluding a long string of tasks ( drainage , ballasting , and so on ) involved the lifting of of material reduced to the weight of stone used in the pyramid . the pyramid involved , he says , the effort of 300,000 men ( according to diodorus siculus ) or 100,000 ( according to herodotus ) for twenty years . the railway involved 20,000 men for five years . in passing , he also noted that the cost of the railway in penny pieces , was enough to more than form a belt of pennies around the equator ; and the amount of material moved would be enough to build a wall high by one foot wide , more than three times around the equator . opening . the line had been planned to open at the same time as the grand junction railway which entered birmingham from the north . however great difficulty in constructing the kilsby tunnel in northamptonshire delayed the opening . the first part of the line between euston station in an article in the staffordshire advertiser , saturday 18 august 1838 , that refers to the harrow train accident 1838 , euston station is referred to as '' the station at euston grove . '' and boxmoor ( hemel hempstead ) opened on 20 july 1837 . services were extended to tring on 16 october 1837 . on 9 april 1838 the company opened the north end of the line , between birmingham and rugby , and the south end from london to a temporary station at near bletchley with a stagecoach shuttle service linking the two parts to allow through journeys to london . the line was officially fully opened on 17 september 1838 , with the first passenger train from london to birmingham arriving that day . the first london-to-birmingham trains took hours to complete the journey . it has often been claimed that initially , owing to the lack of power available to early locomotives , trains from euston were cable-hauled up the relatively steep incline to camden by a stationary steam engine . however , this was denied by peter lecount , one of the l & br engineers , who wrote in his 'history of the railway connecting london and birmingham ' ( 1839 ) , page 48 : '' it is not because locomotives can not draw a train of carriages up this incline that a fixed engine and endless rope are used , for they can and have done so , but because the company are restricted , by their act of parliament , from running locomotive engines nearer london than camden town . '' the railway opened from euston on 20 july 1837 ; the stationary engines and rope haulage did not commence until 27 september , and handled all trains from 14 october 1837 . until then , and whenever the rope system was stopped for repairs , locomotives hauled the trains up the incline . from november 1843 some expresses were worked without recourse to the rope , and from 15 july 1844 the rope working ceased permanently . locomotives . initially it was decided that it would be cheaper to work the railway by a contractor , and edward bury was chosen and awarded the contract in may 1836 . the contract stipulated that the company would provide locomotives to bury 's specification , while he would maintain them in good repair and convey each passenger and each ton of goods for a fixed sum at a speed not to exceed . bury provided specifications and drawings for a passenger and a goods engine , and by mid-1841 the l & br was equipped with sixty 2-2-0 passenger engines and thirty 0-4-0 goods engines . they all had inside cylinders and dome-topped fireboxes , and were mounted on inside bar-frames ; they were manufactured by seven different firms , including bury 's own . working the line by contract never worked in practice , because of the unforeseen ever-increasing traffic and the demand for higher speeds , so in july 1839 the contract was annulled , and thereafter bury was engaged as manager of the locomotive department in the normal way , on a fixed salary with a profits bonus . by the end of the l & br 's separate existence in july 1846 , the total stock was about 120 locomotives ; some six-wheeled engines had been acquired , but some of these proved inferior to the original four-wheelers . the locomotive workshops were established in 1838 at wolverton , roughly halfway between the two termini at london and birmingham . these workshops remained in use for locomotive repairs until 1877 , but had been gradually taken over by the carriage dept from 1864 , and remained as a manufacturing facility up until the 1980s ; today just a few parts of the original wolverton railway works are used solely for rolling stock maintenance and repair . stations . when the railway was fully opened , it had sixteen intermediate stations between london and birmingham . the '' first-class '' stations ( served by all trains ) were at watford , , leighton , , , , and . additionally , '' second-class '' intermediate stations ( served by slower second-class trains only ) were at harrow , , , , , crick , brandon and hampton . roade was later redesignated as first-class due to its stagecoach connections . from about 1844 platforms were opened at camden for tickets to be collected on southbound trains . this became a public station in 1851 . chronology of london railways by h.v.borley page48 . links and branches . the first branch from the main line was the aylesbury railway at aylesbury railway junction , of single track , which opened in 1839 and was leased to the l & br until purchased outright by the lnwr in 1846 . the warwick and leamington union railway , a branch of almost between coventry and leamington , was purchased by the l & br in 1843 and opened in 1844 . from 1840 , when the midland counties railway made a junction to its line at rugby , the l & br also provided through connections from london to the east midlands and the north east . it also made connections to the birmingham and derby junction railway at hampton-in-arden between coventry and birmingham . in 1845 , the northampton and peterborough railway , a branch from the main line , was opened from blisworth . also in 1845 branch lines , from marston vale line and from leighton to dunstable , were leased ; they opened in 1846 and 1848 . in 1846 the l & br leased the west london railway ( jointly with the gwr ) which opened in 1844 between willesden jct and the canal basin at kensington . the l & br purchased the trent valley railway in 1846 on behalf of the lnwr ; this line connected rugby on the l & br with stafford on the grand junction railway thus creating a more direct line from london to liverpool and manchester by avoiding the original route through birmingham . the rugby and stamford railway , a further branch into the eastern counties was approved in 1846 . merger . in july 1846 the l & br merged with the grand junction railway and the manchester and birmingham railway to form the london and north western railway , which in turn was later absorbed into the london midland and scottish railway , before finally passing into the hands of the nationalised british railways in 1948 to become part of the west coast main line as it is known today . the major change to the line during this period was electrification , which was carried out during the mid-1960s as part of br 's modernisation plan . neither of the l & br 's original termini , both designed by philip hardwick , has survived in its original form . curzon street station in birmingham closed to passenger traffic in 1854 ( the original entrance building remains ) when it was replaced by new street station and the original euston station in london was demolished in 1962 to make way for the present structure which opened in 1968 . on the closure of curzon street as a passenger station , the site became the london and north western railway goods depot ( birmingham ) and became fully operational in 1865 . the curzon street goods site continued railway operations as a parcel depot until 1966 . the remaining parts of the old passenger station received listed building status in 1952 . london and birmingham railway gallery for 1838 . image : entrance to euston station on the london and birmingham railway.jpg euston station entrance by edward radclyffe file : willesden 1842 station.jpg willesden railway station ( opened july 1842 ) and acton lane level crossing file : harrow on the hill on the london and birmingham railway.jpg the harrow on hill railway cutting , 1838 file : berkhampstead railway station 1838.jpg berkhamsted railway station in 1838 with the grand junction canal to the right roscoe , thomas ( 1839 ) . the london and birmingham railway ; with the . etc . , pub . charles tilt . london . facing p . 64 . image : denbigh hall bridge on the london and birmingham railway.jpg bridge image : beechwood tunnel , nr coventry the london and birmingham railway.jpg beechwood tunnel near coventry file : the avon viaduct on the london and birmingham railway.jpg the avon viaduct at wolston in 1838 roscoe , thomas ( 1839 ) . the london and birmingham railway ; with the . etc . , pub . charles tilt . london . facing p . 117 . image : birmingham station entrance 1838.jpg the birmingham terminus , as intended with flanking arches , but these were not built image : lon-brum-centenary.jpg lms london and birmingham railway centenary 1938 souvenir , illustrating the 2-2-0 locomotive of edward bury . see also . john cooke bourne locomotives of the london and north western railway wolverton railway works . notes . references . further reading . hough , richard . '' the london and birmingham . '' history today ( aug 1951 ) 1 8 pp 51–57 . external links . london and birmingham railway at camden railway heritage trust