Jon Lech Johansen

education . in a post on his blog , he said that in the 1990s he started with a book ( programming the 8086/8088 ) , the web ( '' fravia 's site was a goldmine '' ) and irc ( '' lurked in a x86 assembly irc channel and picked up tips from wise wizards . '' ) jon lech johansen ’ s blog , '' reverse engineering '' , 2006-02-09 . retrieved on 2010-06-29 . . decss prosecution . after johansen released decss , he was taken to court in norway for computer hacking in 2002 . the prosecution was conducted by the norwegian national authority for the investigation and prosecution of economic and environmental crime ( økokrim in norwegian ) , after a complaint by the us dvd copy control association ( dvd-cca ) and the motion picture association ( mpa ) . johansen has denied writing the decryption code in decss , saying that this part of the project originated from someone in germany . he only developed the gui component of the software . his defense was assisted by the electronic frontier foundation . the trial opened in the oslo district court on 9 december 2002 with johansen pleading not guilty to charges that had a maximum penalty of two years in prison or large fines . the defense argued that no illegal access was obtained to anyone else 's information , since johansen owned the dvds himself . they also argued that it is legal under norwegian law to make copies of such data for personal use . the verdict was announced on 7 january 2003 , acquittal johansen of all charges . two further levels of appeals were available to the prosecutors , to the appeals court and then to the supreme court . økokrim filed an appeal on 20 january 2003 and it was reported on 28 february that the borgarting court of appeal had agreed to hear the case . johansen 's second decss trial began in oslo on 2 december 2003 , and resulted in an acquittal on 22 december 2003 . økokrim announced on 5 january 2004 that it would not appeal the case to the supreme court . other projects . in the first decade of the 21st century , johansen 's career has included many other projects . 2001 . in 2001 , johansen released openjaz , a reverse-engineered set of drivers for linux , beos and windows 2000 that allow operation of the jazpiper mp3 digital audio player without its proprietary drivers . 2003 . in november 2003 , johansen released qtfairuse , an open source program which dumps the raw output of a quicktime advanced audio coding ( aac ) stream to a file , which could bypass the digital rights management ( drm ) software used to encrypt content of music from media such as those distributed by the itunes music store , apple inc . 's online music store . although these resulting raw aac files were unplayable by most media players at the time of release , they represent the first attempt at circumventing apple 's encryption . 2004 . johansen had by now become a videolan developer , and had reverse engineered fairplay and written vlc 's fairplay support . it has been available in videolan cvs since january 2004 , but the first release to include fairplay support is vlc 0.7.1 ( released march 2 , 2004 ) . 2005 . on march 18 , 2005 , travis watkins and cody brocious , along with johansen , wrote pymusique , a python based program which allows the download of purchased files from the itunes music store without digital rights management ( drm ) encryption . smith , tony ( march 18 , 2005 ) & ndash ; '' dvd jon : buy drm-less tracks from apple itunes '' this was possible because apple computer 's itunes software adds the drm to the music file after the music file is downloaded . on march 22 , apple released a patch for the itunes music store blocking the use of his pymusique program . the same day , an update to pymusique was released , circumventing the new patch . on june 26 , 2005 , johansen created a modification of google 's new in-browser video player ( which was based on the open source vlc media player ) less than 24 hours after its release , to allow the user to play videos that are not hosted on google 's servers . in late 2005 , håkon wium lie , the norwegian cto of opera software , co-creator of cascading style sheets and long-time supporter of open source , named johansen a '' hero '' in a net meeting arranged by one of norway 's biggest newspapers . on september 2 , 2005 , the register published news that dvd jon had defeated encryption in microsoft 's windows media player by reverse engineering a proprietary algorithm that was ostensibly used to protect windows media station nsc files from engineers sniffing for the files ' source ip address , port or stream format . johansen had also made a decoder available . clarke , gavin ( san francisco . september 2 , 2005 ) & ndash ; '' dvd jon hacks media player file encryption '' in september 2005 , johansen announced the release of sharpmusique 1.0 , an alternative to the default itunes program . the program allows linux and windows users to buy songs from the itunes music store without copy protection . in 2005 , johansen worked for mp3tunes in san diego as a software engineer . his first project was a new digital music product , code-named oboe . . sony bmg drm rootkit . in november 2005 , a slashdot story claimed that sony-bmgs extended copy protection ( xcp ) drm software includes code and comments ( such as '' copyright ( c ) apple computer , inc . all rights reserved . '' ) illegally copied from an itunes drm circumvention program by johansen . a popular claim was that , using the criteria that riaa uses in its copyright lawsuits , johansen could sue for billions of dollars in damages . . 2006 . on january 8 , 2006 , johansen revealed his intent to defeat the encryption of next-generation dvd encryption , advanced access content system ( aacs ) . on june 7 , 2006 , he announced that he had moved to san francisco and was joining doubletwist ventures . in october 2006 , johansen and doubletwist ventures announced they had reverse engineered apple computer 's drm for itunes , called fairplay . rather than allow people to strip the drm , doubletwist would license the ability to apply fairplay to media companies who wanted their music and videos to play on the ipod , without having to sign a distribution contract with apple . . 2007 . in july 2007 , johansen managed to allow the iphone to work as an ipod with wifi , without at & t activation . . 2008 . on february 2 , 2008 , johansen launched doubletwist , which allows customers to route around digital rights management in music files and convert files between various formats . the software converts digital music of any bitrate encoded with any popular codec into a format that can be played on any device . . 2009 . in june , he managed to get an advertisement for his application doubletwist on the wall of the bay area rapid transit exit doubletwist controversy outside the san francisco apple store , just days before the 2009 wwdc event . on june 9 , it was reported that the advertisement was removed by bart for allegedly '' being too opaque '' ( the background was blueish ) and not allowing enough light into the adjoining transit station . the advertisement was later redesigned and redeployed with a transparent background . . awards . january 2000 - karoline award , given to high-school students with excellent grades and noteworthy achievements in sports , arts or culture april 2002 - eff pioneer award