Meltham

geography . the valley has been inhabited since pre-historic times and there are two iron age sites overlooking the town . meltham also includes the small village of helme which has its own school and church . meltham is situated within close reach of several major cities . bradford is 14 miles to the north , leeds is 19 miles north-east , manchester is 19 miles to the south-west and sheffield is 21 miles to the south-east . surrounding villages within the kirklees area include crosland moor , golcar , honley , holmfirth , linthwaite , marsden , netherton and slaithwaite . the peak district boundary walk runs past the west side of the town . . education . meltham itself contains three primary schools , namely meltham church of england ( c of e ) school , meltham moor primary school and helme ( c of e ) junior and infant school . secondary schools serving meltham primarily include honley high school , holmfirth high school and colne valley high school , all of which are located in neighbouring areas . sport . meltham has active teams in a variety of sports , including football , cricket and rugby league . the football team , meltham athletic fc , currently play in the west riding county amateur football league premier division . notable honours include the west riding challenge cup in 2005 , the huddersfield and district league on two occasions and the barlow cup 4 times ( including three in a row 2003-05 ) . the cricket side , meltham cc , has won the 1st xi byrom shield on 7 occasions and the sykes cup 8 times . meltham cricket club honours the 1st xi and 2nd xi currently play in the drakes premierships 1 and 2 respectively . notable ex-players include england international cricketer ryan sidebottom , dilip doshi ( father of nayan ) , madan lal and shahid mahmood . the rugby league side , meltham all blacks arlfc , currently play in the pennine league division 4 . arts . music . meltham is home to the meltham and meltham mills band , which was established in 1846 as a brass band . they became the first band to win the british open title for three consecutive years , a feat only matched by 5 others . the british open brass band championships past winners . television . meltham has been used as part of the location for several television projects . the third episode in 1995 's coogan 's run was set in and around meltham parish church hall . in addition scenes of long-running bbc sitcom last of the summer wine and itv drama where the heart is used some meltham houses as character 's homes . the scout hut has also been used as well as streets for shooting outdoor scenes . industrial history . brook ( e ) family . meltham mills was the former site of jonas brook and brothers , a silk mill complex that employed over 1,000 workers during the late 19th century . the brook family originally came from new house hall in sheepridge , moving to thickhollins towards the end of the 18th century . william brook married martha smith at bradford parish church - the daughter of a prominent mirfield banker . their sons jonas , james and joseph established their business in meltham mills , using a goat 's head - the crest from the brook 's coat of arms - as their brand . the goat 's head can still be seen on the old office building to the mill complex and their arms are emblazoned in st . james ' church , in meltham mills ( which the family built ) - a hawkes lure : motto '' en dieu ma foy '' ( in god my trust ) . meltham mills band also carry the brook family coat of arms as their official logo . edward brook died in 1904 at hoddom castle , the house near ecclefechan , south-west scotland , which he had purchased in 1878 . the brook family were philanthropists and built housing in meltham mills for their employees , including the convalescent home . they also built meltham hall , helme church and owned an estate at enderby in leicestershire . william brook is buried with his wife martha in meltham church , but his descendants are buried in the crypt underneath st . james church , meltham mills . annals of the church and parish of almondbury , yorkshire - ( page 29 of 57 ) jonas brook and brothers became united threads in 1890 and sir hildred carlile of ponsonby hall , hertfordshire was a director of the business . united threads was closed in 1939 - the business was transferred to paisley as part of j & p coats - now coats viyella . the factory site was taken over by david brown tractors . john charles brooke , who originated from the silkstone branch of the newhouse hall family was somerset herald during the 18th century . he was crushed to death at the haymarket theatre in london following the crowd 's clamour to see king george iii in 1794 . he is buried in st benet paul 's wharf in london . tractor factory . meltham mills was also the former base of the david brown ltd . factory opening in 1939 and closing operations on the site in 1988 . the various building have now been converted into a diverse number of industrial units , one housing a tractor museum and other large sections containing an indoor kart racing track . durker roods , the former home of sir david brown was converted into a hotel and the grounds were sold for private housing . the town has its own joint scouting and guides association buildings . notable people from meltham . meltham was the birthplace of lance sergeant james taylor ( 25b/82 ) e company 2nd battalion , 24th regiment ( 2nd warwickshire ) , who fought at , and survived , the battle at rorke 's drift in the zulu war . although born in the village , to parents william dyson taylor and sarah taylor of helms lane , baptismal record retrieved from ancestry.co.uk on 31 jan 2021 both of whom were also born there , he grew up in manchester and died in wales , but can still be regarded as a native of meltham . the roll of those present at rorke 's drift 22/23 january , 1879 rorke 's drift , adrian greaves , cassell , 2003 , p . 246 . censuses 1861 , 1871 , 1901 . albert craig , dubbed the surrey poet , was also born and raised in meltham . his ditties mostly related to cricket and football . australian textile magnate godfrey hirst was born at royd edge , meltham in 1857 . in 1890 he founded the godfrey hirst woollen mills at geelong , victoria , which in the early 20th century became the largest manufacturer of textiles in australia . the company still operates , as godfrey hirst carpets . hirst died in 1917 . australian dictionary of biography website - godfrey hirst dora thewlis , who gained brief national notoriety as a young suffragette when a photograph of her arrest appeared on the front page of the daily mirror , was born on shady row , meltham mills , in may 1890 . within a few years of her birth , the residents of the row had successfully petitioned to have the boundary redrawn so that the entirety of meltham mills was within the township of meltham . prior to the boundary change in 1896 , parts of meltham mills were within the township of honley boundary . it seems likely that dora 's father , james lindley thewlis , organised the petition . . see also . listed buildings in meltham . gallery . image : meltham_village viewed from wessenden moor.jpg view of meltham from wessenden moor , huddersfield is in the far distance image : david brown tractors , meltham mills ( rlh ) . jpg david brown tractor factory meltham , 1981 image : david_brown_990_implematic_tractor.png david brown 990 implematic tractor made in meltham around 1964 image : meltham cub scouts , late 1970s ( rlh ) . jpg meltham cub scouts , on blackpool bridge , near digley reservoir ( late 1970s ) image : royd edge.jpg meltham viewed from royd edge . location grid . the above grid is based on exact directions rather than close to .