Natural experiment

history . one of the best-known early natural experiments was the 1854 broad street cholera outbreak in london , england . on 31 august 1854 , a major outbreak of cholera struck soho . over the next three days , 127 people near broad street died . by the end of the outbreak 616 people died . the physician john snow identified the source of the outbreak as the nearest public water pump , using a map of deaths and illness that revealed a cluster of cases around the pump . in this example , snow discovered a strong association between the use of the water from the pump , and deaths and illnesses due to cholera . snow found that the southwark and vauxhall waterworks company , which supplied water to districts with high attack rates , obtained the water from the thames downstream from where raw sewage was discharged into the river . by contrast , districts that were supplied water by the lambeth waterworks company , which obtained water upstream from the points of sewage discharge , had low attack rates . given the near-haphazard patchwork development of the water supply in mid-nineteenth century london , snow viewed the developments as '' an experiment.on the grandest scale . '' snow , j . ( 1855 ) . on the mode of communication of cholera ( 2nd ed . ) . london : churchill . excerpted in macmahon , b . & pugh , t.f . ( 1970 ) . epidemiology . boston : little brown . of course , the exposure to the polluted water was not under the control of any scientist . therefore , this exposure has been recognized as being a natural experiment . the 1854 cholera outbreak is the example of a natural experiment discussed often by david a . freedman , e.g . in statistical models : theory and practice ( cambridge university press ) chapter 1.3 ( pp . 6–9 ) . macmahon , b . , & pugh , t.f . ( 1970 ) . epidemiology : principles and methods . boston : little , brown . snow 's studies of the pattern of the disease were convincing enough to persuade the local council to disable the well pump by removing its handle . after the handle of the well-pump was replaced , the incidence of new cases dropped . in stopping the use of water from the well-pump , the authorities conducted , in effect , a second study , an uncontrolled intervention study , a study with an intervention group but no control group . . recent examples . family size . an aim of a study angrist and evans ( 1998 ) was to estimate the effect of family size on the labor market outcomes of the mother . for at least two reasons , the correlations between family size and various outcomes ( e.g . , earnings ) do not inform us about how family size causally affects labor market outcomes . first , both labor market outcomes and family size may be affected by unobserved '' third '' variables ( e.g . , personal preferences ) . second , labor market outcomes themselves may affect family size ( called '' reverse causality '' ) . for example , a woman may defer having a child if she gets a raise at work . the authors observed that two-child families with either two boys or two girls are substantially more likely to have a third child than two-child families with one boy and one girl . the sex of the first two children , then , constitutes a kind of natural experiment : it is as if an experimenter had randomly assigned some families to have two children and others to have three . the authors were then able to credibly estimate the causal effect of having a third child on labor market outcomes . angrist and evans found that childbearing had a greater impact on poor and less educated women than on highly educated women although the earnings impact of having a third child tended to disappear by that child 's 13th birthday . they also found that having a third child had little impact on husbands ' earnings . . game shows . within economics , game shows are a frequently studied form of natural experiment . while game shows might seem to be artificial contexts , they can be considered natural experiments due to the fact that the context arises without interference of the scientist . game shows have been used to study a wide range of different types of economic behavior , such as decision making under risk and cooperative behavior . . smoking ban . in helena , montana a smoking ban was in effect in all public spaces , including bars and restaurants , during the six-month period from june 2002 to december 2002 . helena is geographically isolated and served by only one hospital . the investigators observed that the rate of heart attacks dropped by 40 % while the smoking ban was in effect . opponents of the law prevailed in getting the enforcement of the law suspended after six months , after which the rate of heart attacks went back up . this study was an example of a natural experiment , called a crossover study , where the exposure is removed for a time and then returned . the study also potentially suggests that the inability to control variables in natural experiments can impede investigators from drawing firm conclusions . critics argued that the particularly large percentage fluctuation in the rate of myocardial infarction was likely due to chance , given the small population size . . nuclear weapons testing . nuclear weapons testing released large quantities of radioactive isotopes into the atmosphere , some of which could be incorporated into biological tissues . the release stopped after the partial nuclear test ban treaty in 1963 , which prohibited atmospheric nuclear tests . this resembled a large-scale pulse-chase experiment , but could not have been performed as a regular experiment in humans due to scientific ethics . several types of observations were made possible ( in people born before 1963 ) , such as determination of the rate of replacement for cells in different human tissues . vietnam war draft . an important question in economics research is what determines earnings . angrist ( 1990 ) evaluated the effects of military service on lifetime earnings . using statistical methods developed in econometrics , lambert , b . ( 2013 ) . natural experiments in econometrics . youtube video angrist capitalized on the approximate random assignment of the draft lottery ( 1969 ) , and used it as an instrumental variable associated with eligibility ( or non-eligibility ) for military service . because many factors might predict whether someone serves in the military , the draft lottery frames a natural experiment whereby those drafted into the military can be compared against those not drafted because the two groups should not differ substantially prior to military service . angrist found that the earnings of veterans were , on average , about 15 percent less than the earnings of non-veterans . industrial melanism . with the industrial revolution in the nineteenth century , many species of moth , including the well-studied peppered moth , responded to the atmospheric pollution of sulphur dioxide and soot around cities with industrial melanism , a dramatic increase in the frequency of dark forms over the formerly abundant pale , speckled forms . in the twentieth century , as regulation improved and pollution fell , providing the conditions for a large-scale natural experiment , the trend towards industrial melanism was reversed , and melanic forms quickly became scarce . the effect led the evolutionary biologists l . m . cook and j . r . g . turner to conclude that '' natural selection is the only credible explanation for the overall decline '' . . see also . common garden experiment . references .