Hanja

history . a major motivation for the introduction of chinese characters into korea was the spread of buddhism . the major chinese text that introduced hanja to koreans , however , was not a religious text but the chinese text cheonjamun ; thousand character classic ) . although koreans had to learn classical chinese to be properly literate for the most part , some additional systems were developed which used simplified forms of chinese characters that phonetically transcribe korean , including hyangchal , gugyeol , and idu . one way of adapting hanja to write korean in such systems ( such as gugyeol ) was to represent native korean grammatical particles and other words solely according to their pronunciation . for example , gugyeol uses the characters to transcribe the korean word '' hăni '' , which in modern korean means '' does , and so '' . in chinese , however , the same characters are read in mandarin as the expression '' wéi ní '' , meaning '' becoming a nun '' . this is a typical example of gugyeol words where the radical is read in korean for its meaning ( hă— '' to do '' ) , whereas the suffix , ni ( meaning '' nun '' ) , is used phonetically . hanja were the sole means of writing korean until king sejong the great promoted the invention of hangul in the 15th century . even after the invention of hangul , however , most korean scholars continued to write in hanmun . hangul effectively replaced hanja only in the 20th century . since june 1949 , hanja have not officially been used in north korea , and , in addition , most texts are now most commonly written horizontally instead of vertically . many words borrowed from chinese have also been replaced in the north with native korean words . nevertheless , a large number of chinese-borrowed words are still widely used in the north ( although written in hangul ) , and hanja still appear in special contexts , such as recent north korean dictionaries . the replacement has been less total in south korea where , although usage has declined over time , some hanja remain in common usage in some contexts . character formation . each hanja is composed of one of 214 radicals plus in most cases one or more additional elements . the vast majority of hanja use the additional elements to indicate the sound of the character , but a few hanja are purely pictographic , and some were formed in other ways . hanja became prominent in use by the elite class between the 3rd and 4th centuries by the three kingdoms . the use came from chinese that migrated into korea . with them they brought the writing system hanja . thus the hanja being used came from the characters already being used by the chinese at the time . since hanja was primarily used by the elite and scholars , it was hard for others to learn , thus much character development was limited . scholars in the 4th century used this to study and write confucian classics , which were written with these traditional characters as opposed to the not yet invented simplified characters . character formation is also coined to the idu form which was a buddhist writing system for chinese characters . this practice however was limited due to the opinion of buddhism whether it was favorable at the time or not . character development of hanja can be traced further back then when the use in korea had begun . hanja uses traditional characters that came before the invention of simplified characters . even before the creation of simplified characters , hanja was already losing ground to the newly invented hangul system . hanja is rarely used today , which could be used as an explanation as to why hanja did not have the chance to adapt to simplified characters . however , this also brings up the discussion of whether or not hanja should still be in use today or not . the historical use of hanja in korea has had a change over time . some hanja have started to be trended between different ideas . in writing and literacy in chinese , korean , and japanese by insup taylor and m . martin taylor , the authors explain that from the 1920s to 1990 the use of hanja as a social idea and political idea has decreased drastically . in 1920 , in leading newspapers hanja was being used 100 % in political headlines and 80 % in social headlines . by 1990 , headlines hanja use was under 20 % for both political and social aspects . in body text , political stories saw just over 60 % use , and social saw 0 % use . by 1990 , the political aspect had dropped to about 1-5 % . this shows that hanja would not be able to gain the use of simplified characters due to the decrease of usage . thus , to the knowledge that is still being used traditional characters would remain the traditional style of hanja being used . eumhun . to aid in understanding the meaning of a character , or to describe it orally to distinguish it from other characters with the same pronunciation , character dictionaries and school textbooks refer to each character with a combination of its sound and a word indicating its meaning . this dual meaning-sound reading of a character is called eumhun ; from '' sound '' + '' meaning , '' '' teaching '' ) . the word or words used to denote the meaning are often & mdash ; though hardly always & mdash ; words of native korean ( i.e . , non-chinese ) origin , and are sometimes archaic words no longer commonly used . education . south . south korean primary schools abandoned the teaching of hanja in 1971 , although they are still taught as part of the mandatory curriculum in grade 6 . they are taught in separate courses in education in south korea , separately from the normal korean-language curriculum . formal hanja education begins in grade 7 ( junior high school ) and continues until graduation from senior high school in grade 12 . a total of 1,800 hanja are taught : 900 for junior high , and 900 for senior high ( starting in grade 10 ) . hannas 1997 : 71 . '' a balance was struck in august 1976 , when the ministry of education agreed to keep chinese characters out of the elementary schools and teach the 1,800 characters in special courses , not as part of korean language or any other substantive curricula . this is where things stand at present '' post-secondary hanja education continues in some liberal-arts universities . hannas 1997 : 68-69 the 1972 promulgation of basic hanja for educational use changed on december 31 , 2000 , to replace 44 hanja with 44 others . 한문 교육용 기초 한자 ( 2000 ) , page 15 ( 추가자 : characters added , 제외자 : characters removed ) debate flared again in 2013 after a move by south korean authorities to encourage primary and secondary schools to offer hanja classes . officials said that learning chinese characters could enhance students ' korean-language proficiency ; protesters called the program '' old-fashioned and unnecessary '' . '' hangeul advocates oppose hanja classes '' , the korea herald , 2013-07-03 . the ministry of education dropped the plan in 2018 . . north . though north korea rapidly abandoned the general use of hanja soon after independence , hannas 1997 : 67 . '' by the end of 1946 and the beginning of 1947 , the major newspaper nodong sinmun , mass circulation magazine kulloja , and similar publications began appearing in all-hangul . school textbooks and literary materials converted to all-hangul at the same time or possibly earlier ( so 1989:31 ) . '' the number of hanja taught in primary and secondary schools is actually greater than the 1,800 taught in south korea . hannas 1997 : 68 . '' although north korea has removed chinese characters from its written materials , it has , paradoxically , ended up with an educational program that teachers more characters than either south korea or japan , as table 2 shows . '' kim il-sung had earlier called for a gradual elimination of the use of hanja , hannas 1997 : 67 . '' according to ko yong-kun , kim went on record as early as february 1949 , when chinese characters had already been removed from most dprk publications , as advocating their gradual abandonment ( 1989:25 ) . '' but by the 1960s , he had reversed his stance ; he was quoted as saying in 1966 , '' while we should use as few sinitic terms as possible , students must be exposed to the necessary chinese characters and taught how to write them . '' hannas 1997 : 67 as a result , a chinese-character textbook was designed for north korean schools for use in grades 5–9 , teaching 1,500 characters , with another 500 for high school students . hannas 1997 : 67 . '' between 1968 and 1969 , a four-volume textbook appeared for use in grades 5 through 9 designed to teach 1,500 characters , confirming the applicability of the new policy to the general student population . another five hundred were added for grades 10 through 12 ( yi yun-p'yo 1989 : 372 ) . '' college students are exposed to another 1,000 , bringing the total to 3,000 . hannas 2003 : 188-189 . uses . because many different hanja—and thus , many different words written using hanja—often share the homophone , two distinct hanja words ( hanjaeo ) may be spelled identically in the phonetic hangul alphabet . hanja 's language of origin , chinese , has many homophones , and hanja words became even more homophonic when they came into korean , since korean lacks a tonal system , which is how chinese distinguishes many words that would otherwise be homophonic . for example , while 道 , 刀 , and 島 are all phonetically distinct in mandarin ( pronounced dào , dāo , and dǎo respectively ) , they are all pronounced do ( 도 ) in korean . for this reason , hanja are often used to clarify meaning , either on their own without the equivalent hangul spelling or in parentheses after the hangul spelling as a kind of gloss . hanja are often also used as a form of shorthand in newspaper headlines , advertisements , and on signs , for example the banner at the funeral for the sailors lost in the sinking of roks cheonan . . print media . in south korea , hanja are used most frequently in ancient literature , legal documents , and scholarly monographs , where they often appear without the equivalent hangul spelling . usually , only those words with a specialized or ambiguous meaning are printed in hanja . in mass-circulation books and magazines , hanja are generally used rarely , and only to gloss words already spelled in hangul when the meaning is ambiguous . hanja are also often used in newspaper headlines as abbreviations or to eliminate ambiguity . brown 1990 : 120 in formal publications , personal names are also usually glossed in hanja in parentheses next to the hangul . in contrast , north korea eliminated the use of hanja even in academic publications by 1949 , a situation that has since remained unchanged . hanja are often used for advertising or decorative purposes , and appear frequently in athletic events and cultural parades , dictionaries and atlases . for example , the hanja ( sin or shin , meaning sour or hot ) appears prominently on packages of shin ramyun noodles . dictionaries . in modern korean dictionaries , all entry words of sino-korean origin are printed in hangul and listed in hangul order , with the hanja given in parentheses immediately following the entry word . this practice helps to eliminate ambiguity , and it also serves as a sort of shorthand etymology , since the meaning of the hanja and the fact that the word is composed of hanja often help to illustrate the word 's origin . as an example of how hanja can help to clear up ambiguity , many homophones can be distinguished by using hanja . an example is the word ( sudo ) , which may have meanings such as : naver hanja dictionary query of sudo : spiritual discipline : prisoner : '' city of water '' ( e.g . venice or suzhou ) : paddy rice : drain , rivers , path of surface water : tunnel : capital ( city ) : hand knife hanja dictionaries for specialist usage ( jajeon or okpyeon are organized by radical ( the traditional chinese method of classifying characters ) . personal names . korean name are generally based on hanja , although some exceptions exist . on business cards , the use of hanja is slowly fading away , with most older people displaying their names in hanja while most of the younger generation uses hangul . korean personal names usually consist of a one-character family name ( seong , followed by a two-character given name ( ireum , . there are a few two-character family names ( e.g . , namgung ) , and the holders of such names—but not only them—tend to have one-syllable given names . traditionally , the given name in turn consists of one character unique to the individual and one character shared by all people in a family of the same sex and generation ( see generation name ) . during the japanese administration of korea ( 1910–1945 ) , koreans sōshi-kaimei , including kun'yomi of the hanja , but this practice was reversed by post-independence governments in korea . since the 1970s , some parents have given their children given names that break the chinese generation style , and are simply native korean words . popular ones include haneul—meaning '' sky '' —and iseul—meaning '' morning dew '' . nevertheless , on official documents , people 's names are still recorded in both hangul and in hanja ( if the name is composed of hanja ) . toponymy . due to standardization efforts during goryeo and joseon eras , native korean placenames were converted to hanja , and most names used today are hanja-based . the most notable exception is the name of the capital , seoul , a native korean word meaning '' capital '' with no direct hanja conversion ; the hanja gyeong , '' capital '' ) is sometimes used as a back-rendering . for example , disyllabic names of railway lines , freeways , and provinces are often formed by taking one character from each of the two locales ' names ; thus , the gyeongbu corridor connects seoul ( gyeong , and busan ( bu , ; the gyeongin corridor connects seoul and incheon ( in , ; the former jeolla province took its name from the first characters in the city names jeonju and naju ( '' naju '' is originally '' raju , '' but the initial '' r/l '' sound in south korean is simplified to '' n '' ) . most atlases of korea today are published in two versions : one in hangul ( sometimes with some english as well ) , and one in hanja . subway and railway station signs give the station 's name in hangul , hanja , and english , both to assist visitors ( including chinese or japanese who may rely on the hanja spellings ) and to disambiguate the name . academia . hanja are still required for certain disciplines in academia , such as oriental studies and other disciplines studying chinese , japanese or historic korean literature and culture , since the vast majority of primary source text material are written in hanzi , kanji , hanja , etc . art and culture . for the traditional creative arts such as calligraphy and painting , a knowledge of hanja is needed to write and understand the various scripts and inscriptions , as is the same in china and japan . many old songs and poems are written and based on hanja characters . on 9 september 2003 , the celebration for the 55th anniversary of north korea appeared a float decorated with the situation of north korean people welcomes kim il-sung , which including a banner with kim il-sung 's name written with hanja . 2003年9月9日朝鲜阅兵 on bilibili . retrieved 18 sep 2020 . . popular usage . opinion surveys in south korea regarding the issue of hanja use have had mixed responses in the past . hanja terms are also expressed through hangul , the standard script in the korean language . hanja use within general korean literature has declined significantly since the 1980s because formal hanja education in south korea does not begin until the seventh year of schooling , due to changes in government policy during the time . in 1956 , one study found mixed-script korean text ( in which sino-korean nouns are written using hanja , and other words using hangul ) were read faster than texts written purely in hangul ; however , by 1977 , the situation had reversed . taylor and taylor 1983 : 90 in 1988 , 80 % of one sample of people without a college education '' evinced no reading comprehension of any but the simplest , most common hanja '' when reading mixed-script passages . brown 1990 : 119 . gukja . a small number of characters were invented by koreans themselves . these characters are called gukja , literally '' national characters '' ) . most of them are for proper names ( place-names and people 's names ) but some refer to korean-specific concepts and materials . they include ; dap ; '' paddy field '' ) , ; jang , '' wardrobe '' ) , ; dol , a character only used in given names ) , ; so , a rare surname from seongju ) , and ; gi , an old name referring to kumgangsan ) . further examples include bu ) , tal ) , pyeon ) , and ppun ) , myeong ) . compare to the parallel development in japan of , of which there are hundreds , many rarely used—these were often developed for native japanese plants and animals . yakja . thumb some hanja characters have simplified forms , 略字 , yakja ) that can be seen in casual use . an example is , which is a cursive form of ( meaning '' nothing '' ) . pronunciation . each hanja character is pronounced as a single syllable , corresponding to a single composite character in hangul . the pronunciation of hanja in korean is by no means identical to the way they are pronounced in modern chinese , particularly mandarin , although some chinese dialects and korean share similar pronunciations for some characters . for example , '' print '' is yìnshuā in mandarin chinese and inswae in korean , but it is pronounced insah in shanghainese ( a wu chinese dialect ) . one obvious difference is the complete loss of tone from korean while most chinese dialects retain tone . in other aspects , the pronunciation of hanja is more conservative than most northern and central chinese dialects , for example in the retention of labial consonant codas in characters with labial consonant onsets , such as the characters beop ) and beom ) ; labial codas existed in middle chinese but do not survive intact in most northern and central chinese varieties today , and even in many southern chinese varieties that still retain labial codas , including cantonese and hokkien , labial codas in characters with labial onsets are replaced by their dental counterparts . due to divergence in pronunciation since the time of borrowing , sometimes the pronunciation of a hanja and its corresponding hanzi may differ considerably . for example , ( '' woman '' ) is nǚ in mandarin chinese and nyeo in korean . however , in most modern korean dialects ( especially south korean ones ) , is pronounced as yeo when used in an initial position , due to a systematic elision of initial n when followed by y or i . additionally , sometimes a hanja-derived word will have altered pronunciation of a character to reflect korean pronunciation shifts , for example mogwa '' quince '' from mokgwa , and moran '' paeonia suffruticosa '' from mokdan . there are some pronunciation correspondence between the onset , rhyme , and coda between cantonese and korean . patrick chun kau chu . ( 2008 ) . onset , rhyme and coda corresponding rules of the sino-korean characters between cantonese and korean . paper presented at the 5th postgraduate research forum on linguistics ( prfl ) , hong kong , china , march 15–16 . when learning how to write hanja , students are taught to memorize the native korean pronunciation for the hanja 's meaning and the sino-korean pronunciations ( the pronunciation based on the chinese pronunciation of the characters ) for each hanja respectively so that students know what the syllable and meaning is for a particular hanja . for example , the name for the hanja is ( mul-su ) in which ( mul ) is the native korean pronunciation for '' water '' , while ( su ) is the sino-korean pronunciation of the character . the naming of hanja is similar to if '' water '' were named '' water-aqua '' , '' horse-equus '' , or '' gold-aurum '' based on a hybridization of both the english and the latin names . other examples include ( saram-in ) for '' person/people '' , ( keul-dae ) for '' big/large/great '' , ( jageul-so ) for '' small/little '' , ( arae-ha ) for '' underneath/below/low '' , ( abi-bu ) for '' father '' , and ( naraireum-han ) for '' han/korea '' .