Sodium carbonate

hydrates . sodium carbonate is obtained as three hydrates and as the anhydrous salt : sodium carbonate decahydrate ( natron ) , na 2 co 3 ·10h 2 o , which readily effloresces to form the monohydrate . sodium carbonate heptahydrate ( not known in mineral form ) , na 2 co 3 ·7h 2 o . sodium carbonate monohydrate ( thermonatrite ) , na 2 co 3 ·h 2 o . also known as crystal carbonate . anhydrous sodium carbonate , also known as calcined soda , is formed by heating the hydrates . it is also formed when sodium hydrogen carbonate is heated ( calcined ) e.g . in the final step of the solvay process . the decahydrate is formed from water solutions crystallizing in the temperature range -2.1 to +32.0 & nbsp ; °c , the heptahydrate in the narrow range 32.0 to 35.4 & nbsp ; °c and above this temperature the monohydrate forms . in dry air the decahydrate and heptahydrate lose water to give the monohydrate . other hydrates have been reported , e.g . with 2.5 units of water per sodium carbonate unit ( '' pentahemihydrate '' ) . . washing soda . sodium carbonate decahydrate ( na 2 co 3 ·10h 2 o ) , also known as washing soda , is the most common hydrate of sodium carbonate containing 10 molecules of water of crystallization . soda ash is dissolved in water and crystallized to get washing soda . na2co3 + 10h2o - > na2co3.10h2o it is white crystalline solid . it is one of the few metal carbonate which are soluble in water . it is alkaline with a ph level of 11 ; it turns red litmus to blue . it has detergent properties or cleansing properties , because it can remove dirt and grease from dirty clothes , etc . it attacks dirt and grease to form water soluble products , which are then washed away on rinsing with water . applications . some common applications of sodium carbonate ( or washing soda ) include : sodium carbonate ( or washing soda ) is used as a cleansing agent for domestic purposes like washing clothes . sodium carbonate is a component of many dry soap powders . it is used for removing temporary and permanent hardness of water . ( see water softening ) . it is used in the manufacture of glass , soap and paper . ( see glass manufacture ) it is used in the manufacture of sodium compounds like borax . glass manufacture . sodium carbonate serves as a flux for silica , lowering the melting point of the mixture to something achievable without special materials . this '' soda glass '' is mildly water-soluble , so some calcium carbonate is added to the melt mixture to make the glass insoluble . bottle and window glass ( soda-lime glass ) is made by melting such mixtures of sodium carbonate , calcium carbonate , and silica sand ( silicon dioxide ( sio 2 ) ) . when these materials are heated , the carbonates release carbon dioxide . in this way , sodium carbonate is a source of sodium oxide . soda-lime glass has been the most common form of glass for centuries . . water softening . hard water contains dissolved compounds , usually calcium or magnesium compounds . sodium carbonate is used for removing temporary and permanent hardness of water . as sodium carbonate is water-soluble and magnesium carbonate and calcium carbonate are insoluble , so it is used to soften water by removing mg 2+ and ca 2+ . these ions form insoluble solid precipitates upon treatment with carbonate ions : : ca^2+ + co3^2- - > caco3 ca^2+ ( aq ) + na2co3 ( aq ) - > caco3 ( s ) + 2na+ ( aq ) similarly , mg^2+ ( aq ) + na2co3 ( aq ) - > mgco3 ( s ) + 2na+ ( aq ) the water is softened because it no longer contains dissolved calcium ions and magnesium ions . . food additive and cooking . sodium carbonate is a food additive ( e500 ) used as an acidity regulator , anticaking agent , raising agent , and stabilizer . it is one of the components of , a solution of alkaline salts used to give ramen noodles their characteristic flavor and texture . it is used in the production of snus to stabilize the ph of the final product . sodium carbonate is used in the production of sherbet powder . the cooling and fizzing sensation results from the endothermic reaction between sodium carbonate and a weak acid , commonly citric acid , releasing carbon dioxide gas , which occurs when the sherbet is moistened by saliva . in china , it is used to replace lye-water in the crust of traditional cantonese moon cakes , and in many other chinese steamed buns and noodles . in cooking , it is sometimes used in place of sodium hydroxide for lyeing , especially with german cuisine and lye rolls . these dishes are treated with a solution of an alkaline substance to change the ph of the surface of the food and improve browning . sodium carbonate is corrosive to aluminum cookware , utensils and foil . . inexpensive , weak base . sodium carbonate is also used as a relatively strong base in various fields . as a common alkali , it is preferred in many chemical processes because it is cheaper than naoh and far safer to handle . its mildness especially recommends its use in domestic applications . for example , it is used as a ph regulator to maintain stable alkaline conditions necessary for the action of the majority of photographic film developing agents . it is also a common additive in swimming pools and aquarium water to maintain a desired ph and carbonate hardness ( kh ) . in dyeing with fiber-reactive dyes , sodium carbonate ( often under a name such as soda ash fixative or soda ash activator ) is used to ensure proper chemical bonding of the dye with cellulose ( plant ) fibers , typically before dyeing ( for tie dyes ) , mixed with the dye ( for dye painting ) , or after dyeing ( for immersion dyeing ) . it is also used in the froth flotation process to maintain a favourable ph as a float conditioner besides cao and other mildly basic compounds . precursor to other compounds . sodium ( nahco 3 ) or baking soda , also a component in fire extinguishers , is often generated from sodium carbonate . although nahco 3 is itself an intermediate product of the solvay process , the heating needed to remove the ammonia that contaminates it decomposes some nahco 3 , making it more economic to react finished na 2 co 3 with co 2 : : na 2 co 3 + co 2 + h 2 o → 2nahco 3 in a related reaction , sodium carbonate is used to make sodium bisulfite ( nahso 3 ) , which is used for the '' sulfite '' method of separating lignin from cellulose . this reaction is exploited for removing sulfur dioxide from flue gases in power stations : : na 2 co 3 + so 2 + h 2 o → nahco 3 + nahso 3 this application has become more common , especially where stations have to meet stringent emission controls . sodium carbonate is used by the cotton industry to neutralize the sulfuric acid needed for acid delinting of fuzzy cottonseed . miscellaneous . sodium carbonate is used by the brick industry as a wetting agent to reduce the amount of water needed to extrude the clay . in casting , it is referred to as '' bonding agent '' and is used to allow wet alginate to adhere to gelled alginate . sodium carbonate is used in toothpastes , where it acts as a foaming agent and an abrasive , and to temporarily increase mouth ph . sodium carbonate is also used in the processing and tanning of animal hides . physical properties . the integral enthalpy of solution of sodium carbonate is −28.1 & nbsp ; kj/mol for a 10 % w/w aqueous solution . the mohs hardness of sodium carbonate monohydrate is 1.3 . . occurrence as natural mineral . sodium carbonate is soluble in water , and can occur naturally in arid regions , especially in mineral deposits ( evaporites ) formed when seasonal lakes evaporate . deposits of the mineral natron have been mined from dry lake bottoms in egypt since ancient times , when natron was used in the preparation of mummy and in the early manufacture of glass . the anhydrous mineral form of sodium carbonate is quite rare and called natrite . sodium carbonate also erupts from ol doinyo lengai , tanzania 's unique volcano , and it is presumed to have erupted from other volcanoes in the past , but due to these minerals ' instability at the earth 's surface , are likely to be eroded . all three mineralogical forms of sodium carbonate , as well as trona , trisodium hydrogendicarbonate dihydrate , are also known from ultra-alkaline pegmatite , that occur for example in the kola peninsula in russia . extraterrestrially , known sodium carbonate is rare . deposits have been identified as the source of bright spots on ceres , interior material that has been brought to the surface . while there are carbonates on mars , and these are expected to include sodium carbonate , deposits have yet to be confirmed , this absence is explained by some as being due to a global dominance of low ph in previously aqueous martian soil . grotzinger , j . and r . milliken ( eds . ) 2012 . sedimentary geology of mars . sepm . production . mining . trona , sodium sesquicarbonate ( na 3 hco 3 co 3 ·2h 2 o ) , is mined in several areas of the us and provides nearly all the domestic consumption of sodium carbonate . large natural deposits found in 1938 , such as the one near green river , wyoming , have made mining more economical than industrial production in north america . there are important reserves of trona in turkey ; two million tons of soda ash have been extracted from the reserves near ankara . it is also mined from some alkaline lakes such as lake magadi in kenya by dredging . hot saline springs continuously replenish salt in the lake so that , provided the rate of dredging is no greater than the replenishment rate , the source is fully sustainable . barilla and kelp . several '' halophyte '' ( salt-tolerant ) plant species and seaweed species can be processed to yield an impure form of sodium carbonate , and these sources predominated in europe and elsewhere until the early 19th century . the land plants ( typically glassworts or saltworts ) or the seaweed ( typically fucus species ) were harvested , dried , and burned . the ashes were then '' lixivated '' ( washed with water ) to form an alkali solution . this solution was boiled dry to create the final product , which was termed '' soda ash '' ; this very old name refers derives from the arabic word soda , in turn applied to salsola soda , one of the many species of seashore plants harvested for production . '' barilla '' is a commercial term applied to an impure form of potash obtained from coastal plants or kelp . the sodium carbonate concentration in soda ash varied very widely , from 2–3 percent for the seaweed-derived form ( '' kelp '' ) , to 30 percent for the best barilla produced from saltwort plants in spain . plant and seaweed sources for soda ash , and also for the related alkali '' potash '' , became increasingly inadequate by the end of the 18th century , and the search for commercially viable routes to synthesizing soda ash from salt and other chemicals intensified . clow , archibald and clow , nan l . ( 1952 ) . chemical revolution , ( ayer co pub , june 1952 ) , pp . 65–90 . . leblanc process . in 1792 , the french chemist nicolas leblanc patented a process for producing sodium carbonate from salt , sulfuric acid , limestone , and coal . in the first step , sodium chloride is treated with sulfuric acid in the mannheim process . this reaction produces sodium sulfate ( salt cake ) and hydrogen chloride : : 2nacl + h 2 so 4 & rarr ; na 2 so 4 + 2hcl the salt cake and crushed limestone ( calcium carbonate ) was reduced by heating with coal . this conversion entails two parts . first is the carbothermic reaction whereby the coal , a source of carbon , redox the sulfate to sulfide : : na 2 so 4 + 2c & rarr ; na 2 s + 2co 2 the second stage is the reaction to produce sodium carbonate and calcium sulfide : : na 2 s + caco 3 & rarr ; na 2 co 3 + cas this mixture is called black ash . the soda ash is extracted from the black ash with water . evaporation of this extract yields solid sodium carbonate . this extraction process was termed lixivating . the hydrochloric acid produced by the leblanc process was a major source of air pollution , and the calcium sulfide byproduct also presented waste disposal issues . however , it remained the major production method for sodium carbonate until the late 1880s . . solvay process . in 1861 , the belgium industrial chemist ernest solvay developed a method to make sodium carbonate by first reacting sodium chloride , ammonia , water , and carbon dioxide to generate sodium bicarbonate and ammonium chloride : : nacl + nh 3 + co 2 + h 2 o → nahco 3 + nh 4 cl the resulting sodium bicarbonate was then converted to sodium carbonate by heating it , releasing water and carbon dioxide : :2nahco 3 → na 2 co 3 + h 2 o + co 2 meanwhile , the ammonia was regenerated from the ammonium chloride byproduct by treating it with the lime ( calcium oxide ) left over from carbon dioxide generation : :2nh 4 cl + cao → 2nh 3 + cacl 2 + h 2 o the solvay process recycles its ammonia . it consumes only brine and limestone , and calcium chloride is its only waste product . the process is substantially more economical than the leblanc process , which generates two waste products , calcium sulfide and hydrogen chloride . the solvay process quickly came to dominate sodium carbonate production worldwide . by 1900 , 90 % of sodium carbonate was produced by the solvay process , and the last leblanc process plant closed in the early 1920s . the second step of the solvay process , heating sodium bicarbonate , is used on a small scale by home cooks and in restaurants to make sodium carbonate for culinary purposes ( including pretzels and alkali noodles ) . the method is appealing to such users because sodium bicarbonate is widely sold as baking soda , and the temperatures required to to convert baking soda to sodium carbonate are readily achieved in conventional kitchen ovens . . hou 's process . this process was developed by chinese chemist hou debang in the 1930s . the earlier steam reforming byproduct carbon dioxide was pumped through a saturated solution of brine and ammonia to produce sodium bicarbonate by these reactions : : methane + 2water → carbon dioxide + 4hydrogen :3hydrogen + nitrogen → 2ammonia : ammonia + carbon dioxide + water → ammonium bicarbonate : ammonium bicarbonate + nacl → nh 4 cl + nahco 3 the sodium bicarbonate was collected as a precipitate due to its low solubility and then heated up to approximately or to yield pure sodium carbonate similar to last step of the solvay process . more sodium chloride is added to the remaining solution of ammonium and sodium chlorides ; also , more ammonia is pumped at 30-40 & nbsp ; °c to this solution . the solution temperature is then lowered to below 10 & nbsp ; °c . solubility of ammonium chloride is higher than that of sodium chloride at 30 & nbsp ; °c and lower at 10 & nbsp ; °c . due to this temperature-dependent solubility difference and the common-ion effect , ammonium chloride is precipitated in a sodium chloride solution . the chinese name of hou 's process , lianhe zhijian fa , means '' coupled manufacturing alkali method '' : hou 's process is coupled to the haber process and offers better atom economy by eliminating the production of calcium chloride , since ammonia no longer needs to be regenerated . the byproduct ammonium chloride can be sold as a fertilizer . see also . natron residual sodium carbonate index sodium bicarbonate . references . further reading . . external links . american natural soda ash company international chemical safety card 1135 fmc wyoming corporation use of sodium carbonate in dyeing sodium carbonate manufacturing by synthetic processes soda ash light overview , manufacturing method and applications soda ash market- industry analysis and forecast