1968 in literature

events . january 1 – cecil day-lewis is announced as the new poet laureate of the united kingdom . march 28 – glidrose publications releases the james bond novel , colonel sun by '' robert markham '' ( a pseudonym for kingsley amis ) . initially intended to relaunch the bond book series after the death in 1964 of the character 's creator , ian fleming , colonel sun ends up as the final book in the series , discounting a '' biography '' of bond and a pair of film-script adaptations , until john gardner revives it in 1981 . april – the american edition of andrew garve 's thriller the long short cut becomes the first book printed completely by electronic composition . may – the action theater in munich is disbanded after its building is wrecked by one of its founders , jealous of director rainer werner fassbinder 's growing power in the group . june 17 – tom stoppard 's parody comedy the real inspector hound opens at the criterion theatre in london 's west end , starring richard briers and ronnie barker . july 28 – last exit to brooklyn is cleared of obscenity in the english appeal court . john mortimer appears for the defence . this is the last prosecution of a book under the u.k . obscene publications acts . august – tom wolfe 's books the electric kool-aid acid test and the pump house gang are published on the same day . both will become bestsellers and cement wolfe 's status as a leading social critic , chronicler of the counterculture of the 1960s , and practitioner of new journalism . september 26 – theatres act 1968 ( royal assent july 26 ) ends censorship of the theater in the united kingdom . october – colin spencer 's comedy spitting image , one of the first plays with openly gay male leads , premières in london october 31 – alan bennett 's first stage play , forty years on , opens at the apollo theatre in london 's west end under the direction of patrick garland , starring sir john gielgud , paul eddington and the playwright . november – the english novelist antony burgess and his new wife liana settle in lija on malta . unknown dates the first translations and book-length discussion of the sumerian enheduanna 's work is published . she is a priestess and poet of the 23rd century bc and the earliest named author known . dean r . koontz 's first novel , star quest , is published by ace books in the united states . n . scott momaday 's novel house made of dawn is published , winning the pulitzer prize for fiction in 1969 and initiating the native american renaissance . the arvon foundation is established by young poets john fairfax and john moat in the uk to promote creative writing . . new books . fiction . lloyd alexander – the high king isaac asimov – asimov 's mysteries james blish – black easter nelson bond – nightmares and daydreams elizabeth bowen – eva trout richard brautigan – in watermelon sugar rolf dieter brinkmann – keiner weiß mehr ( nobody knows anymore ) john brunner not before time stand on zanzibar anthony burgess – enderby outside martin caidin – the god machine taylor caldwell – testimony of two men samuel youd – the pool of fire john dickson carr dark of the moon papa la-bas agatha christie – by the pricking of my thumbs arthur c . clarke – 2001 : a space odyssey l . sprague de camp the goblin tower the tritonian ring with lin carter – conan of the isles august derleth the adventure of the unique dickensians mr . fairlie 's final journey a praed street dossier wisconsin murders philip k . dick – do androids dream of electric sheep ? allen drury – preserve and protect lawrence durrell – tunc haddis alemayehu – love to the grave ( amharic : ፍቅር እስከ መቃብር , fəqər əskä mäqabər ) richard gordon – surgeon at arms arthur hailey – airport michael harrison – the exploits of chevalier dupin l.p . hartley – poor clare georgette heyer – cousin kate barry hines – a kestrel for a knave robert e . howard and l . sprague de camp conan the freebooter with lin carter – conan the wanderer with björn nyberg – conan the avenger john irving – setting free the bears dorothy m . johnson – indian country james jones – the ice-cream headache and other stories halldór laxness – kristnihald undir jökli ( christianity under the glacier ) john le carré – a small town in germany john d . macdonald pale gray for guilt the girl in the plain brown wrapper helen macinnes – the salzburg connection norman mailer – armies of the night kingsley amis – colonel sun patrick modiano – la place de l'étoile n . scott momaday – house made of dawn brian moore – i am mary dunne alice munro – dance of the happy shades ( short stories ) andrew osmond and douglas hurd – send him victorious anthony powell – the military philosophers jean rhys – tigers are better-looking mordecai richler – cocksure keith roberts – pavane giorgio scerbanenco – i ragazzi del massacro rudi šeligo – triptih agate schwarzkobler robert silverberg – the masks of time aleksandr solzhenitsyn cancer ward ( « раковый корпус » , rakovy korpus ) in the first circle ( « в круге первом » , v kruge pervom ) muriel spark – the public image angus john mackintosh stewart – sandel sri lal sukla – raag darbari john updike – couples jack vance – city of the chasch tarjei vesaas – the boat in the evening gore vidal – myra breckinridge christa wolf – the quest for christa t . ( nachdenken über christa t . ) john wyndham – chocky . children and young people . joan aiken – the whispering mountain elisabeth beresford – the wombles ( first in the wombles series of six titles ) don freeman – corduroy clement freud ( with frank francis ) – grimble john grant – littlenose ( first in the littlenose series of 15 books ) rosemary harris – the moon in the cloud russell hoban – the mouse and his child ted hughes – the iron man judith kerr – the tiger who came to tea alexander key – escape to witch mountain ursula le guin – a wizard of earthsea ( first in the earthsea series ) ruth manning-sanders – a book of mermaids david mckee – elmer the patchwork elephant robert c . o'brien – the silver crown seymour simon – the look-it-up book of the earth ( non-fiction ) jill tomlinson – the owl who was afraid of the dark paul zindel – the pigman ( first in the pigman trilogy ) . drama . alan bennett – forty years on hugo claus – vrijdag ( friday ) mart crowley – the boys in the band thomas kilroy – the death and resurrection of mr roche colin spencer – spitting image tom stoppard – the real inspector hound shūji terayama ( 寺山 修司 ) – throw away your books , rally in the streets ( 書を捨てよ町へ出よう , sho o suteyo , machi e deyō ) michel tremblay – les belles-sœurs . poetry . rod mckuen – lonesome cities george oppen – of being numerous . non-fiction . peter brook – the empty space l . sprague de camp the conan reader the great monkey trial with catherine crook de camp – the day of the dinosaur carlos castaneda – the teachings of don juan eldridge cleaver – soul on ice paul r . ehrlich – the population bomb esther hautzig – the endless steppe ( autobiography ) bevis hillier – art deco of the 20s and 30s h . p . lovecraft – selected letters ii ( 1925–1929 ) peter maas – the valachi papers norman mailer – miami and the siege of chicago william manchester – the arms of krupp : 1597-1968 jan morris – pax britannica trilogy charles rembar – the end of obscenity : the trials of lady chatterley , tropic of cancer and fanny hill adam smith – the money game erich von däniken – chariots of the gods ? ( erinnerungen an die zukunft ) james d . watson – the double helix . births . january 30 – rhoda shipman , american comic book writer march 23 – mitch cullin , american novelist may 27 – ekow eshun , british ghanaian writer , journalist and broadcaster june 11 – bryan perro , canadian author july 6 – tiit aleksejev , estonian novelist and playwright september 14 – shuichi yoshida ( 吉田修 ) , japanese novelist december 6 – karl ove knausgård , norwegian autobiographical novelist december 31 – junot díaz , dominican american novelist unknown date – k . v . johansen , canadian children 's author . deaths . january 1 – donagh macdonagh , irish poet , playwright and judge ( born 1912 ) january 14 – dorothea mackellar , australian poet ( born 1885 ) february 23 – fannie hurst , american novelist ( born 1889 ) march 22 - margaret duley , newfoundland novelist ( born 1894 ) april 9 - zofia kossak , polish writer ( born 1889 ) april 16 – edna ferber , american novelist , short story writer and playwright ( born 1885 ) april 25 – donald davidson , american poet ( born 1893 ) may 1 – sir harold nicolson , british biographer ( born 1886 ) may 30 constantin s . nicolăescu-plopșor , romanian anthropologist , ethnographer and children 's writer ( born 1900 ) martin noth , german hebraist ( born 1902 ) june 1 – helen keller , deaf-blind american author , activist and lecturer ( born 1880 ) june 2 – a . a . thomson , english cricket and travel writer ( born 1894 ) august 21 - germaine guèvremont , canadian writer ( born 1893 ) september 29 – sixto pondal ríos , argentine screenwriter , poet and dramatist ( born 1907 ) october 30 – conrad richter , american novelist ( born 1890 ) november 17 – mervyn peake , english novelist ( dementia , born 1911 ) november 25 – upton sinclair , american novelist and politician ( born 1878 ) december 5 – anna kavan , british novelist , short story writer and painter ( born 1901 ) december 10 – tian han , chinese dramatist ( born 1898 ) december 20 – john steinbeck , american novelist ( congestive heart failure , born 1902 ) december 24 – d . gwenallt jones , welsh poet ( born 1899 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : yasunari kawabata . canada . see 1968 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : bernard clavel , les fruits de l'hiver prix médicis : élie wiesel , le mendiant de jérusalem . united kingdom . carnegie medal for children 's literature : rosemary harris , the moon in the cloud cholmondeley award : harold massingham , edwin morgan eric gregory award : james aitchison , douglas dunn , brian jones james tait black memorial prize for fiction : maggie ross , the gasteropod james tait black memorial prize for biography : gordon haight , george eliot newdigate prize : james fenton queen 's gold medal for poetry : robert graves . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry , w . h . auden hugo award : roger zelazny , lord of light nebula award : alexei panshin , rite of passage newbery medal for children 's literature : e . l . konigsburg , from the mixed-up files of mrs . basil e . frankweiler pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : william styron , the confessions of nat turner pulitzer prize for poetry : anthony hecht , the hard hours pulitzer prize for poetry : anthony hecht , mijn moeder . elsewhere . miles franklin award : thomas keneally , three cheers for the paraclete alfaguara prize : daniel sueiro , corte de corteza premio nadal : álvaro cunqueiro , el hombre que se parecía a orestes viareggio prize : libero bigiaretti , la controfigura . references .