Book burning

historical background . the burning of books has a long history as a tool that has been wielded by authorities both secular and religion , in their efforts to suppress dissenting or heresy views that are believed to pose a threat to the prevailing order . 7th century bce . according to the tanakh ( hebrew bible ) , in the 7th century bce king jehoiakim of judah burned part of a scroll that baruch ben neriah had written at prophet jeremiah 's dictation ( jeremiah 36 ) . burning of books and burying of scholars in china ( 210–213 bce ) . in 213 bce qin shi huang , the first emperor of the qin dynasty , ordered the burning of books and burying of scholars and in 210 bce he supposedly ordered the live burial of 460 confucian scholars in order to stay on his throne . though the burning of books is well established , the live burial of scholars has been disputed by modern historians who doubt the details of the story , which first appeared more than a century later in the han dynasty official sima qian 's records of the grand historian . some of these books were written in shang xiang , a superior school founded in 2208 bce . the event caused the loss of many philosophical treatises of the hundred schools of thought . treatises which advocated the official philosophy of the government ( '' legalism '' ) survived . christian book burnings . in the new testament 's acts of the apostles , it is claimed that paul performed an exorcism in ephesus . after men in ephesus failed to perform the same feat many gave up their '' curious arts '' and burned the books because apparently , they did not work . and many that believed , came and confessed and shewed their deeds . many of them also which used curious arts , brought their books together , and burned them before all men : and they counted the price of them , and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver . after the first council of nicea ( 325 ce ) , roman emperor constantine the great issued an edict against nontrinitarian arians which included a prescription for systematic book-burning : '' in addition , if any writing composed by arius should be found , it should be handed over to the flames , so that not only will the wickedness of his teaching be obliterated , but nothing will be left even to remind anyone of him . and i hereby make a public order , that if someone should be discovered to have hidden a writing composed by arius , and not to have immediately brought it forward and destroyed it by fire , his penalty shall be death . as soon as he is discovered in this offense , he shall be submitted for capital punishment . '' edict by emperor constantine against the arians . according to elaine pagels , '' in ad 367 , athanasius , the zealous bishop of alexandria . issued an easter letter in which he demanded that egyptian monks destroy all such unacceptable writings , except for those he specifically listed as 'acceptable ' even 'canonical'—a list that constitutes the present 'new testament ' '' . elaine pagels , beyond belief : the secret gospel of thomas ( random house , 2003 ) , page 176-177 ( pagels cites athanasius 's paschal letter ( letter 39 ) for 367 ce , which prescribes a canon , but her citation '' cleanse the church from every defilement '' ( page 177 ) does not explicitly appear in the festal letter . ) heretical texts do not turn up as palimpsests , scraped clean and overwritten , as do many classical literature . according to author rebecca knuth , multitudes of early christian texts have been as thoroughly '' destroyed '' as if they had been publicly burnt . knuth , r . ( 2006 ) . burning books and leveling libraries , p . 13 . praeger , london . . burning of nestorian books . activity by cyril of alexandria 376–444 ) brought fire to almost all the writings of nestorius ( 386–450 ) shortly after 435 . 'the writings of nestorius were originally very numerous ' , however , they were not part of the nestorian or oriental theological curriculum until the mid-sixth century , unlike those of his teacher theodore of mopsuestia , and those of diodorus of tarsus , even then they were not key texts , so relatively few survive intact , cf . baum , wilhelm and dietmar w . winkler . 2003 . the church of the east : a concise history . london : routledge . burning of arian books . according to the chronicle of fredegar , recared , visigothic kingdom ( reigned 586–601 ) and first catholic king of spain , following his conversion to catholicism in 587 , ordered that all arian books should be collected and burned ; and all the books of arian theology were reduced to ashes , along with the house in which they had been purposely collected . duncan mcmillan , wolfgang van emden , philip e . bennett , alexander kerr , société rencesvals , guillaume d'orange and the chanson de geste : essays presented to duncan mcmillan in celebration of his seventieth birthday by his friends and colleagues of the société rencesvals , university of reading , 1984 . edward gibbon , the history of the decline and fall of the roman empire , 1776–89 . which facts demonstrate that constantine 's edict on arian works was not rigorously observed , as arian writings or the theology based on them survived to be burned much later in spain . burning of jewish manuscripts in 1244 . in 1244 , as an outcome of the disputation of paris , twenty-four carriage loads of talmuds and other jewish religious manuscripts were set on fire by french law officers in the streets of paris . . burning of aztec and mayan manuscripts in the 1560s . during the conquest of the americas and in the aftermath of the encounter between european and indigenous american civilizations , many books written by indigenous peoples were destroyed . there were many books written by the aztecs in existence at the time of the spanish conquest of yucatán in the 16th century . however , most were destroyed by the conquistadors and the catholic priests , with the exception of the work of the priest bartolome de la casas . in particular , many books in yucatán were ordered destroyed by diego de landa in july 1562 . de landa wrote : '' we found a large number of books in these characters and , as they contained nothing in which were not to be seen as superstition and lies of the devil , we burned them all , which they ( the maya ) regretted to an amazing degree , and which caused them much affliction . '' ironically , most of the books that were destroyed by the europeans were biased and based upon the aztec people 's version of the history of the region . the aztecs had previously conquered the area and destroyed many of the mayan books and documents . murray , s . a . p . ( 2009 ) . the library : an illustrated history . retrieved from . burning of abbeys in tudor and stuart england . the schism between the church of england and that of the roman catholic church reached a tipping point during the tudor and stuart periods of england ( 1485–1603 , 1603–1714 ) , when the citizens loyal to crown and country sacked abbeys and monasteries across the british countryside , and pillaged their valuable books to burn , degrade , or destroy . david cressy 's ( 2005 ) article , book burning in tudor and stuart england discussed the mechanics of these book burnings and how the enforcement was trickled down to the citizens ; that everyone had a part in this '' spectacle '' . '' over the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries book burning developed from a rare to an occasional occurrence , relocated from an outdoor to an indoor procedure , and changed from a bureaucratic to a quasi-theatrical performance '' . burning of the us library of congress . the library of congress was founded in 1800 , 24 years after the united states gained its independence from the kingdom of great britain . in 1814 , 3,000 books from the library of congress were used by the british forces to burn down the us capitol during the burning of washington . although there were dissenting voices to this wanton destruction , the conflagration was motivated by a strong desire on the part of the british to humiliate the americans . . institutions dedicated to book burnings . anthony comstock 's new york society for the suppression of vice , founded in 1873 , inscribed book burning on its seal , as a worthy goal to be achieved . comstock 's total accomplishment in a long and influential career is estimated to have been the destruction of some 15 & nbsp ; tons of books , 284,000 & nbsp ; pounds of plates for printing such '' objectionable '' books , and nearly 4,000,000 pictures . all of this material was defined as '' lewd '' by comstock 's very broad definition of the term – which he and his associates successfully lobbied the united states congress to incorporate in the comstock law . roth v . united states , 354 u.s . 476 ( 1957 ) . nazi regime ( 1933 ) . main : nazi book burnings the nazi government decreed broad grounds for burning material : . notable book burnings and destruction of libraries . burnings by authors . in 1588 , the exiled english catholic william cardinal allen wrote '' an admonition to the nobility and people of england '' , a work sharply attacking queen elizabeth i . it was to be published in spanish-occupied england in the event of the spanish armada succeeding in its invasion . upon the defeat of the armada , allen carefully consigned his publication to the fire , and it is only known of through one of elizabeth 's spies , who had stolen a copy . catholic encyclopedia , '' spanish armada '' . the hassidic rabbi nachman of breslov is reported to have written a book which he himself burned in 1808 . to this day , his followers mourn '' the burned book '' and seek in their rabbi 's surviving writings for clues as to what the lost volume contained and why it was destroyed . carlo goldoni is known to have burned his first play , a tragedy called amalasunta , when encountering unfavorable criticism . nikolai gogol burned the second half of his magnum opus dead souls , having come under the influence of a priest who persuaded him that his work was sinful ; gogol later described this as a mistake . as noted in claire tomalin 's intensively researched '' the invisible woman '' , charles dickens is known to have made a big bonfire of his letters and private papers , as well as asking friends and acquaintances to either return letters which he wrote to them or themselves destroy the letters – and most complied with his request . dickens ' purpose was to destroy evidence of his affair with the actress nelly ternan . to judge from surviving dickens letters , the destroyed material – even if not intended for publication – might have had considerable literary merit . in the 1870s tchaikovsky destroyed the full manuscript of his first opera , the voyevoda . decades later , during the soviet period , the voyevoda was posthumously reconstructed from surviving orchestral and vocal parts and the composer 's sketches . martin gardner , a well-known expert on the work of lewis carroll , believes that carroll had written a earlier version of alice in wonderland which he later destroyed after writing a more elaborate version which he presented to the child alice who inspired the book . ref name '' :2 '' > after hector hugh munro ( better known by the pen name saki ) was killed in world war i in november 1916 , his sister ethel destroyed most of his papers . joe shuster , who together with jerry siegel created the fictional superhero superman , in 1938 burned the first superman story when under the impression that it would not find a publisher . in august 1963 , when c.s . lewis resigned from magdalene college , cambridge and his rooms there were being cleaned out , lewis gave instructions to douglas gresham to destroy all his unfinished or incomplete fragments of manuscript - which scholars researching lewis ' work regard as a grievous loss . there is substantial evidence that finnish composer jean sibelius worked on an eighth symphony . he promised the premiere of this symphony to serge koussevitzky in 1931 and 1932 , and a london performance in 1933 under basil cameron was even advertised to the public . however , no such symphony was ever performed , and the only concrete evidence of the symphony 's existence on paper is a 1933 bill for a fair copy of the first movement and short draft fragments first published and played in 2011 . sibelius had always been quite self-critical ; he remarked to his close friends , '' if i can not write a better symphony than my seventh , then it shall be my last . '' since no manuscript survives , sources consider it likely that sibelius destroyed most traces of the score , probably in 1945 , during which year he certainly consigned a great many papers to the flames . aino , sibelius ' wife , recalled that '' in the 1940s there was a great auto da fé at ainola where the sibelius couple lived . my husband collected a number of the manuscripts in a laundry basket and burned them on the open fire in the dining room . parts of the karelia suite were destroyed – i later saw remains of the pages which had been torn out – and many other things . i did not have the strength to be present and left the room . i therefore do not know what he threw on to the fire . but after this my husband became calmer and gradually lighter in mood . '' it is assumed that a draft of sibelius ' eighth symphony - which he worked on in the early 1930s but with which he was not satisfied - was among the papers destroyed . ross , alex ( 2009 ) first published 2007 . '' 5 '' . the rest is noise : listening to the twentieth century ( 3rd ed . ) . harper perennial . axel jensen made his debut as a novelist in oslo in 1955 with the novel dyretemmerens kors , but he later burned the remaining unsold copies of the book . books saved from burning . in catholic hagiography , saint vincent of saragossa is mentioned as having been offered his life on condition that he consign scripture to the fire ; he refused and was martyred . he is often depicted holding the book which he protected with his life . another book-saving catholic saint is the 10th-century saint wiborada . she is credited with having predicted in 925 an hungarian invasions of europe of her region in switzerland . her warning allowed the priests and religious of st . gall and st . magnus to hide their books and wine and escape into caves in nearby hills . wiborada herself refused to escape and was killed by the marauders , being later canonized . in art , she is commonly represented holding a book to signify the library she saved , and is considered a patron saint of library and librarians . during a tour of thuringia in 1525 , martin luther became enraged at the widespread burning of libraries along with other buildings during the german peasants ' war , writing against the murderous , thieving hordes of peasants in response . jaroslav j . pelikan , hilton c . oswald , luther 's works , 55 vols . ( st . louis and philadelphia : concordia pub . house and fortress press , 1955–1986 ) , 46 : 50–51 . during the revolutions of 1848 in the austrian empire the imperial court library ( now austrian national library ) was in extreme danger , when the bombardment of vienna caused the burning of the hofburg , in which the imperial library was located . fortunately , the fire was halted in time - saving countless irreplaceable books , diligently collected by many generations of habsburg emperors and the scholars in their employ . at the beginning of the battle of monte cassino in world war ii , two german officers – viennese-born lt . col . julius schlegel ( a roman catholic ) and captain maximilian becker ( a protestant ) – had the foresight to transfer the monte cassino archives to the vatican . otherwise the archives – containing a vast number of documents relating to the 1500-years ' history of the abbey as well as some 1,400 irreplaceable manuscript codex , chiefly patristic and historical – would have been destroyed in the allied air bombing which almost completely destroyed the abbey shortly afterwards . also saved by the two officers ' prompt action were the collections of the keats-shelley memorial house in rome , which had been sent to the abbey for safety in december 1942 . the sarajevo haggadah – one of the oldest and most valuable jewish illustrated manuscripts , with immense historical and cultural value – was hidden from the nazis and their ustaše collaborators by derviš korkut , chief librarian of the national museum in sarajevo . at risk to his own life , korkut smuggled the haggadah out of sarajevo and gave it for safekeeping to a muslim cleric in zenica , where it was hidden until the end of the war under the floorboards of either a mosque or a muslim home . the haggadah again survived destruction during the wars which followed the breakup of yugoslavia . in 1940s france , a group of anti-fascist exiles created a library of burned books which housed all the books that adolf hitler had destroyed . this library contained copies of titles that were burned by the nazis in their campaign to cleanse german culture of jewish and foreign influences such as pacifist and decadent literature . the nazis themselves planned to make a '' museum '' of judaism once the final solution was complete to house certain books that they had saved . . books preserved by being burned . the herculaneum papyri are more than 1,800 papyri found in the herculaneum villa of the papyri , in the 18th century , carbonized by the eruption of mount vesuvius in 79 , very fragile , but with great care they can be unrolled and read . carbonization preserved them : if not carbonized , they would never have survived buried to the modern age in a climate as wet as central italy 's . posthumous destruction of works . when virgil died , he left instructions that aeneid virgil 's death , and editing , as it was a draft version with uncorrected faults and not a final version for release . however , this instruction was ignored . it is mainly to the aeneid , published in this '' imperfect '' form , that virgil owes his lasting fame – and it is considered one of the great masterpieces of classical literature as a whole . before his death , franz kafka wrote to his friend and literary executor max brod : '' dearest max , my last request : everything i leave behind me . in the way of diaries , manuscripts , letters ( my own and others ' ) , sketches , and so on , is to be burned unread . '' quoted in publisher 's note to the castle , schocken books . brod overrode kafka 's wishes , believing that kafka had given these directions to him , specifically , because kafka knew he would not honour them – brod had told him as much . had brod carried out kafka 's instructions , virtually the whole of kafka 's work – except for a few short stories published in his lifetime – would have been lost forever . most critics , at the time and up to the present , justify brod 's decision . in his forward to kafka 's the castle brod noted that when entering kafka 's apartment after his death , he found several big empty folders and traces of burnt paper - the manuscripts which were in these folders having evidently been destroyed by kafka himself before his death . brod expressed pain at the irreversible loss of this material and happiness at having saved so much of kafka 's work from its creator 's ruthlessness . a similar case concerns the noted american poet emily dickinson , who died in 1886 and left to her sister lavinia the instruction of burning all her papers . lavinia dickinson did burn almost all of her sister 's correspondences , but interpreted the will as not including the forty notebooks and loose sheets , all filled with almost 1800 poems ; these lavinia saved and began to publish the poems that year . had lavinia dickinson been more strict in carrying out her sister 's will , all but a small handful of emily dickinson 's poetic work would have been lost . in early 1964 , several months after the death of c.s . lewis , lewis ' literary executor walter hooper , rescued a 64-page manuscript from a bonfire of the author 's writings - the burning carried out according to lewis ' will . in 1977 hooper published it under the name the dark tower . it was apparently intended as part of lewis ' space trilogy . though incomplete and evidently an early draft which lewis abandoned , its publication aroused great interest and a continued discussion among lewis fans and scholars researching his work . modern biblioclasm . despite the fact that the act of destroying books is condemned by the majority of the world 's societies , book burning still occurs on a small or large scale . in the people 's republic of china , library officials publicize the burning of books that have fallen out of favor with the communist party of china 's elites . in azerbaijan , when a modified latin alphabet was adopted , books which were published in the arabic script were burned , especially those published in the late 1920s and 1930s . aziza jafarzade , '' memoirs of 1937 : burning our books , the arabic script goes up in flames , '' in azerbaijan international , vol . 14:1 ( spring 2006 ) , pp . 24–25 . the texts were not limited to the quran ; medical and historical manuscripts were also destroyed . asaf rustamov , '' the day they burned our books , '' in azerbaijan international , vol . 7:3 ( autumn 1999 ) , pp . 74–75 . book burnings were regularly organised in nazi germany in the 1930s by stormtroopers so that '' degenerate '' works could be destroyed , especially works written by jewish authors such as thomas mann , marcel proust , and karl marx . one of the most infamous book burnings in the 20th century occurred in frankfurt , germany on may 10 , 1933 . organized by joseph goebbels , books were burned in a celebratory fashion , complete with bands , marchers , and songs . seeking to '' cleanse '' german culture of the '' un-german '' spirit , goebbels compelled students ( who were egged on by their professors ) to perform the book burning . to some this could be easily dismissed as the childish actions of the youth , but to many in europe and america , it was a horrific display of power and disrespect . baker , k . burning books . history today . september 2006 . ( pg 44 ) during the denazification which followed the war , literature which had been confiscated by the allies was reduced to pulp rather than burned . in 1942 , local catholic priests forced irish storyteller timothy buckley to burn a book the tailor and ansty by eric cross about buckley and his wife , because of its sexual frankness . in the 1950s , over six tons of books by william reich were burned in the u.s . in compliance with judicial orders . reich , wilhelm ( 1897–1957 ) , international dictionary of psychoanalysis in 1954 , the works of mordecai kaplan were burned by orthodox jewish rabbis in america , after kaplan was excommunicated . zachary silver , '' a look back at a different book burning , '' the forward , 3 june 2005 in denmark , a comic book burning took place on 23 june 1955 . it was a bonfire which consisted of comic books topped by a life-size cardboard cutout of the phantom . kjell ludvik kvavik , a senior norwegian official , had a penchant for removing maps and other pages from rare books and he was noticed in january 1983 by a young college student . the student , barbro andenaes , reported the actions of the senior official to the superintendent of the reading room and then reported them to the head librarian of the university library in oslo . hesitant to make the accusation against kvavik public because it would greatly harm his career , even if it was proven to be false , the media did not divulge his name until his house was searched by police . the authorities seized 470 maps and prints as well as 112 books that kvavik had illegally obtained . while this may not have been the large scale , violent demonstration which usually occurs during wars , kvavik 's disregard for libraries and books shows that the destruction of books on any scale can affect an entire country . here , a senior official in the norwegian government was disgraced and the university library was only refunded for a small portion of the costs which it had incurred from the loss and destruction of rare materials and the security changes that had to be made as a result of it . in this case , the lure of personal profit and the desire to enhance one 's own collection were the causes of the defacement of rare books and maps . while the main goal was not destruction for destruction 's sake , the resulting damage to the ephemera still carries weight within the library community . in 1984 , amsterdam 's south african institute was infiltrated by an organized group which was bent on drawing attention to the inequality of apartheid . well-organized and assuring patrons of the library that no harm would come to them , group members systematically smashed microfiche machines and threw books into the nearby waterway . indiscriminate with regard to the content which was being destroyed , shelf after shelf was cleared of its contents until the group left . staff members fished books from the water in hopes of salvaging the rare editions of travel books , documents about the boer wars , and contemporary materials which were both for and against apartheid . many of these materials were destroyed by oil , ink , and paint that the anti-apartheid demonstrators had flung around the library . the world was outraged by the loss of knowledge that these demonstrators had caused , and instead of supporting their cause and drawing people 's attention to the issue of apartheid , the international community denounced their actions at amsterdam 's south african institute . some of the demonstrators came forward and sought to justify their actions by accusing the institute of being pro-apartheid and claiming that nothing was being done to change the status quo in south africa . knuth , rebecca . burning books and leveling libraries . westport , connecticut : praeger , 2006 . the advent of the digital age has resulted in the cataloguing of an immense collection of written works , exclusively or primarily in digital form . the intentional deletion or removal of these works has often been referred to as a new form of book burning . ruggiero , lucia . ( n.d . ) . digital books ; could they make censorship and '' book burning '' easier ? digital meets culture . retrieved 22 october 2015 , from see also deletionism and inclusionism in wikipedia for information about this phenomenon on wikipedia . for example , amazon , the world 's largest online marketplace , has increasingly banned the sale of controversial books . an article in the new york times reported that '' booksellers that sell on amazon say the retailer has no coherent philosophy about what it decides to prohibit , and seems largely guided by public complaints . '' . some supporters have celebrated book-burning cases in art and other media . such is the case with the burning of heretical books over a side door on the façade of santa maria maggiore , rome , the bas-relief by giovanni battista maini , which depicts the burning of '' heretical '' books as a triumph of righteousness . noted in touring club italiano , roma e dintorni 1965:344 . during the years of the chilean military dictatorship under augusto pinochet ( 1973–1990 ) , book burnings in chile as a way of repression and censorship of left-wing literature . in some instances , even books on cubism were burned because soldiers thought it had to do with the cuban revolution . jorge edwards . '' books in chile , '' index on censorship nº 2 , 1984 , pp . 20–23 . andrain , charles . political change in the third world , 2011 , p . 186 . a biblioclastic incident occurred in mullumbimby , new south wales , australia in 2009 . reported as '' just like the ritual burning of books in nazi germany '' , a book-burning ceremony was held by students of the '' socially harmful cult '' universal medicine , an esoteric healing business which was owned by serge benhayon . students were invited to throw their books onto the pyre . most of the volumes were on chinese medicine , kinesiology , acupuncture , homeopathy and other alternative healing modalities , all of which benhayon has decreed evil or '' prana '' . in 1981 , the jaffna public library in jaffna , sri lanka , was burned down by sinhalese police and paramilitaries during a pogrom against the minority tamil population . at the time of its burning , it contained almost 100,000 tamil books and rare documents . knuth , rebecca . burning books and leveling libraries : extremist violence and cultural destruction . praeger publishers , 2006 , p . 84 . . sikh book burning . in the sikh religion , any copies of their sacred book , guru granth sahib , which are too badly damaged to be used , and any printer 's waste which bears any of its text , are cremated . this ritual is called an agan bhet , and it is similar to the ritual which is performed when a deceased sikh is cremated . . book burnings in popular culture . in his 1821 play , almansor , the german writer heinrich heine – referring to the burning of the muslim holy book , the qur'an , during the spanish inquisition – wrote , '' where they burn books , so too will they in the end burn human beings . '' ( '' dort , wo man bücher verbrennt , verbrennt man auch am ende menschen . '' ) over a century later , heine 's own books were among the thousands of volumes that were torched by the nazis in berlin 's bebelplatz , even while his poem die lorelei continued to be printed in german schoolbooks as '' by an unknown author '' . in the she-ra : princess of power episode '' book burning , '' the horde burned all the village of ruxtown ’ s books . in fahrenheit 451 , books are burned in a culture which rejects learning . see also . banned books library fires list of book-burning incidents maya codices bonfire of the vanities bibliophobia . further reading . knuth , rebecca ( 2006 ) . burning books and leveling libraries : extremist violence and cultural destruction . westport , connecticut : praeger . polastron , lucien x . 2007 . books on fire : the destruction of libraries throughout history . rochester , vt : inner traditions . the bosnian manuscript ingathering project – a call for bosnian manuscripts ingathering polastron , lucien x . ( 2007 ) libros en llamas : historia de la interminable destrucción de bibliotecas . libraria , . knuth , rebecca . libricide : the regime-sponsored destruction of books and libraries in the twentieth century . polastron , lucien x . books on fire : the destruction of libraries throughout history . civallero , edgardo . when memory turns into ashes . memoricide during the xx century . doi . unesco . lost memory – libraries and archives destroyed in the twentieth century books on fire : the destruction of libraries throughout history . lucien xavier polastron . translated by john e graham . inner traditions . ovenden , richard burning the books . london : john murray burning the books by richard ovenden review – the libraries we have lost ; the guardian ; 31 august 2020 ; accessed 2020-09-02 . references . external links . '' on book burnings and book burners : reflections on the power ( and powerlessness ) of ideas '' by hans j . hillerbrand '' burning books '' by haig a . bosmajian '' bannings and burnings in history '' – book and periodical council ( canada ) '' the books have been burning : timeline '' by daniel schwartz , cbc news . updated 10 september 2010