Language isolate

genetic or genealogical relationships . the term '' genetic relationship '' is meant in the genealogical sense of historical linguistics , which groups most languages spoken in the world today into a relatively small number of families , according to reconstructed descent from common ancestral languages . a '' genetic relationship '' is a connection between languages , like similarities in vocabulary or grammar , that can be attributed to a common ancestral proto-language that diverged into multiple languages or branches . for example , english is related to other indo-european languages and mandarin chinese is related to other sino-tibetan languages . by this criterion , each language isolate constitutes a family of its own , which explains the exceptional interest that these languages have received from linguists . . looking for relationships . in some situations , a language with no ancestor can arise . this frequently happens with sign languages—most famously in the case of nicaraguan sign language , where deaf children with no language were placed together and developed a new language . similarly , if deaf parents were to raise a group of hearing children who have no contact with others until adulthood , those children might develop an oral idioglossia and keep using it later , teaching it to their children , and so on . eventually , it could develop into the full-fledged language of a population . with unsigned languages , this is not very likely to occur at any one time but , over the tens of thousands of years of human prehistory , the likelihood of this occurring at least a few times increases . there are also creole languages and constructed languages such as esperanto , which do not descend directly from a single ancestor but have become the language of a population ; however , they do take elements from existing languages . extinct isolates . caution is required when speaking of extinct languages as isolates . despite their great age , sumerian and elamite can be safely classified as isolates , as the languages are well enough known that , if modern relatives existed , they would be recognizably related . however , many extinct languages are very poorly attested , and the fact that they can not be linked to other languages may be a reflection of our poor knowledge of them . hattic , gutian , and kassite are also believed by mainstream majority to be isolates , but their status is disputed by a minority of linguists . many extinct languages of the americas such as cayuse and majena may likewise have been isolates . a language thought to be an isolate may turn out to be relatable to other languages once enough material is recovered , but material is unlikely to be recovered if a language was not documented in writing . sign language isolates . a number of sign languages have arisen independently , without any ancestral language , and thus are true language isolates . the most famous of these is the nicaraguan sign language , a well documented case of what has happened in schools for the deaf in many countries . in tanzania , for example , there are seven schools for the deaf , each with its own sign language with no known connection to any other language . tanzanian sign language ( tsl ) dictionary . h.r.t . muzale , university of dar es salaam , 2003 sign languages have also developed outside schools , in communities with high incidences of deafness , such as kata kolok in bali , the adamorobe sign language in ghana , the urubu sign language in brazil , several mayan sign languages , and half a dozen sign languages of the hill tribes in thailand including the ban khor sign language . these and more are all presumed isolates or small local families , because many deaf communities are made up of people whose hearing parents do not use sign language , and have manifestly , as shown by the language itself , not borrowed their sign language from other deaf communities during the recorded history of these languages . list of language isolates by continent . below is a list of known language isolates , arranged by continent , along with notes on possible relations to other languages or language families . the status column indicates the degree of endangerment of the language , according to the definitions of the unesco red book of endangered languages . '' vibrant '' languages are those in full use by speakers of every generation , with consistent native acquisition by children . '' vulnerable '' languages have a similarly wide base of native speakers , but a restricted use and the long-term risk of language shift . '' endangered '' languages are either acquired irregularly or spoken only by older generations . '' moribund '' languages have only a few remaining native speakers , with no new acquisition , highly restricted use , and near-universal multilingualism . '' extinct '' languages have no native speakers , but are sufficiently documented to be classified as isolates . africa . with few exceptions , all of africa 's languages have been gathered into four major phyla : afroasiatic , niger–congo , nilo-saharan and khoisan . blench , roger . 2017 . african language isolates . in language isolates , edited by lyle campbell , pp . 176–206 . routledge . however , the genetic unity of some language families , like nilo-saharan , is questionable , and so there may be many more language families and isolates than currently accepted . data for several african languages , like kwadi and kwisi , are not sufficient for classification . in addition , jalaa , shabo , laal , kujargé , and a few other languages within nilo-saharan and afroasiatic-speaking areas may turn out to be isolates upon further investigation . defaka and ega are highly divergent languages located within niger-congo-speaking areas , and may also possibly be language isolates . . see also . unclassified languages list of language families . references . bibliography . lyle campbell , ed . 2017 . language isolates . routledge . campbell , lyle . ( 1997 ) . american indian languages : the historical linguistics of native america . new york : oxford university press . goddard , ives ( ed . ) . ( 1996 ) . languages . handbook of north american indians ( w . c . sturtevant , general ed . ) ( vol . 17 ) . washington , d.c . : smithsonian institution . goddard , ives . ( 1999 ) . native languages and language families of north america ( rev . and enlarged ed . with additions and corrections ) . map . lincoln , ne : university of nebraska press ( smithsonian institution ) . ( updated version of the map in goddard 1996 ) . grimes , barbara f . ( ed . ) . ( 2000 ) . ethnologue : languages of the world , ( 14th ed . ) . dallas , tx : sil international . ( online edition : ethnologue : languages of the world ) . marianne mithun . ( 1999 ) . the languages of native north america . cambridge : cambridge university press . ( hbk ) ; . sturtevant , william c . ( ed . ) . ( 1978–present ) . handbook of north american indians ( vol . 1–20 ) . washington , d . c . : smithsonian institution . ( vols . 1–3 , 16 , 18–20 not yet published ) . external links . ethnologue 's list of language isolates