Cecil Rhodes

expanding the british empire . rhodes and the imperial factor . rhodes used his wealth and that of his business partner alfred beit and other investors to pursue his dream of creating a british empire in new territories to the north by obtaining mineral rights from the most powerful indigenous chiefs . rhodes ' competitive advantage over other mineral prospecting companies was his combination of wealth and astute political instincts , also called the '' imperial factor , '' as he often collaborated with the british government . he befriended its local representatives , the british commissioners , and through them organized british protectorates over the mineral concession areas via separate but related treaties . in this way he obtained both legality and security for mining operations . he could then attract more investors . imperial expansion and capital investment went hand in hand . the imperial factor was a double-edged sword : rhodes did not want the bureaucrats of the colonial office in london to interfere in the empire in africa . he wanted british settlers and local politicians and governors to run it . this put him on a collision course with many in britain , as well as with british missionaries , who favoured what they saw as the more ethical direct rule from london . rhodes prevailed because he would pay the cost of administering the territories to the north of south africa against his future mining profits . the colonial office did not have enough funding for this . rhodes promoted his business interests as in the strategic interest of britain : preventing the portugal , the germany or the boers from moving into south-central africa . rhodes 's companies and agents cemented these advantages by obtaining many mining concessions , as exemplified by the rudd and lochner concessions . treaties , concessions and charters . rhodes had already tried and failed to get a mining concession from lobengula , king of the ndebele of matabeleland . in 1888 he tried again . he sent john moffat , son of the missionary robert moffat , who was trusted by lobengula , to persuade the latter to sign a treaty of friendship with britain , and to look favourably on rhodes 's proposals . his associate charles rudd , together with francis thompson and rochfort maguire , assured lobengula that no more than ten white men would mine in matabeleland . this limitation was left out of the document , known as the rudd concession , which lobengula signed . furthermore , it stated that the mining companies could do anything necessary to their operations . when lobengula discovered later the true effects of the concession , he tried to renounce it , but the british government ignored him . during the company 's early days , rhodes and his associates set themselves up to make millions ( hundreds of millions in current pounds ) over the coming years through what has been described as a '' suppressio veri & nbsp ; . which must be regarded as one of rhodes 's least creditable actions '' . contrary to what the british government and the public had been allowed to think , the rudd concession was not vested in the british south africa company , but in a short-lived ancillary concern of rhodes , rudd and a few others called the central search association , which was quietly formed in london in 1889 . this entity renamed itself the united concessions company in 1890 , and soon after sold the rudd concession to the chartered company for 1,000,000 shares . when colonial office functionaries discovered this chicanery in 1891 , they advised secretary of state for the colonies knutsford to consider revoking the concession , but no action was taken . armed with the rudd concession , in 1889 rhodes obtained a charter from the british government for his british south africa company ( bsac ) to rule , police , and make new treaties and concessions from the limpopo river to the great lakes of central africa . he obtained further concessions and treaties north of the zambezi , such as those in barotseland ( the lochner concession with king lewanika in 1890 , which was similar to the rudd concession ) ; and in the lake mweru area ( alfred sharpe 's 1890 kazembe concession ) . rhodes also sent sharpe to get a concession over mineral-rich katanga , but met his match in ruthlessness : when sharpe was rebuffed by its ruler msiri , king leopold ii of belgium obtained a concession over msiri 's dead body for his congo free state . rhodes also wanted bechuanaland protectorate ( now botswana ) incorporated in the bsac charter . but three tswana kings , including khama iii , travelled to britain and won over british public opinion for it to remain governed by the british colonial office in london . rhodes commented : '' it is humiliating to be utterly beaten by these niggers . '' the british colonial office also decided to administer british central africa ( malawi ) owing to the activism of david livingstone trying to end the arab slave trade . rhodes paid much of the cost so that the british central africa commissioner sir harry johnston , and his successor alfred sharpe , would assist with security for rhodes in the bsac 's north-eastern territories . johnston shared rhodes 's expansionist views , but he and his successors were not as pro-settler as rhodes , and disagreed on dealings with africans . rhodesia . the bsac had its own police force , the british south africa police , which was used to control matabeleland and mashonaland , in present-day zimbabwe . the company had hoped to start a '' new rand '' from the ancient gold mines of the shona . because the gold deposits were on a much smaller scale , many of the white settlers who accompanied the bsac to mashonaland became farmers rather than miners . when the ndebele and the shona—the two main , but rival , peoples—separately rebelled against the coming of the european settlers , the bsac defeated them in the first matabele war and second matabele war . shortly after learning of the assassination of the ndebele spiritual leader , mlimo , by the american scout frederick russell burnham , rhodes walked unarmed into the ndebele stronghold in matobo hills . he persuaded the impi to lay down their arms , thus ending the second matabele war . by the end of 1894 , the territories over which the bsac had concessions or treaties , collectively called '' zambesia '' after the zambezi river flowing through the middle , comprised an area of 1,143,000 & nbsp ; km 2 between the limpopo river and lake tanganyika . in may 1895 , its name was officially changed to '' rhodesia '' , reflecting rhodes 's popularity among settlers who had been using the name informally since 1891 . the designation southern rhodesia was officially adopted in 1898 for the part south of the zambezi , which later became zimbabwe ; and the designations north-western and north-eastern rhodesia were used from 1895 for the territory which later became northern rhodesia , then zambia . he built a house for himself in 1897 in bulawayo . image : south africa committee vanity fair 1897-11-25.jpg thumb 300px caricature '' empire makers and breakers '' - a scene at the south africa committee 1897 . left-right : her majesty 's attorney-general webster , labouchere - remembered for the labouchère amendment , which for the first time criminalised all male homosexual activity - rhodes , the squire of malwood harcourt , chamberlain rhodes decreed in his will that he was to be buried in matopos hills ( now matobo hills ) . after his death in the cape in 1902 , his body was transported by train to bulawayo . his burial was attended by ndebele chiefs , who asked that the firing party should not discharge their rifles as this would disturb the spirits . then , for the first time , they gave a white man the matabele royal salute , bayete . rhodes is buried alongside leander starr jameson and 34 british soldiers killed in the shangani patrol . despite occasional efforts to return his body to the united kingdom , his grave remains there still , '' part and parcel of the history of zimbabwe '' and attracts thousands of visitors each year . '' cape to cairo red line '' . one of rhodes 's dreams ( shared by other members of the british empire ) was for a '' red line '' on the map from the cape to cairo ( on geo-political maps , british dominions were always denoted in red or pink ) . rhodes had been instrumental in securing southern african states for the empire . he and others felt the best way to '' unify the possessions , facilitate governance , enable the military to move quickly to hot spots or conduct war , help settlement , and foster trade '' would be to build the '' cape to cairo railway '' . this enterprise was not without its problems . france had a conflicting strategy in the late 1890s to link its colonies from west to east across the continent william roger louis , and prosser gifford , eds . france and britain in africa : imperial rivalry and colonial rule ( yale university press , 1971 ) . and the portuguese produced the '' pink map '' , representing their claims to sovereignty in africa . ultimately , belgium and germany proved to be the main obstacles to the british objective until the united kingdom conquered and seized tanganyika from the germans as a league of nations mandate . . political views . rhodes wanted to expand the british empire because he believed that the anglo-saxon race was destined to greatness . in his last will and testament , rhodes said of the english , '' i contend that we are the first race in the world , and that the more of the world we inhabit the better it is for the human race . i contend that every acre added to our territory means the birth of more of the english race who otherwise would not be brought into existence . '' rhodes wanted to develop a commonwealth in which all of the british-dominated countries in the empire would be imperial federation . rhodes explicitly stipulated in his will that all races should be eligible for the scholarships . it is said that he wanted to develop an american elite of philosopher-kings who would have the united states rejoin the british empire . as rhodes also respected and admired the germans and their kaiser , he allowed german students to be included in the rhodes scholarships . he believed that eventually the united kingdom ( including ireland ) , the us , and germany together would dominate the world and ensure perpetual peace . rhodes 's views on race have been debated ; he supported the rights of indigenous africans to vote , but critics have labelled him as an '' architect of apartheid '' and a '' white supremacy '' , particularly since 2015 . according to magubane , rhodes was '' unhappy that in many cape constituencies , africans could be decisive if more of them exercised this right to vote under current law referring to the cape qualified franchise , '' with rhodes arguing that '' the native is to be treated as a child and denied the franchise . we must adopt a system of despotism , such as works in india , in our relations with the barbarism of south africa '' . rhodes advocated the governance of indigenous africans living in the cape colony '' in a state of barbarism and communal tenure '' as '' a subject race . i do not go so far as the member for victoria west , who would not give the black man a vote . & nbsp ; . if the whites maintain their position as the supreme race , the day may come when we shall be thankful that we have the natives with us in their proper position . '' however historian raymond c . mensing notes that rhodes has the reputation as the most flamboyant exemplar of the british imperial spirit , and always believed that british institutions were the best . mensing argues that rhodes quietly developed a more nuanced concept of imperial federation in africa , and that his mature views were more balanced and realistic . according to and front page , '' rhodes was not a scientific racism . despite his support for what became the basis for the apartheid system , he is best seen as a cultural racism '' . on domestic politics within britain , rhodes was a supporter of the liberal party . rhodes ' only major impact was his large-scale support of the irish nationalist party , led by charles stewart parnell ( 1846–1891 ) . rhodes worked well with the afrikaners in the cape colony ; he supported teaching dutch as well as english in public schools . while prime minister of the cape colony , he helped to remove most of their legal disabilities . he was a friend of jan hofmeyr , leader of the afrikaner bond , and it was largely because of afrikaner support that he became prime minister of the cape colony . rhodes advocated greater self-government for the cape colony , in line with his preference for the empire to be controlled by local settlers and politicians rather than by london . scholar and zimbabwean author peter godwin , whilst critical of rhodes , writes that he needs to be viewed via the prisms and cultural and social perspective of his epoch , positing that rhodes '' was no 19th-century hitler . he was n't so much a freak as a man of his time.rhodes and the white pioneers in southern africa did behave despicably by today 's standards , but no worse than the white settlers in north america , south america , and australia ; and in some senses better , considering that the genocide of natives in africa was less complete . for all the former african colonies are now ruled by indigenous peoples , unlike the americas and the antipodes , most of whose aboriginal natives were all but exterminated . '' godwin goes on to say '' rhodes and his cronies fit in perfectly with their surroundings and conformed to the morality ( or lack of it ) of the day . as is so often the case , history simply followed the gravitational pull of superior firepower . '' . personal relationships . personal life . rhodes never married , pleading , '' i have too much work on my hands '' and saying that he would not be a dutiful husband . subsequent historians such as robin brown have suggested that rhodes was a homosexual who was in love with his private secretary , neville pickering . rhodes made pickering the sole beneficiary of his will , but an accident resulted in pickering catching septicaemia , during which time rhodes spent six weeks trying to nurse pickering back to health . pickering eventually died in rhodes 's arms . the casual observer : rhodes : '' the enigma of his close male personal relationships '' city press : '' rhodes and his sexuality '' robin brown , the secret society : cecil john rhodes ' plan for a new world order ( penguin : 2015 ) . showme : '' the secret rhodes '' . princess radziwiłł . in the last years of his life , rhodes was stalked by polish princess catherine radziwill , born rzewuska , who had married into the noble polish family radziwiłł . the princess falsely claimed that she was engaged to rhodes , and that they were having an affair . she asked him to marry her , but rhodes refused . in reaction , she accused him of loan fraud . he had to go to trial and testify against her accusation . she wrote a biography of rhodes called cecil rhodes : man and empire maker . her accusations were eventually proven to be false . second boer war . during the second boer war rhodes went to kimberley at the onset of the siege , in a calculated move to raise the political stakes on the government to dedicate resources to the defence of the city . the military felt he was more of a liability than an asset and found him intolerable . the officer commanding the garrison of kimberley , lieutenant colonel robert kekewich , experienced serious personal difficulties with rhodes because of the latter 's inability to co-operate ; despite these differences , rhodes 's company was instrumental in the defence of the city , providing water and refrigeration facilities , constructing fortifications , and manufacturing an armoured train , shells and a one-off gun named long cecil . rhodes used his position and influence to lobby the british government to relieve the siege of kimberley , claiming in the press that the situation in the city was desperate . the military wanted to assemble a large force to take the boer cities of bloemfontein and pretoria , but they were compelled to change their plans and send three separate smaller forces to relieve the sieges of kimberley , mafeking and ladysmith . death . although rhodes remained a leading figure in the politics of southern africa , especially during the second boer war , he was dogged by ill health throughout his relatively short life . he was sent to natal aged 16 because it was believed the climate might help problems with his heart . on returning to england in 1872 , his health again deteriorated with heart and lung problems , to the extent that his doctor , sir morell mackenzie , believed he would survive only six months . he returned to kimberley where his health improved . from age 40 his heart condition returned with increasing severity until his death from heart failure in 1902 , aged 48 , at his seaside cottage in muizenberg . the government arranged an epic journey by train from the cape to rhodesia , with the funeral train stopping at every station to allow mourners to pay their respects . it was reported that at kimberley , '' practically the entire population marched in procession past the funeral car '' . mr . rhodes 's bequests , new-york tribune , 6 april 1902 , page 4 he was finally laid to rest at world 's view , a hilltop located approximately south of bulawayo , in what was then rhodesia . today , his grave site is part of matobo national park , zimbabwe . legacy . rhodes has been the target of much recent criticism , with some historians attacking him as a ruthless imperialist and white supremacist . the continued presence of his grave in the matopos ( now matobos ) hills has not been without controversy in contemporary zimbabwe . in december 2010 , cain mathema , the governor of bulawayo , branded the grave outside the country 's second city an '' insult to the african ancestors '' and said he believed its presence had brought bad luck and poor weather to the region . in february 2012 , mugabe loyalists and zanu-pf activists visited the grave site demanding permission from the local chief to exhume rhodes 's remains and return them to britain . many considered this a nationalist political stunt in the run up to an election , and local chief masuku and godfrey mahachi , one of the country 's foremost archaeologists , strongly expressed their opposition to the grave being removed due to its historical significance to zimbabwe . then-president robert mugabe also opposed the move . in 2004 , he was voted 56th in the sabc 3 television series great south africans . in his second will , written in 1877 before he had accumulated his wealth , rhodes wanted to create a secret society that would bring the whole world under british rule . his biographer calls it an '' extensive fantasy . '' rhodes envisioned a secret society to extend british rule worldwide , including china , japan , all of africa and south america , and indeed the united states as well : rhodes 's final will – when he actually did have money – was much more realistic and focused on scholarships . he also left a large area of land on the slopes of table mountain to the south african nation . part of this estate became the upper campus of the university of cape town , another part became the kirstenbosch national botanical garden , while much was spared from development and is now an important conservation area . rhodes scholarship . in his last will , he provided for the establishment of the rhodes scholarship . over the course of the previous half-century , governments , universities and individuals in the settler colonies had been establishing travelling scholarships for this purpose . the rhodes awards fit the established pattern . the scholarship enabled male students from territorial evolution of the british empire and from germany to study at rhodes 's alma mater , the university of oxford . rhodes ' aims were to promote leadership marked by public spirit and good character , and to '' render war impossible '' by promoting friendship between the great powers . philip ziegler , legacy : cecil rhodes , the rhodes trust and rhodes scholarships ( yale up , 2008 ) online review . memorials . rhodes memorial stands on rhodes 's favourite spot on the slopes of devil 's peak , cape town , with a view looking north and east towards the cape to cairo route . from 1910 to 1984 rhodes 's house in cape town , groote schuur , was the official cape residence of the prime ministers of south africa and continued as a presidential residence . his birthplace was established in 1938 as the rhodes memorial museum , now known as rhodes arts complex . the cottage in muizenberg where he died is a provincial heritage site in the western cape province of south africa . the cottage today is operated as a museum by the muizenberg historical conservation society , and is open to the public . a broad display of rhodes material can be seen , including the original de beers board room table around which diamonds worth billions of dollars were traded . rhodes university college , now rhodes university , in grahamstown , was established in his name by his trustees and founded by act of parliament on 31 may 1904 . the residents of kimberley , northern cape elected to build a memorial in rhodes 's honour in their city , which was unveiled in 1907 . the 72-ton bronze statue depicts rhodes on his horse , looking north with map in hand , and dressed as he was when met the ndebele after their rebellion . opposition . memorials to rhodes have been opposed since at least the 1950s , when some afrikaner students demanded the removal of a rhodes statue at the university of cape town . a 2015 movement , known as '' rhodes must fall '' ( or rhodesmustfall on social media ) , began with student protests at the university of cape town that were successful in getting university authorities to remove the rhodes statue from the campus . the protest also had the broader goal of highlighting what the activists considered the lack of systemic post-apartheid racial transformation in south african institutions . following a series of protests and vandalism at the university of cape town , various allied movements both in south africa and other countries have been launched in opposition to cecil rhodes memorials . these include a campaign to change the name of rhodes university and to remove a statue of rhodes from oriel college , oxford . the campaign was covered in a documentary by channel 4 , which was called the battle for britain 's heroes . the documentary was commissioned after afua hirsch wrote an article on the topic . moreover , an article by amit chaudhuri , in the guardian , suggested the criticism was '' unsurprising and overdue '' . however , oxford university opted to keep the rhodes statue , despite the protests . oriel college claimed in 2016 they would lose about £100 million worth of gifts if they removed the statue . nevertheless , in june 2020 , the college voted in favour of setting up an independent commission of inquiry , amid widespread support for removing the statue . encyclopædia britannica , discussing his legacy , wrote of rhodes that he '' once defined his policy as 'equal rights for every white man south of the zambezi ' and later , under liberal pressure , amended 'white ' to 'civilized ' . but he probably regarded the possibility of native africans becoming 'civilized ' as so remote that the two expressions , in his mind , came to the same thing . '' encyclopaedia britannica effects of the jameson raid on rhodes ’ s career as part of his legacy , on his death rhodes left a significant amount of money to be used to finance talented young scholars ( '' race '' was not a criterion ) at oxford . currently , in oxford a number of those south african and zimbabwean recipients of funds from his legacy are campaigning for his statue to be removed from display in oxford . when asked if there was any double standard or hypocrisy in being funded by the rhodes scholarship fund and benefiting from the opportunity , whilst at the same time , campaigning against the legacy of rhodes , one of the south african campaigners , ntokozo qwabe , replied that '' this scholarship does not buy our silence.there is no hypocrisy in being a recipient of a rhodes scholarship and being publicly critical of cecil rhodes and his legacy . there is no clause that binds us to find 'the good ' in rhodes ’ character , nor to sanitise the imperialist , colonial agenda he propagated '' . in june 2020 , amid the wider context of black lives matter protests , the governing body of oxford 's oriel college voted to remove the statue of rhodes . the actual removal would not take place until at least january 2021 , when a commission set up by the college delivers its findings on the statue 's future , after which the college will need to apply for planning permission from the local council . . popular culture . mark twain 's sarcastic summation of rhodes ( '' i admire him , i frankly confess it ; and when his time comes i shall buy a piece of the rope for a keepsake '' ) , from chapter lxix of following the equator , still often appears in collections of famous insults . the will of cecil rhodes is the central theme in the science fiction book great work of time by john crowley , an alternative history in which the secret society stipulated in the will was indeed established . its members eventually achieve the secret of time travel and use it to restrain world war i and prevent world war ii , and to perpetuate the world ascendancy of the british empire up to the end of the twentieth century . the book contains a vivid description of cecil rhodes himself , seen through the eyes of a traveller from the future british empire . in the british film rhodes of africa ( 1936 , directed by austrian filmmaker berthold viertel ) , rhodes was portrayed by canadian actor walter huston . rhodes of africa ( 1936 ) . rhodes is the unofficial mascot of uncomfortable oxford , an oxford based tour guide and history organisation which focuses on british imperial history . much of their promotional material , tours and speeches all focus on rhode 's statue outside of oriel college , oxford , and they were central to organising the 2020 oxford blm protests in response to the killing of george floyd . rhodes was played by ferdinand marian in the nazi propaganda film ohm krüger ( 1941 ) , where he – like all other british characters in the film – was presented as an outright villain . in 1901 , rhodes bought dalham hall , suffolk . in 1902 , colonel frank rhodes erected the village hall in the village of dalham , near bury st edmunds , to commemorate the life of his brother , who had died before taking possession of the estate . rhodes was a peripheral but influential character in the historical novel the covenant by james michener . his memorial at devil 's peak also served as a temple in the adventures of sinbad episode '' the return of the ronin '' . the 1976 hugh masekela album colonial man has a song titled '' cecil rhodes '' . cecil rhodes was the subject of a south african television mini-series , barney barnato , made in 1989 and first aired on sabc in early 1990 . in 1996 , bbc-tv made an eight-part television drama about rhodes called rhodes ( tv series ) . '' rhodes '' on imdb it was produced by david drury and written by antony thomas . it tells the story of rhodes ' life through a series of flashbacks of conversations between him and princess catherine radziwiłł and also between her and people who knew him . it also shows the story of how she stalked and eventually ruined him . in the serial , cecil rhodes is played by martin shaw , the younger cecil rhodes is played by his son joe shaw , and princess radziwiłł is played by frances barber . in the serial rhodes is portrayed as ruthless and greedy . the serial also suggests that he was homosexual . countering the implication of rhodes ' homosexuality , historian and journalist paul johnson wrote that rhodes had been falsely smeared by the programme , commenting : '' in nine tendentious hours , rhodes is to be presented as a corrupt and greedy money-grabber , a racist and paedophile , whose disgusting passion was to get his hands on young boys . the bbc has spent £10m of our money putting together a farrago of exaggerations and smears about this great man . '' peter godwin said of the film that '' it feels like a work overwhelmingly informed by malice , consistently seizing on the very worst interpretation of the man without really attempting to get under his skin . rhodes was no 19th-century hitler . he was n't so much a freak as a man of his time . '' rhodes features prominently in wilbur smith 's ballantyne series of novels , fictional stories based amongst real events in rhodes ' lifetime .