Simon Marius

early life . marius was the son of reichart mayr , a mayor of gunzenhausen . on the recommendation of george frederick , margrave of brandenburg-ansbach , he was admitted to the margrave 's academy in heilsbronn in 1586 , where he studied until 1601 . during this time , he published observations about a comet as well as astronomical tables , which gave him a reputation as a good astronomer and mathematician , and the margrave appointed him as his official mathematician . marius wanted to attend the university of königsberg , but was unable to get a scholarship . however , the margrave wrote a letter of recommendation on may 22 , 1601 , so that marius could study in prague under tycho brahe , which he did for several months , although he may actually have worked directly with david fabricius instead of brahe himself . by september 1601 , marius had already left prague and he arrived in padua in december 1601 to study medicine at the university of padua . during this time , he tutored other students in astronomy , including one baldassarre capra , with whom he wrote a book on a new star ( actually kepler 's supernova ) they observed in 1604 . capra had a dispute with galileo galilei ( both of them learned fencing from capra 's father clelia pighetti , il vuoto e la quiete . scienza e mistica nel '600 : elena cornaro e carlo rinaldini , milano , franco angeli , 2005 , p . 27 . ) on the invention of the sector ( instrument ) and marius took his student 's side in the argument . marius left the school in july 1605 , returning to ansbach to become the mathematician and physician to the new margraves , christian and joachim ernst . in 1606 , marius married felicitas lauer ( born 1590 ) , the daughter of his publisher , in ansbach , and in 1609 he published the first german translations of euclid 's elements . that year , he also built his own telescope and in november made observations of the galilean moons , slightly before galileo did himself , which became the source of a major dispute between the two . . dispute with galileo . capra published another book in 1607 which he actually plagiarised from galileo , and marius was implicated in the act due to his prior association with capra , even though this was after marius had left padua . galileo certainly was under that impression , as he referred to his '' old adversary '' ( without explicitly naming marius ) as a '' poisonous reptile '' , and an '' enemy of all mankind '' . in 1614 , marius published his work mundus iovialis describing the planet jupiter and its moons ( he previously had published the discovery in 1611 in a local almanac ) . here he claimed to have discovered the planet 's four major moons about a month before galileo , who was naturally incensed . in the assayer in 1623 , he accused marius of plagiarism . because of galileo 's stature in the scientific community , for nearly 300 years , marius 's reputation was tainted by galileo 's accusations . however , a jury in the netherlands in 1903 examined the evidence extensively and ruled in favor of marius 's independent discoveries , with results published by bosscha in 1907 . apparently marius discovered the moons independently , but did not start keeping notes until december 29 , 1609 . marius used the julian calendar , and that date is equivalent to january 8 , 1610 , in the gregorian one used by galileo , one day after galileo 's letter in which he first described the moons . regardless of priority , the mythological names by which these satellites are known today ( io , europa , ganymede and callisto ) are those given them by marius : marius/schlör , mundus iovialis , p . 78 f . ( with misprint in for io ) . discoveries . simon marius also observed the andromeda galaxy , which had also been known to persian astronomers of the middle ages . discussion of marius ' work is scarce , but what exists tends to note his skill as an observer , including : that in 1612 he measured the diameter of the andromeda nebula and discerned it as having a dull , pale light which increased in brightness toward its center , bond , george p . , '' an account of the nebula in andromeda '' , memoirs of the american academy of arts and sciences , new series , volume 3 , 1848 pp . 75–76 . like '' a candle shining through horn '' . watson , fred , stargazer : the life and times of the telescope , da capo press , 2005 , pg . 86 . that he detected spurious disks of stars created by his telescope . dreyer , jle , '' the tercentenary of the telescope '' , nature , vol . 82 ( december 16 , 1909 ) , pp . 190–191 that , from his observations of the galilean moons he derived better periods of revolution and other orbital elements for them than did galileo . pannekoek , anton , a history of astronomy , interscience publishers , 1989 , pg . 231 . that he observed the location of tycho brahe 's supernova of 1572 and found a star there which he estimated to be '' somewhat dimmer than jupiter 's third moon '' . waldrop , m . mitchell , '' supernova 1987 a : facts and fancies '' , science , new series , vol . 239 , no . 4839 ( january 29 , 1988 ) , pp . 460–462 marius drew conclusions about the structure of the universe from his observations of the jovian moons and the stellar disks . the stellar disks he observed were spurious ( likely the airy disk caused by diffraction , as stars are too distant for their physical disks to be detected telescopically ) , but marius interpreted them to be physical disks , like the planetary disks visible through a telescope . he concluded that since he could see stellar disks , the stars could not be as distant as was required in the copernican world system , and he said that the appearance of the stars as seen through a telescope actually argued against copernicus . marius/schlör , mundus iovialis , pp . 46–49 . he also concluded from his observations of the galilean moons that they must orbit jupiter while jupiter orbits the sun . marius , simon ( tr . by a.o . prickard ) , '' the mundus jovialis of simon marius '' , the observatory ( astronomy ) , vol . 39 , 1916 , pp . 404 , 408 , 409 therefore , marius concluded that the geocentric tychonic system , in which the planets circle the sun while the sun circles the earth , must be the correct world system , or model of the universe . marius/schlör , mundus iovialis , pp . 46–49 . . work . mundus iovialis anno mdcix detectus ope perspicilli belgici ( die welt des jupiter , 1609 mit dem flämischen teleskop entdeckt ; lateinisches faksimile und deutsche übersetzung ; hrsg . und bearb . von joachim schlör . naturwiss . begleitet und mit einem nachw . vers . von alois wilder ) , 1614 zinner , e . , '' zur ehrenrettung des simon marius '' , in : vierteljahresschrift der astronomischen gesellschaft , 77 . jahrgang , 1 . heft , leipzig 1942 bosscha , j . , '' simon marius . réhabilitation d´un astronome calomnié '' , in : archives nederlandaises des sciences exactes et naturelles , ser . ii , t . xii , pp . & nbsp ; 258–307 , 490–528 , la haye , 1907