Peter Rosegger

early life . thumb rosegger was born as the first of seven children of a peasant couple in the village of alpl , in the mountains above krieglach , styria . the family lived in a simple 18th-century alps farmhouse , called kluppeneggerhof . living conditions were modest , the central room was used for eating , sleeping and working . food was prepared over a hearth in the scullery . the farmhouse is now part of the universalmuseum joanneum , but even today the building ensemble can only be reached by foot . since this little village , consisting only of a handful of farms , had neither a church nor a school , rosegger and the other children would have had to walk down the mountain to the larger village , st . kathrein , in order to attend either . the way there takes two hours and as a result , peter had very limited education , largely provided by a wandering teacher who taught him and other children from the region for a year and a half . his physical constitution was not sufficient for him to become a farmer like his father , as he was often sick and rather frail in general . so , he became understudy of a traveling tailor at the age of seventeen . success as a writer . his interest in literature prevailed , although he earned little money . he spent what he could afford on books and soon began to write himself . eventually , he was discovered by the publisher of the graz-based newspaper , tagespost , published by dr . svoboda . he realized rosegger 's talent as an author and enabled him to attend the akademie für handel und industrie ( academy for trade and industries ) in graz . there , peter von reininghaus became his mentor . von reininghaus was a wealthy and influential industrialist , and rosegger had a personal friendship with him for the rest of his life . however , he had a hard time studying , as he was not used to attending school regularly , and had little , and fragmentary , knowledge in many disciplines . he left the academy in 1869 at the age of twenty-six . soon after that , he was offered a chance to publish his literary works , namely by gustav heckenast , who had worked with adalbert stifter before . peter rosegger accepted , and his first book , geschichten aus der steiermark ( '' tales from styria '' ) , was released in 1871 . from then on , all of his works were published by heckenast . presumably only until heckenast 's death : see next sentence ? rosegger changed to a new publisher twice after heckenast 's death , eventually ending up with ludwig staackmann , who made him a most generous offer . he had always been very faithful towards his publishers , and the relationship between them was one of friendship and familiarity . rosegger started to publish heimgarten in 1876 , a monthly journal with articles and stories for the people of the country , whose main representative and interpreter he was . character and private life . in 1873 , rosegger married anna pichler . they had two children , but the marriage was short - anna died giving birth in 1875 . this affected peter to a great degree , as is obvious from various letters he wrote to friends in that time . in 1879 , rosegger married again : anna knaur , with whom he had three more children and a very harmonious house life . she also cared for him during his many times of sickness . he developed many brilliant and extraordinary ideas from the context of his time , and kept contact with unconventional personalities . rudolf falb , the creator of the popular '' lunisolar flood theory , '' was not only his school teacher but remained a lifelong friend . biography of rudolf falb on the obdach website ] ( german ) archived although feeling strongly connected to his rural homelands , he was a liberal thinker with conservative roots . fascinated by machines and technology , and being a faithful christian , he showed a sharp eye for the potentials and advantages , as well as for the dangers and downsides of both the church and the economic development of the late 19th century . as an author he aimed to entertain , to teach and also to help . he called for donations publicly at various occasions or used his influence in academic circles , thus contributing to the founding of one school ( in alpl , his home village ) , the building of two churches ( one in mürzzuschlag and one in st . kathrein , rebuilt after it burned down ) and other benevolent actions . honors . in 1903 , at his 60th birthday , he was honoured by receiving the '' ehrendoktorwürde '' ( doctor honoris causa ) of the university of heidelberg . the university of vienna and the university of graz also awarded him with similar decorations , and the german emperor wilhelm ii , as well as the austrian emperor franz josef i of austria gave rosegger medals of honour ( namely , the '' kronenorden 2 . klasse '' and the '' ehrenabzeichen für kunst und wissenschaft '' ) . he became citizen of honour in graz and vienna , and franz josef 's successor karl presented the ex-farmer-boy-now-national-poet with the franz-joseph-medal , a high-ranking accolade for an author . late life and death . rosegger , who had been ill frequently and seriously , travelled back to his home in krieglach in may 1918 in order to die where '' the beautiful legend of the forest-farmer boy '' had once begun , in the woodlands of the styrian alps . his birth house , the former '' forest school '' ( waldschule ) he helped to found in alpl in 1902 and his house in krieglach , where he lived until his death in 1918 , are museums today . the region where he came from ( the mountains of the fischbacher alps south of krieglach and mürzzuschlag ) are now unofficially named '' waldheimat '' ( '' home in the forest '' ) after the name he gave it himself . the tourism industry in the region still profits from rosegger 's enduring popularity among readers . selected works . zither und hackbrett ( poems in styrian dialect , 1870 ) volksleben in steiermark ( '' people 's life in styria '' ) , 1875 die schriften des waldschulmeisters ( '' manuscripts of a forest-school master '' ) , 1875 waldheimat ( '' home in the forest '' ) , 1877 der gottsucher ( '' the god-seeker '' ) , 1883 heidepeters gabriel , 1886 jakob der letzte ( '' jakob the last one '' ) , 1888 als ich noch jung war ( '' when i was young '' ) , 1895 das ewige licht ( '' the eternal light '' ) , 1896 erdsegen ( '' earth 's blessing '' ) , 1900 als ich noch der waldbauernbub war ( '' when i was a forest-farmer boy '' ) , 1902 . further reading . eindringen des kapitalismus in ein bauerndorf , martin der mann , 1889 ( '' introduction of capitalism into a village of farmers '' , '' martin the man '' ) hoch vom dachstein , 1891 weltgift , 1903 inri ( christ book ) , 1905 collected works , 1913–16 letters to f . v . hausegger , 1924 letters to a . silberstein , 1929 . film and television adaptations . i.n.r.i . ( dir . robert wiene , 1923 ) ( dir . alfred stöger , 1949 ) ( dir . robert a . stemmle , 1955 ) ( dir . ferdinand dörfler , 1956 ) als ich noch der waldbauernbub war . ( 1963 , tv film ) aus meiner waldheimat ( 1963 , tv film ) als ich beim käthele im wald war ( 1963 , tv film ) am tage des gerichts ( 1965 , tv film ) ( dir . axel corti , 1976 , tv film ) waldheimat ( 1983–1984 , tv series , 26 episodes ) die försterbuben ( dir . peter patzak , 1984 , tv film ) erdsegen ( dir . karin brandauer , 1986 , tv film )