Republican Guard (Iraq)

history . formed in 1969 , it was originally created to be a presidential guard . its primary objective was to maintain the stability of the regime and provide protection against internal and external enemies . during the iran–iraq war , it was expanded into a large military force . it was disbanded along with the rest of iraqi military after the 2003 invasion of iraq by the coalition provisional authority of the administering u.s . and british forces . the force 's last commander was qusay hussein , the younger son of saddam hussein . saddam hussein was so confident about the capability of the guard that he had said : '' in history when they write about napoleon 's guard , they will arrange them next to the republican guard of iraq . '' because of their elite status republican guards received better equipment and uniforms than their regular army counterparts , and could often be identified by distinctive markings or items of head dress . members of the regular republican guards conventionally wore a scarlet-colored triangle insignia on both shoulders of their uniforms ( sometimes backed with white material to form a white border around the edge of the triangle ) ; they also wore black berets as did some army personnel , but as a distinctive marking a scarlet ribbon was often sewn to the right of the national cap badge to distinguish bravery in combat and/or loyalty to the hussein regime . the special republican guards wore a maroon beret with the national eagle device , and a special variation of the triangle shoulder insignia in maroon with green arabic lettering . the bright red qardoon ( shoulder cord ) distinguished republican guards as well . a similar cord with green and red bands was also worn by the special republican guards . iran–iraq war . initially , the guard had limited capabilities ; however , during the iran–iraq war , it was expanded to five brigades , which was initially being mostly used in counterattacks , notably in operation dawn 4 . by 1986 the war had exhausted iraq with both iran and iraq suffering heavy casualties . iran had by then first battle of al-faw and generally pushed iraqi forces beyond the pre-war border and captured territory inside iraq , repulsing counterattacks by the republican guard . this , coupled with another defeat at the battle of mehran , caused the iraqi ba'ath party to convene the ba'ath extraordinary congress of july 1986 . during this congress the ba'ath party decided on a new strategy to overhaul the iraqi military and utilize iraq 's manpower capability . the government closed all colleges and universities and began a mass mobilization program to force draft dodgers into the iraqi popular army . this decision allowed for the drafting of thousands of university students , who were sent to military summer camps . in addition , the military began accepting volunteers from throughout iraq . with this massive influx of manpower the republican guard expanded to over 25 brigades which were led by loyal officers drawn from the iraqi military . this force then conducted the tawakalna ala allah operations which , allowed for the eviction of the iranians out of occupied iraqi territory including the liberation of al-faw , as well as allowing for renewed major offensives into iran . 1980–1988 order of battle . the order of battle according to iranian sources was as follows : 1st division ( iraq ) 2nd , 10th armored brigades 3rd special forces brigade 4th , 5th , 6th , 7th , 8th , 16th , 17th infantry brigades ( sometimes as mechanized units ) 11th commando brigade there are some claims of units with names that are unknown . persian gulf war . see operation desert shield between the invasion of kuwait and the persian gulf war ( '' operation desert storm '' ) , the number of republican guard formations was expanded and the guard was reorganized . the republican guard forces command was also created during this period . at the beginning of the persian gulf war , it consisted of the following units : republican guard , co lieutenant general iyad futayyih khalifah al-rawi 1st republican guard corps , deployed in southern iraq and northern kuwait , consisted of : 1st hammurabi armoured division , co major general qais abd al-razaq . 2nd al medina armored division tawakalna division '' in god we trust '' 4th al faw motorized infantry division 2d republican guard corps deployed south of baghdad consisted of : 5th baghdad mechanised division , a square division of four brigades , was able to be split into two small half-divisions 6th nebuchadnezzar motorized infantry division 7th adnan motorized infantry division named after a cousin of saddam hussein deployed outside of the corps structure were various other units including : : 8th as saiqa special forces division - contained a marine brigade , a paratrooper , and a special forces brigade . the marine brigade was deployed on kuwait 's nine islands , all of which with the exception of failaka island are uninhabited . the brigade was headquartered on bubiyan island the republican guard also included two corps headquarters , the allah akbar republican guard operations command , and the fat ' h al-mubayyin republican guard operations command , separate artillery detachments and numerous field support units . between the invasion of kuwait and the start of the war on 17 january 1991 , four more rgfc internal security divisions had been formed which remained behind in iraq . all of these units were motorised infantry . the names of only three of them were identified : the al-abed , al-mustafa ( 'the elect ' ) and al-nida divisions ( 'the call ' ) . they may have conducted operations against peshmerga in the north . invasion of kuwait . by 1 august 1990 , there were more than 100,000 iraqi troops with up to 700 tanks on the kuwaiti border . on 2 august 1990 , the republican guard units commenced the invasion of kuwait , which lasted two days . the kuwait army strength was 16,000 , so on paper iraqi forces outnumbered the kuwaitis 7 to 1 . however , the actual ratio was far worse ; the initial attack was so quick , and the kuwaiti units so unprepared , that many of military of kuwait were on leave and unable to report in time . the attack was conducted by eight rgfc divisions ( two armoured , two mechanized , three motorised infantry and one special forces ) . the main thrust was conducted from the north down the main iraq-kuwait road , later famous as the highway of death , by the 1st hammurabi armoured division , with the nebuchadnezzar infantry division following ; the tawakalna mechanised and al faw infantry divisions advanced on the flanks . the supporting attack from the west was led by the medina armoured division , followed by the adnan infantry division and the baghdad mechanised division . commandos deployed by helicopters joined the attack on kuwait city . after the invasion , the republican guard was withdrawn and redeployed into strategic reserve positions in northern kuwait and southern and central iraq . . desert storm . during the persian gulf war , the u.s . vii corps assembled in full strength and launched an armoured attack into iraq early sunday , 24 february , just to the west of kuwait , taking iraqi forces by surprise . prior to the ground offensive , the iraqi republican guard had been attacked relentlessly by us warplanes but managed to shoot down and damage a number of the attackers . on 15 february , the iraqi republican guard shot down two a-10 warthogs and damaged another and this alarmed usaf general charles albert horner , who was forced to call off further a-10 attacks on these divisions . '' on 15 february , when the republican guard shot down two a-1os and damaged another , horner pulled the warthogs off the republican guard . '' airpower advantage : planning the gulf war air campaign , 1989-1991 , diane therese putney , p . 253 , air force history and museums program , u.s . air force , 2004 simultaneously , the u.s . xviii airborne corps launched a sweeping '' left-hook '' attack across the largely undefended desert of southern iraq , led by the 3rd armored cavalry regiment and the 24th infantry division ( mechanized ) . once the allies had penetrated deep into iraqi territory , they turned eastward , launching a flank attack against the republican guard . both sides exchanged fire , but the republican guard divisions , worn down by weeks of aerial bombardment , proved unable to withstand the allied advance . the republican guard participated in some of the largest tank battles in us history including the battle of medina ridge , battle of norfolk , and the battle of 73 easting against the u.s . vii corps . vua citation during the latter battle us veterans later reported coming under heavy small-arms fire with bullets bouncing off their vehicles , having been attacked by several dismounted detachments of the tawakalna division . '' at 73 easting , for example , 2nd acr crews reported large volumes of small arms fire rattling off their vehicles during the assault , which means that iraqi troops stayed at their weapons , returning fire , even as u.s . tanks passed within a few hundred meters of their positions ( i.e . , within small-arms range ) . in fact , some republican guard infantry are known to have remained at their posts , concealed , until u.s . attackers had actually driven through their positions , only then emerging to fire short range antitank rockets at the vehicles from behind . heavy weapons fire was also received . although large-caliber hits were rare , multiple iraqi tank gun rounds were observed falling near u.s . vehicles . '' victory misunderstood several rifle companies of the tawakalna division counterattacked under the cover of darkness , in an attempt to recover lost positions . '' perhaps most important , the tawakalna division not only defended itself when attacked , but also counterattacked the 2nd acr after being driven from its positions . after nightfall the iraqis struck the northernmost of the three u.s . cavalry troops engaged , attacking in multiple , reinforced company-strength waves , and supported by dismounted infantry . '' victory misunderstood the us won with minimal losses while inflicting heavy losses on the iraqi army , but elements of the republican guard divisions were able to withdraw back into iraq , shooting down three us warplanes and a rescue helicopter in the process . in early april 1991 , colonel montgomery meigs , the commander of the 2nd brigade of the 1st armoured division , paid his respects to his former enemy 's medina division reporting that , '' these guys stayed and fought . '' the medina division shot down an a-10 thunderbolt ii in the fighting for medina ridge on 27 february 1991 , and other republican guard units were responsible for the destruction of a us marine corps harrier , a usaf f-16 and a us army uh-60 blackhawk that day . '' the iraqis had skillfully dug in and camouflaged their firing line and placed a formidable protective ring of antiaircraft guns around it . one zsu-23-4 managed to shoot down an american a-10 aircraft . '' certain victory : the u.s . army in the gulf war , robert h . scales , p . 298 , potomac books , inc , 1998 '' the allied air campaign suffered its most disastrous day of the war . lieutenant olson was killed when his a-10 was shot down over medina ridge . marine captain reginald underwood also lost his life when his harrier was shot down ; and air force captain william andrews was also shot down over republican guard positions . '' the gulf war chronicles : a military history of the first war with iraq , richard lowry , p . 199 , iuniverse , 2008 . between the gulf war and the 2003 iraq war . all the eight republican guard divisions were involved in fighting during the gulf war and the '' tawakalna '' division were disbanded due to losses . the remaining formations led the suppression of the 1991 uprisings in northern and southern iraq - the kurdish insurgency in the north and the shi'ite uprising in the east . during these times , there were numerous accusations of the use of poison gas , rape and torture . the hammurabi and medina divisions surrounded karbala with tanks and artillery and shelled the city for one week killing thousands and destroying entire neighborhoods . though it was reduced to a strength of seven or eight divisions , the rgfc was reconstituted , taking equipment from army heavy divisions . journalist sean boyle wrote a number of articles for jane 's intelligence review , including on the republican guard , during the 1990s . in september 1997 he wrote that the northern corps had four divisions - adnan mechanised division ( headquarters ( hq ) mosul ) with the 11 , 12 , 21 brigades ; baghdad infantry division ( hq maqloob maontin , mosul governate ) 4 , 5 , 6 brigades ; al madina al munawara armoured division ( al rashedia camp/al taji camp ) 2 , 10 , 14 , 17 brigades ; and the al abed infantry division ( khaled camp , kirkuk ) with the 38 , 39 , and 40 brigades . sean boyle , article in jane 's intelligence review , september 1997 . the southern corps had three divisions including the hammurabi division . 2003 iraq war . see article : iraq war the republican guard was subordinate to the '' special security apparatus of the state '' and not to the ministry of defense ( iraq ) as was the regular iraqi army . it was split into two corps , one for the defense and control of northern iraq , called '' allah akbar operations command '' , composed of infantry and armoured units , and the '' fat ' h al-mubayyin operations command '' composed primarily of mechanized units , which was located in the southern part of the country . in 2002 , it was reported that the republican guard and the fedayeen saddam were both training in urban warfare and in guerrilla warfare . the republican guard then consisted of between 50,000 and 60,000 men ( although some sources indicate up to 80,000 ) , all volunteers , and some 750 soviet t-72 and asad babil tanks and scores of t-55 and t-62 tanks , along with other mechanized vehicles . a further 90-100 t-72 tanks were operated by the special republican guard . these forces were intentionally away from the capital to avert a possible rebellion against the regime . the members of this body of the army were better paid , equipped , armed and trained . they formed a special corps that were given the ability to buy houses and given other privileges to ensure loyalty to the regime . nevertheless , the medina republican guard division and nebuchadnezzar republican guard division tasked with defending the karbala gap fought well , 23 march 2003 , disrupting a strong attack conducted by the 11th aviation group ( '' 11th attack helicopter regiment '' ) , damaging thirty apaches and shooting down one '' on 23 march 2003 , three days after the onset of the iraq war , 31 apache helicopters of the 11th attack helicopter regiment ( some organic , some attached ) set out to deplete the armour and air defenses of the iraqi medina division near karbala . as was doctrine , they flew low in packs toward their objective . however , en route they became ensnared in 'flak traps ' - storms of small arms fire , rocket-propelled grenades , and man-portable missiles , originating from rooftops . this ad hoc air defense effort , which was remniscent of somali tactics ten years earlier , had probably been triggered by iraqi pickets equipped with either cell phones or low-power radios . the fire brought down one of the apaches and damaged all the others sufficiently to compel their return to base . the experience dampened command interest in attempting helicopter deep attack thereafter . '' military intervention and common sense : focus on land forces , lutz unterseher , carl conetta , pp . 94-95 , commonwealth institute , 2009 and capturing the crew , david williams and ronald young , both chief warrant officers . it was an important iraqi success for the apache unit was taken out of the frontline for a month while undergoing repairs . at least 2 apaches of the helicopter regiment were damaged beyond repair . '' with visibility down to zero , the heavily damaged machines made their finals on instruments , some crash-landing and being written off , others undergoing weeks of repair . '' asia pacific defence reporter , p . 124 , asia-pacific defence publications , 2004 on 2 april 2003 , the iraqi units positioned around karbala shot down a u.s . army sikorsky h-60 black hawk helicopter , killing seven soldiers and wounding four others . '' on 2 april 2003 , a u.s . army sikorsky h-60 black hawk helicopter was shot down near karbala , killing seven soldiers and wounding four others . this event appeared to indicate a significant enemy presence in the city . the encyclopedia of middle east wars : the united states in the persian gulf , afghanistan , and iraq conflicts , spencer c . tucker , p . 672 , abc-clio , 2010 iraqi forces also shot down an fa-18 hornet near karbala around 8.45 am local time . '' on 2 april a navy fa-18 was shot down west of karbala , iraq . '' leave no man behind : the saga of combat search and rescue , george galdorisi , thomas phillips , p . 519 , zenith imprint , 2008 '' the plane from the aircraft carrier uss kitty hawk in the persian gulf went down just before midnight wednesday while on a bombing mission near karbala , a city 50 miles south of baghdad where fighting raged between u.s . forces and the republican guard . a search team was immediately launched . other aircraft reported seeing surface-to-air missiles and anti-aircraft fire in the area where the plane disappeared , said lt . brook dewalt , a spokesman for the kitty hawk . iraqi television broadcast pictures thursday of what it said was the wreckage and iraqi information minister mohammed saeed al-sahaf claimed the aircraft was shot down by the saddam fedayeen , iraq 's paramilitary force . '' two aircraft down over iraq on 7 april 2003 , an iraqi special republican guard frog-7 rocket or an ababil-100 ssm missile exploded among the parked vehicles of the headquarters of 2nd brigade , 3rd infantry division , killing two soldiers ( private 1st class anthony miller and staff sergeant lincoln hollinsaid ) and two embedded journalists ( julio parrado and christian liebig ) , wounding 15 others and destroying 17 military vehicles . on 8 april 2003 , some 500 iraqis ( including special republican guard '' . about 500 iraq forces took part in the counterattack . they were a combination of special republican guard , fedayeen and baath party loyalists . '' iraqis launch counterattack in baghdad ; 50 reported killed ) mounted a fierce counterattack across the jumhuriya bridge in baghdad , forcing part of the u.s . forces on the western side of baghdad to initially abandon their positions , but the iraqis reportedly lost 50 killed in the fighting that included the use of a-10 warthogs on the part of the us forces . an a-10 attack plane was shot down in combating the counterattack by an iraqi surface-to-air missile . '' a-10 aircraft strafed both sides of the main road leading to the bridge and one aircraft was lost to a shoulder-launched missile . '' cradle of conflict : iraq and the birth of modern u.s . military power , michael knights , p.326 , naval institute press , 2005 . 2003 order of battle . 1st republican guard ( southern ) corps 2nd al medina armored division ; 2nd , 10th and 14th brigades . 5th baghdad mechanized division ; including the 4th , 5th , and 6th motorized brigades . 7th adnan infantry division ; 11th , 12th , 21st , and divisional artillery brigades . 2nd republican guard ( northern ) corps al nida armored division ; 41st , 42nd , 43rd brigades . 6th nebuchadnezzer mechanized division ; 19th , 22nd and 23rd brigades . 1st hammurabi armoured division - possibly with western desert force ; 8th , 9th mechanized brigades , 18th armored , division artillery brigade . as saiqa special forces division - independent unit containing : a special forces brigade , paratroop brigade , marine brigade and numerous commando units . on 2 april 2003 , u.s . army brigadier general vincent k . brooks said that the baghdad division of the iraqi republican guard had been '' destroyed '' . iraq information minister muhammed saeed al-sahaf responded that this was another u.s . '' lie '' . the republican guard was officially dissolved on 23 may 2003 per order number 2 of the coalition provisional authority under paul bremer . in early 2004 , british journalist sean langan confirmed that one of the local commanders of the guerrilla stronghold of ramadi was a former republican guard officer . mission accomplished , sean langan , bbc , 2007 in late april 2004 , a pentagon report claimed that members of the special republican guard had regrouped in the guerrilla stronghold of fallujah . '' a pentagon intelligence report has concluded that many bombings against americans and their allies in iraq , and the more sophisticated of the guerrilla attacks in fallujah , are organized and often carried out by members of saddam hussein 's secret service . in fallujah , which is currently encircled by u.s . marines , an estimated 1,500 to 2,000 hard-core insurgents , including members of the iraqi special republican guard who melted away under the u.s.-led offensive , are receiving tactical guidance and inspiration from these former intelligence operatives . '' saddam agents blamed for plots many members of the republican guard joined several of the insurgent groups currently operating in iraq such as the return and isis . . in popular culture . in the television show lost , sayid jarrah , one of the main characters , served in the republican guard during the 1991 persian gulf war . during his service in the 1991 persian gulf war , he was a soldier , a communications officer and an interrogator . the majority of his background story revolves around the guilt he has felt towards people he 's tortured in the past . the video game , conflict : desert storm series feature soldiers of the ba'athist iraqi republican guard as the main enemies . the video game blacksite : area 51 features the iraqi republican guard as the main enemies in the first episode , iraq . texas comedian bill hicks referred to the '' elite republican guard '' in some of his routines . he mentioned the media downplaying the u.s . 's success in iraq during the 1991 persian gulf war because '' we still have not faced the elite republican guard '' . he went on to say that after the ineffectiveness of the iraqi response to u.s . bombing campaigns , the media no longer used the term '' elite '' , and that eventually the republican guard '' became 'the republicans made this shit up about there being guards out there ' . '' the republican guard appeared in an episode of deadliest warrior as saddam hussein 's personal bodyguards and elite troops as they fought against pol pot 's khmer rouge . see also . special republican guard republican guard list of protective service agencies imperial guard royal guard presidential security service united states secret service waffen ss . notes . references . further reading . watson , bruce , military lessons of the gulf war , greenhill books , london , 1993 . ( paperback ) jane 's intelligence review : january 2002 ( iaf/iaac ) , february 1999 ( regional commands ) , january 1999 ( srg ) , september 1997 ( army/rg ) , february 1995 , and march 1993 . external links . key components of the iraqi ground forces the republican guard : outgunned and outnumbered , but they never surrender cns article global security article fas article republican guard gets last chance against u.s . forces ( usa today )