Samoyed dog

history . the samoyed has been identified as a basal breed that predates the emergence of the modern breeds in the 19th century . it belongs to the spitz or northern dog group , specifically the laikas , a eurasian dog type used for a variety of purposes , namely hunting , herding , guarding , and sledding . the samoyed is descended from the nenets herding laika , a dog that may not only be white , but also a wide variety of colors . like many breeds , the samoyed was bred from a small number of founders ( in this case , from siberia ) . samoyeds were originally used for hunting , herding reindeer , and hauling sledges for the samoyede people in siberia . . appearance and characteristics . the akc standard requires and at the shoulder for males , and and for females . the uk kennel club standard requires for males , and for females . samoyed eyes are usually black or brown and are almond in shape . blue or other color eyes can occur but are not allowed in the show ring . it is in the '' brown and black section '' in its family , the spitz family . samoyed ears are thick and covered with fur , triangular in shape , and erect . they are almost always white but can often have a light to dark brown tint ( known as '' biscuit '' ) , usually around the tips of the ears . the samoyed tail is one of the breed 's distinguishing features . like the alaskan malamute , the tail is carried curled over the back ; however , unlike the alaskan malamute , the samoyed tail is held actually touching the back . it is not usually held in a tight curl , or held flag-like ; it is usually carried lying over the back and to one side . in cold weather , samoyeds may sleep with their tails over their noses to provide additional warmth . almost all samoyeds will allow their tails to fall when they are relaxed and at ease , as when being stroked or while eating , but will return their tails to a curl when more alert . samoyeds have a dense , double coat . the topcoat contains long , coarse , and straight guard hairs , which appear white but have a hint of silver coloring . this top layer keeps the down hair relatively clean and free of debris . the under layer , or undercoat , consists of a dense , soft , and short fur that keeps the dog warm . the undercoat typically sheds heavily once or twice a year , and this seasonal process is sometimes referred to as '' blowing coat '' . this does not mean the samoyed will shed only during that time however ; fine hairs ( versus the dense clumps shed during seasonal shedding ) will be shed all year round , and have a tendency to stick to cloth and float in the air . the standard samoyed may come in a mixture of biscuit and white coloring , although pure white and all biscuit dogs are common . males typically have larger ruffs than females . while this breed is touted as '' hypoallergenic '' , it does shed a fair amount and needs frequent grooming . while the breed may produce fewer allergens , care should be taken for severe allergies . shed samoyed fur is sometimes used as an alternative to wool in knitting , with a texture similar to angora . the fur is sometimes also used for the creation of artificial fly for fly fishing . life expectancy for the breed is about 12–13 years . . temperament . samoyeds ' friendly and affable disposition makes them poor guard dogs ; an aggressive samoyed is rare . the breed is characterized by an alert and happy expression which has earned the nicknames '' sammie smile '' and '' smiley dog . '' with their tendency to bark , however , they can be diligent watch dogs , barking whenever something approaches their territory . samoyeds are excellent companions , especially for small children or even other dogs , and they remain playful into old age . according to the samoyed club of america , when samoyeds become bored , they may become destructive or start to dig . with their sled dog heritage , a samoyed is not averse to pulling things , and an untrained samoyed has no problem pulling its owner on a leash rather than walking alongside . activities . samoyeds can compete in dog agility trials , carting , obedience , showmanship , flyball , tracking , mushing and herding events . herding instincts and trainability can be measured at noncompetitive herding tests . samoyeds exhibiting basic herding instincts can be trained to compete in herding trials . . health . samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy . the breed can be affected by a genetic disease known as samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy , a kidney disease . the disease is known to be caused by an x-linked dominant faulty allele and therefore the disease is more severe in male samoyeds . also known as hereditary nephritis , it is caused by a nonsense mutation in codon 1027 of the col4a5 gene on the x chromosome ( glycine to stop codon ) , which is similar to alport 's syndrome in humans . carrier females do develop mild symptoms after 2–3 months of age , but mostly do not go on to develop kidney failure . the disease is caused by a defect in the structure of the type-iv collagen fibrils of the glomerular basement membrane . as a consequence , the collagen fibrils of the glomerular basement membrane are unable to form cross-links , so the structural integrity is weakened and the membrane is more susceptible to '' wear-and-tear '' damage . as the structure of the basement membrane begins to degenerate , plasma proteins are lost in the urine and symptoms begin to appear . affected males appear healthy for the first three months of life , but then symptoms start to appear and worsen as the disease progresses : the dog becomes lethargic and muscle wastage occurs , as a result of proteinuria . from three months of age onwards , a reduced glomerular filtration rate is detected , indicative of progressive kidney failure . clinically , proteinuria is found in both sexes from the age of three to four months ; in dogs older than this , kidney failure in combination with more or less pronounced hearing loss occurs swiftly and death at the age of 8 to 15 months is expected . in heterozygous females , the disease develops slowly . the disease can be treated to slow down the development by use of cyclosporine a and ace inhibitors , but not be stopped . if a carrier female is mated with a healthy stud dog , the female offspring have a 50 % chance of being carriers for the disease , and any male offspring have a 50 % chance of being affected by the disease . a genetic test is available for this disease . . other health concerns . for the samoyeds several breed-specific hereditary diseases are described in the veterinary literature : diabetes in dogs similar but not identical to human type i ( insulin deficiency ) : the disease occurs in middle-aged samoyeds , the mean age at diagnosis is seven years . the cause is a chronic inflammation of the pancreas and/or autoimmune destruction of beta cells of islets of langerhans . moreover , in affected dogs autoantibodies were found to insulin . currently , several genetic markers are discussed as possible causes . progressive retinal atrophy ( pra ) caused by a frameshift mutation in the rprg locus of the x chromosome . the disease leads to a slowly progressive loss of vision , which eventually leads to blindness . the first symptoms appear between two and five years of age . the disease corresponds to the x-linked pra type 3 in humans . short legs in conjunction with eye abnormalities : due to a genetic defect at the col2a1 locus occurs on disproportionate dwarfism with short limbs in connection with cataracts , malformations of the retina and / or retinal detachment , liquefaction of the vitreous and a persistent hyaloid artery . the malformations of the retina are dominant ( i.e . before coming in heterozygous dogs ) ; the other symptoms are recessive , so they only come to expression in homozygous affected dogs . a connection with opticin is not . pulmonary stenosis occurs more frequently in samoyeds in comparison with other breeds . the disease can cause shortness of breath , cardiac arrhythmias and tiring on motion and increases the risk of congestive heart failure . hip dysplasia is also a concern for samoyeds . the breed can also be affected by sebaceous adenitis , an uncommon idiopathic autoimmune skin disease . . see also . . references . further reading . . external links .