Port wine

region and production . port is produced from grapes grown and processed in the demarcated douro region . porter , darwin & danforth price ( 2000 ) frommer 's portugal 16th ed . , p . 402 . idg books worldwide , inc . the wine produced is then fortified by the mutage known as aguardente to stop the fermentation , leaving residual sugar in the wine , and to boost the alcohol . the fortification spirit is sometimes referred to as brandy , but it bears little resemblance to commercial brandies . the wine is then stored and aged , often in barrels stored in a lodge ( meaning '' cellar '' ) as is the case in vila nova de gaia , before being bottled . the wine received its name , '' port '' , in the latter half of the 17th century from the seaport city of porto at the mouth of the douro river , where much of the product was brought to market or for export to other countries in europe . the douro valley where port wine is produced was defined and established as a protected region , and the name douro thus an official appellation , in 1756 , making it the third oldest , after chianti ( 1716 ) and tokaj ( 1730 ) . the reaches of the valley of the douro river in northern portugal have a microclimate that is optimal for cultivation of olives , almonds , and especially grapes important for making port wine . the region around pinhão and são joão da pesqueira is considered to be the centre of port production , and is known for its picturesque quintas & nbsp ; – estates clinging on to almost vertical slopes dropping down to the river . wine regions . the demarcation of the douro river valley includes a broad swath of land of pre-cambrian schist and granite . beginning around the village of barqueiros ( about upstream from porto ) , the valley extends eastward almost to the spanish border . the region is protected from the influences of the atlantic ocean by the serra do marão mountains . the area is sub-divided into three official zones : the baixo ( lower ) corgo , the cima ( higher ) corgo and the douro superior . j . robinson ( ed ) '' the oxford companion to wine '' third edition p . 536 oxford university press 2006 baixo corgo – the westernmost zone located downstream from the river corgo , centred on the municipality of peso da régua . this region is the wettest port production zone , receiving an annual average of precipitation , and has the coolest average temperature of the three zones . the grapes grown here are used mainly for the production of inexpensive ruby and tawny ports . cima corgo – located upstream from the baixo corgo , this region is centred on the town of pinhão ( municipality of alijó ) . the summertime average temperature of the region is a few degrees higher , and annual rainfall is about less . the grapes grown in this zone are considered of higher quality , being used in bottlings of vintage , reserve , aged tawny and late bottled vintage ports . douro superior – the easternmost zone , extending almost to the spanish border . this is the least cultivated region of douro , due in part to the difficulties of navigating the river past the rapids of valeira dam . this is the most arid and warmest region of the douro . the overall terrain is relatively flat , with the potential for mechanization . . grapes . over a hundred varieties of grapes ( castas ) are sanctioned for port production , although only five ( tinta barroca , tinto cão , tinta roriz ( tempranillo ) , touriga francesa , and touriga nacional ) are widely cultivated and used . mayson ( 1999 ) , port and the douro , p . 93 touriga nacional is widely considered the most desirable port grape but the difficulty in growing it and the small yields cause touriga francesa to be the most widely planted grape . white ports are produced the same way as red ports , except that they use white grapes & nbsp ; – donzelinho branco , esgana-cão , folgasão , gouveio , malvasia fina , rabigato and viosinho . while a few shippers have experimented with ports produced from a single variety of grapes , all ports commercially available are from a blend of different grapes . since the phylloxera crisis , most vines are grown on grafted rootstock , with the notable exception of the nacional area of quinta do noval , which , since being planted in 1925 , has produced some of the most expensive vintage ports . grapes grown for port are generally characterized by their small , dense fruit which produce concentrated and long-lasting flavours , suitable for long aging . while the grapes used to produce port made in portugal are strictly regulated by the instituto do vinho do porto , wines from outside this region which describe themselves as port may be made from other varieties . sales . in 2013 , there were 8.7 million cases of port sold , 3.6 % less than the previous year , at a value of 499 million . port sales have been declining since 2005 and are down 16 % from that year . declining sales are attributed by some to increasing prices , due to the increased cost of alcohol used in the production process . declining sales have also been attributed to the global rise in alcohol levels of table wines . as of 2014 , the leading brand in portugal is cálem , which sells 2.6 million bottles annually . . transport . port is produced from grapes grown in the douro valley . until 1986 it could only be exported from portugal from vila nova de gaia near porto , portugal 's second-largest city . traditionally , the wine was taken downriver in flat-bottom boats called 'rabelo boat ' , porter , darwin & danforth price ( 2000 ) frommer 's portugal 16th ed . , p . 305 . idg books worldwide , inc . to be processed and stored . in the 1950s and 1960s , several hydroelectric power dams were built along the river , ending this traditional conveyance . currently , the wine is transported from the vineyards by tanker trucks and the barcos rabelos are only used for racing and other displays . properties . port wine is typically richer , sweeter , heavier , and higher in alcohol content than unfortified wines . this is caused by the addition of distilled grape spirits to fortify the wine and halt fermentation before all the sugar is converted to alcohol , and results in a wine that is usually 19 % to 20 % alcohol . port is commonly served after meals as a dessert wine in english-speaking countries , often with cheese , nuts , and/or chocolate ; white and tawny ports are often served as an apéritif . in europe all types of port are frequently consumed as apéritifs . styles . port from portugal comes in several styles , which can be divided into two broad categories : wines matured in sealed glass bottles , and wines that have matured in wooden barrels . the former , without exposure to air , experience what is known as '' reductive '' ageing . this process leads to the wine losing its color very slowly and produces a wine which is smoother on the palate and less tannic . the latter , being matured in wooden barrels , whose permeability allows a small amount of exposure to oxygen , experience what is known as '' oxidative '' aging . they too lose color , but at a faster pace . they also lose volume to evaporation ( angel 's share ) , leaving behind a wine that is slightly more viscous . the ivdp ( instituto dos vinhos do douro e porto ) further divides port into two categories : normal ports ( standard rubies , three-year-old tawnies , and white ports ) and categorias especiais , special categories , which include everything else . ruby . ruby port is the least expensive and most extensively produced type of port . after fermentation , it is stored in tanks of concrete or stainless steel to prevent oxidative aging and preserve its bright red color and full-bodied fruitiness . portwine.com ruby port the wine is usually blended to match the style of the brand to which it is to be sold . the wine is fined and cold filtered before bottling and does not generally improve with age , although premium rubies are aged in wood from four to six years . . reserve . reserve ruby is a premium ruby port approved by the ivdp 's tasting panel , the câmara de provadores . in 2002 the ivdp prohibited the use of the term '' vintage character '' , as reserve ruby port had neither a single vintage ( usually being a blend of several vintages of ruby ) nor the typical character of vintage port . . rose . rose port is a very recent variation on the market , first released in 2008 by poças and by croft , part of the taylor , fladgate , & yeatman . it is technically a ruby port , but fermented in a similar manner to a rosé wine , with a limited exposure to the grape skins , thus creating the rose color . tawny . tawny ports are wines usually made from red grapes that are aged in wooden barrels exposing them to gradual oxidation and evaporation . as a result of this oxidation , they mellow to a golden-brown color . the exposure to oxygen imparts '' nutty '' flavours to the wine , which is blended to match the house style . they are sweet or medium dry and typically consumed as a dessert wine , but can also pair with a main course . porter , darwin & danforth price ( 2000 ) frommer 's portugal 16th ed . , p . 492 when a port is described as tawny , without an indication of age , it is a basic blend of wood-aged port that has spent time in wooden barrels , typically at least three years . reserve tawny port ( produced by borges , calem , croft , cruz , graham , kopke and other houses ) has been aged about seven years . above this are tawnies with an indication of age , which represent a blend of several vintages . the target age profile , in years in wood , is stated on the label , usually 10 , 20 , 30 or 40 years . these ports are produced by most houses . it is also possible to produce an aged white port in this manner , with some shippers now marketing aged white ports . note : in some places , such as canada , tawny may also be used to describe any port-style wine that is not produced in portugal as per agreement with eu . . colheita . a colheita port is a single-vintage tawny port aged for at least seven years , with the vintage year on the bottle instead of a category of age ( 10 , 20 , etc . ) . colheita port should not be confused with vintage port : a vintage port will spend only about 18 months in barrels after harvest and will continue to mature in bottle , but a colheita may have spent 20 or more years in wooden barrels before being bottled and sold . white colheitas have also been produced . garrafeira . unusual and rare , vintage-dated garrafeira combines the oxidative maturation of years in wood with further reductive maturation in large glass demijohns . it is required by the ivdp that wines spend some time in wood , usually between three and six years , followed by at least a further eight years in glass , before bottling . in practice the times spent in glass are much longer . the style is most closely associated with the company niepoort , although others do exist . their dark green demijohns , affectionately known as bon-bons , hold approximately each . some connoisseurs describe garrafeira as having a slight taste of bacon , although many people will neither notice nor understand such a description ; the reason being that , during the second phase of maturation , certain oils may precipitate , causing a film to form across the surface of the glass that can be tasted by those who are accustomed to the difference between garrafeira and other forms of port . confusingly , the word garrafeira may also be found on some very old tawny labels , where the contents of the bottle are of exceptional age . white port . white port is made from white grapes , such as malvasia fina , donzelinho , gouveio , codega and rabigato , and can be made in a wide variety of styles , although until recently few shippers have produced anything other than a standard product . ordinary white ports make an excellent basis for a cocktail while those of greater age are best served chilled on their own . sweet white port and tonic water is a commonly consumed drink in the porto region . there is a range of styles of white port , from dry to very sweet . taylor 's introduced chip dry , a new style of white apéritif port , in 1934 . made from traditional white grape varieties , it is fermented for longer than usual to give it a crisp dry finish . lagrima , meaning '' tears '' , is the name for the sweetest style of white port . in addition to this type of wine , there is the white port colheita , which is obtained from a single harvest and ages in huge tanks acquiring a straw color , has mature and elegant aromas and flavours , featuring fruity and wooden notes , and the white port with an indication of age , which is an elegant , full-bodied and rich port , obtained from the blend of different wines with the same average age . when white ports are matured in wood for long periods , the color darkens , eventually reaching a point where it can be hard to discern ( from appearance alone ) whether the original wine was red or white . late bottled vintage ( lbv ) . late bottled vintage ( often referred to simply as lbv ) was originally wine that had been destined for bottling as vintage port , but because of lack of demand was left in the barrel for longer than had been planned . over time it has become two distinct styles of wine , both of them bottled between four and six years after the vintage , but one style is fined and filtered before bottling , while the other is not . the accidental origin of late bottled vintage has led to more than one company claiming its invention . the earliest known reference to a style of port with this name in a merchant 's list is to be found in the wine society 's catalogue from 1964 , which includes fonseca 's quinta milieu 1958 , bottled in the uk , also in 1964 . by the 1962 vintage , lbv was being produced in portugal and bottled as lbv . lbv is intended to provide some of the experience of drinking a vintage port but without the need for lengthy bottle ageing . to a limited extent it succeeds , as the extra years of oxidative ageing in barrel does mature the wine more quickly . unfiltered . unfiltered lbvs are mostly bottled with conventional driven corks and need to be decanted . after decanting they should be consumed within a few days . recent bottlings are identified by the label '' unfiltered '' , or '' bottle matured '' , or both . since the 2002 regulations , bottles that carry the words '' bottle matured '' must have enjoyed at least three years of bottle maturation before release . before 2002 this style was often marketed as ' '' traditional '' , a description that is no longer permitted . unfiltered lbv will usually be improved by extra years in the bottle . it can age as long as vintage ports and are very difficult to identify as lbvs when inserted into blind tastings of vintage ports . filtered . the filtered wine has the advantage of being ready to drink without decanter and is usually bottled in a stoppered bottle that can be easily resealed . however , many wine experts feel that this convenience comes at a price and believe that the filtration process strips out much of the character of the wine . typically ready to drink when released , filtered lbv ports tend to be lighter bodied than a vintage port . filtered lbvs can improve with age , but only to a limited degree . crusted . crusted port is usually a blend of several vintages . unlike vintage port , which has to be sourced from grapes from a single vintage , crusted port affords the port blender the opportunity to make best use of the varying characteristics of different vintages . crusted port is bottled unfiltered , and sealed with a driven cork . like vintage port it needs to be decanted before drinking . . vintage port . vintage ports may be aged in barrels or stainless steel for a maximum of two and a half years before bottling , and generally require another 10 to 40 years of aging in the bottle before reaching what is considered a proper drinking age . since they are potentially aged in cask for only a short time , they retain their dark ruby color and fresh fruit flavours . particularly fine vintage ports can continue to gain complexity for many decades after they were bottled . it is not uncommon for 19th-century bottles to still be in perfect condition for consumption . the oldest known vintage port still available from a shipper is the 1815 ferreira . a tasting in 1990 described it as having an '' intensely spicy aroma – cinnamon , pepper and ginger – hints of exotic woods , iodine and wax . '' vintage port is made entirely from the grapes of a declared vintage year . while it is by far the most renowned type of port , from a volume and revenue standpoint , vintage port accounts for only about two percent of overall port production . not every year is declared a vintage in the douro . the decision on whether to declare a vintage is made early in the second year following the harvest . the decision to declare a vintage is made by each individual port house , often referred to as a '' shipper . '' much of the complex character of aged vintage port comes from the continued slow decomposition of grape solids in each bottle . these solids are undesirable when port is consumed , and thus vintage port typically requires a period of settling before decanting and pouring . single quinta vintage port . single quinta vintage ports are wines that originate from a single estate , unlike the standard bottlings of the port wine houses which can be sourced from a number of quintas . single quinta bottlings are used in two ways by producers . most of the large port wine houses have a single quinta bottling which is only produced in some years when the regular vintage port of the house is not declared . in those years , wine from their best quinta is still bottled under a vintage designation , rather than being used for simpler port qualities . . vintages . the term vintage has a distinct meaning in the context of vintage port . while a vintage is simply the year in which a wine is made , most producers of vintage port restrict their production of year-labelled bottlings to only the best years , a few per decade . contrast with second wines , where ( primarily ) bordeaux producers release a year-labelled top wine almost every year , but also lesser quality wines in some years . if a port house decides that its wine is of quality sufficient for a vintage , samples are sent to the ivdp for approval and the house declares the vintage . in very good years , almost all the port houses will declare their wines . in intermediate years , the producers of blended vintage ports will not declare their flagship port , but may declare the vintage of a single quinta , e.g . , the 1996 dow 's quinta do bomfim and taylor 's quinta de vargellas . some houses declare their wines in all but the worst years : quinta do vesuvio has declared a vintage every year with the exceptions of 1993 , 2002 and 2014 . improved wine-making technologies and better weather forecasts during the harvest have increased the number of years in which a vintage can be declared . although there have been years when only one or two wines have been declared , it has been over thirty years since there was a year with no declarations at all . 2016 was declared a vintage year by most producers , as was 2011 . the quality of the grape harvest was attributed to ideal rainfall and temperature . other recent widely declared vintage years were 2007 , 2003 , 2000 , 1997 and 1994 . . history and tradition . the wine-producing douro region is the third oldest protected appellation in the world after the tokaj-hegyalja region in hungary , established in 1730 , and chianti , in 1716 . in 1756 , during the rule of the marquis of pombal , the companhia geral da agricultura das vinhas do alto douro ( c.g.a.v.a.d . , also known as the general company of viticulture of the upper douro or douro wine company ) , was founded to guarantee the quality of the product and fair pricing to the end consumer . the c.g.a.v.a.d . was also in charge of regulating which port wine would be for export or internal consumption and managing the protected geographic indication . j . robinson ( ed ) '' the oxford companion to wine '' third edition pp . 536–540 oxford university press 2006 port became very popular in england after the methuen treaty of 1703 , when merchants were permitted to import it at a low duty , while war with france deprived english wine drinkers of french wine . british importers could be credited for recognising that a smooth , already fortified wine that would appeal to english palates would survive the trip to london . in 1678 , a liverpool wine merchant sent two new representatives to viana do castelo , north of oporto , to learn the wine trade . while on a vacation in the douro , the two gentlemen visited the abbot of lamego , who treated them to a '' very agreeable , sweetish and extremely smooth '' wine , '' which had been fortified with a distilled spirit . the two englishmen were so pleased with the product that they purchased the abbot 's entire lot and shipped it home . tom stevenson '' the sotheby 's wine encyclopedia '' the fourth edition p . 334 dk publishing 2007 the continued british involvement in the port trade can be seen in the names of many port shippers and brands : broadbent , cockburn , croft , dow , gould campbell , graham , osborne , offley , sandeman , taylor , and warre being amongst the best known . shippers of dutch and german origin are also prominent , such as niepoort and burmester . the british involvement grew so strong that they formed a trade association that became a factory house . a few port shippers and producers were also established by native portuguese families : ferreira and quinta do crasto are among the best . both ferreira and quinta do crasto can be credited for pioneering the douro as a table-wine-producing region , ferreira making barca velha since 1952 and quinta do crasto becoming the second producer of note , starting in the early 1990s . storing and serving . port , like other wine , should be stored in a cool but not cold , dark location ( as light can damage the port ) , at a steady temperature ( such as a cellar ) , with the bottle laid on its side if it has a cork , or standing up if it is stoppered . portwine.com – storing ( accessed 27 december 2007 ) with the exception of white port , which can be served chilled , port should be served at between . tawny port may also be served slightly cooler . portwine.com – enjoying ( accessed 27 december 2007 ) port wines that are unfiltered ( such as vintage ports , crusted ports and some lbvs ) form a sediment ( or crust ) in the bottle and require decanter . this process also allows the port to breathe . ukwinesonline – decanting port info ( accessed 3 july 2008 ) once opened , port generally lasts longer than unfortified wine , but it is still best consumed within a short period of time . tawny , ruby , and lbv ports may keep for several months once opened ; because they are aged longer in barrels , these ports have already been exposed to some degree of oxidation . old vintage ports are best consumed within several days of opening , but young vintage ports can be kept open for several weeks , if not months when very young . words about port ( accessed 2 april 2010 ) tradition in the united kingdom calls for port being served at a formal dinner to be passed to the left ( '' pass the port to port '' ) and for the bottle or decanter not to touch the table on its way around , telegraph – why pass to the left ? ( accessed 27 september 2010 ) though some cultures reject this tradition . vintage port – which way to pass ? ( accessed 27 september 2010 ) if a diner fails to pass the port , others at the table may ask '' do you know the bishop of norwich ? '' the bishop of norwich ( accessed 7 august 2014 ) - the question acts as a reminder to pass the port , for those who know the story , and an opportunity to tell the story to those who have not heard it . instituto dos vinhos do douro e do porto . the port and douro wines institute is an official body belonging to the ministry of agriculture of portugal and is a key institution in promoting the industry and knowledge of making port wine . it was previously known as the instituto do vinho do porto . the port and douro wines institute ( accessed 25 september 2010 ) . port houses . producers of port wine are often called '' shippers '' . in the early history of the port wine trade , many of the most powerful shipping families were british ( english and scottish ) and irish ; this history can still be seen in the names of many of the most famous port wines . over the years portuguese , as well as dutch and german owned shippers have also become prevalent in the port industry . porto , a world heritage site , is home to many famous port houses located near the douro river , making the shipping of port wine easy . some of these port houses are private , while others are open to public tours and visits . . as a historical remedy for illness . port has been used in the past as a healing agent in earlier remedies . the british prime minister pitt the younger was given port for gout as a boy . he began at the age of 14 ( 1773 ) with a bottle a day according to j . ehrman ( 1969 ) : '' the younger pitt '' . j . ehrman ( 1969 ) , '' the younger pitt '' heavy alcohol consumption is known to exacerbate gout . a recurring theme in the novels of anthony trollope is the partiality of respectable elderly ladies for port , which they excuse on the grounds that it is '' medicinal '' . chemistry . aged port wine contains a family of bluish phenolic pigments called portosins ( vinylpyranoanthocyanins ) and oxovitisin a , an oxovitisin , a type of pyranoanthocyanin with a 2-pyrone component . . see also . list of portuguese wine regions sherry madeira wine portello , a non-alcoholic soft drink based on the flavour of the wine . port wine cheese , a cheese made with the wine . references . external links . instituto dos vinhos do douro e porto port and douro wines institute official site , portuguese ministry of agriculture