Ferdinand Waldo Demara

early life and adulthood . demara , known locally as 'fred ' , was born in lawrence , massachusetts , in 1921 , at 40 texas avenue in the lower southwest tower hill neighborhood . his father , ferdinand waldo demara sr . , was born in rhode island and worked in lawrence 's old theatre district as a motion picture operator . demara sr . was financially well-off , and the family lived on jackson st . in lawrence , an upper-class neighborhood . demara sr . 's brother napoleon demara sr . owned many of the theatres in lawrence , in which demara sr . was an active union member . early in the great depression , fred 's father became financially insolvent , forcing the family to move from the tower hill neighborhood to the poorer section in the city . during this financially troubled time , demara jr . ran away from home at age 16 to join the cistercian monks in rhode island , where he stayed for several years . he joined the united states army in 1941 . impersonations . the following year , demara began his new lives by borrowing the name of anthony ignolia , an army buddy , and going awol . after two more attempts in monasteries , he joined the navy where he trained as a hospital corpsman . he did not reach the position he wanted , faked his suicide and borrowed another name , robert linton french , and became a religion-oriented psychologist , who taught psychology at gannon college ( now a university ) in erie , pennsylvania . afterwards , demara served as an orderly in a los angeles sanitarium , and served as an instructor in st . martin 's college ( now a university ) in the state of washington . the fbi captured him , and he served 18 months at the naval disciplinary barracks , san pedro , california , for desertion . after his release he assumed a fake identity and studied law at night at northeastern university , then joined the brothers of christian instruction in maine , a roman catholic order . while at the brothers of christian instruction , he became acquainted with a young canadian doctor named joseph c . cyr . that led to his most famous exploit , in which he masqueraded as cyr , working as a trauma surgeon aboard hmcs cayuga , a royal canadian navy destroyer , during the korean war . he managed to improvise successful major surgeries and fend off infection with generous amounts of penicillin . his most notable surgical practices were performed on some sixteen korean combat casualties who were loaded onto the cayuga . all eyes turned to demara , the only '' surgeon '' on board , as it became obvious that several of the casualties would require major surgery or certainly die . after ordering personnel to transport these variously injured patients into the ship 's operating room and prep them for surgery , demara disappeared to his room with a textbook on general surgery and proceeded to speed-read the various surgeries he was now forced to perform , including major chest surgery . none of the casualties died as a result of demara 's surgeries . apparently , the removal of a bullet from a wounded man ended up in canadian newspapers . one person reading the reports was the mother of the real joseph cyr ; her son at the time of '' his '' service in korea was actually practicing medicine in grand falls , new brunswick . when news of the impostor reached the cayuga , still on duty off korea , captain james plomer at first refused to believe demara was not a doctor ( and not joseph cyr ) . however , faced with the embarrassment of having allowed an impostor into the navy 's ranks , canadian officials chose not to press charges . instead , demara was quietly dismissed from the royal canadian navy and forced to return to the united states . the mash episode '' dear dad . again '' included a one time character captain adam casey , likely inspired by demara 's exploits , who performs several surgeries , but turns out not to be a real doctor . philosophy behind demara 's impersonations . demara told his biographer he was successful in his roles because he was able to fit into positions which no one else had previously occupied . demara explained it in the following excerpt from his biography : demara referred to it as 'expanding into the power vacuum , ' and described as such ; 'if you come into a new situation ( there 's a nice word for it ) do n't join some other professor 's committee and try to make your mark by moving up in that committee . you 'll , one , have a long haul and two , make an enemy . ' demara 's technique was to find his own committee . 'that way there 's no competition , no past standards to measure you by . how can anyone tell you are n't running a top outfit ? and then there 's no past laws or rules or precedents to hold you down or limit you . make your own rules and interpretations . nothing like it . remember it , expand into the power vacuum ! ' . founded a college . during demara 's impersonation as brother john payne of the christian brothers of instruction ( also known as brothers of christian instruction ) , demara decided to make the religious teaching order more prominent by founding a college in alfred , maine . demara proceeded on his own , and actually got the college chartered by the state . he then promptly left the religious order in 1951 , when the christian brothers of instruction offended him by not naming him as rector or chancellor of the new college and chose what demara considered a terrible name for the college . the college demara founded , lamennais college in alfred , maine , began in 1951 ( when demara left ) ; in 1959 it moved to canton , ohio , and in 1960 , became walsh college ( now walsh university ) . . minor fame . after this episode , he sold his tale to life and worked in short-term jobs , since he had become widely known . only after he returned to his old tricks and possessed fake credentials could he get another job at a prison in huntsville , texas . according to his biographer , demara 's past became known and his position untenable when an inmate found a copy of life with an article about the impostor . on november 5 , 1959 , demara appeared on the surrealistic game show hosted by ernie kovacs , take a good look . the object was for one of the three celebrity panelists to guess his identity . one week later on november 12 , 1959 , he appeared on an episode of the tv quiz show you bet your life , with groucho marx . demara recounted his exploits , and said the 1,000 he earned on the program was going to be donated to the 'feed and clothe fred demara fund' . demara continued to use new aliases but , as a result of his self-generated publicity , it became much harder to accomplish impersonations than before . in 1960 , as a publicity stunt , demara was given a small acting role in the horror film the hypnotic eye . he appears briefly in the film as a ( genuine ) hospital surgeon . by this point , demara 's girth was so notable that he could not avoid attracting attention . demara had already been considerably overweight during his impersonation of joseph c . cyr . later life . in the early 1960s demara worked as a counselor at the union rescue mission in downtown los angeles . in 1967 demara received a graduate certificate from multnomah school of the bible in portland , oregon . his first ministerial assignment was a pastor of the cherry grove baptist church in gaston , oregon . he was very well liked but soon plagued with rumors about his old life , causing him to resign the position . many parishioners felt this was yet another con , though many others felt he was taking the position seriously and had legitimate credentials . demara had various friendships with a wide variety of notable people during his life , including a close relationship with actor steve mcqueen , to whom demara delivered last rites in november 1980 . when demara 's past exploits and infamy were discovered in the late 1970s , he was almost dismissed from the good samaritan hospital of orange county in anaheim , california , where he worked as a visiting chaplain . chief of staff philip s . cifarelli , who had developed a close personal friendship with demara , personally vouched for him and demara was allowed to remain as chaplain . demara was a very active and appreciated minister , serving a variety of patients in the hospital . few of those with whom he interacted at the hospital knew of his colorful past . due to limited financial resources and his friendships with cifarelli and jerry nilsson , one of the major owners of the hospital , demara was allowed to live in the hospital until his death , even after illness forced him to stop working for them in 1980 . demara died on june 7 , 1982 , at the age of 60 due to heart failure and complications from his diabetic condition , which had required both of his legs to be amputated . according to his obituary in the new york times , he had been living in orange county , california , for eight years . he died at nilsson 's home in anaheim , california . in media . demara 's story was recounted in the 1960 book , the great impostor , written by robert crichton and published by random house ; the book was a new york times bestseller and adapted into a 1961 film by the same name starring tony curtis as demara . a second book by crichton , the rascal and the road , recounted demara and crichton 's experiences together as crichton conducted research for the great impostor . music . the band recorded a song , '' ferdinand the imposter '' , released on a 2005 reissue of the basement tapes . the fleetwoods recorded a song , '' ( he 's ) the great imposter '' , which was inspired by demara 's story . , p . 245 . books . . films/tv . the great impostor ( 1960 ) is a feature film of a fictionalised version of demara 's life , starring tony curtis as demara . in '' dear dad again '' , a 1973 episode of the tv series m a s h , hawkeye exposes a fraudulent surgeon ; the plot was inspired by demara . the protagonist of the tv series the pretender , jarod , is inspired by ( but not based on ) demara . in the animated series one piece , a character named demaro black impersonated the main character , referring to demara 's impersonations . notes . external links . obituary , the new york times article on demara ( archived ) at cfb esquimalt naval and military museum hmcs cayuga history page recollection of demara as dr . joseph cyr by retired commander peter g . chance in his book