Jodrell Bank Observatory

early years . thumb jodrell bank was first used for academic purposes in 1939 when the university of manchester 's department of botany purchased three fields from the leighs . it is named from a nearby rise in the ground , jodrell bank , which was named after william jauderell , whose descendants lived at the mansion that is now terra nova school . the site was extended in 1952 by the purchase of a farm from george massey on which the lovell telescope was built . lovell , the story of jodrell bank the site was first used for astrophysics in 1945 , when bernard lovell used some equipment left over from world war ii , including a gun laying radar , to investigate cosmic rays . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 2 the equipment was a gl ii radar system working at a wavelength of 4.2 & nbsp ; m , provided by j . s . hey . astronomer by chance , p . 110 gunn , 2005 he intended to use the equipment in manchester , but electrical interference from the trams on oxford road prevented him from doing so . he moved the equipment to jodrell bank , south of the city , on 10 december 1945 . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 3 lovell 's main research was transient radio echoes , which he confirmed were from ionized meteor trails by october 1946 . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 9 the first staff were alf dean and frank foden who observed meteors observed with the naked eye while lovell observed the electromagnetic signal using equipment . the first time lovell turned the radar on – 14 december 1945 – the geminids meteor shower was at a maximum . over the next few years , lovell accumulated more ex-military radio hardware , including a portable cabin , known as a '' park royal '' in the military ( see park royal vehicles ) . the first permanent building was near to the cabin and was named after it . jodrell bank is primarily used for investigating radio waves from the planets and stars . searchlight telescope . a searchlight was loaned to jodrell bank in 1946 by the army ; lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 10 a broadside array was constructed on its mount by j . clegg . it consisted of a number of yagi antennas . astronomer by chance , p . 129 it was used for astronomical observations in october 1946 . astronomer by chance , p . 128 on 9 and 10 october 1946 , the telescope observed ionisation in the atmosphere caused by meteors in the giacobinids meteor shower . when the antenna was turned by 90 degrees at the maximum of the shower , the number of detections dropped to the background level , proving that the transient signals detected by radar were from meteors . the telescope was then used to determine the radiant points for meteors . this was possible as the echo rate is at a minimum at the radiant point , and a maximum at 90 degrees to it . the telescope and other receivers on the site , studied auroral streamers that were visible in early august 1947 . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 15 astronomer by chance , p . 186 . transit telescope . the transit telescope was a parabolic reflector zenith telescope built in 1947 . at the time , it was the world 's largest radio telescope . it consisted of a wire mesh suspended from a ring of scaffolding , which focussed radio signals on a focal point above the ground . the telescope mainly looked directly upwards , but the direction of the beam could be changed by small amounts by tilting the mast to change the position of the focal point . the focal mast was changed from timber to steel before construction was complete . the telescope was replaced by the steerable lovell telescope and the mark ii telescope was subsequently built at the same location . the telescope could map a ± 15-degree strip around the zenith at 72 and 160 & nbsp ; mhz , with a resolution at 160 & nbsp ; mhz of 1 degree . ( the proposal document for the lovell telescope ) . pp . 4–5 it discovered radio noise from the great nebula in andromeda—the first definite detection of an extragalactic radio source—and the remains of tycho 's supernova in the radio frequency ; at the time it had not been discovered by optical astronomy . . lovell telescope . image : lovell telescope 1.jpg thumb upright the lovell telescope the '' mark i '' telescope , now known as the lovell telescope , was the world 's largest steerable dish radio telescope , in diameter , when it was constructed in 1957 ; it is now the third largest , after the green bank telescope in west virginia and the effelsberg telescope in germany . part of the gun turret mechanisms from the battleships and were reused in the telescope 's motor system . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 29 the telescope became operational in mid-1957 , in time for the launch of the soviet union 's sputnik 1 , the world 's first artificial satellite . the telescope was the only one able to track sputnik 's booster rocket by radar ; first locating it just before midnight on 12 october 1957 , eight days after its launch . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 196 lovell , astronomer by chance , p . 262 in the following years , the telescope tracked various space probes . between 11 march and 12 june 1960 , it tracked the united states ' nasa-launched pioneer 5 probe . the telescope sent commands to the probe , including those to separate it from its carrier rocket and turn on its more powerful transmitter when the probe was eight million miles away . it received data from the probe , the only telescope in the world capable of doing so . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . xii , pp . 239–244 lovell , astronomer by chance , p . 272 in february 1966 , jodrell bank was asked by the soviet union to track its unmanned moon lander luna 9 and recorded on its fax transmission of photographs from the moon 's surface . the photographs were sent to the british press and published before the soviets made them public . lovell , the story of jodrell bank , p . 250 in 1969 , the soviet union 's luna 15 was also tracked . a recording of the moment when jodrell bank 's scientists observed the mission was released on 3 july 2009 . , includes link to recording with lovell with the support of sir bernard lovell , the telescope tracked russian satellites . satellite and space probe observations were shared with the us department of defense satellite tracking research and development activity at project space track . tracking space probes only took a fraction of the lovell telescope 's observing time and the remainder used for scientific observations including using radar to measure the distance to the moon and to venus ; lovell , out of the zenith , pp . 197–198 lovell , astronomer by chance , pp . 277–280 observations of astrophysical masers around star formation and giant stars ; observations of pulsars ( including the discovery of millisecond pulsars and the first pulsar in a globular cluster ) ; observations of quasars and gravitational lenses ( including the detection of the first gravitational lens lovell , astronomer by chance , pp . 297–301 and the first einstein ring ) . the telescope has been used for seti observations . . mark ii and iii telescopes . image : jodrell bank mark ii.jpg thumb the mark ii radio telescope the mark ii is an elliptical radio telescope , with a major axis and a minor axis of . it was constructed in 1964 . as well as operating as a standalone telescope , it has been used as an interferometer with the lovell telescope , and is now primarily used as part of the merlin project . the mark iii telescope , the same size as the mark ii , was constructed to be transportable palmer and rowson ( 1968 ) but it was never moved from wardle , near nantwich , where it was used as part of merlin . it was built in 1966 and decommissioned in 1996 . . mark iv , v and va telescope proposals . thumb the mark iv , v and va telescope proposals were put forward in the 1960s through to the 1980s to build even larger radio telescopes . the mark iv proposal was for a diameter standalone telescope , built as a national project . the mark v proposal was for a moveable telescope . the concept of this proposal was for a telescope on a railway line adjoining jodrell bank , but concerns about future levels of interference meant that a site in wales would have been preferable . design proposals by husband and co and freeman fox , who had designed the parkes observatory telescope were put forward . the mark va was similar to the mark v but with a smaller dish of and a design using prestressed concrete , similar to the mark ii ( the previous two designs more closely resembled the lovell telescope ) . lovell , jodrell bank telescopes none of the proposed telescopes was constructed , although design studies were carried out and scale models were made , partly because of the changing political climate , partly to the financial constraints of astronomical research in the uk and it became necessary to upgrade the lovell telescope to the mark ia , which overran in terms of cost . . other single dishes . a 50 & nbsp ; ft ( 15 & nbsp ; m ) alt-azimuth dish was constructed in 1964 for astronomical research and to track the zond 1 , zond 2 , ranger 6 and ranger 7 space probes and apollo 11 . after an accident that irreparably damaged the 50 & nbsp ; ft telescope 's surface , it was demolished in 1982 and replaced with a more accurate telescope , the '' 42 & nbsp ; ft '' . the 42 & nbsp ; ft ( 12.8 & nbsp ; m ) dish is mainly used to observe pulsars , and continually monitors the crab pulsar . when the 42 & nbsp ; ft was installed , a smaller dish , the '' 7 & nbsp ; m '' ( actually 6.4 m , or 21 & nbsp ; ft , in diameter ) was installed and is used for undergraduate teaching . the 42 & nbsp ; ft and 7 & nbsp ; m telescopes were originally used at the woomera rocket testing range in australia . the 7 & nbsp ; m was originally constructed in 1970 by marconi company . a polar axis telescope was built in 1962 . it had a circular 50 & nbsp ; ft ( 15.2 & nbsp ; m ) dish on a polar mount , lovell , jodrell bank telescopes , p . 232 and was mostly used for moon radar experiments . it has been decommissioned . an reflecting optical telescope was donated to the observatory in 1951 pullan , a history of the university of manchester 1951–73 , p . 37 but was not used much , and was donated to the salford astronomical society around 1971 . . merlin . the multi-element radio linked interferometer network ( merlin ) is an array of radio telescopes spread across england and the welsh borders . the array is run from jodrell bank on behalf of the science and technology facilities council as a national facility . the array consists of up to seven radio telescopes and includes the lovell telescope , the mark ii , cambridge , defford , knockin , darnhall , and pickmere ( previously known as tabley ) . the longest baseline is and merlin can operate at frequency between 151 mhz and 24 ghz . at a wavelength of 6 & nbsp ; cm ( 5 & nbsp ; ghz frequency ) , merlin has a resolution of 50 & nbsp ; milliarcseconds which is comparable to that of the hst at optical wavelengths . . very long baseline interferometry . jodrell bank has been involved with very long baseline interferometry ( vlbi ) since the late 1960s ; the lovell telescope took part in the first transatlantic interferometer experiment in 1968 , with other telescopes at algonquin and penticton in canada . lovell , out of the zenith , pp . 67–68 the lovell telescope and the mark ii telescopes are regularly used for vlbi with telescopes across europe ( the european vlbi network ) , giving a resolution of around 0.001 arcseconds . . square kilometre array . in april 2011 , jodrell bank was named as the location of the control centre for the planned square kilometre array , or ska project office ( spo ) . the ska is planned by a collaboration of 20 countries and when completed , is intended to be the most powerful radio telescope ever built . in april 2015 it was announced that jodrell bank would be the permanent home of the ska headquarters for the period of operation expected for the telescope ( over 50 years ) . research . the jodrell bank centre for astrophysics , of which the observatory is a part , is one of the largest astrophysics research groups in the uk . about half of the research of the group is in the area of radio astronomy—including research into pulsars , the cosmic microwave background radiation , gravitational lenses , active galaxy and astrophysical masers . the group also carries out research at different wavelengths , looking into star formation and evolution , planetary nebula and astrochemistry . the first director of jodrell bank was bernard lovell , who established the observatory in 1945 . he was succeeded in 1980 by francis graham-smith , followed by rod davies around 1990 and andrew lyne in 1999 . phil diamond took over the role on 1 october 2006 , at the time when the jodrell bank centre for astrophysics was formed . prof ralph spencer was acting director during 2009 and 2010 . in october 2010 , prof . albert zijlstra became director of the jodrell bank centre for astrophysics . professor lucio piccirillo was the director of the observatory from oct 2010 to oct 2011 . prof . simon garrington is the jbca associate director for the jodrell bank observatory . in 2016 , prof . michael garrett was appointed as the inaugural sir bernard lovell chair of astrophysics and director of jodrell bank centre for astrophysics . as director jbca , prof . garrett also has overall responsibility for jodrell bank observatory . in may 2017 jodrell bank entered into a partnership with the breakthrough listen initiative and will share information with jodrell bank 's team , who wish to conduct an independent seti search via its 76-m radio telescope and e-merlin array . there is an active development programme researching and constructing telescope receivers and instrumentation . the observatory has been involved in the construction of several cosmic microwave background experiments , including the tenerife experiment , which ran from the 1980s to 2000 , and the amplifiers and cryostats for the very small array . it has also constructed the front-end modules of the 30 and 44 & nbsp ; ghz receivers for the planck spacecraft . receivers were also designed at jodrell bank for the parkes telescope in australia . . visitor facilities , and events . thumb a visitors ' centre opened on 19 april 1971 by the duke of devonshire , lovell , out of the zenith attracted around 120,000 visitors per year . it covered the history of jodrell bank and had a planetarium and 3d theatre hosting simulated trips to mars . asbestos in the visitors ' centre buildings led to its demolition in 2003 leaving a remnant of its far end . a marquee was set up in its grounds while a new science centre was planned . the plans were shelved when victoria university of manchester and umist merged to become the university of manchester in 2004 , leaving the interim centre , which received around 70,000 visitors a year . in october 2010 , work on a new visitor centre started and the jodrell bank discovery centre opened on 11 april 2011 . it includes an entrance building , the planet pavilion , a space pavilion for exhibitions and events , a glass-walled cafe with a view of the lovell telescope and an outdoor dining area , an education space , and landscaped gardens including the galaxy maze . a large orrery was installed in 2013 . it does not , however , include a planetarium , though a small inflatable planetarium dome has been in use on the site in recent years . the visitor centre is open to daily and organises public outreach events , including public lectures , star parties , and '' ask an astronomer '' sessions . a path around the lovell telescope is approximately 20 & nbsp ; m from the telescope 's outer railway , information boards explain how the telescope works and the research that is done with it . the arboretum , created in 1972 , houses the uk 's national collections of crab apple malus and sorbus sorbus species , and the heather society 's calluna collection . the arboretum also has a small scale model of the solar system , the scale is approximately 1:5,000,000,000 . at jodrell bank , as part of the spacedout project , is the sun in a 1:15,000,000 scale model of the solar system covering britain . on 7 july 2010 , it was announced that the observatory was being considered for the 2011 united kingdom tentative list for world heritage site status . it was announced on 22 march 2011 that it was on the uk government 's shortlist . in january 2018 , it became the uk 's candidate for world heritage status . in july 2011 the visitor centre and observatory hosted '' jodrell bank live '' – a rock concert with bands including the flaming lips , british sea power , wave machines , ok go and alice gold . on 23 july 2012 , elbow performed live at the observatory and filmed a documentary of the event and the facility which was released as a live cd/dvd of the concert . on 31 august 2013 , jodrell bank hosted a concert performed by the halle orchestra to commemorate what would have been lovell 's 100th birthday . as well as a number of operatic performances during the day , the evening halle performance saw numbers such as themes from star trek , star wars and doctor who among others . the main lovell telescope was rotated to face the onlooking crowd and used as a huge projection screen showing various animated planetary effects . during the interval the 'screen ' was used to show a history of lovell 's work and jodrell bank . there is an astronomy podcast from the observatory , named the jodcast . the bbc television programme stargazing live is hosted in the control room of the observatory . the programme has had four series , in january 2011 , 2012 , 2013 and 2014 . since 2016 , the observatory hosted bluedot , a music and science festival , featuring musical acts such as public service broadcasting , the chemical brothers , as well as talks by scientists and scientific communicators such as jim al-khalili and richard dawkins . threat of closure . on 3 march 2008 , it was reported that britain 's science and technology facilities council ( stfc ) , faced with an £80 million shortfall in its budget , was considering withdrawing its planned £2.7 million annual funding of jodrell bank 's e-merlin project . the project , which aimed to replace the microwave links between jodrell bank and a number of other radio telescopes with high-bandwidth fibre-optic cables , greatly increasing the sensitivity of observations , was seen as critical to the survival of the facility . bernard lovell said '' it will be a disaster … the fate of the jodrell bank telescope is bound up with the fate of e-merlin . i do n't think the establishment can survive if the e-merlin funding is cut '' . on 9 july 2008 , it was reported that , following an independent review , stfc had reversed its initial position and would now guarantee funding of £2.5 million annually for three years . . fictional references . jodrell bank has been mentioned in several works of fiction , including doctor who ( the tenth planet , remembrance of the daleks , '' the poison sky '' , '' the eleventh hour '' , '' spyfall '' ) and '' birthday boy '' by david baddiel . it was intended to be a filming location for logopolis ( tom baker 's final doctor who serial ) but budget restrictions prevented this and another location with a superimposed model of a radio telescope was used instead . it was also mentioned in the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy adams , hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy , p . 30–31 ( as well as the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy film ) , the creeping terror and meteor . jodrell bank was also featured heavily in the 1983 music video secret messages by electric light orchestra and also are we ourselves by the fixx . the prefab sprout song technique ( from debut album swoon ) opens with the line '' her husband works at jodrell bank/he 's home late in the morning '' . the observatory is the site of several episodes in the novel boneland , by alan garner ( 2012 ) , and the central character , colin whisterfield , is an astrophysicist on its staff . appraisal . since 13 july 1988 the lovell telescope has been designated as a grade i listed building . on 10 july 2017 the mark ii telescope was also designated at the same grade . on the same date five other buildings on the site were designated at grade ii ; namely the searchlight telescope , the control building , the park royal building , the electrical workshop , and the link hut . grade i is the highest of the three grades of listing , and is applied to buildings that are of '' exceptional interest '' , and grade & nbsp ; ii , the lowest grade , is applied to buildings '' of special interest '' . at the 43rd session of the unesco world heritage committee in baku on 7 july 2019 , the jodrell bank observatory was adopted as a world heritage site on the basis of 4 criteria criterion ( i ) : jodrell bank observatory is a masterpiece of human creative genius related to its scientific and technical achievements . criterion ( ii ) : jodrell bank observatory represents an important interchange of human values over a span of time and on a global scale on developments criterion ( iv ) : jodrell bank observatory represents an outstanding example of a technological ensemble which illustrates a significant stage in human history criterion ( vi ) : jodrell bank observatory is directly and tangibly associated with events and ideas of outstanding universal significance .