Toronto International Film Festival

background . the toronto international film festival was first launched as the toronto festival of festivals , collecting the best films from other film festivals around the world and showing them to eager audiences in toronto . founded by bill marshall , dusty cohl , and henk van der kolk , the inaugural event took place from october 18 through 24 , 1976 . that first year , 35,000 filmgoers watched 127 films from 30 countries presented in ten programmes . piers handling has been the festival 's director and ceo since 1994 , while noah cowan became co-director of tiff in 2004 . in late 2007 , cowan became the artistic director of tiff bell lightbox , while longtime programmer cameron bailey succeeded as co-director . as of 2013 , bailey is now the artistic director of the toronto international film festival , as well as tiff bell lightbox 's year round programming . '' cameron bailey named artistic director of toronto international film festival '' . national post , march 14 , 2012 . tiff was once centred on the yorkville neighbourhood , but the toronto entertainment district later gained a greater level of prominence . tiff is known for the celebrity buzz it brings to the area with international media setting up near its restaurants and stores for photos and interviews with the stars . in 2010 , tiff opened its permanent headquarters , tiff bell lightbox , a year-round home for the appreciation of film in the heart of downtown toronto , although tiff films are still screened at a wider variety of venues , including the scotiabank theatre toronto , rather than exclusively at the lightbox . tiff has grown , steadily adding initiatives throughout the years . tiff cinematheque ( formerly cinematheque ontario ) and the film reference library ( frl ) opened in 1990 . the tiff kids international film festival ( formerly sprockets ) launched in 1998 . film circuit began exhibiting independent and canadian films in under-serviced cities across canada in 1994 . history . the festival was founded in 1976 at the windsor arms hotel by bill marshall , henk van der kolk and dusty cohl . beginning as a collection of the best-regarded films from film festivals around the world , it had an inaugural attendance of 35,000 . ironically , however , hollywood studios withdrew their submissions from tiff due to concerns that toronto audiences would be too parochial for their products . in 1978 , the decision was made to replace the name '' festival of festivals '' with '' toronto international film festival '' as well as a move to a new location for the festival , moving from the harbour castle hotel to the plaza ii , and also a new director , with wayne clark replacing marshall . the number of galas increased from one to two per night and the canadian film awards were incorporated into the festival . from 1994 to 2009 , the umbrella organization running tiff was named '' toronto international film festival group '' ( tiffg ) . in 2009 , the umbrella organization tiffg was renamed to tiff . in 2001 , perspective canada , the programme that had focused on canadian films since 1984 , was replaced by two programmes : canada first ! , a forum for canadian filmmakers presenting their first feature-length work , featuring eight to 15 films , and short cuts canada , which includes 30-40 canadian short films . otherwise , canadian films are now simply included alongside international films in the other film programs rather than being grouped as a dedicated canadian film stream . in 2004 , tiff was featured as the site of murder mystery in the film jiminy glick in lalawood , a comedy film starring martin short . in 2007 , it was announced that the organization generates an estimated annual impact of 67 million cad . by 2011 , that benefit had grown to 170 million cad . in 2008 , rose mcgowan caused controversy at a tiff press conference for her film fifty dead men walking , when she noted that '' i imagine , had i grown up in belfast , i would 100 % have been in the ira '' . in 2009 , tiff 's decision to spotlight films from tel aviv created a controversy with protesters , saying it was part of an attempt to re-brand israel israel set to launch in gta , canadian jewish news , august 21 , 2009 . in a positive light after the january 2009 gaza war . in 2017 , tiff reduced the number of films screened compared to the 2016 festival with 255 feature-length films in 2017 vs about 400 films in 2016 , and also eliminated two venues that had been used in prior years . in 2019 , it was reported that due to a request from its owner , cineplex entertainment , no tiff films distributed by subscription video-on-demand services ( specifically amazon video and netflix ) are being screened at scotiabank theatre—which has been considered the '' primary '' venue of the festival . the 2020 version announced that it would be both in-person and virtual due to the covid-19 pandemic , and that film screening would be '' masks optional '' . it was criticized for creating a potential superspreader event as the social nature of the festival could increase the risk for covid-19 transmission . the festival reversed the decision within 24 hours citing a surge of new cases in ontario . . notable film premieres . films such as american beauty , ray , mr . nobody , 127 hours , black swan , the five obstructions , singapore sling , and i am love have premiered at tiff . jamie foxx 's portrayal of ray charles ultimately won him the academy award for best actor while slumdog millionaire went on to win eight oscars at the 2009 academy awards . precious , which won the 2009 tiff people 's choice award , went on to win two oscars at the 82nd academy awards . the king 's speech , the winner of the 2010 tiff people 's choice award , won four oscars at the 83rd academy awards , while silver linings playbook , the winner of the 2012 tiff people 's choice award , went on to win the academy award for best actress for jennifer lawrence . in 2019 , the festival opened with once were brothers : robbie robertson and the band , the first time the festival ever opened with a canadian documentary film . many hollywood studios premiere their films in toronto due to tiff 's easy-going non-competitive nature , relatively inexpensive costs ( when compared to european festivals ) , eager film-fluent audiences and convenient timing . . tiff bell lightbox . in 2007 , the festival group began construction on tiff bell lightbox , a new facility at the corner of king and john streets in downtown toronto , on land donated by ivan reitman and family . the 181 million facility is named for founding sponsor bell canada , with additional support from the government of ontario and government of canada . in 2010 , the organization opened its new headquarters at tiff bell lightbox . the facility , designed by local firm kpmb architects , provides extensive year-round galleries , cinemas , archives and activities for cinephiles . the five-storey facility contains five cinemas , two gallery spaces , film archives and an extensive reference library , study spaces , film lab facility , and a research centre . there is also a gift shop , two restaurants , a lounge , a cafe , and a three-storey atrium . cooperatively with daniels corporation , there is a 46-storey condominium atop , called the festival tower . the first film screening was bruce mcdonald 's trigger . the first exhibition was a retrospective on tim burton , organized by the museum of modern art ( new york city ) . subsequent exhibitions include fellini : spectacular obsessions , grace kelly : from movie star to princess , designing 007 : 50 years of bond style , and stanley kubrick : the exhibition , all of which were organized by tiff , as well as one called essential cinema , featuring posters , images and props from tiff 's the essential 100 list of films . the film reference library ( frl ) is a large canadian film research collection . the library is a free resource for film lovers , filmmakers , students , scholars , and journalists , and is located on the fourth floor of the tiff bell lightbox . an affiliate member of the international federation of film archives , the frl promotes canadian and global film scholarship by collecting , preserving , and providing access to a comprehensive collection of film prints , and film-related reference resources ( including books , periodicals , scripts , research files , movies , press kits , and about 80 special collections . in 2016 , the festival received a donation of 1,400 film prints , and launched a campaign to raise money for the preservation and storage of the films . '' tiff gains cach of 1,400 film prints '' . toronto star , november 16 , 2016 . page e2 . . canada 's top ten . each year , tiff releases a canada 's top ten list of the films selected by a poll of festival programmers across canada as the ten best canadian feature and short films of the year , regardless of whether or not they were screened at tiff . '' tiff reveals canada ’ s top ten film festival line-up '' . the globe and mail , december 8 , 2015 . the films selected are announced in december each year . previously , the winning films were screened at a smaller follow-up '' canada 's top ten '' festival at the lightbox the following january , with a people 's choice award then presented for that minifestival . in 2018 , tiff announced a change , under which instead of a dedicated festival , each top ten film will receive its own standalone theatrical run at the lightbox throughout the year . '' tiff scraps popular canada 's top ten film festival '' . now , november 7 , 2018 . since 1984 , every decade tiff has also produced a top 10 canadian films of all time list . this list is produced from a wider poll of film industry professionals and academics throughout canada , separately from the annual top-ten list . awards . the festival 's major prize , the people 's choice award , is given to a feature-length film . it is not a juried prize , but is given to the film with the highest ratings as voted by the tiff-going populace . it is presently referred to as the '' grolsch people 's choice award '' ; past sponsors of the award have included cadillac . the winners of this award have often later earned academy award nominations . '' ‘ the imitation game ’ wins top prize at tiff '' . the globe and mail , september 14 , 2014 . people 's choice awards are also presented for documentary and midnight madness films . each of the people 's choice awards names first and second runners-up in addition to the winners . however , tiff does present juried awards in some other categories . the festival presents three major awards for canadian films : best canadian film , best canadian first feature film , and best canadian short film , as well as awards for best international short film , two fipresci-sponsored international critics ' prizes for the special presentation and discovery programs , and a netpac prize for the best film from asia having its world premiere at the festival . in 2015 , the festival introduced platform , a juried programme that champions director 's cinema from around the world ; one film from the stream is selected as the winner of the platform prize . for all of the juried awards , honorable mentions may also be given , although the juries are expected to select one overall winner . for 2019 , tiff announced two new awards , the tiff impact award to honour production companies for work that has had an impact on the film industry , and the mary pickford award to honour an emerging female filmmaker . '' toronto film festival expands tribute gala with new awards '' . variety , june 27 , 2019 . in the same year the festival introduced the tiff tribute awards , a gala ceremony at which distinguished actors and filmmakers are honoured for their lifetime career achievements ; unlike most award categories , the tribute award honorees are named in advance of the festival . michael rosser , '' anthony hopkins , chloe zhao , mira nair to receive tiff tribute awards '' . screen daily , august 12 , 2020 . . sections . the hundreds of films screened at the annual festival are divided into sections ( referred to by tiff as '' programmes '' ) based on genre ( e.g . documentary , children 's films ) , format ( e.g . short films , television episodes ) , the status of filmmaker ( e.g . '' masters '' , first-time directors ) , and so forth . up until the early 2010s there were sections reserved for canadian films , but beginning in 2015 all canadian films are integrated in sections with films from outside canada . currently the festival 's 14 sections are as follows : contemporary world cinema : narrative feature films by established directors discovery : films that are typically the director 's first or second feature film gala presentations : high-profile feature films , often featuring international movie stars , presented with a red carpet in conversation with . : interviews of a director or other figure from the film industry , generally accompanied by brief excerpts from films ( up until the 2014 festival , this section was called '' mavericks '' ) masters : feature films by '' the world 's most influential art-house filmmakers '' midnight madness : film genres ( traditionally at tiff each film in this section has one screening scheduled for 11:59pm and another the following afternoon ) ; the section was launched at tiff in 1988 and was programmed by colin geddes from 1998 to 2016 , now programmed by peter kuplowsky platform : a competitive section launched in 2015 , named for jia zhangke 's film platform , of films from around the world that do not have distribution in north america . every year the platform section has a high-profile international jury which confers a prize of c 25,000 ; both documentaries and narrative films are eligible for inclusion in the section ; prior winners of the platform prize are the canadian documentary hurt ( 2015 ) , the biographical drama jackie ( 2016 ) and sweet country ( 2017 ) . primetime : television episodes making either their world premiere or north american premiere projected cinematically ; this section was launched in 2015 short cuts : a section of short films ( usually six to ten short films included at each screening ) both canadian and international ; up until the 2013 festival only canadian short films were screened and the section was called short cuts canada , in 2014 a new section called short cuts international was added , and then in 2015 they were merged into a section called short cuts special presentations : high-profile feature films , usually canadian premieres if not premiere tiff cinematheque : unlike the other sections which present new films , the tiff cinematheque section has films from all eras of cinema , often classic films that have been newly restored tiff docs ( formerly called reel to reel ) : documentary films tiff kids and tiff next wave ( formerly called sprockets ) : films for children and teenagers ; however , this is not a dedicated program in its own right , but a designation added to youth-suitable films that are already in one of the other programs . wavelengths : experimental films and art films , both feature-length and shorts ( this section was named for michael snow 's film wavelength ) in previous years , sections at tiff have included perspectives canada , canada first ! , city to city ( 2009 to 2016 ) , future projections , vanguard ( up to 2016 ) , and visions ( up to 2011 ) . media coverage . in 2016 , tiff hosted 1,800 members of the press and print media outlets such as the toronto star , the globe and mail , the new york times , the times of india , los angeles times , the philadelphia inquirer , miami herald , and the toronto sun have published a significant amount of festival coverage . also , the major industry trade magazines variety , the hollywood reporter and screen international all produce daily editions during tiff . tiff reports also appear in weekly news magazines ; american , canadian and international entertainment shows ; news services ; and a wide range of film and celebrity blogs . . references . external links .