Shaving

history . image : napoli bw 2013-05-16 16-24-01.jpg thumb left 250px alexander the great 's shaven image on the alexander mosaic , 2nd century bc before the advent of razors , hair was sometimes removed using two shells to pull the hair out or using water and a sharp tool . around 3000 bc when copper tools were developed , copper razors were invented . the idea of an aesthetic approach to personal hygiene may have begun at this time , though egyptian priests may have practiced something similar to this earlier . alexander the great strongly promoted shaving during his reign in the 4th century bc because he believed it looked tidier . in some native american tribes , at the time of contact with british colonists , it was customary for men and women to remove all body hair . straight razors are known to have been manufactured in sheffield , england since the 18th century . in the united states , getting a straight razor shave in a barbershop and self-shaving with a straight razor were still common in the early 1900s . the popularisation of self-shaving changed this . according to an estimate by new york city barber charles de zemler , barbers ' shaving revenue dropped from about 50 percent around the time of the spanish–american war to 10 percent in 1939 due to the invention of the safety razor and electric razor . mckibben , pp . 17–18 safety razors have been known to exist since at least 1876 when the single-edge star safety razor was patented by brothers frederick and otto kampfe . the razor was essentially a small piece of a straight razor attached to a handle using a clamp mechanism . before each shave the blade had to be attached to a special holder , stropped with a leather belt , and placed back into the razor . after a time , the blade needed to be honed by a cutler . mckibben , pp . 5–6 in 1895 , king camp gillette invented the double-edged safety razor , which utilised inexpensive , disposable blades sharpened from two sides . it took him until 1901 to build a working , patentable model , and commercial production began in 1903 . mckibben , pp . 5–14 the razor gained popularity during world war i when the u.s . military started issuing gillette shaving kits to its servicemen : in 1918 , the gillette sold 3.5 million razors and 32 million blades . after the first world war , the company changed the pricing of its razor from a premium 5 to a more affordable 1 , leading to another big surge in popularity . mckibben , pp . 18–21 the world war ii led to a similar increase in users when gillette was ordered to dedicate its entire razor production and most blade production to the u.s . military . during the war , 12.5 million razors and 1.5 billion blades were provided to servicemen . mckibben , p . 40 in 1970 , wilkinson sword introduced the 'bonded blade ' razor , which consisted of a single blade housed in a plastic cartridge . mckibben , p . 68 gillette followed in 1971 with its trac ii cartridge razor that utilised two blades . mckibben , pp . 67–69 gillette built on this twin blade design for a time , introducing new razors with added features such as a pivoting head , mckibben , p . 96 lubricating strip , mckibben , p . 118 and spring-mounted blades mckibben , p . 240 until their 1998 launch of the triple-bladed mach3 razor . schick launched a four-blade quattro razor later the same year , and in 2006 gillette launched the five-blade fusion . since then , razors with six and seven blades have been introduced . wholly disposable razors gained popularity in the 1970s after bic brought the first disposable razor to market in 1974 . other manufacturers , gillette included , soon introduced their own disposable razors , and by 1980 disposables made up more than 27 percent of worldwide unit sales for razors . mckibben , pp . 97–99 . shaving methods . shaving can be done with a straight razor or safety razor ( called 'manual shaving ' or 'wet shaving ' ) or an electric razor ( called 'dry shaving ' ) or beard trimmer . the removal of a full beard often requires the use of scissors or an hair trimmer to reduce the mass of hair , simplifying the process . wet shaving . there are two types of manual razors : straight razor and safety razors . safety razors are further subdivided into double-edged razors , single edge , injector razors , cartridge razors and disposable razors . double-edge razors are named so because the blade that they use has two sharp edges on opposite sides of the blade . current multi-bladed cartridge manufacturers attempt to differentiate themselves by having more or fewer blades than their competitors , each arguing that their product gives a greater shave quality at a more affordable price . before wet shaving , the area to be shaved is usually doused in warm to hot water by showering or bathing or covered for several minutes with a hot wet towel to soften the skin and hair . a lathering or lubricating agent such as cream , shaving soap , gel , foam or oil is normally applied after this . lubricating and moisturizing the skin to be shaved helps prevent irritation and damage known as razor burn . many razor cartridges include a lubricating strip , made of polyethylene glycol , to function instead of or in supplement to extrinsic agents . it also lifts and softens the hairs , causing them to swell . this enhances the cutting action and sometimes permits cutting the hairs slightly below the surface of the skin . additionally , during shaving , the lather indicates areas that have not been addressed . when soap is used , it is generally applied with a shaving brush , which has long , soft bristles . it is worked up into a usable lather by the brush , either against the face , in a shaving mug , bowl , scuttle , or palm of the hand . left since cuts are more likely when using safety razors and straight razors , wet shaving is generally done in more than one pass with the blade . the goal is to reduce the amount of hair with each pass , instead of trying to eliminate all of it in a single pass . this also reduces the risks of cuts , soreness , and ingrown hairs . alum blocks and styptic pencils are used to close cuts resulting from the shave . aftershave . men may use an aftershave lotion or balm after they have finished shaving . it may contain an antiseptic agent such as isopropyl alcohol , both to prevent infection from cuts and to act as an astringent to reduce skin irritation , a perfume , and a moisturizer to soften the facial skin . electric shaving . thumb the electric razor ( electric shaver ) consists of a set of oscillating or rotating blades , which are held behind a perforated metal screen which prevents them from coming into contact with the skin and behaves much like the second blade in a pair of scissors . when the razor is held against the skin , the whiskers poke through the holes in the screen and are sliced by the moving blades . in some designs the blades are a rotating cylinder . in others they are one or more rotating disks or a set of oscillating blades . each design has an optimum motion over the skin for the best shave and manufacturers provide guidance on this . generally , circular or cylindrical blades ( rotary-type shaver ) move in a circular motion and oscillating blades ( foil-type shaver ) move left and right . hitachi has produced foil-type shavers with a rotary blade that operates similarly to the blade assembly of a reel-type lawn mower . the first electric razor was built by jacob schick in 1928 . the main disadvantages of electric shaving are that it may not cut the whiskers as closely as razor shaving does and it requires a source of electricity . the advantages include fewer cuts to the skin , quicker shaving and no need for a water/lather supply . the initial cost of electric shaving is higher , due to the cost of the shaver itself , but the long-term cost can be significantly lower , since the cutting parts do not need replacement for approximately 18 months and a lathering product is not required . some people also find they do not experience ingrown hairs ( pseudofolliculitis barbae , also called razor bumps ) , when using an electric shaver . in contrast to wet shaving , electric shave lotions are intended to stiffen the whiskers . stiffening is achieved by dehydrating the follicles using solutions of alcohols and a degreaser such as isopropyl myristate . '' hair preparations , '' ullmann ’ s encyclopedia of industrial chemistry . wiley-vch , weinheim ( 2006 ) . lotions are also sold to reduce skin irritation , but electric shaving does not usually require the application of any lubrication . mechanical shavers powered by a spring motor have been manufactured , although in the late 20th century they became rare . such shavers can operate for up to two minutes each time the spring is wound and do not require an electrical outlet or batteries . such type of shaver , the '' monaco '' brand , was used on american space flights in the 1960s and 1970s , during the apollo missions . . beard trimmer . the mechanics of a beard trimmer involves rotatory mechanics , crafted with a mini size motor , which rounds at a very fast speed . this motor causes two sets of hinged blades to move back and forth past one another allowing for the hair cuticles to be cut . the main advantage of a beard trimmer , unlike other shaving tools is that longer beards can be trimmed to a short length efficiently and effectively . effects of shaving . aberrations . shaving can have numerous side effects , including cuts , abrasions , and irritation . many side effects can be minimized by using a fresh blade , applying plenty of lubrication , shaving in the direction of hair growth , and avoiding pressing the razor into the skin . a shaving brush can also help to lift the hair and spread the lubrication . the cosmetic market in some consumer economies offers many products to reduce these effects ; they commonly dry the affected area , and some also help to lift out the trapped hair ( s ) . some people who shave choose to use only single-blade or wire-wrapped blades that shave farther away from the skin . others have skin that can not tolerate razor shaving at all ; they use depilatory shaving powders to dissolve hair above the skin 's surface , or grow a beard . some anatomical parts , such as the scrotum , require extra care and more advanced equipment due to the uneven surface of the skin when the testicles shrivel during coldness , or its imbalance when the testicles hang low due to being warmer . . cuts . cuts from shaving can bleed for about fifteen minutes . shaving cuts can be caused by blade movement perpendicular to the blade 's cutting axis or by regular / orthogonal shaving over prominent bumps on the skin ( which the blade incises ) . as such , the presence of acne can make shaving cuts more likely , and extra care must be exercised . the use of a fresh , sharp blade as well as proper cleaning and lubrication of skin can help prevent cuts . some razor blade manufacturers include disposal containers or receptacles to avoid injuries to anyone handling the garbage . razor burn . razor burn is an irritation of the skin caused by using a blunt blade or not using proper technique . it appears as a mild rash 2–4 minutes after shaving ( once hair starts to grow through sealed skin ) and usually disappears after a few hours to a few days , depending on severity . in severe cases , razor burn can also be accompanied by razor bumps , where the area around shaved hairs get raised red welts or infected pustules . a rash at the time of shaving is usually a sign of lack of lubrication . razor burn is a common problem , especially among those who shave coarse hairs on areas with sensitive skin like the bikini line , pubic hair , armpit , chest , and beard . the condition can be caused by shaving too closely , shaving with a blunt blade , dry shaving , applying too much pressure when shaving , shaving too quickly or roughly , or shaving against the grain . ways to prevent razor burn include keeping the skin moist , using a shaving brush and lather , using a moisturizing shaving gel , shaving in the direction of the hair growth , resisting the urge to shave too closely , applying minimal pressure , avoiding scratching or irritation after shaving , avoiding irritating products on the shaved area ( colognes , perfumes , etc . ) and using an aftershave cream with aloe vera or other emollients . putting a warm , wet cloth on one 's skin helps as well , by softening hairs . this can also be done by using pre-shave oil before the application of shaving cream . essential oils such as coconut oil , tea-tree oil , peppermint oil , and lavender oil help to soothe skin after shaving . they have anti-inflammatory , antiseptic , and antibacterial properties . in some cases multi-bladed razors can cause skin irritation by shaving too close to the skin . switching to a single- or double-bladed razor and not stretching the skin while shaving can mitigate this . one other technique involves exfoliating the skin before and after shaving , using various exfoliating products , included but not limited to , brushes , mitts , and loofah . this process removes dead skin cells , reducing the potential for ingrown hairs and allowing the razor to glide across the skin smoothly decreasing the risk of the razor snagging or grabbing causing razor burn . razor bumps . pseudofolliculitis barbae is a medical term for persistent inflammation caused by shaving . it is also known by the initials pfb or colloquial terms such as '' razor bumps '' . myths . shaving does not cause terminal hair to grow back thicker , coarser or darker . this belief arose because hair that has never been cut has a naturally tapered end , as it emerges from the skin 's hair follicle , whereas , after cutting , there is no taper . the cut hair may thus appear to be thicker , and feel coarser as a result of the sharp edges on each cut strand . the fact that shorter hairs are '' harder '' ( less flexible ) than longer hairs also contributes to this effect . hair can also appear darker after it grows back because hair that has never been cut is often lighter from sun exposure . in addition , as humans grow older hair tends to grow coarser and in more places on the face and body . for example , teenagers may start shaving their face or legs at around 16 , but as they age hair will start to grow more abundantly and thicker , leading some to believe this was due to the shaving , but in reality is just part of the maturation process . shaving in religion . hinduism , buddhism , jainism and christianity . hindu , jain and buddhist ( usually only monks or nuns ) temples of shaving or plucking the hair from the scalp of priests and nuns as a symbol of their renunciation of worldly fashion and esteem . amish men and some other plain peoples shave their beard until they are married , after which they allow it to grow but continue to shave their mustaches . tonsure is the practice of some christian churches . among hindus , a child 's birth hair is shaved as a religious practice . islam . . sunni . shaykh ibn ‘ uthaymeen said : the definition of the beard as stated by the scholars of ( arabic ) language is : the hair of the face , jawbone and cheeks , in the sense that all the hair on the cheeks , jawbone and chin is part of the beard and removing any of it is counted as a sin , because the messenger said : “ let your beards grow , ” “ leave your beards alone , ” “ let your beards increase , ” “ let your beards be full . ” this indicates that it is not permissible to remove anything from the beard . however , ibn omar , a compagnon of the prophet mohamed , used to cut from his beard what outgrows the punch . shia . according to the shia scholars , the length of beard should not exceed the width of a fist . trimming of facial hair is allowed , however , shaving it is haram ( religiously forbidden ) . . judaism . observant jewish men are subject to restrictions on the shaving of their beards , as leviticus 19:27 forbids the shaving of the corners of the head and prohibits the marring of the corners of the beard . the hebrew word used in this verse refers specifically to shaving with a blade against the skin ; rabbis at different times and places have interpreted it in many ways . tools like scissors and electric razors , which cut the hair between two blades instead of between blade and skin , are permitted .