Battle of Turnhout (1597)

background . after the capture of cadiz in 1596 the english army led by sir francis vere were urgently required back in the netherlands and went there directly . due to the raid 's damages spain had gone bankrupt for the third time which meant that payments to the army dried up , which led to mutinies . pedro de abreu : historia del saqueo de cádiz por los ingleses en 1596 , escrita poco después del suceso , fue vetada en su época por las críticas vertidas contra la defensa española . se publicaría por vez primera en 1866 . during the winter of 1596/7 archduke albert 's spain army of 4,600 under the command of the burgundian philibert de rye , count varax , had advanced to the village of turnhout , about twenty miles south of breda ; their design was to surprise the town of tholen on a rare winter offensive . markham pp . 254-55 the dutch stadtholder , maurice of nassau , had received orders from the states general to collect a force at geertruidenberg to counter the spanish threat in the area of turnhout . though the town had not been walled , turnhout was an important strategic town - it held a small castle , surrounded by a moat and contained a garrison of forty men . a force of nearly 6,000 men with two demi-cannons and two field gun , was assembled at geertruidenberg . six companies of dutch infantry were under maurice - the counts of hohenlohe , brederode , and solms arrived with contingents gathered from their various garrisons . sir francis vere led the english force once more - nearly two thirds of maurice 's army were in fact english and scots . a minority were subsidized allied troops or 'religious volunteers ' most of whom were long-term mercenaries sent by elizabeth i . among these were sir alexander murray 's regiment of scots , as well as eight companies of english infantry under the command of captain henry docwra . the cavalry totalled 800 men commanded by marcellus bacx and included a contingent of a hundred elite pistoleers made up of volunteers from among the english gentry , 'the gentlemen of the ( protestant ) religion ' , under sir robert sydney and sir nicholas parker . knight , charles raleigh : historical records of the buffs , east kent regiment ( 3rd foot ) formerly designated the holland regiment and prince george of denmark 's regiment . vol i . london , gale & polden , 1905 , p . 58-59 on january 23 , 1597 the expedition marched out of geertruidenberg in four divisions , with the cavalry on the flanks and stopped off to camp at ravels on the frozen ground . the spanish army under the command of varax consisted of four battalions of infantry ; the elite spanish 'naples ' tercio regiment under the marquis of treviso , the germans under the count of sulz , and a couple of walloon and burgundian regiments under the comtes de hachicourt and de barlaymont . there were five squadrons of spanish cavalry commanded by nicolo basta . the regiments of horse were commanded by juan de cordova , alonzo de mendoza , juan de guzman , alonzo mondragon , and a flemish force under de grubbendonck . these were split into two units , one of heavy lancers and the other of lighter 'herreruelos ' ( mounted harquebusiers ) . coetzee & eysturlid pp 117-18 at midnight maurice broke up his camp and after a forced march they reached the outskirts of turnhout in the neighbouring village of tielen by midnight . markham pp . 256 . battle . varax heard reports of maurice 's army having approached not far from turnhout itself . he immediately ordered a retreat and by dawn the whole of the spanish force were in the process of withdrawing to herentals . maurice soon discovered that the rear guard of the spanish had just marched out of the village . the country was intersected in all directions by hedges and ditches and having reached the banks of the river aa , varax removed all but one plank from the wooden bridge that transversed it . parties of spanish musketeers were stationed on the other side to contest any crossing attempt by maurice , although the english advance guard swiftly forced them off . english carabineers and musketeers were sent forward to engage the spanish rearguard and a skirmish ensued which continued for five miles . dutch musketeers crossed the bridge , while others , with the cavalry , traversed the river through a nearby ford . the spanish were now in full retreat , while maurice ordered the whole of the anglo-dutch cavalry to advance rapidly in pursuit , leaving his infantry well behind . markham pp . 257-58 having come across a large wood further on from the river , vere called up his detached musketeers and placed them along the edges to conceal them . these skirmishers kept up a constant harassing fire on the spanish rearguard , while vere along with sixteen horsemen followed them along the highway in full sight and at the same time sent back a report to maurice to come up in support . vere had his horse shot from under him which slightly wounded his leg , but continued to lead on foot , until he was remounted . this skirmish between the anglo-dutch scouting force and the spanish rearguard lasted for over three hours until the main body of the former 's cavalry arrived . the spanish had by then emerged onto an open heath , suitable for cavalry action . markham pp . 259 varax had his infantry formed in four solid squares of pikemen in the open space of the heath , with musketeers on the flanks as was standard practice for the spanish tercios . his cavalry and wagons had entered an enclosed lane beyond . the first square consisted of germans led by the count of sulz , then came the walloons and burgundian tercios . the marquis of treviso brought up the rear with a force of italian and spanish veteran tercios . vere had followed them , until all of maurice 's cavalry had joined with him having emerged from the wood . the anglo-dutch then formed on the open heath in front of the spanish . motley pp . 426-27 the spaniards steadily continued their march but as they became aware of the allied movements on their left , their cavalry changed position and transferred from the right to the left of the line and rode between the infantry and the belt of woods . after the first volley by vere 's musketeers the spanish harquebuisers on foot broke and fled . varax ordered his cavalry to protect the retreat but count hohenlohe and his dutch cavalry charged the spanish right flank , as vere followed suit upon their rear . hohenlohe fell upon sulz 's regiment of germans while the rearguard consisting of treviso 's tercios was assailed by vere 's english and bacx 's dutch cavalry . the surprise was complete ; the spanish cavalry which included the famed squadrons of guzman , mondragon , and mendoza were hit hard at the first onset and within moments retreated for the pass . most of them escaped through the hollow into the boggy ground beyond . several companies of parker 's cavalry galloped down the herentals road , in pursuit of the spanish cavalry and baggage . with the spanish cavalry having been driven off , the dutch and english cavalry fell upon the straggling spanish infantry . the walloon regiments tried to form a line with the flank protected by a copse , but their morale was already low after witnessing the flight of their cavalry . when they saw in the distance the mass of dutch infantry appearing to support their cavalry they broke into a rout and tried to swim across the aa river to reach herentals . the musketeers of sultz 's regiment fell back in confusion upon the pikemen behind them and the whole formation promptly surrendered en masse upon being charged by the anglo-dutch cavalry . the veteran tercios of treviso however managed to deploy in combat formation and resisted manfully for some time , but vere and bacx 's charge upon them was decisive . the dutch and english troopers rode up very close to the massed ranks of the spanish infantry and discharged their pistols and carbines at point blank range , inflicting carnage . varax , fighting in the front line with his men , was among the casualties . the cuirassiers ' fire opened gaps within the spanish ranks into which the troopers rode in and started attacking the formation from within , rapidly causing a rout . while the veteran spanish tercio were being broken , the surviving germans in the front and the other tercios in the rear had been simultaneously shattered and the panicked survivors swamped the two other regiments , those of hachicourt and la barlotte which were placed between them , masking their field fire and spreading panic among them . the english and dutch soon broke these formations as well and put nearly all of the spanish infantry into rout . the pursuing cavalry harried them and the spanish infantry were 'cut down with terrible slaughter' . parker 's cavalry had in the meantime gone through the pass and plundered the spanish baggage train . the spanish had been completely routed and the battle had lasted no more than half an hour . the rest of the spanish managed to retreat to herentals where nicolo basta took command and rallied the survivors . motley pp . 428-30 top : the advancing army under maurice in pursuit of spanish troops from ravels via turnhout to the tielenheide bottom : the battle on the tielenheide and the fleeing spanish cavalry . aftermath . out of 4,000 spanish soldiers and 500 horsemen nearly over 50 % were casualties ; 2000 were killed or wounded . in addition thirty-eight ensigns were taken and prisoners numbered around 600 . of the allied force only fifty were casualties including ten killed . the whole action was won by around 800 dutch and english horsemen and the majority of the dutch infantry were never brought into action . that night the victors rested in turnhout and the next morning the castle there capitulated and the dutch promptly burned parts of it . however , in a few days maurice had to leave the city before the arrival of spanish reinforcements led by the archduke albert who after hearing of the defeat left his winter quarters . the spanish tercios of francisco velasco and several units of cavalry , which together with the survivors of the battle advanced against him . the allied force then began their return march to geertruidenberg . the victory at turnhout therefore did not result in any long term strategic gain since there was no follow up . on 8 february maurice returned to the hague - the spanish standards captured from the battle were strung up in the ridderzaal ( the political headquarters of the states general ) as a symbol of victory . the prisoners were treated with kindness and the wounded were cared for , even the body of varax was sent to the archduke . in return albert assured the dutch prince that he would follow his generous example for the duration of the war . the english under vere and sidney greatly distinguished themselves . vere accompanied sidney to willemstad , wrote his official despatches and gave them to one of sidney 's captains to deliver in england . both generals spoke generously of each other - vere thought that sidney exceeded well in battle , being one of the first that charged . sidney reported that the victory was only due to vere . news of the battle of turnhout was received in england with great rejoicing , and congratulations poured in on all sides . the satirist stephen gosson composed a sermon called the trumpet of warre a justification of war with spain . the battle was even dramatised in london , and introduced on the stage known as the overthrow of turnholt . dunthorne p.50 all of the officers who were present at the battle were impersonated . queen elizabeth i of england herself wrote to vere on february 7 , 1597 , in the following terms : . analysis . at the time the battle had great importance for the evolution of mounted warfare for two reasons . the first impact was that maurice 's army had demonstrated the superiority of the new type of cavalry , the cuirassiers or reiters , as used by henry iv of france at the battle of ivry . the cuirassiers wore half armour and a light headpiece and were armed with several pistols but also carried carbines as well as a sword . manning p.56 no lance was carried so instead of being arrayed in a thin line to maximize the number of lance being deployed they charged in a dense formations ( eight in depth ) and fired their pistols only in the moment of contact . this tactic , which had already defeated french gendarmes ( lancers in full armour ) at ivry , proved to be effective as well against the lighter spanish demi-lancer . the second impact was that the dutch and english cuirassiers , with the support of a few hundred musketeers , had destroyed a regiment of spanish tercios without the help of their own heavy infantry . these lessons on the value of the cuirassiers were quickly learned and most european armies abandoned the employment of lancers soon after , with only the poles retaining them within their famed husaria . the spaniards finally drew their conclusions after the battle of nieuwpoort three years later . leon p . 93 . cultural . music composer kevin houben commemorated the battle in his concert work , thyellene , battle on the heath . in september 2008 , brassband kempenzonen tielen played this work on the site where once the battle took place . the defeat of varax inspired the writing of the hymn we gather together . references . ; notes . bibliography .