George-Étienne Cartier

early career . george-étienne cartier was born on september 6 , 1814 in saint-antoine-sur-richelieu , quebec ( then known as lower canada ) . cartier was educated and was called to the bar in 1834 where he began to practise his profession . he was also involved in the railway business , and grand trunk railway was one of his legal clients . early in his career , cartier was inspired by louis-joseph papineau . through this connection , cartier became a member of the société des fils de la liberté ( '' sons of liberty '' ) and took part in the lower canada rebellion of 1837 at the battle of saint-denis . for his part in the uprising , cartier was exiled and he took temporary refuge in vermont . however , he was allowed to return to montreal in 1838 to resume his law practice . on his return to lower canada in 1838 , which was now canada east of the province of canada , cartier resumed his law practice . he was a member of the saint-jean-baptiste society and became active in politics as campaign manager of louis-hippolyte lafontaine . in 1848 , cartier gave up his law practice and ran for office as a reformer and was elected to the legislative assembly of the province of canada . during his time in the union parliament , cartier introduced a bill in 1852 for the creation of the grand trunk railway company of canada . in 1854 cartier was appointed to cabinet . from 1857 to 1862 he served alongside john a . macdonald as co-premier of the united province . cartier was a loyal friend of macdonald , with whom he created the great coalition with george brown in 1864 . the purpose of the great coalition was to end the political instability in the province , which had six governments in as many years . the great coalition was one of the first steps in the movement towards confederation . he attended all three of the conferences convened for this purpose : charlottetown , quebec , and london . cartier was largely responsible for gaining french-canadian support for union . cartier also played a leading role in pushing through legislative reform that effectively abolished the semi-feudal seigneurial system of land ownership in lower canada , turning its legislative council into an elected body of representatives , and pushed successfully for the adoption of the civil code within the province . political life in dominion of canada . upon the creation of the dominion of canada in 1867 , macdonald became prime minister and cartier was his minister of militia and defence . as the law of the time allowed a dual mandate in both the federal and provincial governments , cartier ran in the 1867 quebec general election in montréal-est electoral district . cartier was elected as a conservative supporter of the pierre-joseph-olivier chauveau government . as a result , cartier was both a member of the parliament of canada and the legislative assembly of quebec . federally , cartier represented montreal east following the conclusion of canada 's first election on 20 september 1867 . at the next federal election in august 1872 , he was defeated by louis-amable jetté while seeking a second term in montreal east in the face of the pacific scandal . the following month cartier was acclaimed the victor in the manitoba riding of provencher after louis riel and henry james clarke resigned as candidates there . notably , cartier had intended to support an amnesty for riel for his role in setting up a provisional government in the northwest , but that the conservative government reneged on its promise to secure amnesty for the métis leader , who was cartier 's maternal fifth cousin , twice removed . both were descended from settlers zacharie cloutier and xainte dupont ( c . 1596 - 1680 ) who had , in 1634 , immigrated to new france in the first wave of the percheron immigration from the former province of perche , to an area that , today , is part of quebec , canada . he settled in beauport and founded one of the foremost families of quebec . during his tenure in ottawa , cartier was responsible for the negotiations with britain and the hudson 's bay company for the purchase of rupert 's land and the north-western territory by canada . cartier was also an active participant in the negotiations that lead to the creation of the province of manitoba and the entry of british columbia into confederation . in keeping with his ties to the railways , in 1872 cartier introduced a bill for the creation of the canadian pacific railway . from 1867 to 1873 he was the minister of militia and defence . illness . image : funeral procession of george-étienne cartier.jpg thumb right funeral procession , montreal in 1871 , cartier experienced the first symptom of bright 's disease , a kidney disease . after the 1872 election , cartier traveled to london hoping to find a cure . his health did not improve and he died in london on may 20 , 1873 at the age of 58 . he was unable to pay a visit to his manitoba riding where he was acclaimed a member of parliament . his body was brought back to canada , and interred in the cimetière notre-dame-des-neiges in montreal , following a public funeral procession . family . george-étienne cartier married hortense fabre , daughter of édouard-raymond fabre , former mayor of montreal , on june 16 , 1846 . the couple had three children , all girls , one of whom died in infancy , and one in 1886 . after she was widowed , lady cartier enjoyed a pension of 1,200 in recognition of her husband 's services . when caroline , the eldest daughter , died in march 1886 , at her request her remains were brought to montreal and interred alongside those of her father . lady cartier and their surviving daughter hortense lived in cannes , france , until lady cartier died on february 27 , 1898 . she was buried in quebec alongside her husband and daughter , in notre dame des neiges cemetery . in 1892 lady cartier presented a marble bust of her husband to the legislative assembly of quebec . cartier 's niece victoria cartier was a noted canadian music educator , organist and pianist . legacy . the entry of canada east ( quebec ) into the confederation is cartier 's most significant contribution to his country . following the rebellions in 1837/1838 and the durham report , upper and lower canada were merged into a single colony . great britain had begun to loosen its ties to the north american colonies . the united states was becoming more and more powerful , and represented a threat to canada . in 1864 , george brown , leader of the clear grits in canada west ( ontario ) , proposed an alliance with the conservatives of macdonald and cartier . in 1867 , following a series of discussions and conferences ( at charlottetown and quebec ) , the alliance known as the grand coalition succeeded in forging the agreement which gave birth to confederation . from this time onwards , the new federal government convened in ottawa . in 1834 he contributed to founding the société saint-jean-baptiste patriotic society , where he sang his famous poem ô canada ! mon pays , mes amours ( not to be confused with the national anthem of canada ) . . honours and memorials . to celebrate the part he played in the country 's development , cartier was created a baronet , of montreal , in the baronetage of the united kingdom by queen victoria in 1868 . since he had no legal heirs , the cartier baronetcy became extinct on his death . in addition , he had the prenominal '' the honourable '' and the postnominal '' pc '' for life by virtue of being made a member of the queen 's privy council for canada on 1 july 1867 . ] image : montreal - parc mont-royal , statue d'athéna - 20050320.jpg thumb monument to sir george-étienne cartier in front of mount royal during winter in montreal ontario 's highway 401 ( ontario ) is named after cartier and fellow father of confederation john a . macdonald , as are ottawa 's macdonald-cartier international airport and the macdonald-cartier bridge , linking ottawa , ontario with gatineau , quebec . the former macdonald-cartier high school of saint-hubert , quebec , was named after john a . macdonald and cartier , which has merged and became heritage regional high school . cartier 's residence in montreal , at 458 notre-dame street east , is now the sir george-étienne cartier national historic site dedicated to his life and achievements . it also serves to recall the architectural heritage and lifestyles of the upper middle class of 19th-century montreal . in 1931 , canada post issued a ten-cent postage stamp with cartier 's portrait surrounded by the national symbol , the maple leaf . numerous streets in quebec and elsewhere in canada have been named for cartier , as has the montreal metro 's cartier station in laval , quebec . six schools have been named in his honour : george-étienne cartier french catholic primary school in ottawa , ontario . école élémentaire catholique george-étienne-cartier . school website george-étienne cartier primary school in gatineau , québec . george-étienne-cartier french preschool in longueuil , quebec école préscolaire/primaire george-étienne-cartier . school website sir george-étienne cartier primary school in london , ontario . george-étienne cartier french catholic primary school in toronto , ontario école georges-étienne-cartier . school website école secondaire macdonald-cartier high school in sudbury , ontario . école secondaire macdonald-cartier he was portrayed by david la haye in the 2011 cbc television film john a . : birth of a country . in 2017 , the bank of canada unveiled a commemorative canadian ten-dollar note in honour of canada 150 , featuring cartier 's portrait alongside sir john a . macdonald , agnes macphail and james gladstone . . arms .