Kerosene lamp

history . the first description of a simple lamp using crude mineral oil was provided by persian alchemist al-razi ( rhazes ) in 9th century baghdad , who referred to it as the '' naffatah '' in his kitab al-asrar ( book of secrets ) . zayn bilkadi ( university of california , berkeley ) , '' the oil weapons '' , saudi aramco world , january–february 1995 , pp . & nbsp ; 20–27 . in 1846 abraham pineo gesner invented a substitute for whale oil for lighting , distilled from coal . later made from petroleum , kerosene became a popular lighting fuel . modern and most popular versions of the kerosene lamp were later constructed by poles inventor and pharmacist ignacy łukasiewicz , in lviv in 1853 . it was a significant improvement over lamps designed to burn vegetable or sperm oil . types . flat-wick lamp . a flat-wick lamp is a simple type of kerosene lamp , which burns kerosene drawn up through a wick by capillary action . if this type of lamp is broken , it can easily start a fire . a flat-wick lamp has a fuel tank ( fount ) , with the lamp burner attached . attached to the fuel tank , four prongs hold the glass chimney , which acts to prevent the flame from being blown out and enhances a thermally induced draft . the glass chimney needs a '' throat '' , or slight constriction , to create the proper draft for complete combustion of the fuel ; the draft carries more air ( oxygen ) past the flame , helping to produce a smokeless light , which is brighter than an open flame would produce . the chimney is used for a more important duty . the mantle/wick holder has holes around the outer edges . when the lantern is lit and a chimney is attached , the thermally induced draft draws air thru these holes and passes over the top of the mantle , just as a chimney in your house . this has a cooling effect and keeps the mantle from over heating . without a properly installed chimney , a definite safety condition exists . this is even more important if using aladdin lamps . they also have a thinner chimney to induce a faster air-flow . this information should be adhered to regardless of the type of lantern in use . the lamp burner has a flat wick , usually made of cotton . the lower part of the wick dips into the fount and absorbs the kerosene ; the top part of the wick extends out of the wick tube of the lamp burner , which includes a wick-adjustment mechanism . adjusting how much of the wick extends above the wick tube controls the flame . the wick tube surrounds the wick and ensures that the correct amount of air reaches the lamp burner . adjustment is usually done by means of a small knob operating a cric , which is a toothed metal sprocket bearing against the wick . if the wick is too high , and extends beyond the burner cone at the top of the wick tube , the lamp will produce smoke and soot ( unburned carbon ) . when the lamp is lit , the kerosene that the wick has absorbed burns and produces a clear , bright , yellow flame . as the kerosene burns , capillary action in the wick draws more kerosene up from the fuel tank . all kerosene flat-wick lamps use the dead-flame burner design , where the flame is fed cold air from below , and hot air exits above . this type of lamp was very widely used by railways , both on the front and rear of trains and for hand signals , due to its reliability . at a time when there were few competing light sources at night outside major towns , the limited brightness of these lamps was adequate and could be seen at sufficient distance to serve as a warning or signal . central-draft ( tubular round wick ) lamp . a central-draught lamp , or argand lamp , works in the same manner as the flat-wick lamp . the burner is equipped with a tall glass chimney , of around tall or taller , to provide the powerful draft this lamp requires to burn properly . the burner uses a wick , usually made of cotton , that is made of a wide , flat wick rolled into a tube , the seam of which is then stitched together to form the complete wick . the tubular wick is then mounted into a '' carrier '' , which is some form of a toothed rack that engages into the gears of the wick-raising mechanism of the burner and allows the wick to be raised and lowered . the wick rides in between the inner and outer wick tubes ; the inner wick tube ( central draft tube ) provides the '' central draft '' or draft that supplies air to the flame spreader . when the lamp is lit , the central draft tube supplies air to the flame spreader that spreads out the flame into a ring of fire and allows the lamp to burn cleanly . mantle lamp . a variation on the '' central-draught '' lamp is the mantle lamp . the mantle is a roughly pear-shaped mesh made of fabric placed over the burner . the mantle typically contains thorium or other rare-earth salts ; on first use the cloth burns away , and the rare-earth salts are converted to oxides , leaving a very fragile structure , which incandesces ( glows brightly ) upon exposure to the heat of the burner flame . mantle lamps are considerably brighter than flat- or round-wick lamps , produce a whiter light and generate more heat . mantle lamps typically use fuel faster than a flat-wick lamp , but slower than a center-draught round-wick , as they depend on a small flame heating a mantle , rather than having all the light coming from the flame itself . mantle lamps are nearly always bright enough to benefit from a lampshade , and a few mantle lamps may be enough to heat a small building in cold weather . mantle lamps , because of the higher temperature at which they operate , do not produce much odor , except when first lit or extinguished . like flat- and round-wick lamps , they can be adjusted for brightness ; however , caution must be used , because if set too high , the lamp chimney and the mantle can become covered with black areas of soot . a lamp set too high will burn off its soot harmlessly if quickly turned down , but if not caught soon enough , the soot itself can ignite , and a '' runaway lamp '' condition can result . one popular model of mantle lamp uses only a wick and is unpressurized . large fixed pressurized kerosene mantle lamps were used in lighthouse beacons for navigation of ships , brighter and with lower fuel consumption than oil lamps used before . dennis l . noble lighthouses & keepers : the u.s . lighthouse service and its legacy , naval institute press , 2004 , page 34 . . kerosene lantern . a kerosene lantern , also known as a '' barn lantern '' or '' hurricane lantern '' , is a flat-wick lamp made for portable and outdoor use . they are made of soldered or crimped-together sheet-metal stampings , with tin-plated sheet steel being the most common material , followed by brass and copper . there are three types : dead-flame , hot-blast , and cold-blast . both hot-blast and cold-blast designs are called tubular lanterns and are safer than dead-flame lamps , as tipping over a tubular lantern cuts off the oxygen flow to the burner and will extinguish the flame within seconds . the earliest portable kerosene '' glass globe '' lanterns , of the 1850s and 1860s , were of the dead-flame type , meaning that it had an open wick , but the airflow to the flame was strictly controlled in an upward motion by a combination of vents at the bottom of the burner and an open topped chimney . this had the effect of removing side-to-side drafts and thus significantly reducing or even eliminating the flickering that can occur with an exposed flame . later lanterns , such as the hot-blast and cold-blast lanterns , took this airflow control even further by partially or fully enclosing the wick in a '' deflector '' or '' burner cone '' and then channeling the air to be supplied for combustion at the wick while at the same time pre-heating the air for combustion . the hot-blast design , also known as a '' tubular lantern '' due to the metal tubes used in its construction , was invented by john h . irwin and was . as noted in the patent , the '' novel mode of constructing a lantern whereby the wind , instead of acting upon the flame in such a manner as to extinguish it , serves to support or sustain and prevent the extinguishment thereof . '' this improvement essentially redirected wind which might normally tend to extinguish the flame of an unprotected dead-flame lantern , instead is redirected , slowed , pre-heated , and supplied to the burner to actually support and promote the combustion of the fuel . later , irwin improved upon this design by inventing and . this design is similar to his earlier '' hot-blast '' design , except that the oxygen-depleted hot combustion byproducts are redirected and prevented from recirculating back to the burner by redesigning the intake products , so that only oxygen-rich , fresh air is drawn from the atmosphere into the lamp ( '' the inlets for fresh air are placed out of the ascending current of products of combustion , and said products are thereby prevented from entering the air intake '' ) . the primary benefit of this design compared to the earlier '' hot-blast '' design was to maximize the amount of oxygen available for combustion by ensuring that only fresh air is supplied to the burner , thereby increasing the brightness and stability of the flame . . fuels . contamination of lamp fuel with even a small amount of gasoline results in a lower flash point and higher vapor pressure for the fuel , with potentially dangerous consequences . vapors from spilled fuel may ignite ; vapor trapped above liquid fuel may lead to excess pressure and fires . kerosene lamps are still extensively used in areas without electrical lighting ; the cost and dangers of combustion lighting are a continuing concern in many countries . . performance . flat-wick lamps have the lowest light output , center-draft round-wick lamps have 3–4 times the output of flat-wick lamps , and pressurized lamps have higher output yet ; the range is from 8 to 100 lumens . a kerosene lamp producing 37 lumens for 4 hours per day consumes about of kerosene per month . narasimha desirazu rao distributional impacts of energy policies in india : implications for equity stanford university , 2011 page 36 . 12.57 lumens 1 cp