Science education

historical background . the first person credited with being employed as a science teacher in a british public school was william sharp , who left the job at rugby school in 1850 after establishing science to the curriculum . sharp is said to have established a model for science to be taught throughout the british public school system . bernard leary , 'sharp , william ( 1805–1896 ) ’ , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , sept 2004 ; online edn , oct 2005 retrieved 22 may 2010 the british academy for the advancement of science ( baas ) published a report in 1867 calling for the teaching of '' pure science '' and training of the '' scientific habit of mind . '' the progressive education movement supported the ideology of mental training through the sciences . baas emphasized separately pre-professional training in secondary science education . in this way , future baas members could be prepared . the initial development of science teaching was slowed by the lack of qualified teachers . one key development was the founding of the first london school board in 1870 , which discussed the school curriculum ; another was the initiation of courses to supply the country with trained science teachers . in both cases the influence of thomas henry huxley . john tyndall was also influential in the teaching of physical science . in the united states , science education was a scatter of subjects prior to its standardization in the 1890s . the development of a science curriculum emerged gradually after extended debate between two ideologies , citizen science and pre-professional training . as a result of a conference of thirty leading secondary and college educators in florida , the national education association appointed a committee of ten in 1892 , which had authority to organize future meetings and appoint subject matter committees of the major subjects taught in secondary schools . the committee was composed of ten educators and chaired by charles eliot of harvard university . the committee of ten appointed nine conferences committees : latin ; greek ; english ; other modern languages ; mathematics ; history ; civil government and political economy ; physics , astronomy , and chemistry ; natural history ; and geography . each committee was composed of ten leading specialists from colleges , normal schools , and secondary schools . committee reports were submitted to the committee of ten , which met for four days in new york city , to create a comprehensive report . national education association ( 1894 ) . report of the committee of ten on secondary school studies with the reports of the conferences arranged by the committee . new york : the american book company read the book online in 1894 , the nea published the results of work of these conference committees . according to the committee of ten , the goal of high school was to prepare all students to do well in life , contributing to their well-being and the good of society . another goal was to prepare some students to succeed in college . this committee supported the citizen science approach focused on mental training and withheld performance in science studies from consideration for college entrance . the baas encouraged their longer standing model in the uk . the us adopted a curriculum was characterized as follows : elementary science should focus on simple natural phenomena ( nature study ) by means of experiments carried out '' in-the-field . '' secondary science should focus on laboratory work and the committee 's prepared lists of specific experiments teaching of facts and principles college preparation the format of shared mental training and pre-professional training consistently dominated the curriculum from its inception to now . however , the movement to incorporate a humanism approach , such as inclusion of the arts steam fields , science , technology , society and environment education is growing and being implemented more broadly in the late 20th century . reports by the american academy for the advancement of science ( aaas ) , including project 2061 , and by the national committee on science education standards and assessment detail goals for science education that link classroom science to practical applications and societal implications . fields of science education . science is a universal subject that spans the branch of knowledge that examines the structure and behavior of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment . in 1996 , the u.s . national academy of sciences of the u.s . national academies produced the national science education standards , which is available online for free in multiple forms . its focus on inquiry-based science , based on the theory of constructivism rather than on direct instruction of facts and methods , remains controversial . some research suggests that it is more effective as a model for teaching science . '' the standards call for more than 'science as process , ' in which students learn such skills as observing , inferring , and experimenting . inquiry is central to science learning . when engaging in inquiry , students describe objects and events , ask questions , construct explanations , test those explanations against current scientific knowledge , and communicate their ideas to others . they identify their assumptions , use critical and logical thinking , and consider alternative explanations . in this way , students actively develop their understanding of science by combining scientific knowledge with reasoning and thinking skills . '' concern about science education and science standards has often been driven by worries that american students lag behind their peers in international rankings . one notable example was the wave of education reforms implemented after the soviet union launched its sputnik satellite in 1957 . the first and most prominent of these reforms was led by the physical science study committee at mit . in recent years , business leaders such as microsoft chairman bill gates have called for more emphasis on science education , saying the united states risks losing its economic edge . to this end , tapping america 's potential is an organization aimed at getting more students to graduate with science , technology , engineering and mathematics degrees . public opinion surveys , however , indicate most u.s . parents are complacent about science education and that their level of concern has actually declined in recent years . furthermore , in the recent national curriculum survey conducted by act , researchers uncovered a possible disconnect among science educators . '' both middle school/junior high school teachers and post secondary science instructors rate ( d ) process/inquiry skills as more important than advanced science content topics ; high school teachers rate them in exactly the opposite order . '' perhaps more communication among educators at the different grade levels in necessary to ensure common goals for students . . 2012 science education framework . according to a report from the national academy of sciences , the fields of science , technology , and education hold a paramount place in the modern world , but there are not enough workers in the united states entering the science , technology , engineering , and math ( stem ) professions . in 2012 the national academy of sciences committee on a conceptual framework for new k-12 science education standards developed a guiding framework to standardize k-12 science education with the goal of organizing science education systematically across the k-12 years . titled a framework for k-12 science education : practices , crosscutting concepts , and core ideas , the publication promotes standardizing k-12 science education in the united states . it emphasizes science educators to focus on a '' limited number of disciplinary core ideas and crosscutting concepts , be designed so that students continually build on and revise their knowledge and abilities over multiple years , and support the integration of such knowledge and abilities with the practices needed to engage in scientific inquiry and engineering design . '' a framework for k-12 science education the report says that in the 21st century americans need science education in order to engage in and '' systematically investigate issues related to their personal and community priorities , '' as well as to reason scientifically and know how to apply science knowledge . the committee that designed this new framework sees this imperative as a matter of educational equity to the diverse set of schoolchildren . getting more diverse students into stem fields is a matter of social justice as seen by the committee . a framework for k-12 science education : practices , crosscutting concepts , and core ideas . 2013 next generation science standards . in 2013 a new standards for science education were released that update the national standards released in 1996 . developed by 26 state governments and national organizations of scientists and science teachers , the guidelines , called the next generation science standards , are intended to '' combat widespread scientific ignorance , to standardize teaching among states , and to raise the number of high school graduates who choose scientific and technical majors in college . '' included are guidelines for teaching students about topics such as climate change and evolution . an emphasis is teaching the scientific process so that students have a better understanding of the methods of science and can critically evaluate scientific evidence . organizations that contributed to developing the standards include the national science teachers association , the american association for the advancement of science , the national research council , and achieve , a nonprofit organization that was also involved in developing math and english standards . . informal science education . informal science education is the science teaching and learning that occurs outside of the formal school curriculum in places such as museums , the media , and community-based programs . the national science teachers association has created a position statement on informal science education to define and encourage science learning in many contexts and throughout the lifespan . research in informal science education is funded in the united states by the national science foundation . national science foundation funding for informal science education the center for advancement of informal science education ( caise ) provides resources for the informal science education community . examples of informal science education include science centers , science museums , and new digital learning environments ( e.g . global challenge award ) , many of which are members of the association of science and technology centers ( astc ) . the exploratorium in san francisco and the franklin institute in philadelphia are the oldest of this type of museum in the united states . media include tv programs such as nova , newton 's apple , '' bill nye the science guy '' , '' beakman 's world '' , the magic school bus , and dragonfly tv . early examples of science education on american television included programs by daniel q . posin , such as '' dr . posin 's universe '' , '' the universe around us '' , '' on the shoulders of giants '' , and '' out of this world '' . examples of community-based programs are 4-h youth development programs , hands on science outreach , nasa and after school programs and girls at the center . home education is encouraged through educational products such as the former ( 1940-1989 ) things of science subscription service . in 2010 , the national academies released surrounded by science : learning science in informal environments , based on the national research council study , learning science in informal environments : people , places , and pursuits . surrounded by science is a resource book that shows how current research on learning science across informal science settings can guide the thinking , the work , and the discussions among informal science practitioners . this book makes valuable research accessible to those working in informal science : educators , museum professionals , university faculty , youth leaders , media specialists , publishers , broadcast journalists , and many others . see also . center for informal learning and schools controversial science constructivism in science education discipline-based education research discovery learning educational research environmental groups and resources serving k–12 schools epistemology ( the study of knowledge and how we know things ) graduate school inquiry-based science national science education standards national science teachers association pedagogy physics education mathematics education engineering education school science technicians science education in england science , technology , society and environment education scientific literacy science outreach scientific modelling science education on youtube . references . further reading . is science only for the rich ? . '' around the world , poverty and social background remain huge barriers in scientific careers . '' nature , 537 , pp 466–470 , ( 22 september 2016 ) , doi:10.1038/537466a walker . m . d . 2015 . teaching inquiry-based science teaching science through inquiry . . external links . eric : education related articles online national science education standards the importance of scientific education electronic journal of science education national institute for science education benchmarks for science literacy teaching inquiry-based science the association for science teacher education eurasia journal of mathematics , science & technology education science videos for use in science education the european learning laboratory for the life sciences ( ells ) science class back in the day – slideshow by life magazine making scientific practices matter in the classroom.and beyond ! xvivo ( scientific animation ) scientix : portal on science and maths education in europe national center for case study teaching in science ( nccsts ) blossoms ( mit ) —free science education videos inter-divisional teaching commission ( idtc ) of the international union for the history and philosophy of science ( iuhps ) international history , philosophy and science teaching group