Ben & Jerry's

political stances and controversies . commercial . the center for science in the public interest , a consumer-advocacy group , urged ben & jerry 's to stop labeling their ice cream as '' all natural '' due to the company 's use of corn syrup , alkalised cocoa , and other chemically modified ingredients . in september 2010 , the company agreed to stop labeling their ice cream and frozen yogurt as '' all natural '' . in 2011 , ben & jerry 's released a flavor named schweddy balls , in homage to the saturday night live ( snl ) schweddy balls . this received protest from one million moms , a project of the conservative christian group american family associated , who said that the name was too explicit for grocery store shelves . spokesperson monica cole explained to the media : '' i realize it could be a lot worse , but are they going to progressively get worse if we do n't say something ? maybe they 'll think twice before they come up with another inappropriate name for ice cream . '' however , the expression of disdain was not unanimous among u.s . parents , as mother gina ragusa said to the huffington post : '' we just think it 's funny , that 's all , and honestly we all really want to try it '' , adding that she consistently checks for the item 's availability at her local supermarket . actor alec baldwin , who appeared in the snl skit as baker pete schweddy , hosted the september 24 , 2011 , episode of the 37th season of the show and responded to the protests by stating that a new flavor called '' go fudge yourself '' had been produced for those in opposition to the tribute . following the initial release of the flavor , baldwin informed the media that '' thanks to ben & jerry 's , the goodness of the schweddy family recipe wo n't go with me to the great beyond , '' as he had previously feared that his association with the snl episode would remain permanent until his death . . political . following rumors that suggested ben & jerry 's supported the defense of mumia abu-jamal—who was convicted in 1982 of killing philadelphia police officer daniel faulkner —the company confirmed that cohen did sign a petition , as a private citizen , asking that '' the system of american justice be followed fully in the case '' . between 2005 and 2008 , ben and jerry 's collaborated with polar explorer marc cornelissen and the world wide fund for nature ( wwf ) to run the climate change college , an initiative to train young people in communications and campaigning around climate change . controversy emerged in 2006 after the company released a flavor of ice cream called '' black and tan '' . it had named the flavor after the black and tan , which is made by mixing stout with pale ale , but the '' black and tans '' are also known as a paramilitary police force of british world war i veterans recruited during the irish revolution . at the time that the flavor was released , the irish republican movement was still offended by the historical association of the title . in 2012 , vermonters for a just peace in palestine/israel ( vtjp ) contacted ben cohen , jerry greenfield and the ceo of ben & jerry 's after learning that ice cream produced by ben & jerry 's franchise in israel was being sold in israeli settlements in the west bank and east jerusalem . leafleting occurred at locations in vermont , new york and california on 'free cone day ' in april 2013 and april 2014 . , 232 organizations across the united states and in seventeen countries worldwide have signed a letter written by vtjp calling on ben & jerry 's to end its commercial ties to such settlements . in late april 2014 , ben & jerry 's signed onto the '' fight for the reef '' campaign , a partnership between the world wide fund for nature-australia and the australian marine conservation society ( amcs ) . premier campbell newman and queensland state senator matt canavan both said in statements that ben & jerry 's was making misleading statements that exaggerated the detrimental impact that proposed government programs would have on the great barrier reef , and environment minister andrew powell said that '' the only people taking a scoop out of the reef is ben and jerry 's and unilever . if you understand the facts , you 'd want to be boycotting ben and jerry 's '' . australian ben & jerry 's brand manager kalli swaik responded that '' ben & jerry 's believes that dredging and dumping in world heritage waters surrounding the marine park area will be detrimental to the reef ecology . it threatens the health of one of australia 's most iconic treasures . '' in february 2016 , ben & jerry 's cofounder ben cohen created an ice cream flavor called '' bernie 's yearning '' in support of u.s senator bernie sanders ' run for president in the 2016 democratic primaries against secretary of state hillary clinton . the flavor consisted of plain mint ice cream covered by a solid layer of mint chocolate . according to cohen , '' the chocolate disk represents the huge majority of economic gains that have gone to the top 1 percent since the end of the recession . beneath it , the rest of us . '' ben & jerry 's founder creates bernie sanders ice cream flavor this was done in an effort to showcase the united states ' current socioeconomic issues . in april 2016 , ben & jerry 's cofounders , ben cohen and jerry greenfield , were both arrested at the democracy awakening protests on the u.s . capitol steps in washington , d.c . in may 2017 , ben and jerry 's announced they would not serve two scoops of the same ice cream flavor in australia , due to the refusal of the australian government to legalize same-sex marriage . they said this would encourage '' fans to contact their mp 's to tell them the time has come-make marriage equality legal ! '' . this stance , they said , would continue for however long it took for same-sex marriage to be legalized . in june 2018 , ben & jerry 's announced their support for some 9,000 afghan asylum seekers ' right to stay in sweden , drawing heavy criticism from some commentators . on october 30 , 2018 , they announced their new limited batch flavor called '' pecan resist '' . it was introduced as a part of the opposition campaign against president donald trump . it was marketed as '' a campaign to lick injustice and champion those fighting to create a more just and equitable nation of us all '' . in august 2019 , they produced another bernie sanders flavor called '' bernie 's back . '' it was not for sale in stores , but was awarded as a prize to 40 contest winners . ben cohen endorsed bernie sanders for president . in 2020 , ben & jerry 's announced that it plans to join the '' stophateforprofit '' campaign , halting paid advertising on facebook and instagram in the u.s . the company said it was asking facebook '' to take the clear and unequivocal actions called for by the campaign to stop its platform from being used to spread and amplify racism and hate . '' in august 2020 , ben & jerry 's attracted criticism from several british commentators and government officials for defending the channel crossings of migrants from france , which had started after a tweet sent to home secretary priti patel , calling for their treatment as asylum seekers . additionally , the company claimed people can not be illegal , even when entering a country for economic migrant with the crossings coming from the developed first world country of france . with these points of contention being voiced by some . minister james cleverly also criticized the statements from the company as being statistically inaccurate and described them as 'virtue signalling . ' spiked considered the statements hypocritical due to the company 's own practices in relation to worker 's rights and pay . the publication also alleged the hiring of illegal immigrants in which they were said to be treated with poor working conditions , 12 to 14-hour days and a barely minimum wage pay rate . in january 2021 , ben & jerry 's released a tweet calling for the resignation , impeachment , and invoking of the 25th amendment against u.s . president donald trump following the storming of the united states capitol , saying “ yesterday was not a protest—it was a riot to uphold white supremacy . ” . social . in february 2012 , a ben & jerry 's franchise near harvard university created a special edition frozen yogurt flavor named '' taste the lin-sanity '' in honor of asian-american basketball player jeremy lin , a harvard alumnus . at inception , the product contained vanilla frozen yogurt , lychee honey swirls , and fortune cookie pieces , leading to a widely publicized controversy about ethnic stereotype due to the association of the fortune cookie ingredient with chinese culture . the latter ingredient was later replaced with waffle cookies , as the fortune cookies became soggy and the franchise received returns from customers . ben & jerry 's general manager for boston and cambridge explained to the media : '' we obviously were n't looking to offend anybody and the majority of the feedback about it has been positive . '' ben & jerry 's released an official statement shortly after the launch of the product apologizing to those who were offended . in september 2014 , anti-hazing activists raised concerns about the ice cream flavor '' hazed & confused '' , which had been released earlier that year . the concern was that the name could be perceived as belittling of hazing and bullying problems . the company has noted that the name was based on the word hazelnut and a play on the phrase '' dazed and confused '' , which is both a song popularized by led zeppelin and a 1993 film . the decision was made in october to not rename the flavor . attempts by migrant worker to directly contact company ben & jerry 's officials in waterbury , vermont , during 2018 resulted in arrests by immigration and customs enforcement . '' zero '' farms are reported to be in compliance with the milk with dignity code of conduct , according to will lambek of migrant justice . during the 2020 protests against racial prejudice following the police killing of george floyd , ben & jerry 's publicized a statement encouraging americans to '' dismantle white supremacy '' and face '' the sins of our past . '' . product safety . the organic consumers association announced in july 2017 that it found traces of the herbicide glyphosate in 10 of 11 samples of the company 's ice creams . the traces were found to be at levels below the ceiling set by the environmental protection agency for environmental contamination . global locations . ben and jerry 's has locations around the world . aruba australia austria bahamas belgium brazil canada croatia czech republic denmark england estonia finland france germany greece ireland israel italy malaysia mexico netherlands new zealand norway philippines poland portugal puerto rico romania serbia singapore slovakia south korea spain sweden switzerland thailand united arab emirates united states . former markets . hong kong japan morocco russia turkey . wages . ben & jerry 's used to have a policy that no employee 's rate of pay shall exceed five times that of entry-level employees . in 1995 , entry-level employees were paid 12 hourly , and the highest paid employee was president and chief operating officer chuck lacy , who earned 150,000 annually . when ben cohen resigned as chief executive officer and ben & jerry 's announced the search for a new ceo in 1994 , the company ended the five-to-one-ratio policy . . references . further reading . criswell , ann . '' ben & jerry 's is sweet on social issues '' . houston chronicle . wednesday june 24 , 1992 . food 1 . lager , fred '' chico '' . ben & jerry 's : the inside scoop . 1st ed . new york : crown publishers , inc . , 1994 . print . wieder , tamara . '' coneheads '' . the boston phoenix . august 8–14 , 2003 . – boston phoenix interview with founders ben cohen and jerry greenfield . external links .