Human intelligence

correlates . as a construct and measured by measuring , intelligence is considered to be one of the most useful concepts used in psychology , because it correlates with many relevant variables , for instance the probability of suffering an accident , salary , and more . triglia , a . ; regader , b . ; & garcía-allen , j . ; ( 2018 ) . '' ¿qué es la inteligencia ? del ci a las inteligencias múltiples '' . barcelona : emse . ; education according to a 2018 metastudy of educational effects on intelligence , education appears to be the '' most consistent , robust , and durable method '' known for raising intelligence . ; myopia a number of studies have shown myopia correlations iq and myopia . some suggest that the reason for the correlation is environmental , whereby people with a higher iq are more likely to damage their eyesight with prolonged reading , or the other way around whereby people who read more are more likely to reach a higher iq , while others contend that a genetic link exists . ; aging there is evidence that aging causes a decline in cognitive functions . in one cross-sectional study , various cognitive functions measured declines by about 0.8 in z-score from age 20 to age 50 , the cognitive functions included speed of processing , working memory , and long-term memory . ; genes a number of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in human dna are correlated with intelligence . ; motivation motivation is a factor that influences the results of the iq test . people with higher motivation obtained better iq scores . this theory has been confirmed by scientific research . . theories . relevance of iq tests . in psychology , human intelligence is commonly assessed by iq scores that are determined by iq tests . however , while iq test scores show a high degree of inter-test reliability , and predict certain forms of achievement rather effectively , their construct validity as a holistic measure of human intelligence is considered dubious . while iq tests are generally understood to measure some forms of intelligence , they may fail to serve as an accurate measure of broader definitions of human intelligence inclusive of creativity and social intelligence . according to psychologist wayne weiten , '' iq tests are valid measures of the kind of intelligence necessary to do well in academic work . but if the purpose is to assess intelligence in a broader sense , the validity of iq tests is questionable . '' . theory of multiple intelligences . howard gardner 's theory of multiple intelligences is based on studies not only of normal children and adults , but also of gifted individuals ( including so-called '' savants '' ) , of persons who have suffered brain damage , of experts and virtuosos , and of individuals from diverse cultures . gardner breaks intelligence down into at least a number of different components . in the first edition of his book frames of mind ( 1983 ) , he described seven distinct types of intelligence—logical-mathematical , linguistic , spatial , musical , kinesthetic , interpersonal , and intrapersonal . in a second edition of this book , he added two more types of intelligence—naturalist and existential intelligences . he argues that psychometric ( iq ) tests address only linguistic and logical plus some aspects of spatial intelligence . article in wikipedia : intelligence : knowns and unknowns a major criticism of gardner 's theory is that it has never been tested , or subjected to peer review , by gardner or anyone else , and indeed that it is unfalsifiable . others ( e.g . locke , 2005 ) have suggested that recognizing many specific forms of intelligence ( specific aptitude theory ) implies a political—rather than scientific—agenda , intended to appreciate the uniqueness in all individuals , rather than recognizing potentially true and meaningful differences in individual capacities . schmidt and hunter ( 2004 ) suggest that the predictive validity of specific aptitudes over and above that of general mental ability , or '' g '' , has not received empirical support . on the other hand , jerome bruner agreed with gardner that the intelligences were '' useful fictions '' , and went on to state that '' his approach is so far beyond the data-crunching of mental testers that it deserves to be cheered . '' howard gardner describes his first seven intelligences as follows : linguistic intelligence : people high in linguistic intelligence have an affinity for words , both spoken and written . logical-mathematical intelligence : it implies logical and mathematical abilities . spatial intelligence : the ability to form a mental model of a spatial world and to be able to maneuver and operate using that model . musical intelligence : those with musical intelligence have excellent pitch , and may even be absolute pitch . physical intelligence : the ability to solve problems or to fashion products using one 's whole body , or parts of the body . gifted people in this intelligence may be good dancers , athletes , surgeons , craftspeople , and others . interpersonal intelligence : the ability to see things from the perspective of others , or to understand people in the sense of empathy . strong interpersonal intelligence would be an asset in those who are teachers , politicians , clinicians , religious leaders , etc . intrapersonal intelligence : it is a capacity to form an accurate , veridical model of oneself and to be able to use that model to operate effectively in life . triarchic theory of intelligence . robert sternberg proposed the triarchic theory of intelligence to provide a more comprehensive description of intellectual competence than traditional differential or cognitive theories of human ability . the triarchic theory describes three fundamental aspects of intelligence : analytic intelligence comprises the mental processes through which intelligence is expressed . creative intelligence is necessary when an individual is confronted with a challenge that is nearly , but not entirely , novel or when an individual is engaged in automatizing the performance of a task . practical intelligence is bound in a sociocultural milieu and involves adaptation to , selection of , and shaping of the environment to maximize fit in the context . the triarchic theory does not argue against the validity of a general intelligence factor ; instead , the theory posits that general intelligence is part of analytic intelligence , and only by considering all three aspects of intelligence can the full range of intellectual functioning be fully understood . more recently , the triarchic theory has been updated and renamed as the theory of successful intelligence by sternberg . intelligence is now defined as an individual 's assessment of success in life by the individual 's own ( idiographic ) standards and within the individual 's sociocultural context . success is achieved by using combinations of analytical , creative , and practical intelligence . the three aspects of intelligence are referred to as processing skills . the processing skills are applied to the pursuit of success through what were the three elements of practical intelligence : adapting to , shaping of , and selecting of one 's environments . the mechanisms that employ the processing skills to achieve success include utilizing one 's strengths and compensating or correcting for one 's weaknesses . sternberg 's theories and research on intelligence remain contentious within the scientific community . attempts to raise iq with brain training have led to increases on aspects related with the training tasks – for instance working memory – but it is yet unclear if these increases generalize to increased intelligence per se . a 2008 research paper claimed that practicing a dual n-back task can increase fluid intelligence ( gf ) , as measured in several different standard tests . jaeggi , s . m . , buschkuehl , m . , jonides , j . , perrig , w . j . ( 2008 ) , improving fluid intelligence with training on working memory , proceedings of the national academy of sciences , vol . 105 no . 19 this finding received some attention from popular media , including an article in wired . alexis madrigal , forget brain age : researchers develop software that makes you smarter , wired , april 2008 however , a subsequent criticism of the paper 's methodology questioned the experiment 's validity and took issue with the lack of uniformity in the tests used to evaluate the control and test groups . for example , the progressive nature of raven 's advanced progressive matrices ( apm ) test may have been compromised by modifications of time restrictions ( i.e . , 10 minutes were allowed to complete a normally 45-minute test ) . substances which actually or purportedly improve intelligence or other mental functions are called nootropics . a meta analysis shows omega 3 fatty acids improves cognitive performance among those with cognitive deficits , but not among healthy subjects . a meta-regression shows omega 3 fatty acids improve the moods of patients with major depression ( major depression is associated with mental deficits ) . however , exercise , not just performance-enhancing drugs , enhances cognition for healthy and non healthy subjects as well . on the philosophical front , conscious efforts to influence intelligence raise ethical issues . neuroethics considers the ethical , legal and social implications of neuroscience , and deals with issues such as the difference between treating a human neurological disease and enhancing the human brain , and how wealth impacts access to neurotechnology . neuroethical issues interact with the ethics of human genetic engineering . transhumanist theorists study the possibilities and consequences of developing and using techniques to enhance human abilities and aptitudes . eugenics is a social philosophy which advocates the improvement of human hereditary traits through various forms of intervention . eugenics has variously been regarded as meritorious or deplorable in different periods of history , falling greatly into disrepute after the defeat of nazi germany in world war ii . . measuring . thumb the approach to understanding intelligence with the most supporters and published research over the longest period of time is based on psychometric testing . it is also by far the most widely used in practical settings . intelligence quotient ( iq ) tests include the stanford-binet , raven 's progressive matrices , the wechsler adult intelligence scale and the kaufman assessment battery for children . there are also psychometric tests that are not intended to measure intelligence itself but some closely related construct such as scholastic aptitude . in the united states examples include the ssat , the sat , the act , the gre , the mcat , the lsat , and the gmat . regardless of the method used , almost any test that requires examinees to reason and has a wide range of question difficulty will produce intelligence scores that are approximately normal distribution in the general population . jensen , a . r . ( 1998 ) . the g factor : the science of mental ability . westport , ct : praeger . intelligence tests are widely used in educational , business , and military settings because of their efficacy in predicting behavior . iq and g ( discussed in the next section ) are correlated with many important social outcomes—individuals with low iqs are more likely to be divorced , have a child out of marriage , be incarcerated , and need long-term welfare support , while individuals with high iqs are associated with more years of education , higher status jobs and higher income . intelligence is significantly correlated with successful training and performance outcomes ( e.g . , adaptive performance ) , and iq/g is the single best predictor of successful job performance . . general intelligence factor or g . there are many different kinds of iq tests using a wide variety of test tasks . some tests consist of a single type of task , others rely on a broad collection of tasks with different contents ( visual-spatial , verbal , numerical ) and asking for different cognitive processes ( e.g . , reasoning , memory , rapid decisions , visual comparisons , spatial imagery , reading , and retrieval of general knowledge ) . the psychologist charles spearman early in the 20th century carried out the first formal factor analysis of correlations between various test tasks . he found a trend for all such tests to correlate positively with each other , which is called a positive manifold . spearman found that a single common factor explained the positive correlations among tests . spearman named it g for '' general intelligence factor '' . he interpreted it as the core of human intelligence that , to a larger or smaller degree , influences success in all cognitive tasks and thereby creates the positive manifold . this interpretation of g as a common cause of test performance is still dominant in psychometrics . ( although , an alternative interpretation was recently advanced by van der maas and colleagues . their mutualism model assumes that intelligence depends on several independent mechanisms , none of which influences performance on all cognitive tests . these mechanisms support each other so that efficient operation of one of them makes efficient operation of the others more likely , thereby creating the positive manifold . ) iq tasks and tests can be ranked by how highly they load on the g factor . tests with high g-loadings are those that correlate highly with most other tests . one comprehensive study investigating the correlations between a large collection of tests and tasks has found that the raven 's progressive matrices have a particularly high correlation with most other tests and tasks . the raven 's is a test of inductive reasoning with abstract visual material . it consists of a series of problems , sorted approximately by increasing difficulty . each problem presents a 3 x 3 matrix of abstract designs with one empty cell ; the matrix is constructed according to a rule , and the person must find out the rule to determine which of 8 alternatives fits into the empty cell . because of its high correlation with other tests , the raven 's progressive matrices are generally acknowledged as a good indicator of general intelligence . this is problematic , however , because there are substantial gender differences on the raven 's , which are not found when g is measured directly by computing the general factor from a broad collection of tests . . general collective intelligence factor or c . a recent scientific understanding of collective intelligence , defined as a group 's general ability to perform a wide range of tasks , expands the areas of human intelligence research applying similar methods and concepts to groups . definition , operationalization and methods are similar to the psychometric approach of general individual intelligence where an individual 's performance on a given set of cognitive tasks is used to measure intelligence indicated by the g factor ( psychometrics ) extracted via factor analysis . in the same vein , collective intelligence research aims to discover a ‘ c factor ’ explaining between-group differences in performance as well as structural and group compositional causes for it . . historical psychometric theories . several different theories of intelligence have historically been important for psychometrics . often they emphasized more factors than a single one like in g factor . cattell–horn–carroll theory . many of the broad , recent iq tests have been greatly influenced by the cattell–horn–carroll theory . it is argued to reflect much of what is known about intelligence from research . a hierarchy of factors for human intelligence is used . g is at the top . under it there are 10 broad abilities that in turn are subdivided into 70 narrow abilities . the broad abilities are : iq testing 101 , alan s . kaufman , 2009 , springer publishing company , fluid intelligence ( gf ) : includes the broad ability to reason , form concepts , and solve problems using unfamiliar information or novel procedures . crystallized intelligence ( gc ) : includes the breadth and depth of a person 's acquired knowledge , the ability to communicate one 's knowledge , and the ability to reason using previously learned experiences or procedures . quantitative reasoning ( gq ) : the ability to comprehend quantitative concepts and relationships and to manipulate numerical symbols . reading & writing ability ( grw ) : includes basic reading and writing skills . short-term memory ( gsm ) : is the ability to apprehend and hold information in immediate awareness and then use it within a few seconds . long-term storage and retrieval ( glr ) : is the ability to store information and fluently retrieve it later in the process of thinking . visual processing ( gv ) : is the ability to perceive , analyze , synthesize , and think with visual patterns , including the ability to store and recall visual representations . auditory processing ( ga ) : is the ability to analyze , synthesize , and discriminate auditory stimuli , including the ability to process and discriminate speech sounds that may be presented under distorted conditions . processing speed ( gs ) : is the ability to perform automatic cognitive tasks , particularly when measured under pressure to maintain focused attention . decision/reaction time/speed ( gt ) : reflect the immediacy with which an individual can react to stimuli or a task ( typically measured in seconds or fractions of seconds ; not to be confused with gs , which typically is measured in intervals of 2–3 minutes ) . see mental chronometry . modern tests do not necessarily measure of all of these broad abilities . for example , gq and grw may be seen as measures of school achievement and not iq . gt may be difficult to measure without special equipment . g was earlier often subdivided into only gf and gc which were thought to correspond to the nonverbal or performance subtests and verbal subtests in earlier versions of the popular wechsler iq test . more recent research has shown the situation to be more complex . . controversies . while not necessarily a dispute about the psychometric approach itself , there are several controversies regarding the results from psychometric research . one criticism has been against the early research such as craniometry . the mismeasure of man , stephen jay gould , norton , 1996 a reply has been that drawing conclusions from early intelligence research is like condemning the auto industry by criticizing the performance of the model t . several critics , such as stephen jay gould , have been critical of g , seeing it as a statistical artifact , and that iq tests instead measure a number of unrelated abilities . the american psychological association 's report '' intelligence : knowns and unknowns '' stated that iq tests do correlate and that the view that g is a statistical artifact is a minority one . intelligence across cultures . psychology have shown that the definition of human intelligence is unique to the culture that one is studying . robert sternberg is among the researchers who have discussed how one 's culture affects the person 's interpretation of intelligence , and he further believes that to define intelligence in only one way without considering different meanings in cultural contexts may cast an investigative and unintentionally egocentric view on the world . to negate this , psychologists offer the following definitions of intelligence : successful intelligence is the skills and knowledge needed for success in life , according to one 's own definition of success , within one 's sociocultural context . analytical intelligence is the result of intelligence 's components applied to fairly abstract but familiar kinds of problems . creative intelligence is the result of intelligence 's components applied to relatively novel tasks and situations . practical intelligence is the result of intelligence 's components applied to experience for purposes of adaption , shaping and selection . intelligence and culture , robert sternberg , american psychologist , american psychological association , 2004 , vol . 59 , no . 5 , pp . 325-338 . although typically identified by its western definition , multiple studies support the idea that human intelligence carries different meanings across cultures around the world . in many eastern cultures , intelligence is mainly related with one 's social roles and responsibilities . a chinese conception of intelligence would define it as the ability to empathize with and understand others — although this is by no means the only way that intelligence is defined in china . in several african communities , intelligence is shown similarly through a social lens . however , rather than through social roles , as in many eastern cultures , it is exemplified through social responsibilities . for example , in the language of chi-chewa , which is spoken by some ten million people across central africa , the equivalent term for intelligence implies not only cleverness but also the ability to take on responsibility . furthermore , within american culture there are a variety of interpretations of intelligence present as well . one of the most common views on intelligence within american societies defines it as a combination of problem-solving skills , deductive reasoning skills , and iq ( iq ) , while other american societies point out that intelligent people should have a social conscience , accept others for who they are , and be able to give advice or wisdom . intelligence and culture , robert serpell , handbook of intelligence , cambridge university press , 2000 , pp . 549-578 .