Fremen

origins . dune was inspired by herbert 's research for a potential article about the united states department of agriculture 's attempt to use poverty grasses to stabilize the oregon dunes in florence , oregon . herbert learned that the moving dunes could '' swallow whole cities , lakes , rivers , highways . '' he said that in studying sand dunes , we must analyze the '' black foot ( people ) of the kalahari and how they utilize every drop of water . you ca n't just stop with the people who are living in this type of environment : you have to go on to how the environment works on the people and how they work on their environment . '' herbert based fremen culture , in part , on the desert-dwelling bedouin and san people . in an early , alternate dune outline by frank herbert called spice planet , the fremen are called the '' free men '' , convicts who had been transported to '' duneworld '' to work for the spice operation of the '' hoskanners '' in exchange for a reduction in their sentence . . plot . in dune , duke leto atreides , his bene gesserit concubine lady jessica , and their son paul arrive on arrakis to take control of melange mining operations there . the mysterious fremen housekeeper at the palace of arrakeen is known as the shadout mapes , and when paul saves her life from a deadly hunter-seeker intended to kill him , mapes warns of a traitor in the atreides household . she is killed by that same traitor , suk doctor wellington yueh , as the harkonnens attack . leto is killed , and paul and jessica flee into the deep desert and find shelter with the fremen of sietch tabr . paul is immediately called out by the fremen warrior jamis , and when he kills jamis in a ritual fight to the death , paul is faced with the fremen custom of taking responsibility for jamis 's wife harah and her children . a key to fremen survival in the harsh conditions of arrakis is their ritualistic conservation of water . paul rises as a leader among the fremen , learning their ways while he and jessica train them in the bene gesserit weirding way fighting discipline . paul also becomes close to chani , the daughter of imperial planetologist liet-kynes and his fremen wife . harah tries to explain to the superstitious and wary fremen the unique nature of paul 's younger sister alia , who was changed in the womb as jessica underwent a fremen/bene gesserit ritual to replace the fremen reverend mother ramallo . paul leads the fremen to take back arrakis from the harkonnens and padishah emperor shaddam iv , placing himself on the throne . in dune messiah ( 1969 ) , a religion has arisen around paul , and a jihad is being fought in his name across the universe . korba , one of fedaykin death commandos in dune , has become one of the chief priests the religion of muad'dib . another fedaykin , farok , is one of many fremen disillusioned by the changes paul 's regime brings to their culture , and he joins the conspiracy to unseat paul initiated by the spacing guild , tleilaxu , and bene gesserit . lichna , the daughter of paul 's trusted fedaykin otheym , is killed and impersonated by the tleilaxu face dancer scytale as a means to infiltrate paul 's household , which ultimately fails . chani dies giving birth to paul 's twin heirs , leto ii and ghanima , and a blinded paul follows fremen tradition and walks into the desert to die . as regent for leto ii and ghanima , alia struggles to control paul 's virtually uncontrollable religion in children of dune ( 1976 ) . as she succumbs to abomination , sietch tabr leader stilgar , his wife harah , and princess irulan flee with leto ii and ghanima to escape alia 's worsening tyranny . though married to duncan idaho , the possessed alia takes fremen warrior buer argarves as a lover , promising him leadership of sietch tabr in return for killing stilgar . in the clandestine sietch fondak , jessica tasks fremen namri to administer an overdose of melange to leto ii as a test of his resistance to abomination , but namri has secretly been instructed by alia to kill leto no matter the result . leto recognizes a potential mate in the fondak woman sabiha , but recognizes this as an alternate path he should not take . a blind preacher emerges from the desert , guided by teenage assan tariq , son of muriz from a cast out tribe of fremen . by god emperor of dune ( 1981 ) , taking place 3500 years after children of dune , arrakis has become terraformed into a wet , lush planet . desert is now limited to the area surrounding leto ii 's fortress , and all sandworms other than the god emperor have died off , thus altering the fremen culture drastically . traditions and rituals held by ancient fremen are maintained and performed by '' museum fremen '' , though they have lost their meaning and value . in heretics of dune ( 1984 ) , 1500 years after the events of god emperor of dune , arrakis ( now called rakis ) is destroyed by the honored matres . this act killed the overwhelming majority of fremen , apart from sheeana and a few fremen descendants living on other planets . characteristics . in the series , the '' native '' fremen of arrakis live in communities called sietches , each with its own naib leader who has ascended to the position by challenging his predecessor and proving himself the strongest in the tribe . the fremen system of justice relies primarily on trial by combat , and individuals may challenge each other hand-to-hand duels to the death over matters of etiquette , law , or honor . the victor of these challenges becomes responsible for the wife , children , and certain possessions of the defeated . the fremen pay enormous spice bribes to the spacing guild to keep the atmosphere of arrakis free of spy satellites , and they have a long-term plan to terraform the planet . each sietch also has a sayyadina , a wise woman trained in the spiritual traditions of her people who can serve as a spiritual leader or as an acolyte to a holy woman who is the fremen version of a bene gesserit reverend mother . a significant part of the fremen mythology has been created by the bene gesserit missionaria protectiva , an arm of the matriarchy which practices '' religious engineering '' by introducing contrived myths , prophecies and superstition among the populations of the empire with the intent to later exploit them to the advantage of an individual bene gesserit or the entire order . in the case of the fremen , a messiah legend has been put in place that is utilized in dune by paul atreides to secure the safety of himself and his mother jessica . the fremen have a language unique to them , but also use chakobsa for ritual purposes . the fremen worship the giant sandworms of arrakis as manifestations of the earth deity they call shai'hulud . though they cross the desert on foot in a specifically nonrhythmic pattern to avoid vibrations that would attract the deadly and destructive creatures , the fremen are also able to ride the worms by '' calling '' and mounting them in a ritualized , controlled manner . as part of the sandworm life cycle , the spice drug melange is everywhere on arrakis , and the fremen diet is rich with it . such a level of exposure to the spice tints the sclera , cornea and iris of the user to a dark shade of blue , called '' blue-in-blue '' or '' the eyes of ibad . '' . water conservation . herbert illustrates that living in the desert with no natural sources of water has spurred the fremen to ritualize and build their society around the collection , storage , and conservative use of all moisture . they conserve the water distilled from their dead , consider spitting a sign of respect , and put a great cultural reverence on tears . water is collected from the atmosphere in windtraps that condense the humidity and add it to underground water stores in each sietch . water can also be collected from dead people and animals using a deathstill to remove the water from a corpse for addition to the sietch water store . personal ownership of moisture is designated by '' water rings '' , which are used as a form of currency . when outside of their sietch , fremen wear a stillsuit , a special body-enclosing suit designed to collect and recycle all the moisture the body releases through perspiration , urine , feces , and even the exhalation of water vapor in the breath . the special fabric is a micro-sandwich designed to dissipate heat and filter wastes while reclaiming moisture . the water is then held in catchpockets and made available to drink through a tube . a fremen in a well-kept suit can survive weeks in the desert without any other source of water . herbert even suggests in dune that the fremen have adapted to the environment physiologically , with their blood able to clot almost instantly in order to prevent water loss . . combat . the dangerous conditions of arrakis , which ensure that only the strongest survive , have also forged the fremen into superior hand-to-hand combatants . in dune , paul trains his fremen forces in the use of the '' weirding way '' , the fremen name for the specialized bene gesserit martial arts that he learned from his mother . the mentat assassin thufir hawat is later shocked to learn that fremen have not only overcome some of shaddam iv 's fierce and previously unstoppable sardaukar soldiers , but have done the impossible and captured some as well . herbert also writes that '' paul recalled the stories of the fremen—that their children fought as ferociously as the adults . '' in the novel shaddam notes , '' i only sent in five troop carriers with a light attack force to pick up prisoners for questioning . we barely got away with three prisoners and one carrier . mind you , baron , my sardaukar were almost overwhelmed by a force composed mostly of women , children , and old men . '' in herbert 's fictional universe , holtzman shield have made all forms of projectile weapons semi-obsolete . only a slow-moving weapon can penetrate a shield , putting knives and similar weapons in common use . the beam of energy weapons called lasguns react violently with a shield , creating an unpredictable explosion comparable to sub-atomic fusion which can kill the attacker , shield wearer , and surrounding individuals . fremen do not use shields because they also attract the native giant sandworms of arrakis and drive them into a killing frenzy . as a result , the fremen have the advantage of not being trained to slow their knives when attacking , as those battling a shielded opponent do . fremen use different archaic weapons such as maula pistols , lances and crossbows to great effect , but the most deadly and prized possession of a fremen warrior is the crysknife . a crysknife is a personally-tuned blade ground from the crystal tooth of a sandworm , and is the formal and sacred weapon of the fremen . it is a milk-white , double-edged curved knife , the blade about 20 centimeters long . the crysknife comes in two forms , fixed and unfixed . unfixed knives need to be stored in proximity to an electrical field produced by the human body or they will disintegrate after a period of time . fixed crysknives are put through chemical processes to keep them permanently intact . in children of dune , leto ii notes that '' the crysknife dissolves at the death of its owner . '' all young fremen must go through a coming of age , which is sealed with the gift of a crysknife to the adolescent warrior . according to the religious beliefs of the fremen , a drawn crysknife must not be sheathed until it draws blood . the fremen also forbid outsiders from possessing crysknives , and in dune the lady jessica refers to '' the fabled crysknife of arrakis , the blade that had never been taken off the planet , and was known only by rumor and wild gossip . '' when the shadout mapes gives one to jessica , the fremen woman warns , '' who sees that knife must be cleansed or slain ! '' . in the dune games . the fremen have been featured in the dune series of games , playing a vital role in the plots of nearly all of them . the first dune game ( 1992 ) and frank herbert 's dune ( 2001 ) are tied closely to the original book by frank herbert , retelling paul muad'dib 's rise to becoming the fremen 's messiah , and leading them against the harkonnens and the padishah emperor under the atreides banner . in dune ii ( 1992 ) and dune 2000 ( 1998 ) , the fremen are special atreides units , native elite guerillas invoked from the palace . in emperor : battle for dune ( 2001 ) they are one of the five sub-factions . references . external links . arabic and islamic themes in dune