William Cowper

life . cowper was born in berkhamsted , hertfordshire , where his father john cowper was rector of the church of st peter . his father 's sister was the poet judith madan . his mother was ann née donne . he and his brother john were the only two of seven children to live past infancy . ann died giving birth to john on 7 november 1737 . his mother ’ s death at such an early age troubled william deeply and was the subject of his poem , '' on the receipt of my mother 's picture '' , written more than fifty years later . he grew close to her family in his early years . he was particularly close with her brother robert and his wife harriot . they instilled in young william a love of reading and gave him some of his first books – john bunyan ’ s pilgrim ’ s progress and john gay ’ s fables . cowper was first enrolled in westminster school in april of 1742 after moving from school to school for a number of years . he had begun to study latin from a young age , and was an eager scholar of latin for the rest of his life . older children bullied cowper through many of his younger years . at westminster school he studied under the headmaster john nicoll . at the time , westminster school was popular amongst families belonging to england ’ s whig political party . many intelligent boys from families of a lower social status also attended , however . cowper made lifelong friends from westminster . he read through the iliad and the odyssey , which ignited his lifelong scholarship and love for homer ’ s epics . he grew skilled at the interpretation and translation of latin , which he put to use for the rest of his life . he was skilled in the composition of latin as well and wrote many verses of his own . rhodes , n . , ( ed . ) , william cowper : selected poems , psychology press , 2003 , p . 8 . after education at westminster school , cowper was articled to mr chapman , solicitor , of ely place , holborn , to be trained for a career in law . during this time , he spent his leisure at the home of his uncle bob cowper , where he fell in love with his cousin theodora , whom he wished to marry . but as james croft , who in 1825 first published the poems cowper addressed to theodora , wrote , '' her father , from an idea that the union of persons so nearly related was improper , refused to accede to the wishes of his daughter and nephew . '' this refusal left cowper distraught . he suffered his first severe attack of depression/mental illness , referred to at the time as melancholy . in 1763 he was offered a clerkship of journals in the house of lords , but broke under the strain of the approaching examination ; he experienced a period of depression and insanity . at this time he tried three times to commit suicide and was sent to nathaniel cotton 's asylum at st . albans for recovery . his poem beginning '' hatred and vengeance , my eternal portions '' ( sometimes referred to as '' sapphics '' ) was written in the aftermath of his suicide attempt . after recovering , he settled at huntingdon with a retired clergyman named morley unwin and his wife mary . cowper grew to be on such good terms with the unwin family that he went to live in their house , and moved with them to olney . there he met curate john newton , a former captain of slave ships who had devoted his life to the gospel . not long afterwards , morley unwin was killed in a fall from his horse ; cowper continued to live in the unwin home and became greatly attached to the widow mary unwin . at olney , newton invited cowper to contribute to a hymnbook that he was compiling . the resulting volume , known as olney hymns , was not published until 1779 but includes hymns such as '' praise for the fountain opened '' ( beginning '' there is a fountain fill 'd with blood '' ) and '' light shining out of darkness '' ( beginning '' god moves in a mysterious way '' ) , which remain some of cowper 's most familiar verses . several of cowper 's hymns , as well as others originally published in the olney hymns , are today preserved in the sacred harp , which also collects shape note songs . in 1773 , cowper experienced an attack of insanity , imagining not only that he was eternally condemned to hell , but that god was commanding him to make a sacrifice of his own life . mary unwin took care of him with great devotion , and after a year he began to recover . in 1779 , after newton had moved from olney to london , cowper started to write poetry again . mary unwin , wanting to keep cowper 's mind occupied , suggested that he write on the subject of the progress of error . after writing a satire of this name , he wrote seven others . these poems were collected and published in 1782 under the title poems by william cowper , of the inner temple , esq . in 1781 cowper met a sophisticated and charming widow named lady austen who inspired new poetry . cowper himself tells of the genesis of what some have considered his most substantial work , the task , in his '' advertisement '' to the original edition of 1785 : in the same volume cowper also printed '' the diverting history of john gilpin '' , a notable piece of comic verse . writing '' john gilpin '' was later credited by g . k . chesterton in orthodoxy with saving cowper from becoming completely insane . to be precise , chesterton was making , in chapter 2 of orthodoxy the point that contrary to some assumptions poetry does not make men mad , but if anything logic does . he then takes the example of cowper : '' only one great english poet went mad , cowper . and he was definitely driven mad by logic , by the . logic of predestination . poetry was not the disease , but the medicine ; poetry partly kept him in health . he was damned by john calvin ; he was almost saved by john gilpin . '' cowper and mary unwin moved to weston underwood , buckinghamshire , in 1786 , having become close with his cousin lady harriett hesketh ( theodora 's sister ) . james william kelly , ‘ hesketh , harriet , lady hesketh ( bap . 1733 , d . 1807 ) ’ , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edn , jan 2008 accessed 24 jan 2015 during this period he started his translations of homer 's iliad and odyssey into blank verse . his versions ( published in 1791 ) were the most significant english renderings of these epic poems since those of alexander pope earlier in the century . later critics have faulted cowper 's homer for being too much in the mould of john milton . in 1789 cowper befriended a cousin , dr john johnson , a norfolk clergyman , and in 1795 cowper and mary moved to norfolk to be near him and his sister catharine . they originally stayed at north tuddenham , then at dunham lodge near swaffham and then mundesley before finally settling in east dereham , with the johnsons , after mary unwin became paralysed . catharine bodham johnson , introduction to letters of lady hesketh to the rev . john johnson ll.d . ( 1901 ) , pp . 5–8 mary unwin died in 1796 , plunging cowper into a gloom from which he never fully recovered . he did continue to revise his homer for a second edition of his translation . aside from writing the powerful and bleak poem , '' the castaway '' , he penned some english translations of greek verse and translated some of the fables of john gay into latin . death and memorials . cowper was seized with dropsy in the spring of 1800 and died . he is buried in the chapel of st thomas of canterbury , st nicholas 's church in east dereham , and a stained-glass window there commemorates his life . in st peter 's church in berkhamsted there are two windows in memory of cowper : the east window by clayton & bell ( 1872 ) depicts cowper at his writing desk accompanied by his pet hares , and bears the inscription '' salvation to the dying man , and to the rising god '' ( a line from cowper 's poem '' the saviour , what a noble flame '' ) ; and in the north aisle , an etched glass window is inscribed with lines from '' oh ! for a closer walk with god '' and '' the task '' . in the same church there is also a memorial tablet to the poet 's mother , ann cowper . cowper is also commemorated ( along with george herbert ) by another clayton & bell stained-glass window in st george 's chapel , westminster abbey . in 1823 , cowper 's correspondence was published posthumously from the original letters in the possession of his kinsman john johnson . near the village of weston underwood , where cowper once resided , is a folly named cowper 's alcove . the folly was built by the lord of the manor of weston house , a member of the throckmorton family in 1753 . cowper is known to visit here frequently for inspiration for his poetry . the alcove is mentioned in cowper 's '' the task '' . the folly was dedicated to cowper by the buckinghamshire county council green belt estate , and a plaque with the verse from '' the task '' referencing the alcove was installed . works . poems . the snail , 1730 the winter nosegay , 1777 olney hymns , 1778–1779 , in collaboration with john newton john gilpin , 1782 epitaph on a hare , 1782 cowper ’ s first independent volume , poems by william cowper , of the inner temple , esq . , 1782 the rose , 1783 the task , 1785 the morning dream , 1788 homer 's iliad and odyssey , 1791 ( translations from the greek ) . the retired cat , 1791 to mary , 1793 on the ice islands seen floating in the german ocean , 1803 the castaway , 1803 hatred and vengeance , my eternal portion , 1815 the poplar-field , 1785 lines written during a period of insanity , 1816 . hymns . cowper is represented with fifteen hymns in american presbyterian edwin hatfield 's 1872 opus : sv : the church hymn book 1872 . 127 jesus ! where'er thy people meet 357 the spirit breathes upon the word 450 there is a fountain , filled with blood 790 hark ! my soul ! it is the lord 856 to jesus , the crown of my hope 871 far from the world , o lord ! i flee 885 my lord ! how full of sweet content ( 1782 translation ) 932 what various hindrances we meet 945 oh ! for a closer walk with god 965 when darkness long has veiled my mind 1002 tis my happiness below 1009 o lord ! in sorrow i resign ( 1782 translation ) 1029 o lord ! my best desire fulfill 1043 there is a safe and secret place 1060 god of my life ! to thee i call . familiar quotations . moves in a mysterious way , his wonders to perform ; he plants his footsteps in the sea , and rides upon the storm . : there is a fountain fill 'd with blood drawn from 's veins ; and sinners , plung 'd beneath that flood , lose all their guilty stains . : oh ! for a closer walk with , a calm and heav'nly frame ; a light to shine upon the road that leads me to the lamb ! : god made the country , and man made the town . : there is a pleasure in poetic pains which only poets know . : variety 's the very spice of life , that gives it all its flavour . : i am monarch of all i survey , my right there is none to dispute ; from the centre all round to the sea , i am lord of the fowl and the brute . : no voice divine the storm allay 'd , no light propitious shone ; when , snatch 'd from all effectual aid , we perish 'd , each alone ; but i beneath a rougher sea , and whelmed in deeper gulphs than he . : 't is pleasant , through the loopholes of retreat , to peep at such a world ; to see the stir of the great babel , and not feel the crowd ; to hear the roar she sends through all her gates at a safe distance , where the dying sound falls a soft murmur on the uninjur 'd ear . : . see also . list of abolitionist forerunners . notes .