Wan Chai

urban decay and renewal . many of wan chai 's older buildings now face a serious problem of urban decay . to tackle the problem , the government has launched a series of urban renewal projects to bring new life into the area . many local residents have relocation worries such as whether the urban renewal authority can compensate enough to put them in a new space of equal size . other concerns involve the loss of building character that make up part of that culture of hong kong . demolition of lee tung st – old buildings on lee tung street are scheduled for demolition . many businesses have shut down or moved out . today , most stores have signs on their gate proclaiming '' this is an urban renewal authority property '' . renovation of tai yuen st – visitors may gain a distinctive experience of bustling local street-stall shopping in tai yuen street . many huckster stalls sell a wide variety of dried goods , garments , household products , dumplings , and chinese herbal medicine . this predominantly tourist attraction area is a place where old houses and modern mansions mingle , creating an interesting disparity . renewal of southorn playground – in partnership with the wan chai district council , the british council invited english designer , thomas heatherwick , and urban renewal specialist , fred manson , to lead a public art project at southorn playground . central and wan chai reclamation ( from 2007 ) . after the completion of the central and wan chai reclamation feasibility study in 1989 , the land development policy committee endorsed the idea of an ongoing series of reclamation . the reclamation comprises three discrete development areas to be aligned by public parks , namely , central , tamar and exhibition . the urban development of each cell would be further divided into five subsequent phases . as of 2014 , reclamation for the central area has been completed : the area is largely taken by the new government offices and the legislative council of hong kong ( its old building in the heart of central has been reverted to its original use as the supreme court ) . government . the hong kong immigration department has its headquarters at the immigration tower in wan chai . '' contact us . '' immigration department . retrieved on 14 august 2011 . '' immigration department immigration tower , 7 gloucester road , wan chai , hong kong '' the hong kong police force operates from the wan chai district ; their headquarters is located at the wan chai police district headquarters , 1 arsenal street . '' hong kong police force . '' government of hong kong . retrieved on 14 august 2011 . within the hong kong police headquarters compound . maggie farley of the los angeles times said in 1996 , referring to the then wan chai police station , that the police headquarters was '' a stolid , whitewashed building with square pillars and breezy verandas '' . farley , maggie . '' law enforcement ; colony 's expatriate police see '97 as incentive to hand in badges ; those who opt to leave hong kong cite reasons ranging from uncertainty under chinese rule to perks for early retirement . series : lives in transition . hong kong awaits china 's takeover . one in an occasional series . '' los angeles times . 6 december 1996 . part a foreign desk . retrieved on 14 august 2011 . '' in the wan chai police headquarters , a stolid , whitewashed building with square pillars and breezy verandas . '' . transportation . geographically , wan chai is the crossing point between the central and western district ( west point/central ) , and the eastern ( causeway bay/north point ) district . its thoroughfares connect the main developed areas along the northern coast of hong kong island . the transport in hong kong is efficient , convenient and highly accessible . the mtr trains run between kennedy town and chai wan ( north-eastern part of hong kong island ) a new station will be built in wanchai as part of the shatin-central link . trams run between kennedy town and shau kei wan ( north-eastern part of hong kong island ) buses travel along thoroughfares such as gloucester road and hennessy road , with destinations as different parts of hong kong ferry services from wan chai pier to tsim sha tsui in kowloon , across the victoria harbour . ferries . the star ferry at wan chai pier the sole ferry operator in the area . frequent services cross the victoria harbour from hkcec , wan chai to the cultural centre in tsim sha tsui . in light of more convenient and competitive cross-harbour public transportation , the star ferry continues to provide an inexpensive option to local commuters . numerous shipping companies , such as the anglo-eastern group , also have their headquarters in wan chai . main roads and tunnels . image : gloucester road.jpg thumb gloucester road in wan chai . wan chai 's gloucester road , an east–west trunk route along the northern coast , is connected to cross-harbour tunnel , the first undersea tunnel in hong kong . this tunnel is connected to the south by a direct viaduct from its landing point on hong kong island to the aberdeen tunnel towards the southern coast . bray , denis . 2001 ( 2001 ) . hong kong metamorphosis . hong kong university press . connecting hong kong island at kellett island ( the site of the royal navy club ) to a reclaimed site at hung hom bay in kowloon , this tunnel provides a direct link by road . prior to the tunnel 's opening in 1972 , local drivers and pedestrians depended solely upon the star ferry services to cross the victoria harbour . harper , damian . 2005 ( 2005 ) . china . lonely planet . linking the main financial districts on both sides of victoria harbour , the tunnel carries 123,000 vehicles daily . on the other hand , the thoroughfare queen 's road east , an extension from queen 's road west at kennedy town , through queen 's road central at central , queensway at admiralty , takes a southerly route to provide an alternative east–west road link . due to wan chai 's early involvement in the british colonial administration , road names were often taken from previous governors , such as hennessy road , and notable people ( gloucester road , jaffe road , lockhart road , johnston road , fleming road , luard road , o'brien road , marsh road , stewart road , mcgregor street , etc . ) . thoroughfares , roads and streets : amoy street anton street arsenal street convention avenue cross lane cross street electric street expo drive expo drive central expo drive east fenwick pier street fenwick street fleming road gresson street harbour road hennessy road hill side terrace jaffe road johnston road landale street lockhart road lee tung avenue laurd road lun fat street marsh road monmouth path moon street , starstreet precinct o ’ brien road performing arts avenue queen 's road east salvation army street schooner street ship street spring garden lane st . francis street st . francis yard star street , starstreet precinct stewart road stone nullah lane sun street , starstreet precinct swatow street tai wong street east tai wong street west tai yuen street thomson road tonnochy road triangle street wan chai road wood road . mass transit railway . image : mtr wan chai station ( 1 ) . jpg thumb wan chai station thumb the main mtr railway lies beneath hennessy road , a thoroughfare , in the locality . due to the large size of wan chai , more than 50 entry/exit gates and 8 entrances/exits are set up . an extension project was carried out in the early 2000s ; it created two additional entrances/exits , one of which connects to the footbridge network from the hong hong exhibition and convention centre to the station . then this footbridge is also interconnected with covered corridor of buildings along the victoria harbour , and ends up at wan chai pier . mtr : island line – wan chai . trams . tram services run between shau kei wan on the northeastern part of the island and kennedy town on the west , with a circular branch serving happy valley and the happy valley racecourse . the tram route runs across johnston road and hennessy road . buses . most buses travel in wan chai from admiralty to causeway bay via hennessy road or , in the opposite direction , johnston road and gloucester road . taxis . red taxi ( urban ) services are available to hire in wan chai . these can be pre-booked by telephone ; however , hailing on the street is a more common way of getting a taxicab . vehicles that carry a green plate at the front of their cars are able to carry passengers across the victoria harbour to kowloon . there are , however , areas with restricted kerbs and designated pick-up and drop-off points in the area . minibus . there are two types of minibuses in wan chai , the green minibus and the red minibus . in general , green minibuses operate on scheduled service with fixed routes and published fares . red minibuses run with government licence but on non-scheduled services , casually connecting regular travellers and commuters to specific urban areas across hong kong island . drivers of red minibuses will display fares in the front of their minibus windshields . routes : green : 4a , 4b , 4c , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 14m , 21a , 21m , 24a , 24m , 25 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 35m , 36x , 39m , 40 , 56 , 69 red : sai wan – causeway bay ( sogo ) / shau kei wan tsuen wan – wan chai – causeway bay . the return to tsuen wan stop is in front of wan chai computer centre . sheung shui – wan chai yuen long – wan chai . see also . wan chai district wan chai pier hong kong convention and exhibition centre golden bauhinia square . references . external links . wan chai district council a memoir of a wan chai district resident ( traditional chinese only ) display wan chai 1841–1997 government records service