Oshawa

health care . oshawa is the site of lakeridge health oshawa , formerly oshawa general hospital . lakeridge health is one of ontario 's largest community hospitals . the facility also houses the rs . mclaughlin durham regional cancer centre . lakeridge health oshawa is also home to lakeridge health education and research network ( lhearn ) that opened in 2013 . lhearn is the academic home for queen 's university family physician residency program and for pediatric residency and training . lhearn centre provides training and testing medical professionals , including doctors , nurses and first responders ( including ornge critical care air ambulance paramedics ) . oshawa is also home to the oshawa clinic , the largest , multi-specialty medical group practice in canada . on 24 april 2020 , general motors canada reopened the city 's local plant in order to manufacture personal protective equipment for healthcare workers treating patients infected with covid-19 during the covid-19 pandemic in ontario . . emergency services . policing in oshawa is provided by the durham regional police service . there are two police stations in oshawa one at 77 centre street north in the downtown area , and a south oshawa community policing centre on cedar street . ems/ambulance services are also operated by the region of durham . oshawa fire services operated by the city operates from six fire stations located throughout the city . oshawa was the first city in ontario to provide paramedic services . in 1979 , 16 ambulance attendants were given specialized training to treat cardiac related problems in the pre-hospital setting . the program was called the pre-hospital cardiac care ( phcc ) program . from this single service , paramedic training was expanded to toronto , hamilton and the provincial air ambulance service . the program has been the source of all paramedic programs in ontario . education . public education in oshawa is provided by the durham district school board . as of june 2015 , there were 28 elementary schools and six secondary schools . the durham catholic district school board , which has its headquarters in oshawa , oversees public catholic education in durham region . there are 10 catholic elementary schools and two secondary schools . the conseil scolaire viamonde operates one french public elementary school , while the conseil scolaire de district catholique centre-sud runs one publicly funded french-language catholic elementary school . private schools include durham elementary school , immanuel christian school , kingsway college and college park elementary school . oshawa is home to 22,000 full-time students studying at three post-secondary institutions durham college , trent university durham and university of ontario institute of technology ( uoit ) . oshawa is a community teaching site for queen 's university school of medicine at lakeridge health . the main campus of durham college is located in the city . the college has grown and expanded since it opened in 1967 and now offers more than 140 full-time programs . the university of ontario institute of technology ( uoit ) opened in 2003 . given the city 's industrial heritage , the university 's courses emphasize technology , manufacturing and engineering themes . uoit has ten buildings at two stand-alone campus locations ( north oshawa and downtown oshawa ) and houses more than 70 specialized research laboratories and research facilities . it is the only university in canada to offer a degree program in automotive engineering . trent university durham has a long history in oshawa . in 2010 , the university opened a stand-alone campus in oshawa ( beside the oshawa civic recreation complex ) . media . oshawa has few media outlets of its own due to its proximity to toronto . the city has one am station , ckdo ( 1580 ) , which is rebroadcast on 107.7 fm , and one fm station , 94.9 ckge . both stations are owned by durham radio , which also owns cjkx , which is licensed to the nearby community of ajax , although all three stations are operated from the same studios at the oshawa executive airport . ckdo has officially been licensed as a clear-channel station since 2006 and is the only full-power station in canada on 1580 am it nonetheless operates at a fifth of the usual power of a clear-channel outlet with a directional signal that is pointed away from the united states . oshawa has a global o & o station , chex-tv-2 ( channel 12 ) , which is a sister station of peterborough 's chex-dt . it airs a daily supper hour news and current affairs program targeted to durham region viewers . although a larger city than peterborough then and now , oshawa was not granted a television station in the original 1950s assignments as it was geographically too close to toronto , since the original spacings were set at . rogers cable , the local cable television service provider , operates rogers tv : a community channel with local television programming for cable subscribers . oshawa is served by several community newspapers , including the oshawa express , an independent which is published every wednesday , and oshawa this week , published two times per week by metroland . the long-standing daily newspaper , the oshawa times ( also known at various times as the oshawa daily times and times-gazette ) , was closed by its owner thomson newspapers , after a lengthy strike in 1994 . john short larke was the proprietor of the oshawa vindicator , a strongly pro-conservative newspaper , in the late 19th century . oshawa is home to artsforum magazine , a not-for-profit magazine of arts and ideas launched in fall 2000 by john arkelian , its publisher and editor-in-chief . topics in the magazine range from foreign policy to film . '' creating a forum for the arts '' . reflections , durham college alumni magazine , fall 2008 , volume 65 . page 4 . . notable people . sean avery , nhl hockey player sherwood bassin , general manager in the ontario hockey league daniel caesar , singer-songwriter lloyd chadburn , canadian world war ii fighter pilot a . j . cook , actress jerry edmonton , member of steppenwolf shirley eikhard , songwriter '' something to talk about '' evangeline lydia emsley , nurse in world war i shalom harlow , canadian supermodel and actress sandy hawley , horse jockey kathryn humphreys , sports anchor donald jackson , figure skater who won the bronze at the 1960 olympics lennon & maisy , country music duo , songwriters and actresses . star as maddie & daphne conrad on the abc musical drama series nashville matt leyden , manager of oshawa generals and ontario hockey association president john j . mclaughlin , son of robert mclaughlin and inventor of canada dry pale ginger ale robert mclaughlin , founder of the mclaughlin motor car company , which became a major part of general motors canada . john part , three-time world darts champion the stellas , country music duo and songwriters stephen poloz , governor of the bank of canada albert w . tucker , mathematician barbara underhill , figure skater tonya lee williams , actress