Iannis Xenakis

life . 1922–47 : early years . xenakis was born in brăila , romania . he was the eldest son of klearchos xenakis , a greek businessman from euboea , and fotini pavlou from lemnos . his parents were both interested in music , and it was fotini who introduced the young xenakis to music . her early death , when xenakis was five years old , was a traumatic experience that , in his own words , '' deeply scarred '' the future composer . matossian , 13 . he was subsequently educated by a series of governesses , and then , in 1932 , sent to a boarding school on the aegean island of spetses , greece . he sang in the school 's boys ' choir , where the repertoire included works by palestrina , and mozart 's requiem , which xenakis memorized in its entirety . varga , 14 . it was also at the spetses school that xenakis studied notation and solfège , and became enamoured of greek traditional and church music . in 1938 , after graduating from the spetses school , xenakis moved to athens to prepare for entrance exams at the national technical university of athens . although he intended to study architecture and engineering , he also took lessons in harmony and counterpoint with aristotelis koundouroff . matossian , 14–17 . in 1940 , he successfully passed the exams , but his studies were cut short by the greco-italian war , which began with the italian invasion on 28 october 1940 . although greece eventually won the war , it was not long before the german army joined the italians in the battle of greece , in april 1941 . this led to the axis occupation of greece during world war ii , which lasted until late 1944 , when the allies began their drive across europe , forcing the axis forces to withdraw . xenakis joined the national liberation front early during the war , participating in mass protests and demonstrations , and later becoming part of armed resistance—this last step was a painful experience xenakis refused to discuss until much later in life . matossian , 18–27 . varga , 14–19 . after the axis forces left , churchill ordered that british forces step in to help restore the greek monarchy ; they were opposed by the democratic army of greece , and the country plunged into a civil war . in december 1944 , during the period of churchill 's martial law , gilbert , martin . ( 1966 ) . winston churchill . oxford university press . p . 56 . xenakis ( who was by then a member of the communist students ' company of the left-wing lord byron faction of elas ) became involved in street fighting against british tanks . he was wounded and facially disfigured when shrapnel from a tank blast hit his cheek and left eye , which was blinded ; that xenakis survived the injury has been described as a miracle . harley , 2 . barthel-calvet , anne-sylvie . ( 2002 ) . '' chronologie '' . in portrait ( s ) de iannis xenakis , edited by françois-bernard mâche , pp . 25–82 . paris : bibliothèque nationale de france . the technical university operated intermittently during these years . despite this , and xenakis 's other activities , he was able to graduate in 1947 , with a degree in civil engineering . baltensperger , andré . ( 1995 ) . iannis xenakis und die stochastische musik – komposition im spannungsfeld von architektur und mathematik . zürich . paul haupt . p . 72 . xenakis was then conscripted into the national armed forces . around 1947 the greek government began arresting former resistance members that were left-wing oriented and sending them to prison . xenakis , fearing for his life , went into hiding . with the help of his father and others he fled greece through italy . on 11 november 1947 he arrived in paris . in a late interview , xenakis admitted to feeling tremendous guilt at leaving his country , and that guilt was one of the sources of his later devotion to music : for years i was tormented by guilt at having left the country for which i 'd fought . i left my friends—some were in prison , others were dead , some managed to escape . i felt i was in debt to them and that i had to repay that debt . and i felt i had a mission . i had to do something important to regain the right to live . it was n't just a question of music—it was something much more significant . varga , 47 . in the meantime , in greece he was sentenced ( in absentia ) to death by the right-wing administration . the sentence was commuted to ten years ' imprisonment in 1951 , and only lifted some 23 years later , after the fall of the greek junta in 1974 . harley , 92 . . 1947–59 : architecture and music . although he was an illegal immigrant in paris , xenakis was able to get a job at le corbusier 's architectural studio . he worked as engineering assistant at first , but quickly rose to performing more important tasks , and eventually to collaborating with le corbusier on major projects . these included a kindergarten on the roof of an apartment block in nantes ( rezé ) ( also : unité d'habitation of nantes-rezé ) , parts of government buildings in chandigarh , india , the '' undulatory glass surfaces '' of sainte marie de la tourette , a dominican priory in a valley near lyon , and the philips pavilion at expo 58—the latter project was completed by xenakis alone , from a basic sketch by le corbusier . hoffmann the experience xenakis gained played a major role in his music : important early compositions such as metastaseis ( 1953–54 ) were based directly on architectural concepts . at the same time , while working for le corbusier , xenakis was studying harmony and counterpoint , and composing . he worked long and hard , frequently far into the night , matossian , 37 . and sought guidance from a number of teachers , most of whom , however , ultimately rejected him . such was the case with nadia boulanger , who was the first person xenakis approached about lessons . he then tried studying with arthur honegger , whose reaction to xenakis 's music was unenthusiastic . as xenakis recounted in a 1987 interview , honegger dismissed a piece which included consecutive fifths as '' not music '' . xenakis , who was by that time well acquainted with music of debussy , béla bartók , and stravinsky , all of whom used such devices and much more experimental ones , was furious and left to study with darius milhaud , but these lessons also proved fruitless . then , annette dieudonné , a close friend of boulanger 's , recommended that xenakis try studying with olivier messiaen . harley , 4 . xenakis approached messiaen for advice : should he once again start studying harmony and counterpoint ? messiaen later recalled : i understood straight away that he was not someone like the others . & nbsp ; . he is of superior intelligence . & nbsp ; . i did something horrible which i should do with no other student , for i think one should study harmony and counterpoint . but this was a man so much out of the ordinary that i said . no , you are almost thirty , you have the good fortune of being greek , of being an architect and having studied special mathematics . take advantage of these things . do them in your music . matossian , 48 . francisco estévez has described this work as '' mathematical formulas translated . into beautiful , exciting , and above all , convincing music . '' thatcher , nathan . 2016 . paco . new york : mormon artists group . p . 116 . xenakis attended messiaen 's classes regularly in 1951–53 . messiaen and his students studied music from a wide range of genres and styles , with particular attention to rhythm . for a study of messiaen 's teaching methods , see boivin 1995 , . xenakis 's compositions from 1949–52 were mostly inspired by greek folk melodies , as well as bartók , ravel , and others ; after studying with messiaen , he discovered serialism and gained a deep understanding of contemporary music ( messiaen 's other pupils at the time included , for example , karlheinz stockhausen and jean barraqué ) . messiaen 's modal serialism was an influence on xenakis 's first large-scale work , anastenaria ( 1953–54 ) : a triptych for choir and orchestra based on an ancient dionysus ritual . the third part of the triptych , metastaseis , is generally regarded as the composer 's first mature piece ; it was detached from the triptych to mark the beginning of the '' official '' xenakis oeuvre . in 1953 , xenakis married françoise xenakis ( née gargouïl ) , journalist and writer , whom he met in 1950 . xenakis , françoise , and andreas waldburg-wolfegg . '' mme xenakis in conversation '' , translated by sarah green and maro elliott . international contemporary ensemble website ( archive from 11 june 2015 , accessed 29 april 2016 ) . their daughter mâkhi , later a painter and sculptor , was born in 1956 . in late 1954 , with messiaen 's support , xenakis was accepted into the groupe de recherches de musique concrète , harley , 12 . an organization established by pierre schaeffer and pierre henry , dedicated to studying and producing electronic music of the musique concrète variety . shortly after that xenakis met conductor hermann scherchen , who was immediately impressed by the score of metastaseis and offered his support . although scherchen did not premiere that particular work , he did give performances of later pieces by xenakis , and the relationship between the conductor and the composer was of vital importance for the latter . matossian , 77–79 . by the late 1950s xenakis slowly started gaining recognition in artistic circles . in 1957 , he received his first composition award , from the european cultural foundation , and in 1958 the first official commission came through , from service de recherche of radio france . harley , 23 . in the same year he produced a musique concrète piece , concret ph , for the philips pavilion , and , in 1960 , xenakis was well-known enough to receive a commission from unesco , for a soundtrack for a documentary film by enrico fulchignoni . harley , 19 . . later life . after leaving le corbusier 's studio in 1959 , xenakis supported himself by composition and teaching , and quickly became recognized as one of the most important european composers of his time . he became especially known for his musical research in the field of computer-assisted composition , for which he founded the equipe de mathématique et automatique musicales ( emamu ) in 1966 ( known as cemamu : centre d ’ etudes de mathématique et automatique musicales , since 1972 ) . he taught at indiana university in 1967–72 ( and established a studio similar to emamu there ) , and worked as visiting professor at the sorbonne in 1973–89 . xenakis frequently gave lectures ( for instance , from 1975 to 1978 he was professor of music at gresham college , london , giving free public lectures ) , cole , jonathan 2009 . '' music and architecture : confronting the boundaries between space and sound '' . gresham college ( 21 september , archive from 18 january 2015 , accessed 29 april 2016 ) taught composition , and his works were performed at numerous festivals worldwide , including the shiraz arts festival in iran . notable students include pascal dusapin , henning lohner , miguel ángel coria and susan frykberg . in addition to composing and teaching , xenakis also wrote a number of articles and essays on music . of these , musiques formelles ( 1963 ) became particularly known . a collection of texts on applications of stochastic processes , game theory and computer programming in music , it was later revised , expanded and translated into english as formalized music : thought and mathematics in composition ( 1971 ) during xenakis 's tenure at indiana university . xenakis was an atheist . zbigniew skowron , describing aïs , wrote '' in accordance with his atheist views , xenakis emphasizes the finality of death as the ultimate event of human life , and this is probably why wild shrieks and moans punctuate his score '' . skowron , zbigniew ( ed . ) . ( 2001 ) . lutosławski studies . oxford and new york : oxford university press . pp . 122–23 . xenakis himself wrote , '' man is one , indivisible , and total . he thinks with his belly and feels with his mind . i would like to propose what , to my mind , covers the term '' music '' : & nbsp ; . 7 . it is a mystical ( but atheistic ) asceticism & nbsp ; . '' . xenakis , iannis . ( 1992 ) . formalized music : thought and mathematics in composition , second edition . harmonologia series , no . 6 . stuyvesant , ny : pendragon press . p . 181 . xenakis completed his last work , o-mega for percussion soloist and chamber orchestra , in 1997 . his health had been getting progressively worse over the years , and by 1997 he was no longer able to work . in 1999 , xenakis was awarded the polar music prize '' for a long succession of forceful works , charged with sensitivity , commitment and passion , through which he has come to rank among the most central composers of our century in the realm of art music , exercising within its various fields an influence which can not be readily overstated '' . '' iannis xenakis , laureate of the polar music prize 1999 '' . polar music prize website ( accessed 29 april 2016 ) after several years of serious illness , on 1 february 2001 the composer lapsed into a coma . he died in his paris home four days later , on 4 february , aged 78 . he was survived by his wife and his daughter . griffiths , paul . ( 5 february 2001 ) . '' iannis xenakis , composer who built music on mathematics , is dead at 78 '' . the new york times , p . b7 . works . specific examples of mathematics , statistics , and physics applied to music composition are the use of the statistical mechanics of gases in pithoprakta , statistical distribution of points on a plane in diamorphoses , minimal constraints in achorripsis , the normal distribution in st/10 and atrées , markov chains in analogique , game theory in duel , stratégie , and linaia-agon , group theory in nomos alpha ( for siegfried palm ) , set theory in herma and eonta , chrissochoidis , ilias , stavros houliaras , and christos mitsakis . ( 2005 ) . '' set theory in xenakis ' eonta '' . in international symposium iannis xenakis , edited by anastasia georgaki and makis solomos , pp . 241–49 . athens : the national and kapodistrian university . and brownian motion in n'shima . persephassa , commissioned by the shiraz arts festival , was performed by les percussions de strasbourg , receiving its world premiere in persepolis in 1969 . subsequently , he was once again commissioned by the shiraz arts festival and composed persepolis for the occasion , a '' polytope '' composed specific to the historic site . although electroacoustic compositions represent only a small fraction of xenakis 's output , they are highly relevant to musical thinking in the late 20th century . important works in this medium include concret ph ( 1958 ) , analogique b ( 1958–59 ) , bohor ( 1962 ) , la légende d'eer ( 1977 ) , mycenae-alpha ( 1978 ) , voyage absolu des unari vers andromède ( 1989 ) , gendy301 ( 1991 ) , and s709 ( 1994 ) . discipio , 201 . by 1979 , he had devised a computer system called upic , which could translate graphical images into musical results . hugill , andrew . ( 2008 ) . the digital musician . new york : routledge . pp . 95 , 182 . '' xenakis had originally trained as an architect , so some of his drawings , which he called 'arborescences ' , resembled both organic forms and architectural structures . '' these drawings ' various curves and lines that could be interpreted by upic as real time instructions for the sound synthesis process . the drawing is , thus , rendered into a composition . mycenae-alpha was the first of these pieces he created using upic as it was being perfected . discipio , 220 . xenakis also developed an stochastic synthesizer algorithm ( used in gendy ) , called dynamic stochastic synthesis , where a polygonal waveform 's sectional borders ' amplitudes and distance between borders may be generated using a form of random walk to create both aleatoric timbres and musical forms . serra , 241 . further material may be generated by then refeeding the original waveform back into the function or wave forms may be superimposed . elastic barriers or mirrors are used to keep the randomly generated values within a given finite interval , so as to not exceed limits such as the audible pitch range , avoid complete chaos ( white noise ) , and to create a balance between stability and instability ( unity and variety ) . despite xenakis 's reputation as a '' mathematical '' composer , his works are known for their power and physicality . alex ross wrote that xenakis '' produced some of the rawest , wildest music in history—sounds that explode around the ears . rarefied methods were employed to release primordial energies . '' ben watson expressed admiration for the '' terrifying emotional impact of xenakis ' sonic objectivity '' , describing his music as possessing '' truly majestic otherness . it is an alien shard , glimmering in the heart of the west . '' tom service praised xenakis ' music for its '' shattering visceral power '' and '' sheer , scintillating physicality '' , noting its '' deep , primal rootedness in richer and older phenomena even than musical history : the physics and patterning of the natural world , of the stars , of gas molecules , and the proliferating possibilities of mathematical principles . '' service described xenakis as a composer '' whose craggily , joyously elemental music turned collections of pitches and rhythms and instruments into a force of nature , releasing a power that previous composers had only suggested metaphorically but which he would realise with arguably greater clarity , ferocity , intensity than any musician , before or since , '' and suggested that his music is '' expressive : not in a conventionally emotional way , perhaps , but it has an ecstatic , cathartic power . xenakis 's music – and its preternaturally brilliant performers - allows its listeners to witness seismic events close at hand , to be at the middle of a musical happening of cosmic intensity . '' service concluded : '' it took xenakis for music to become nature . on holiday in corsica , xenakis would pilot his canoe into the teeth of the biggest storm he and his paddle could manage . when you 're listening to his music , you also go out there into the eye of a musical storm that will invigorate , inspire , and awe . see you out there . '' . writings . xenakis , iannis . 2001 . formalized music : thought and mathematics in composition ( harmonologia series no.6 ) . hillsdale , new york : pendragon press .