Soft power

description . joseph nye introduced the concept of '' soft power '' in the late 1980s . for nye , power is the ability to influence the behavior of others to get the outcomes you want . there are several ways one can achieve this : you can coerce them with threats ; you can induce them with payments ; or you can attract and co-opt them to want what you want . this soft power – getting others to want the outcomes you want – co-opts people rather than coerces them . it can be contrasted with 'hard power ' , which is the use of coercion and payment . soft power can be wielded not just by states but also by all actors in international politics , such as ngos or international institutions . joseph nye , soft power : the means to success in world politics it is also considered the '' second face of power '' that indirectly allows you to obtain the outcomes you want . a country 's soft power , according to nye , rests on three resources : '' its culture ( in places where it is attractive to others ) , its political values ( when it lives up to them at home and abroad ) , and its foreign policies ( when others see them as legitimate and having moral authority ) . '' soft power resources are the assets that produce attraction which often leads to acquiescence . nye asserts that , '' seduction is always more effective than coercion , and many values like democracy , human rights , and individual opportunities are deeply seductive . '' nye , joseph . soft power : the means to success in world politics ( new york : public affairs , 2004 ) p . x . angelo codevilla observed that an often overlooked essential aspect of soft power is that different parts of populations are attracted or repelled by different things , ideas , images , or prospects . angelo m . codevilla , '' political warfare : a set of means for achieving political ends , '' in waller , ed . , strategic influence : public diplomacy , counterpropaganda and political warfare ( iwp press , 2008 ) . soft power is hampered when policies , culture , or values repel others instead of attracting them . in his book , nye argues that soft power is a more difficult instrument for governments to wield than hard power for two reasons : many of its critical resources are outside the control of governments , and soft power tends to '' work indirectly by shaping the environment for policy , and sometimes takes years to produce the desired outcomes . '' lord , carnes , '' public diplomacy and soft power , '' in waller , ed . , strategic influence : public diplomacy , counterpropaganda and political warfare ( iwp press , 2008 . ) pp . 59–71 . the book identifies three broad categories of soft power : '' culture '' , '' political values '' , and '' policies . '' in the future of power ( 2011 ) , nye reiterates that soft power is a descriptive , rather than a normative , concept . therefore , soft power can be wielded for nefarious purposes . '' hitler , stalin , and mao all possessed a great deal of soft power in the eyes of their acolytes , but that did not make it good . it is not necessarily better to twist minds than to twist arms . '' nye also claims that soft power does not contradict the international relations theory of realism . '' soft power is not a form of idealism or liberalism . it is simply a form of power , one way of getting desired outcomes . '' . limitations of the concept . soft power has been criticized as being ineffective by authors such as niall ferguson in the preface to colossus . neorealist and other rationalist and neorationalist authors ( with the exception of stephen walt ) dismiss soft power out of hand as they assert that actors in international relations respond to only two types of incentives : economic incentives and force . as a concept , it can be difficult to distinguish soft power from hard power . for example , janice bially mattern argues that george w . bush 's use of the phrase '' you are either with us or with the terrorists '' was in fact an exercise of hard power . though military and economic force was not used to pressure other states to join its coalition , a kind of force – representational force – was used . this kind of force threatens the identity of its partners , forcing them to comply or risk being labeled as evil . this being the case , soft power is therefore not so soft . page 586 . there are also recent articles about the concept 's neglect of its defensive use . since nye 's approach '' mainly focuses on how to get others to do your biding '' , some researchers argued that rising powers , such as china , are creating new approaches to soft power , thus using it defensively . additionally , others have argued that more attention needs to be paid towards locating and understanding how actors ' attempts at soft power can backfire , leading to reputational damage or loss , or what has been termed 'soft disempowerment' . . measurement . the first attempt to measure soft power through a composite index was created and published by the institute for government and the media company monocle in 2010 . the ifg-monocle soft power index combined a range of statistical metrics and subjective panel scores to measure the soft power resources of 26 countries . the metrics were organized according to a framework of five sub-indices including culture , diplomacy , education , business/innovation , and government . the index is said to measure the soft power resources of countries , and does not translate directly into ability influence . monocle has published an annual soft power survey since then . as of 2016/17 , the list is calculated using around 50 factors that indicate the use of soft power , including the number of cultural missions ( primarily language schools ) , olympic medals , the quality of a country 's architecture and business brands . the soft power 30 , which includes a foreword by joseph nye , is a ranking of countries ' soft power produced and published by the media company portland in 2015 . the ranking is based on '' the quality of a country ’ s political institutions , the extent of their cultural appeal , the strength of their diplomatic network , the global reputation of their higher education system , the attractiveness of their economic model , and a country ’ s digital engagement with the world . '' the elcano global presence report scores the eu first for soft presence . soft power , then , represents the third behavioral way of getting the outcomes you want . soft power is contrasted with hard power , which has historically been the predominant realist measure of national power , through quantitative metrics such as population size , concrete military assets , or a nation 's gross domestic product . but having such resources does not always produce the desired outcomes , as the united states discovered in the vietnam war . the success of soft power heavily depends on the actor 's reputation within the international community , as well as the flow of information between actors . thus , soft power is often associated with the rise of globalization and neoliberalism ( international relations ) . popular culture and mass media are regularly identified as a source of soft power , as is the spread of a national language or a particular set of normative structures . more particularly , world news was found crucial in shaping the image and reputation of foreign countries . the high prominence of the us in international news , for example , has been linked to its soft power . positive news coverage was associated with positive international views , while negative news coverage with negative views . ; it is headquarters for major international corporations , many of which choose to be listed on the london stock exchange . ; ; ; following the poisoning of sergei and yulia skripal in 2018 , the uk responded with bilateral and multilateral diplomatic efforts that led to nations around the world expelling one hundred and fifty russian diplomats , described by cnn as a '' remarkable diplomatic coup for britain '' . british prime minister theresa may stated in parliament that the coordinated global response was the '' largest collective expulsion of russian intelligence officers in history . '' subsequently , russia attempted to attribute some of the influence to the united states , this was seen to be a propaganda exercise designed to damage the uk 's international prestige and found to be untrue following statements by the various states as well as the entirety of the european union . the great campaign of 2012 was one of the most ambitious national promotion efforts ever undertaken by any major nation . it was scheduled take maximum advantage of the worldwide attention to the 2012 summer olympics . the goals were to make british culture more visible in order to stimulate trade , investment and tourism . the government partnered with key leaders in culture , business , diplomacy and education . the campaign unified many themes and targets , including business meetings ; scholarly conventions ; recreational vehicle dealers ; parks and campgrounds ; convention and visitors bureaus ; hotels ; bed and breakfast inns ; casinos ; and hotels . james pamment , '' 'putting the great back into britain ' : national identity , public-private collaboration & transfers of brand equity in 2012 's global promotional campaign , '' british journal of politics & international relations ( 2015 ) 17 2 pp 260-283 . pawel surowiec , and philip long , “ hybridity and soft power statecraft : the ‘ great ’ campaign . ” diplomacy & statecraft 31:1 ( 2020 ) : 1-28 . online review . united states . the foreign relations of the united states has long had a great deal of soft power . joseph s . nye , '' the future of soft power in us foreign policy . '' in soft power and us foreign policy ( routledge , 2010 ) . 16-23 . examples of the impact include franklin d . roosevelt 's four freedoms in europe to motivate the allies in world war ii ; people behind the iron curtain listening to the government 's foreign propaganda arm radio free europe ; newly liberated afghans in 2001 asking for a copy of the bill of rights and young iranians today surreptitiously watching banned american videos and satellite television broadcasts in the privacy of their homes . america 's early commitment to religious tolerance , for example , was a powerful element of its overall appeal to potential immigrants ; and american aid in the reconstruction of europe after world war ii was a propaganda victory to show off the prosperity and the generosity of the people of the united states . studies of american broadcasting into the soviet bloc , and testimonials from czech president václav havel , polish president lech wałęsa , and russian president boris yeltsin support that soft power efforts of the united states and its allies during the cold war were ultimately successful in creating the favorable conditions that led to the collapse of the soviet union . carnes lord , '' public diplomacy and soft power , '' in waller , ed . , strategic influence : public diplomacy , counterpropaganda and political warfare ( iwp press , 2008 ) . india .