Sand dollar

anatomy . image : encope emarginata ( leske , 1778 ) derivate 2013.jpg thumb encope emarginata ( aboral and oral faces ) by ernst haeckel ( 1904 ) image : clypeaster rosaceus ( linnaeus , 1758 ) derivate 2013.jpg thumb clypeaster rosaceus ( aboral and oral faces ) by ernst haeckel ( 1904 ) sand dollars , like all members of the order clypeasteroida , possess a rigid skeleton called a test . the test consists of calcium carbonate plates arranged in a fivefold symmetric pattern . in living individuals , the test is covered by a skin of velvet-textured spines which are covered with very small hairs ( cilia ) . coordinated movements of the spines enable sand dollars to move across the seabed . the velvety spines of live sand dollars appear in a variety of colors—green , blue , violet , or purple—depending on the species . individuals which are very recently dead or dying ( moribund ) are sometimes found on beaches with much of the external morphology still intact . dead individuals are commonly found with their empty test devoid of all surface material and bleached white by sunlight . the bodies of adult sand dollars , like those of other echinoids , display radial symmetry . the petal-like pattern in sand dollars consists of five paired rows of pores . the pores are perforations in the endoskeleton through which podia for gas exchange project from the body . the mouth of the sand dollar is located on the bottom of its body at the center of the petal-like pattern . unlike other urchins , the bodies of sand dollars also display secondary front-to-back bilateral symmetry . the anus of sand dollars is located at the back rather than at the top as in most urchins , with many more bilateral features appearing in some species . these result from the adaptation of sand dollars , in the course of their evolution , from creatures that originally lived their lives on top of the seabed ( epibenthos ) to creatures that burrow beneath it ( endobenthos ) . the common sand dollar , echinarachnius parma , is widespread from the intertidal zone to considerable depths in the ocean waters of the northern hemisphere . it can be found in temperate and tropical zones . the keyhole sand dollar ( three species , genus mellita ) is found on a wide range of coasts in and around the caribbean sea . echinocyamus_pusillus.jpg echinocyamus pusillus alive . live sand dollar trying to bury itself in beach sand.jpg living sand dollar . group of sand dollars in monterey bay aquarium.jpg eccentric sand dollars ( dendraster excentricus ) at monterey bay aquarium . echinarachnius parma ( 6806969731 ) . jpg echinarachnius parma ( family echinarachniidae ) . file : keyhole sand dollar 01.jpg mellita quinquiesperforata test ( clypeasteridae ) file : clypeaster reticulatus both sides.jpg clypeaster reticulatus test ( clypeasteridae ) file : echinodiscus2.jpg echinodiscus tenuissimus test ( astriclypeidae ) file : clypeaster aegypticus ( inside ) . jpg clypeaster aegypticus , showing internal buttresses . suborders and families . according to world register of marine species : sub-order clypeasterina family clypeasteridae l . agassiz , 1835 family fossulasteridae philip & foster , 1971 † family scutellinoididae irwin , 1995 † family conoclypidae von zittel , 1879 † family faujasiidae lambert , 1905 † family oligopygidae duncan , 1889 † family plesiolampadidae lambert , 1905 † sub-order scutellina infra-order laganiformes family echinocyamidae lambert & thiéry , 1914 family fibulariidae gray , 1855 family laganidae desor , 1858 infra-order scutelliformes family echinarachniidae lambert in lambert & thiéry , 1914 family eoscutellidae durham , 1955 † family protoscutellidae durham , 1955 † family rotulidae gray , 1855 super-family scutellidea gray , 1825 family abertellidae durham , 1955 † family astriclypeidae stefanini , 1912 family dendrasteridae lambert , 1900 -- pacific eccentric sand dollar . family mellitidae stefanini , 1912 -- keyhole sand dollars family monophorasteridae lahille , 1896 † family scutasteridae durham , 1955 † family scutellidae gray , 1825 family taiwanasteridae wang , 1984 family scutellinidae pomel , 1888a † image : sanddollar2.jpg underside of live mellita quinquiesperforata image : sanddollarsonseabed.jpg a number of sand dollars on the seabed image : mitchelville beach park 021008 sand dollar.jpg sand dollar beneath the sand at low tide on hilton head island file : key biscayne fl sea biscuit clypeaster rosaceus.jpg live sea biscuit , clypeaster rosaceus , commonly found off key biscayne , florida . common name . the term '' sand dollar '' derives from the appearance of the tests ( skeletons ) of dead individuals after being washed ashore . the test lacks its velvet-like skin of spines and has often been bleached white by sunlight . to beachcombers of the past , this suggested a large , silver coin , such as the old spanish dollar ( diameter 38–40 mm ) . other english names for the creatures include sand cake and cake urchin . frederick converse beach , george edwin rines - the americana : a universal reference library , comprising the arts and sciences , literature , history , biography , geography , commerce , etc . , of the world , volume 4 . the americana : a universal reference library , comprising the arts and sciences , literature , history , biography , geography , commerce , etc . , of the world . scientific american compiling department , 1912 in south africa , they are known as pansy shells from their suggestion of a five-petaled pansy . the caribbean sand dollar or inflated sea biscuit , clypeaster rosaceus , is thicker in height than most . in spanish-speaking areas of the americas , the sand dollar is most often known as ( sea cookie ) ; the translated term is often encountered in english . the various common terms ( sand dollar , sea biscuit , etc . ) sometimes appear printed in hyphenated forms ( sand-dollar , sea-biscuit ) . lifestyle and habitat . sand dollars live beyond the mean low water line on top of or just beneath the surface of sandy or muddy areas . the spines on the somewhat flattened underside of the animal allow it to burrow or to slowly creep through the sediment . fine , hair-like cilia cover the tiny spines . podia line the food grooves that move food to the mouth opening , which is in the center of the star-shaped grooves on the underside of the animal ( called the oral surface ) . its food consists of crustacean larvae , small copepods , diatoms , algae and detritus . monterey bay aquarium : online field guide on the ocean bottom , sand dollars are frequently found together . this is due in part to their preference for soft bottom areas , which are convenient for their reproduction . the sexes are separate and , as with most echinoids , gametes are released into the water column and are conceived by external fertilization . the nektonic larvae metamorphose through several stages before the skeleton or test begins to form , at which point they become benthos . in 2008 , biologists discovered that sand dollar larvae clone themselves as a mechanism of self-defense . cloning is an asexual reproductive mechanism , where the cost is borne by the larva both in resources as well as in development time . larvae have been observed to undergo this process when food is plentiful or temperature conditions are optimal . it has also been suggested that cloning may occur to make use of the tissues that are normally lost during metamorphosis . recent research has shown that the larvae of some sand dollars clone themselves when they detect predators ( by sensing dissolved fish mucus ) . larvae exposed to mucus from predatory fish respond to the threat by cloning themselves , thus doubling their numbers while effectively halving their size . the smaller larvae are better able to escape detection by fish , but may be more vulnerable to predation by smaller animals , such as pelagic and planktonic larval stages of crustaceans . sand dollars in their mature form have few natural predators , though ocean pouts and sunflower seastar are known to eat them on occasion . sand dollars have spines on their bodies that help them to move around the ocean floor . when a sand dollar dies , it loses the spines and becomes smooth as the exoskeleton is then exposed . . evolution . the ancestors of sand dollars diverged from the other irregular echinoids , namely the cassiduloida , during the early jurassic , rapid evolution in echinoids with the first true sand dollar genus , togocyamus , arising during the paleocene . soon after togocyamus , more modern-looking groups emerged during the eocene . . folklore . dead sand dollars are sometimes said to represent coins lost by mermaids or the people of atlantis . some christian missionary found symbolism in the fivefold radial pattern and dove-shaped internal structures , comparing the holes with the crucifixion of jesus , and other features with the star of bethlehem , an easter lily , a poinsettia , and doves . . references . external links . the common sand dollar by cheryl page video showing the life cycle of clypeaster subdepressus