Committee

purpose . a deliberative assembly may form a committee ( or '' commission '' ) consisting of one or more persons to assist with the work of the assembly . for larger organizations , much work is done in committees . committees can be a way to formally draw together people of relevant expertise from different parts of an organization who otherwise would not have a good way to share information and coordinate actions . they may have the advantage of widening viewpoints and sharing out responsibilities . they can also be appointed with experts to recommend actions in matters that require specialized knowledge or technical judgment . functions . committees can serve several different functions : ; governance : in organizations considered too large for all the members to participate in decisions affecting the organization as a whole , a smaller body , such as a board of directors , is given the power to make decisions , spend money , or take actions . a governance committee is formed as a separate committee to review the performance of the board and board policy as well as nominate candidates for the board . ; coordination and administration : a large body may have smaller committees with more specialized functions . examples are an audit committee , an elections committee , a finance committee , a fundraising committee , and a program committee . large conventions or academic conferences are usually organized by a coordinating committee drawn from the membership of the organization . ; research and recommendations : committees may be formed to do research and make recommendations on a potential or planned project or change . for example , an organization considering a major capital investment might create a temporary working committee of several people to review options and make recommendations to upper management or the board of directors . ; discipline : a committee on discipline may be used to handle disciplinary procedures on members of the organization . ; as a tactic for indecision : as a means of public relations by sending sensitive , inconvenient , or irrelevant matters to committees , organizations may bypass , stall , or disacknowledge matters without declaring a formal policy of inaction or indifference . however , this could be considered a dilatory tactic . . power and authority . generally , committees are required to report to their parent body . committees do not usually have the power to act independently unless the body that created it gives it such power . . procedures . when a committee is formed , a chairman ( or '' chair '' or '' chairperson '' ) is designated for the committee . sometimes a vice-chairman ( or similar name ) is also appointed . it is common for the committee chairman to organize its meetings . sometimes these meetings are held through videoconferencing or other means if committee members are not able to attend in person , as may be the case if they are in different parts of the country or the world . the chairman is responsible for running meetings . duties include keeping the discussion on the appropriate subject , recognizing members to speak , and confirming what the committee has decided ( through voting or by unanimous consent ) . using roberts rules of order ( ronr ) , committees may follow informal procedures ( such as not requiring motions if it 's clear what is being discussed ) . the level of formality depends on the size and type of committee , in which sometimes larger committees considering crucial issues may require more formal processes . minutes are a record of the decisions at meetings . they can be taken by a person designated as the secretary . for most organizations , committees are not required to keep formal minutes . however , some bodies require that committees take minutes , especially if the committees are public ones subject to open meeting laws . committees may meet on a regular basis , such as weekly or more often , or meetings may be called irregularly as the need arises . the frequency of the meetings depends on the work of the committee and the needs of the parent body . when the committee completes its work , it provides the results in a report to its parent body . the report may include the methods used , the facts uncovered , the conclusions reached , and any recommendations . if the committee is not ready to report , it may provide a partial report or the assembly may discharge the committee of the matter so that the assembly can handle it . also , if members of the committee are not performing their duties , they may be removed or replaced by the appointing power . whether the committee continues to exist after presenting its report depends on the type of committee . generally , committees established by the bylaws or the organization 's rules continue to exist , while committees formed for a particular purpose go out of existence after the final report . commit ( motion ) . in parliamentary procedure , the motion to commit ( or refer ) is used to refer another motion—usually a main motion—to a committee . a motion to commit should specify to which committee the matter is to be referred , and if the committee is a special committee appointed specifically for purposes of the referred motion , it should also specify the number of committee members and the method of their selection , unless that is specified in the bylaws . any proposed amendments to the main motion that are pending at the time the motion is referred to a committee go to the committee as well . once referred , but before the committee reports its recommendations back to the assembly , the referred motion may be removed from the committee 's consideration by the motion to discharge a committee . recommit . in the united states house of representatives , a motion to recommit can be made with or without instructions . if the motion is made without instructions , the bill or resolution is simply sent back to the committee . if the motion is made with instructions and the motion is agreed to , the chairman of the committee in question will immediately report the bill or resolution back to the whole house with the new language . in this sense , a motion to recommit with instructions is effectively an amendment . . variations for full assembly consideration . in robert 's rules of order newly revised ( ronr ) , the motion to commit has three variations which do not turn a question over to a smaller group , but simply permit the assembly 's full meeting body to consider it with the greater freedom of debate that is allowed to committees . these forms are to go into a committee of the whole , to go into a quasi-committee of the whole , and to consider informally . passing any of these motions removes the limitations on the number of times a member can speak . the standard code of parliamentary procedure has informal consideration , but does not have '' committee of the whole '' and '' quasi committee of the whole '' . . discharge a committee . in robert 's rules of order newly revised , the motion to discharge a committee is used to take a matter out of a committee 's hands before the committee has made a final report on it . a committee can use this motion to discharge a subcommittee . the vote required is a majority vote if the committee has failed to report at the prescribed time or if the assembly is considering a partial report of the committee . otherwise , it requires a majority vote with previous notice ; or a two-thirds vote ; or a majority of the entire membership . under the standard code of parliamentary procedure , the assembly that has referred a motion or a matter to a committee may , by a majority vote , withdraw it at any time from the committee , refer it to another committee , or decide the question itself . . types . executive committee . organizations with a large board of directors ( such as international labor unions , large corporations with thousands of stock holders or national and international organizations ) may have a smaller body of the board , called an executive committee , handle its business . the executive committee may function more like a board than an actual committee . in any case , an executive committee can only be established through a specific provision in the charter or bylaws of the entity ( i.e . a board can not appoint an executive committee without authorization to do so ) . members of the executive committee may be elected by the overall suffrage membership or by the board , depending on the rules of the organization . however formed , an executive committee only has such powers and authority that the governing documents of the organization give it . in some cases , it may be empowered to act on behalf of the board or organization , while in others , it may only be able to make recommendations . . conference committee . governments at the national level may have a conference committee . a conference committee in a bicameral legislature is responsible for creating a compromise version of a particular bill when each house has passed a different version . united states congressional conference committee is a temporary panel of negotiators from the house of representatives and the senate . unless one chamber decides to accept the other 's original bill , the compromise version must pass both chambers after leaving the conference committee . the committee is usually composed of the senior members of the standing committees that originally considered the legislation in each chamber . other countries that use conference committees include france , germany , japan , and switzerland . in canada , conference committees have been unused since 1947 . in the european union ( eu ) legislative process , a similar committee is called a conciliation committee , which carries out the trilogue negotiations in case the council does not agree with a text amended and adopted by the european parliament at a second reading . although the practice has fallen out of favour in other australian parliaments , the parliament of south australia still regularly appoints a '' conference of managers '' from each house to negotiate compromises on disputed bills in private . . different use of term . in organizations , the term '' conference committee '' may have a different meaning . this meaning may be associated with the conferences , or conventions , that the organization puts together . the committees that are responsible for organizing such events may be called '' conference committees '' . standing committee . a standing committee is a subunit of a political or deliberative body established in a permanent fashion to aid the parent assembly in accomplishing its duties , for example by meeting on a specific , permanent policy domain ( e.g . defence , health , or trade and industry ) . a standing committee is granted its scope and powers over a particular area of business by the governing documents . standing committees meet on a regular or irregular basis depending on their function , and retain any power or oversight originally given them until subsequent official actions of the governing body ( through changes to law or by-laws ) disbands the committee . legislatures . most governmental legislative committees are standing committees . the phrase is used in the legislatures of the following countries : australia australian house of representatives committees australian senate committees canada list of committees of the canadian house of commons standing committee ( canada ) china standing committee of the national people 's congress politburo standing committee of the communist party of china iceland list of standing committees of the icelandic parliament india standing committee ( india ) malaysia dewan rakyat committees dewan negara committees new zealand new zealand house of representatives committees united kingdom parliamentary committees of the united kingdom public bill committee united states standing committee ( united states congress ) under the laws of the united states of america , a standing committee is a congressional committee permanently authorized by united states house of representatives and united states senate rules . the legislative reorganization act of 1946 greatly reduced the number of committees , and set up the legislative committee structure still in use today , as modified by authorized changes via the orderly mechanism of rules changes . examples in organizations . examples of standing committees in organizations are an audit committee , an elections committee , a finance committee , a fundraising committee , a governance committee , and a program committee . typically , the standing committees perform their work throughout the year and present their reports at an annual meeting of the organization . these committees continue to exist after presenting their reports , although the membership in the committees may change . nominating committee . a nominating committee ( or nominations committee ) is a group formed for the purpose of nominating candidates for office or the board in an organization . it may consist of members from inside the organization . sometimes a governance committee takes the role of a nominating committee . depending on the organization , this committee may be empowered to actively seek out candidates or may only have the power to receive nominations from members and verify that the candidates are eligible . a nominating committee works similarly to an electoral college , the main difference being that the available candidates , either nominated or '' written in '' outside of the committee 's choices , are then voted into office by the membership . it is a part of governance methods often employed by corporate bodies , business entities , and social and sporting groups , especially clubs . the intention is that they be made up of qualified and knowledgeable people representing the best interests of the membership . in the case of business entities , their directors will often be brought in from outside , and receive a benefit for their expertise . in the context of nominations for awards , a nominating committee can also be formed for the purpose of nominating persons or things held up for judgment by others as to their comparative quality or value , especially for the purpose of bestowing awards in the arts , or in application to industry 's products and services . the objective being to update , set , and maintain high and possibly new standards . steering committee . a steering committee is a committee that provides guidance , direction and control to a project within an organization . the term is derived from the steering mechanism that changes the steering angle of a vehicle 's wheels . project steering committees are frequently used for guiding and monitoring it projects in large organizations , as part of project governance . the functions of the committee might include building a business case for the project , planning , providing assistance and guidance , monitoring the progress , controlling the project scope and resolving conflicts . as with other committees , the specific duties and role of the steering committee vary among organizations . special committee . a special committee ( or working , select , or ad hoc committee ) is established to accomplish a particular task or to oversee a specific area in need of control or oversight . many are research or coordination committees in type or purpose , and are temporary . some are a sub-group of a larger society with a particular area of interest which are organized to meet and discuss matters pertaining to their interests . for example , a group of astronomers might be organized to discuss how to get the larger society to address near earth objects . a subgroup of engineers and scientists of a large project 's development team could be organized to solve some particular issue with offsetting considerations and trade-offs . once the committee makes its final report to its parent body , the special committee ceases to exist . . subcommittee . a committee that is a subset of a larger committee is called a subcommittee . committees that have a large workload may form subcommittees to further divide the work . subcommittees report to the parent committee and not to the general assembly . . committee of the whole . when the entire assembly meets as a committee to discuss or debate , this is called a '' committee of the whole '' . this is not an actual committee but a procedural device that is more commonly used in legislative bodies . central committee . central committee was the common designation of a standing administrative body of communist party , analogous to a board of directors , whether ruling or non-ruling in the 20th century and of surviving communist states in the 21st century . in such party organizations the committee would typically be made up of delegates elected at a party congress . in those states where it constituted the state power , the central committee made decisions for the party between congresses , and usually was ( at least nominally ) responsible for electing the politburo . in non-ruling communist parties , the central committee is usually understood by the party membership to be the ultimate decision-making authority between congresses once the process of democratic centralism has led to an agreed-upon position . see also . caucus list of iec technical committees list of the czech republic senate committees committee for the promotion of virtue and the prevention of vice ( saudi arabia ) parliamentary committees of the united kingdom popular committees ( disambiguation ) revolutionary committee ( disambiguation ) standing committees of the european parliament united states congressional committee