Barbara Castle

opposition . in may 1970 , wilson called a general election , held on 18 june . the conservative party , led by edward heath , enjoyed a surprise victory , despite opinion polling indicating a steady lead for labour in the run-up . castle privately blamed complacency within labour for their loss and had expressed skepticism of their poll lead , writing in her diaries : '' i have a haunting feeling there is a silent majority sitting behind its lace curtains waiting to come out and vote tory . '' in the immediate aftermath of the government 's defeat , castle found she was out of favour with wilson . the day following the general election , wilson held a final inner cabinet meeting at downing street , to which castle was not invited . eager to make contact , she later called him at chequers , where wilson engaged in a brusque telephone conversation with her . refusing to acknowledge her career had been curtailed , castle proposed to run for deputy leadership of the parliamentary labour party . when she informed wilson of her plans he was furious ; castle 's reputation within the party had been damaged by the failure of in place of strife and wilson censured her , claiming her plan would split the party . in an act of retribution for her challenge to the deputy leadership , wilson impeded ted castle 's peerage , which he had all but promised prior to the general election . castle remained as the labour shadow spokesperson on employment . the new government introduced many of her policy suggestions as part of their industrial relations act . when she was attacking the conservative bill , the government simply pointed to her own white paper , following which wilson reshuffled her first to the health portfolio and then out of the shadow cabinet . return to cabinet . . secretary of state for health and social services , 1974–1976 . despite having been on the labour back benches since 1972 and not part of the shadow cabinet , in 1974 , after harold wilson 's defeat of edward heath , castle became secretary of state for social services . while serving in this position , castle introduced a wide range of innovative welfare reforms , including the introduction of the mobility allowance , the carer 's allowance ( july 1976 ) for single women and others who give up their jobs to care for severely disabled relatives , the introduction of a non-contributory invalidity pension for disabled persons who had not qualified for invalidity pension , reforms in child allowances , and the linking of most social security benefits to earnings rather than prices . anthony seldon and kevin hickson ( eds ) , new labour , old labour : the wilson and callaghan governments , 1974–79 . in the 1975 referendum debate she took a eurosceptic stance . during a debate with liberal leader jeremy thorpe he asked her whether , if the vote would be yes , she would stay on as a minister . to this she replied : '' if the vote is yes my country will need me to save it . '' despite her views she later became a member of the european parliament ( 1979–1989 ) . her public support of leaving the eec infuriated wilson . castle recorded in her diary and in her subsequent autobiography that wilson summoned her to downing street where he angrily accused her of disloyalty and that as he had brought her back into the cabinet against other 's wishes and advice , he deserved better from her . castle claimed she offered to resign , but wilson calmed down and she continued to campaign for leaving in the referendum . castle , barbara . the castle diaries 1964-1976 . macmillan ( abridged version 11 jun . 1993 ) . castle , barbara . fighting all the way . pan ; main market edition ( 9 sept . 1994 ) . would be paid directly to mothers , not fathers , unlike family allowance , the previous system in place . the legislation faced opposition from unions whose male members would receive less take-home pay with the loss of family allowance . castle remained in cabinet until wilson 's resignation in march 1976 . the head of the downing street policy unit , bernard donoughue , records in his diary that he warned wilson that castle 's dogged pursuit of personal policy stances on public health would '' wreck the nhs '' . donoughue claims that wilson agreed , but admitted he would leave it to his successor to resolve . downing street diary : with harold wilson at no.10 . jonathan cape , 2001 . castle lost her place as a cabinet minister when her bitter political enemy james callaghan succeeded wilson as prime minister following a leadership election . although he left wilson 's cabinet virtually unchanged , he dismissed castle almost immediately upon taking office , in the midst of a complex health bill that she was steering through the house commons at the time . although he had not yet decided on her successor at the time he fired her , callaghan removed her under the pretext he wanted to lower the average age of his cabinet , which she regarded as a '' phoney reason '' . in an interview years later , she remarked that perhaps the most restrained thing she had ever achieved in her life was not to reply with '' then why not start with yourself , jim ? '' ( callaghan was four years older than wilson , the man he was replacing , and less than 18 months younger than castle ) . castle was angry to discover that wilson had broken a private confidence in informing callaghan that she had intended to retire from the cabinet before the next election . . european parliament ( 1979–1989 ) . despite her eurosceptic stance , less than a month after leaving westminster at the 1979 general election she stood for and was elected to the european parliament , writing in the tribune that '' politics is not just about policies : it is about fighting for them in every available forum and at every opportunity . '' in 1982 she wrote in the new statesman that labour should abandon its opposition to british membership of the eec , saying that britain should fight its corner inside it . barbara castle , 'let them throw us out ' , new statesman ( 17 september 1982 ) , pp . 10–11 . this led her former ally ian mikardo to say to her : '' your name is mud '' . the times ( 10 june 1993 ) , p . 37 . she represented greater manchester north from 1979–1984 , and was then elected for another five years to represent greater manchester west from 1984–1989 . she was , at that time , the only british mep to have held a cabinet position . in the european parliament castle led labour 's delegation , serving as vice-chair of the socialist group and as a member of the committee on agriculture and rural development and also the delegation for relations with malta . the castle diaries were published in two volumes in 1980 and 1984 , chronicling her time in office from 1964–1976 and providing an insight into the workings of cabinet government . edmund dell , reviewing the diaries that cover the years 1974–76 in the london review of books , said that it '' shows more about the nature of cabinet government – even though it deals with only one cabinet – than any previous publication , academic , political or biographical . it is , i think , better than crossman '' . edmund dell , ' keeping left ' , london review of books , vol . 2 no . 19 ( 2 october 1980 ) , pp . 13–14 . michael foot in the listener claimed that the diary , '' whatever else it is or not , is a human document , hopelessly absorbing '' . the times ( 16 october 1980 ) , p . 7 . paul johnson in the sunday telegraph wrote that it was '' a contribution of first rate importance to our knowledge of modern politics '' . . life peer . in 1974 , ted castle was made a life peer . this meant that barbara was now formally lady castle , but she refused to use this courtesy title . ted castle died in 1979 . on 16 july 1990 , she was created a life peer in her own right , as baroness castle of blackburn , of ibstone in the buckinghamshireshire . she remained active in politics right up until her death , attacking the then chancellor , gordon brown , at the labour party conference in 2001 for his refusal to link pensions to earnings . castle was a critic of blairism and '' new labour '' , in particular with blairite economic ideologies , which she perceived to be acceptance of '' market economics , unchallenged globalisation and the dominance of the multinationals '' . she also accused blairites of distorting and dismissing the labour party 's past , stating in an interview published in the new statesman magazine in 2000 , the party 's centenary : '' they do not seem to have realised that all governments , whatever their complexion , end in apparent failure . macmillan was triumphant in 1959 and was biting the dust shortly afterwards . heath won in 1970 and spent three and half years doing u-turns , looking for the perfect answer . thatcher was a remarkable woman , but her premiership ended in ignominy . but the current leadership seems preoccupied by the failing of labour in power and in opposition . '' . death . barbara castle died of pneumonia and chronic lung disease at hell corner farm , her home in ibstone , buckinghamshire , on 3 may 2002 . . legacy . castle has been acknowledged as the most important female labour politician of the 20th century . an adept and gripping orator , castle garnered a reputation as a strong-willed , sometimes single-minded crusader . political commentator andrew marr wrote of castle in 1993 : '' performance has been at the centre of her career . she makes excellent television and was a good commons speaker . but she was really made for the platform , either at labour conferences or during election campaigns . there , her wit , self-confidence and theatricality were displayed . a good castle speech is unforgettable . '' she was admired by bill deedes , conservative politician and editor of the daily telegraph , for '' her astonishing tenacity , her capacity for getting her own way in cabinet and nearly everywhere else , '' though he derided her politics . to her allies , castle was loyal and would fiercely defend them . colleague roy hattersley credited her with saving his career by insisting he remain her junior minister when harold wilson attempted to sack him . nevertheless , she remained unforgiving of her enemies ; when questioned on james callaghan in a 2000 interview in the new statesman , castle said : '' i think it is safest all round if i do n't comment on him . '' referred to disparagingly by fellow labour mp gerald kaufman as '' the norma desmond of politics . always ready for her close-up '' , she was noted for always paying particular attention to her appearance . variously described as sophisticated , stylish and glamorous , castle was also characterised as vain , while her critics called her egocentric . former labour leader neil kinnock recalled she was distraught when her hairdresser cancelled before a television appearance ; in response , castle said : '' if you 're a woman in the public eye , getting your hair nice is a constant preoccupation . '' her weekly appointments with her hairdresser were '' an essential friday engagement '' according to hattersley , although she occasionally wore a wig – which she nicknamed lucy – for public appearances without the benefit of her hairdresser to hand . in 2008 , castle was named by the guardian as one of four of '' labour 's greatest heroes '' '' labour 's greatest hero : barbara castle '' , the guardian , 19 september 2008 . and in 2016 she was named on bbc radio 4 's woman 's hour power list as one of seven women judged to have had the biggest impact on women 's lives over the past 70 years , alongside margaret thatcher , helen brook , germaine greer , jayaben desai , bridget jones , and beyoncé . '' margaret thatcher tops woman 's hour power list '' , bbc news ( arts & entertainment ) , 14 december 2016 . several women politicians have cited castle as an inspiration for embarking on their careers , including shadow foreign secretary emily thornberry , tulip siddiq , and former conservative mp edwina currie . since castle 's death there have been several plans mooted to memorialise her with a statue in her constituency town of blackburn , most recently in 2018 . in the town a dual carriageway that constitutes part of the ring road is named barbara castle way . she was commemorated on a postage stamp issued as part of the royal mail 's women of distinction series in 2008 for piloting the equal pay act through parliament . she appears on the 81p denomination . castle was portrayed by british actress miranda richardson in the 2010 film made in dagenham , dealing with the 1968 strike at the ford dagenham assembly plant . she was later portrayed by stage actress sophie-louise dann in the 2014 west end made in dagenham ( musical ) . in the third series of netflix drama the crown , castle is portrayed by lorraine ashbourne . in the bbc1 drama ‘ ’ the trial of christine keeler ’ ’ ( 2019–2020 ) castle is portrayed by buffy davis . honours and awards . barbara castle was the recipient of '' the order of the companions of or tambo in silver '' , a south african award to foreign nationals for friendship with that country . in a statement the south african government recognised castle 's '' outstanding contribution to the struggle against apartheid and the establishment of a non-sexist , non-racial and democratic south africa '' . this can be seen throughout castle 's career with her active support for the anti-apartheid movement ( aam ) in britain from the very start of its existence and her continued interest and devotion to colonial issues within parliament . in 2002 castle was posthumously awarded an honorary degree from the open university . the award , doctor of the university , was presented for public services for works in areas of special educational concern to the ou . '' ou honours barbara castle '' , the open university , 1 july 2002 . retrieved 8 june 2013 . castle also received a bundesverdienstkreuz in 1990 , for services to european democracy . in september 2008 northern rail , blackburn with darwen borough council and pteg ( passenger transport executive group ) named a train after her . the plaque was unveiled by barbara 's niece , sonya hinton , and ruth kelly mp ( then secretary of state for transport ) . a commemorative brochure of the event was produced by pteg . books by barbara castle . the castle diaries , 1974–1976 , weidenfeld & nicolson , 1980 . the castle diaries , 1964–1970 , weidenfeld & nicolson , 1984 . sylvia and christabel pankhurst , penguin books , 1987 . fighting all the way , macmillan , 1993 .