Andebu

general information . andebu has large areas of woodland . the main villages are andebu , høyjord , and kodal . the church buildings in all three villages are from the middle ages ; kodal church ( kodal kirke ) dates from the 12th century ; høyjord stave church ( høyjord stavkyrkje ) was built around 1150–1200 . name . the old norse form of the name was andabú . the meaning of the first element is unknown and the last element is bú which means '' district '' . prior to 1889 , the name was written '' andebo '' . . coat-of-arms . the coat of arms is from modern times . they were granted on 12 december 1986 . the arms show three silver triangles , each for one of the three villages/parishes in the municipality : andebu , høyjord , and kodal . the three triangles also form the letter a , the initial of the municipality . the colour green represents agriculture and forestry larsen , erlend ( 2016 ) . tre kommuner blir til én : suksesskriteriene bak nye sandefjord . e-forl . page 158 . . history . various historical artifacts and burial mounds dated to the viking age have been discovered in andebu . finds include a bronze key , a stone axe , arrows , and more . burial mounds have been discovered on approximately 30 farms in andebu , including 17 in andebu proper , 5 in høyjord , and 7 in kodal . some mounds are dated back as far as 500 bce , i.e . over a thousand years prior to the viking age . large amounts of burial mounds are found at nordre haugan , nedre skjelland , våle , vestre høyjord , bjørndal , and gjerstad . gallis , arne ( 1975 ) . andebu bygdebok : kulturbind . andebu kommune . page 14 . the 14th century black plague had a devastating impact on andebu . it is estimated that the population was 600 as of 1600 a.d . , approximately the same amount as prior to the plague . gallis , arne ( 1975 ) . andebu bygdebok : kulturbind . andebu kommune . page 4 . andebu municipality was established on 1 january 1838 , with priest jens h . otterbeck as its first mayor . otterbeck served as mayor for 24 years and was the longest-serving mayor of andebu . . geography . andebu lies in the interior central parts of vestfold county . most of andebu is forested , but numerous rivers and mountains can also be found in andebu . rivers include merkedamselva , which flows through eastern parts of høyjord village . steinselva ( skorgeelva ) , bergselva and bølevannsbekken are other rivers . lakes include stålerødvannet , heievannet , goksjø , and others . the highest points of the former municipality are in northwestern parts near the village of høyjord . some peaks include brånafjell , which is the tallest peak in sandefjord municipality , as well as åletjønnåsen and storås . smaller peaks include bustingen , skørsåsane , and storås by skjeau . the municipality of andebu was home to 35 lakes , including askjemvannet ( 0.37 & nbsp ; km 2 ) , which was the largest lake in andebu . parts of goksjø lake was also located in andebu , while minor lakes are ilestadvannet and åletjønn , both located near the village of høyjord . gallis , arne ( 1975 ) . andebu bygdebok : kulturbind . andebu kommune . pages 1-3 . brånafjell at 399 meters above sea level is the tallest mountain peak in the former municipality of andebu , and currently the highest peak in sandefjord municipality . it is located in northernmost andebu on the border to re , and just two kilometers from lardal . parking for mountain hiking trails can be found by trollsvann . larsen , erlend ( 2011 ) . på tur i vestfold del 2 . e-forlag . page 144 . nature preserves include veggemyra ( marsh ) , nordre skarsholttjønn ( marsh ) , dalaåsen ( birch forest ) , and flisefyr-hidalen ( forest ) . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . page 196 . . andebu church . andebu church ( andebu kirke ) dates from ca . 1100 . the church was first mentioned in a diploma from 1314 . the edifice is of stone and has 300 seats . the soapstone baptismal font is from the 1100s . the altarpiece and the pulpit are in renaissance style and date from about 1650 . the images of the altarpiece shows events from the crucifixion of jesus . the church was extensively restored in 1686 . the ridge turret was destroyed in a storm in 1701 and had to be rebuilt . the two church bells were cast by o . olsen & son in 1874 . the pipe organ from 1909 , was replaced during the 1970s . . recreation . heisetra is a cabin owned by sandefjord tourist association which lies by heivannet lake and svartåa river . 100 & nbsp ; km of marked hiking trails are located near the cabin . the trails are used by cross-country skiers , bicyclists , hikers , and equestrians . larsen , erlend ( 2010 ) . på tur i vestfold del 1 . e-forlag . page 20 . heisetra is situated in western andebu near the border to the municipality of larvik . a nature trail with interactive signs detailing local nature is located near the lake heivannet . the lake is used for paddling , kayaking , swimming , and fishing . nearby trails are used for hiking , skiing , mountain biking , horseback riding , and collection of mushrooms and berries . the 100 & nbsp ; km trail network from the cabin leads as far as hardangervidda , while shorter trails include those leading to grevesteinen and sliradammen . the 9.7 & nbsp ; km svartåa culture trail was previously used for the movement of logs to larvik . this trail has various interactive signs describing the river ’ s cultural and historical significance , including signs near the hansekanal , a canal created by hans anders dahl in 1950 . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . pages 200-201 . andebu is home to numerous gravel trails , for instance located by snappen , trolldalen , and vidaråsen . parking for snappen can be found nearby heisetra cabin , along with a variety of other forest- and mountain hikes . it can be reached by driving to pipenholt , which lies along county road 210 between kodal and åsrum in larvik . from pipenholt , drive towards hvitstein . heiaveien goes through an agricultural landscape and passes by geirastadir . larsen , erlend ( 2011 ) . på tur i vestfold del 2 . e-forlag . pages 481 and 490-491 . andebu 's highest mountain , brånafjell , is the tallest mountain in sandefjord municipality at 399 meters . it is located in northernmost andebu , on the border to re , and just two kilometers from lardal ( larvik ) . the trail to the mountain can be found by trollsvann lake . larsen , erlend ( 2011 ) . på tur i vestfold del 2 . e-forlag . page 165 . trollsvann is located on the border with lardal and is surrounded by tall hillsides . a trail , trollstien , follows the lake on its western side . a number of trailheads can be found near the cabin trollsvannstua , a cabin owned by the norwegian trekking association . trails from trollsvannstua lead as far as to merkedammen lake in re and westwards to åletjønn lake . there are also trails leading as far as brånafjell , the tallest mountain in andebu . there are also trails leading to the waterfall løkedalsfossen in lardal . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . pages 197-199 . another mountain trail leads to the peak and tower at vetan , a 1.5 & nbsp ; km hike from the village centre in andebu . from the village centre , follow kodalveien to familiesenteret . from there , make a right and follow the gravel møylandsveien over the farm fields . before the farm , the trail winds left into the woodlands . interpretive signs can be found throughout the trail , which describe the area 's species of wildlife and flora . the peak has an elevation of 180 meters and the house on top was originally a lookout tower meant to be used in times of war . an overlook tower was constructed at vetan in 1988 , which provides panoramic views of tønsberg fortress , the oslo fjord , gaustatoppen and skrim . larsen , erlend ( 2011 ) . på tur i vestfold del 2 . e-forlag . pages 47-50 . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . page 202 . parking for the trail to vetan is located by the kindergarten møyland , immediately west of andebu village center . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . page 202 . andebu is home to 35 lakes , where fishing is permitted in 16 lakes . the largest rivers are svartåa and skorgeelva . . points of interest . høyjord stave church , only stave church left in vestfold county . heisetra , cabin owned by sandefjord tourist association , adjacent to combined 100 & nbsp ; km of hiking trails . gjerseth , simen ( 2016 ) . nye sandefjord . liv forlag . page 31 . schandy , tom and tom helgesen ( 2012 ) . naturperler i vestfold . forlaget tom & tom v/schandy . page 200 . andebu church , largest medieval church in sandefjord municipality . goksjø lake ( part ) , third-largest lake in vestfold county . svartåa river , one of andebu 's largest rivers , popular fishing river . brånafjell , tallest mountain in sandefjord municipality . notable people . kaare reitan