The finger

origin . classical era . the middle finger gesture was used in ancient times as a symbol of sexual intercourse , in a manner meant to degrade , intimidate and threaten the individual receiving the gesture . it also represented the phallus , with the fingers next to the middle finger representing testicles ; from its close association , the gesture may have assumed apotropaic potency . in the 1st-century mediterranean world , extending the finger was one of many methods used to divert the ever-present threat of the evil eye . in greek the gesture was known as the katapygon ( κατάπυγον , from kata & nbsp ; – κατά , '' downwards '' and pugē & nbsp ; – πυγή , '' rump , buttocks '' ) . in ancient greek comedy , the finger was a gesture of insult toward another person , with the term katapugon also referring to '' a male who submits to anal penetration '' or katapygaina to a female . in aristophanes 's comedy the clouds ( 423 bc ) , when the character socrates is quizzing his student on poetic meters , strepsiades declares that he knows quite well what a dactyl is , and gives the finger . the gesture is a visual pun on the two meanings of the greek word daktylos , both '' finger '' and the rhythmic measure composed of a long syllable and two short , like the joints of a finger which also appears as a visual pun on the penis and testicles in a medieval latin text ) . socrates called one who made the gesture '' boorish and stupid '' . the gesture recurs as a form of mockery in peace , alongside farting in someone 's face ; the usage is later explained in the suda and included in the adagia of erasmus . the verb '' to play the sifnos '' appears in a fragment of aristophanes and has a similar meaning ; the usage is once again explained in the suda , where it is said to mean '' to touch the anus with a finger '' . diogenes laërtius records how the cynic philosopher diogenes of sinope directed the gesture at the orator demosthenes in 4th-century bc athens . in the discourses of epictetus , diogenes 's target is instead one of the sophists . in latin , the middle finger was the digitus impudicus , meaning the '' shameless , indecent or offensive finger '' . in the 1st century ad , persius had superstitious female relatives concoct a charm with the '' infamous finger '' ( digitus infamia ) and '' purifying spit '' ; while in the satyricon , an old woman uses dust , spit and her middle finger to mark the forehead before casting a spell . the poet martial has a character in good health extend '' the indecent one '' toward three doctors . in another epigram , martial wrote : '' laugh loud , sextillus , at whoever calls you a cinaedus and extend your middle finger . '' juvenal , through synecdoche , has the '' middle nail '' cocked at threatening fortuna . the indecent finger features again in a mocking context in the priapeia , a collection of poems relating to the phallic god priapus . in late antiquity , the term '' shameless finger '' is explained in the etymologiae of isidore of seville with reference to its frequent use when accusing someone of a '' shameful action '' . image : old hoss radbourn finger.jpg thumb baseball pitcher charles radbourn pictured giving the finger to cameraman , 1886 . first known photograph of the gesture . . modern era . linguist jesse sheidlower traces the gesture 's development in the united states to the 1890s . according to anthropologist desmond morris , the gesture probably came to the united states via italian immigrants . the first documented appearance of the finger in the united states was in 1886 , when charles radbourn , a baseball pitcher for the boston beaneaters , was photographed giving it to a member of their rival the new york giants . in the film speedy ( 1928 ) , harold lloyd 's character gives himself the finger into a distorting mirror at luna park , about 25 minutes into the film . cultural impact . politics and military incidents . the gesture has been involved in notable political events . during the incident , in which an american ship was captured by north korea , the captured american crewmembers often discreetly gave the finger in staged photo ops , thus ruining the north koreans ' efforts at propaganda . the north koreans , ignorant of what the gesture meant , were at first told by the prisoners that it was a '' hawaiian good luck sign '' , similar to the shaka . when the guards finally figured things out , the crewmembers were subjected to extremely severe beatings . abbie hoffman used the gesture at the 1968 democratic national convention . ronald reagan , while serving as the governor of california , gave the middle finger to counterculture protestors in berkeley , california . nelson rockefeller , then the vice president of the united states , directed the gesture to hecklers at a 1976 campaign stop near binghamton , new york , leading it to be called the '' rockefeller gesture '' . pierre trudeau , then the prime minister of canada , gave the finger to protesters in salmon arm , british columbia , earning the incident the nickname the '' salmon arm salute '' . the gesture itself has also been nicknamed the '' trudeau salute '' . former president george w . bush gave the finger to the camera at an austin production facility during his term as governor of texas , saying it was '' just a one-finger victory salute . '' anthony weiner gave the finger to reporters after leaving his election headquarters the night he lost the 2013 primary election for mayor of new york city . during the campaign for the 2013 german federal election , the leading candidate of the social democratic party of germany , peer steinbrück controversially gave the finger in a photo interview with süddeutsche zeitung 's magazin supplement . during world war ii , the 91st bombardment group of the united states army air forces referred to the gesture as the '' rigid digit '' salute . it was used in a more jocular manner , to suggest an airman had committed an error or infraction ; the term was a reference to british slang terms for inattentiveness ( i.e . '' pull your finger out ( of your bum ) '' ) . the '' order of the rigid digit '' continued after the war as a series of awards presented by the veteran 's association of the 91st , marked by wooden statuettes of a hand giving the single finger gesture . in 2005 during the war in iraq , gunnery sergeant michael burghardt gained prominence when the omaha world-herald published a photo of burghardt making the gesture towards iraqi insurgents he believed to be watching after an improvised explosive device failed to kill him . the middle finger has been involved in judicial hearings . an appellate court in hartford , connecticut ruled in 1976 that gesturing with the middle finger was offensive , but not obscene , after a police officer charged a 16-year-old with making an obscene gesture when the student gave the officer the middle finger . the case was appealed to the connecticut supreme court , which upheld the decision . in march 2006 , a federal lawsuit was filed regarding the free speech issue . giving the finger has resulted in negative consequences . a malaysian man was bludgeoned to death after giving the finger to a motorist following a car chase . a pakistani man was deported by the united arab emirates for the gesture , which violates indecency codes . people have given the finger as a method of political protest . at a concert , ricky martin gave a picture of george w . bush the finger to protest the war in iraq . serbian protesters gave the finger to the russian embassy regarding their support of slobodan milošević . artist ai weiwei has used the finger in photographs and sculptures as a political statement . as a political message to the czech president miloš zeman , czech artist david černý floated an outsize , purple statue of a hand on the river vltava in prague ; its middle finger extended towards prague castle , the presidential seat . černý had also mounted a middle finger on a pink former soviet tank from the monument to soviet tank crews in 1991 . in 2011-2012 , the pink tank with the finger was displayed again on a barge on the vltava . in 2017 , while bicycling , juli briskman gave the finger to the motorcade of donald trump as it drove past her , and a photograph that went viral forced her to resign from her job . she was elected to the board of supervisors for loudoun county , virginia , in the 2019 virginia elections . . in popular culture . the use of the middle finger has become pervasive in popular culture . the band cobra starship released a song called '' middle finger '' , and released a music video that showed people giving the finger . italian artist maurizio cattelan installed a marble statue of a middle finger measuring , located directly in front of the milan stock exchange . a now-famous photograph of johnny cash shows him giving the middle finger to a photographer during a 1969 concert at san quentin state prison , released as at san quentin . however , the photo remained fairly obscure until 1998 , when producer rick rubin made it the centerpiece of an ad in billboard criticizing country radio for not giving airplay to cash 's grammy-winning album unchained . cameron diaz made the gesture during a photo shoot for esquire . harold lloyd shot the finger to his own reflection in a coney island funhouse after getting paint on his suit in speedy , his final silent feature , from 1928 . athletes , including stefan effenberg , ron artest , luis suárez , juan pablo montoya , iván rodríguez , danny graves , jack mcdowell , natasha zvereva , josh smith , bryan cox , and johnny manziel have been suspended or fined for making the gesture . josé paniagua was released by the chicago white sox after giving the middle finger to an umpire ; he has n't played in the majors since . baseball executive chub feeney once resigned after giving the finger to fans on fan appreciation night . bud adams , owner of the national football league 's tennessee titans , was fined us 250,000 for giving both middle fingers to the fans of the buffalo bills during a game . professional wrestler stone cold steve austin is also famous for flashing one or both middle fingers as part of his gimmick . hockey star jaromír jágr made the gesture several times following goals in the early 1990s . the nme awards , an annual music awards show in the uk , uses an extended middle finger design in the trophy handed out to the winners . many musical artists , including madonna , lady gaga , eminem , ariana grande , katy perry , and adele have publicly made the gesture . britney spears and iggy azalea have given the gesture towards members of the paparazzi , but had to apologize when fans interpreted the gesture as directed at them . m.i.a . gave the gesture during the super bowl xlvi halftime show . the national football league , nbc , and m.i.a . apologized . the cd itself for kid rock 's album devil without a cause is a picture of his raised middle finger . on the cover of moby grape 's first album , moby grape , band member don stevenson was caught flipping the bird at the camera . the finger was airbrushed out of subsequent releases of the album . in automobile driving culture , giving the finger to a fellow motorist communicates displeasure at another person 's reckless driving habits and/or their disregard for common courtesy . the finger is included in unicode as . the media sometimes refers to the gesture as being mistaken for an indication of '' we 're number one '' , typically indicated with a raised index finger . sometimes , though , the '' mistake '' is actually an intentional euphemism meant to indirectly convey the gesture in a medium where a direct description would be inappropriate . for example , don meredith is famously noted in a 1972 monday night football game describing the finger of a dejected houston oilers fan as , '' he thinks they 're number one in the nation . '' ira robbins , a law professor , believes the finger is no longer an obscene gesture . psychologist david walsh , founder of the national institute on media and the family , sees the growing acceptance of the middle finger as a sign of the growth of a '' culture of disrespect '' . google street view 's picture of the area around the wisconsin governor 's mansion , taken in 2011 during the tenure of scott walker , shows a jogger giving the finger in the direction of the mansion . . similar gestures . in the united kingdom , ireland , australia and new zealand , the v sign , '' two-fingered salute '' or '' the fingers '' , when given with back of the hand towards the recipient , serves a similar purpose . according to a royal shakespeare company synopsis of the play henry v , a '' two-fingered salute '' appeared in the macclesfield psalter of ( in the fitzwilliam museum , cambridge ) , '' being made by a glove in the psalter 's marginalia '' . george h . w . bush , former president of the united states , accidentally made the gesture while on a diplomatic trip to australia . in countries where spanish , portuguese or french are spoken , and especially in spain , portugal , brazil and france , the gesture involving raising a fist and slapping the biceps on the same arm as the fist used , sometimes called the bras d'honneur ( french ) , corte de mangas ( spanish ) , manguito ( portugal ) , dar uma banana ( brazil ) , or iberian slap , is equivalent to the finger . italy , poland and countries under the influence of russian culture , such as russia , belarus and ukraine , also see it as equivalent to the finger , but the majority of young people in these countries use the finger as an insult , which is associated with the western culture . in islamic countries and cultures , a gesture involving exposing only the thumb in a vertical orientation & nbsp ; – a thumbs up & nbsp ; – is used in lieu of the finger to express roughly the same sentiment . a similarly obscene gesture is extending all five digits with the palm facing forward , meaning '' you have five fathers '' , thus calling someone a bastard . this is similar to a gesture known in greece as the moutza , where the five fingers are spread wide and the palm is pushed towards the recipient . more commonly in turkish or slavic regions , the fig sign ( also known as nah or shish ) serves as the equivalent to the finger , meaning '' you wo n't get it '' or '' in your dreams '' . the gesture is typically made with the hand and fingers curled and the thumb thrust between the middle and index fingers . this gesture is also used similarly in indonesia , turkey and china . in japanese sign language , this same gesture ( with all fingers curled inward except the middle one ) means the following : elder brother ( hand moving up ) , younger brother ( hand moving down ) , and siblings in general ( one hand moving up , one moving down ) . this comes from a childish name of the middle finger , o-nii-san-yubi ( '' big bro finger '' ) , as opposed to o-tō-san-yubi ( '' dad finger '' , the thumb ) , o-kā-san-yubi ( '' mom finger '' , the index ) , o-nee-san-yubi ( '' big sis finger '' , the ring finger ) and aka-chan-yubi ( '' baby finger '' , the pinky ) . the equivalent words for sisters are expressed with the pinky . in the japanese manual syllabary , the middle finger stands for the kana せ ( which , incidentally , is also an wikt : 兄 etymology 4 ) . see also . articulatory gestures dulya ( fig sign ) list of gestures list of sign languages manual communication mooning mountza non verbal communication obscene gesture ok ( gesture ) shaka sign shocker ( hand gesture ) sign of the horns v sign or '' the fingers '' wanker . references . further reading . . external links . pt : dedo médio como gesto obsceno