Aguirre, the Wrath of God

reception . critical response . the film was produced in part by west german television station hessischer rundfunk , which televised the film on the same day it opened in theatres . herzog has blamed this for the relatively poor commercial reception of the film in germany . however , outside germany the film became an '' enormous cult favorite '' in '' such places as mexico , venezuela , and algiers . '' danny peary . cult movies , delta books , 1981 . the film had a theatrical run of fifteen months in paris . young , vernon . '' much madness : werner herzog and contemporary german cinema '' , in the hudson review , vol . 30 , no . 3 ( august 1977 ) , pp . 409–414 . aguirre received a theatrical release in the united states in 1977 by new yorker films . it immediately became a cult film , and new yorker films reported four years after its initial release that it was the only film in its catalog that never went out of circulation . in germany , the süddeutsche zeitung described the film as '' a colour-drenched , violently physical moving painting '' . the frankfurter allgemeine zeitung described kinski 's acting as '' too theatrical '' to embody god 's wrath . in the us and the uk the film received mostly positive critical notices upon release . vincent canby , writing in the new york times , called it '' absolutely stunning & nbsp ; . mr . herzog views all the proceedings with fixed detachment . he remains cool . he takes no sides . he may even be slightly amused . mainly he is a poet who constantly surprises us with unexpected juxtapositions . this is a splendid and haunting work . '' in time , richard schickel opined that '' herzog does the audience the honor of allowing it to discover the blindnesses and obsessions , the sober lunacies he quietly lays out on the screen . well acted , most notably by klaus kinski in the title role , gloriously photographed by thomas mauch , aguirre is , not to put too fine a point on it , a movie that makes a convincing claim to greatness . '' time out 's tony rayns noted , '' . each scene and each detail is honed down to its salient features . on this level , the film effectively pre-empts analysis by analysing itself as it proceeds , admitting no ambiguity . yet at the same time , herzog 's flair for charged explosive imagery has never had freer rein , and the film is rich in oneiric moments . '' . legacy . the film 's reputation through the years has continued to grow . j . hoberman has written that aguirre '' is not just a great movie but an essential one . herzog 's third feature . is both a landmark film and a magnificent social metaphor . '' danny peary wrote , '' to see aguirre for the first time is to discover a genuine masterpiece . it is overwhelming , spellbinding ; at first dreamlike , and then hallucinatory . '' roger ebert has added it to his list of the great movies , and in a 2002 sight & sound poll of critics and filmmakers on the best films ever made , ebert listed it in his top ten . in the same poll , critic nigel andrews and director santosh sivan also placed it in their top ten list . in 1999 , rolling stone included the film on the magazine 's '' 100 maverick movies of the last 100 years '' list . aguirre was included in time magazines '' all time 100 best films '' , compiled by richard schickel and richard corliss . entertainment weekly named it the 46th greatest cult film ever made . '' the top cult movies '' , entertainment weekly . the film was ranked 19 in empire magazine 's '' the 100 best films of world cinema '' in 2010 . aguirre has won several prestigious film awards . in 1973 it won the deutscher filmpreis ( german film award ) for '' outstanding individual achievement : cinematography '' . in 1976 it was voted the '' best foreign film '' by the french syndicate of film critics . in 1977 the national society of film critics us gave it their '' best cinematography '' award . it won the prestigious grand prix of the belgian film critics association in 1976 and was nominated for a '' best film '' césar award . . influence . francis ford coppola 's 1979 film apocalypse now , a film based on joseph conrad 's 1902 novella heart of darkness , was influenced also by aguirre , as it contains seemingly deliberate visual '' quotations '' of herzog 's film . coppola himself has noted , '' aguirre , with its incredible imagery , was a very strong influence . i 'd be remiss if i did n't mention it . '' several critics have noted that aguirre appears to have had a direct influence on several other films . martin rubin has written that '' among the films strongly influenced by aguirre are coppola 's apocalypse now and terrence malick 's the new world ( 2005 ) '' . j . hoberman agreed , noting that herzog 's '' sui generis amazon fever dream '' was '' the influence malick 's over-inflated new world ca n't shake . '' channel 4 opined '' this is an astonishing , deceptively simple , pocket-sized epic whose influence , in terms of both style and narrative , is seen in films as diverse as apocalypse now , the mission , predator , and the blair witch project ( 1999 ) . '' . historical accuracy . although plot details and many of the characters in aguirre come directly from herzog 's own imagination , historians have pointed out that the film fairly accurately incorporates some 16th-century events and historical personages into a fictional narrative . herzog 's screenplay merged two expeditions : one led by gonzalo pizarro in 1541 , which resulted in the discovery by europeans of the amazon river by francisco de orellana , and another one that occurred in 1560 . the expedition of gonzalo pizarro and his men left from the city of quito and entered the amazon basin in search of el dorado . various troubles afflicted the expedition and , sure that el dorado was very close , pizarro set up a smaller group led by francisco de orellana to break off from the main group and forge ahead , then return with news of what they had found . this group utilized a brigantine to journey down the river . after failing to find the legendary city , orellana was unable to return because of the current , and he and his men continued to follow the napo river until he reached the estuary of the amazon in 1542 . accompanying orellana was gaspar de carvajal , who kept a journal of the group 's experiences . the historic gaspar de carvajal ( 1500–1584 ) was a spanish dominican friar who had settled in peru and dedicated himself to the conversion of the indigenous peoples . his general attitude towards the local people was consistent with the benevolence of his better-known brother dominican friar , bartolomé de las casas . this personality is at odds with the description in the film where carvajal is portrayed as a cowardly priest who claimed that '' the church was always on the side of the strong . '' the film 's major characters , aguirre , ursúa , don fernando , inez and flores , were involved in the second expedition , which left peru in 1560 to find the city of el dorado . commissioned by peru 's governor , ursúa organized an expeditionary group of 300 men to travel by way of the amazon river . he was accompanied by his mestizo mistress , doña inez . at one point during the journey , aguirre , a professional soldier , decided that he could use the 300 men to overthrow the spanish rule of peru . aguirre had ursúa murdered and proclaimed fernando as '' the prince of peru '' . fernando himself was eventually murdered when he questioned aguirre 's scheme of sailing to the atlantic , conquering panama , crossing the isthmus and invading peru . many others who attempted to rebel against aguirre were also killed . the surviving soldiers conquered isla margarita off the coast of venezuela and made preparations to attack the mainland . however , by that time spanish authorities had learned of aguirre 's plans , and when the rebels arrived in venezuela , government agents offered full pardons to aguirre 's men . all of them accepted the deal . immediately prior to his arrest , aguirre murdered his daughter flores , who had remained by his side during the entire journey . he was then captured and dismembered . waller , gregory . '' aguirre , the wrath of god : history , theater , and the camera '' , from south atlantic review 46.2 ( 1981 ) , pgs . 55 – 69 . other spanish expeditions outside the amazon influenced the story ; the conversation in which the local inhabitants refuse a bible comes from events before the battle of cajamarca , in which inca emperor atahualpa allegedly rejected the requerimiento . the chronicle of álvar núñez cabeza de vaca , la relación ( '' the account '' ) , mentions the appearance of a boat in a treetop after a fierce tropical storm in hispaniola : kinski 's crazed performance bore similarities to the real aguirre , a '' true homicidal megalomaniac '' . many of his fellow soldiers considered his actions to be that of a madman . kinski 's use of a limp reflected one that aguirre had , the result of a battle injury . aguirre 's frequent short but impassioned speeches to his men in the film were accurately based on the man 's noted '' simple but effective rhetorical ability . '' . see also . john okello . references . external links .