Susanoo-no-Mikoto

name . susanoo 's name is variously given in the kojiki as 'takehaya-susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 建速須佐之男命 ) , 'haya-susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 速須佐之男命 ) , or simply as 'susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 須佐之男命 ) . he is meanwhile named in the nihon shoki as 'susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 素戔嗚尊 ) , 'kamu-susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 神素戔嗚尊 ) , 'haya-susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 速素戔嗚尊 ) , and 'take-susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 武素戔嗚尊 ) . the fudoki of izumo province renders his name both as 'kamu-susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 神須佐能袁命 ) and 'susanoo-no-mikoto ' ( 須佐能乎命 ) . in these texts the following honorific prefixes are attached to his name : take- ( 建 / 武 , 'brave ' ) , haya- ( 速 , 'swift ' ) , and kamu- ( 神 , 'divine ' ) . the susa in susanoo 's name has been variously explained as being derived from either of the following words : the verb susabu or susamu meaning 'to be impetuous , ' 'to be violent , ' or 'to go wild ' the verb susumu 'to advance ' the township of susa ( 須佐郷 ) in iishi district , izumo province ( modern shimane prefecture ) a word related to middle korean susung meaning 'master ' or 'shaman ' . mythology . parentage . the kojiki ( ca . 712 ce ) and the nihon shoki ( 720 ce ) both agree in their description of susanoo as the son of the god izanagi and the younger brother of amaterasu , the goddess of the sun , and of tsukuyomi , the god of the moon . the circumstances surrounding the birth of these three deities , collectively known as the '' three precious children '' ( 三貴子 – mihashira-no-uzunomiko , sankishi ) , however , vary between sources . in the kojiki , amaterasu , tsukuyomi , and susanoo came into existence when izanagi misogi in a river to purify himself after visiting yomi , the underworld , in a failed attempt to rescue his deceased wife , izanami . amaterasu was born when izanagi washed his left eye , tsukuyomi was born when he washed his right eye , and susanoo was born when he washed his nose . izanagi then appoints amaterasu to rule takamagahara ( 高天原 , the '' plain of high heaven '' ) , tsukuyomi the night , and susanoo the seas . susanoo , who missed his mother , kept crying and howling incessantly until his beard grew long , causing the mountains to wither and the rivers to dry up . an angry izanagi then '' expelled him with a divine expulsion . '' chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xi.—investiture of the three deities ; the illustrious august children . chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xii.—the crying and weeping of his impetuous-male-augustness . the main narrative of the nihon shoki has izanagi and izanami procreating after kuniumi ; to them were born ( in the following order ) amaterasu , tsukuyomi , the 'leech-child ' hiruko , and susanoo . amaterasu and tsukuyomi were sent up to heaven to govern it , while hiruko – who even at the age of three could not stand upright – was placed on the 'rock-camphor boat of heaven ' ( 天磐櫲樟船 , ame-no-iwakusufune ) and set adrift . susanoo , whose wailing laid waste to the land , was expelled and sent to the netherworld ( ne-no-kuni ) . ( in the kojiki , hiruko is the couple 's very first offspring , born before the islands of japan and the other deities were created ; there he is set afloat on a reed boat . ) a variant legend recorded in the shoki has izanagi begetting amaterasu by holding a bronze mirror in his left hand , tsukuyomi by holding another mirror in his right hand , and susanoo by turning his head and looking sideways . susanoo is here also said to be banished by izanagi due to his destructive nature . a third variant in the shoki has izanagi and izanami begetting amaterasu , tsukuyomi , hiruko , and susanoo , as in the main narrative . this version specifies the rock-camphor boat on which hiruko was placed in to be the couple 's fourth offspring . the fifth child , the fire god kagutsuchi , caused the death of izanami ( as in the kojiki ) . as in other versions , susanoo – who '' was of a wicked nature , and was always fond of wailing and wrath '' – is here expelled by his parents . . susanoo and amaterasu . before susanoo leaves , he ascends to takamagahara , wishing to say farewell to his sister amaterasu . as he did so , the mountains and rivers shook and the land quaked . amaterasu , suspicious of his motives , went out to meet him dressed in male clothing and clad in armor , but when susanoo proposed a trial by pledge ( ukehi ) to prove his sincerity , she accepted . in the ritual , the two gods each chewed and spat out an object carried by the other ( in some variants , an item they each possessed ) . both the kojiki and the shoki 's main account relate that amaterasu broke susanoo 's ten-span sword ( 十拳剣 / 十握剣 , totsuka-no-tsurugi ) into three , chewed them and then spat them out . munakata taisha – takiribime ( tagorihime ) , ichikishimahime , and tagitsuhime – were thus born . susanoo then took the strings of magatama beads amaterasu entwined in her hair and round her wrists , likewise chewed the beads and spat them out . five male deities – ame-no-oshihomimi , ame-no-hohi , amatsuhikone , ikutsuhikone , and kumano-no-kusubi – then came into existence . chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xiii.—the august oath . a variant account in the shoki has amaterasu chew three different swords she bore with her – a ten-span sword , a nine-span sword ( 九握剣 , kokonotsuka no tsurugi ) , and an eight-span sword ( 八握剣 , yatsuka no tsurugi ) – while susanoo chewed the magatama necklace that hung on his neck . another variant account in the shoki has susanoo meet a kami named ha'akarutama ( 羽明玉 ) on his way to heaven . this deity presented him with the magatama beads used in the ritual . in this version , amaterasu begets the three goddesses after chewing the magatama beads susanoo obtained earlier , while susanoo begets the five gods after biting off the edge of amaterasu 's sword . a third variant has amaterasu chewing three different swords to beget the three goddesses as in the first variant . susanoo , in turn , begat six male deities after chewing the magatama beads on his hair bunches and necklace and spitting them on his hands , forearms , and legs . amaterasu declares that the male deities were hers because they were born of her necklace , and that the three goddesses were susanoo's . chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xiv.—the august declaration of the division of the august male children and the august female children . susanoo , announcing that he had won the trial as he had produced deities of the required gender , thus signifying the purity of his intentions , '' raged with victory '' and proceeded to wreak havoc by destroying his sister 's rice fields , defecating in her palace and flaying the 'heavenly piebald horse ' ( 天斑駒 , ame-no-fuchikoma ) , which he then hurled at amaterasu 's loom , killing one of her weaving maidens . chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xv.—the august ravages of his impetuous-male-augustness . a furious amaterasu in response hid inside the ama-no-iwato ( '' heavenly rock cave '' ) , plunging heaven and earth into total darkness . the gods , led by omoikane-no-kami ( 思金神 ) , eventually persuade her to come out of the cave , restoring light to the world . chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xvi.—the door of the heavenly rock-dwelling . as punishment for his misdeeds , susanoo is thrown out of takamagahara : chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xvii.—the august expulsion of his-impetuous-male-augustness . the township of sase ( 佐世郷 ) in ōhara district ( 大原郡 ) is said to have gained its name when susanoo danced there wearing leaves of a plant called sase on his head . mount mimuro ( 御室山 , mimuro-yama ) in the township of hi ( 斐伊郷 ) in ōhara district is said to have been the place where susanoo built a temporary dwelling ( 御室 , mimuro , lit . 'noble chamber ' ) in which he stayed the night . . susanoo , mutō tenjin and gozu tennō . the syncretic deity gozu tennō ( 牛頭天王 , '' ox-headed heavenly king '' ) , originally worshiped at yasaka shrine in kyoto and at other shrines such as tsushima shrine in aichi prefecture , was historically conflated with susanoo . originally a deity of foreign import ( india and korea have all been suggested as possible origins ) , gozu tennō was widely revered since the heian period as a god of pestilence , who both caused disease and cured them . gozu tennō became associated with another deity called mutō-no-kami ( 武塔神 ) or mutō tenjin ( 武塔天神 ) , who appears in the legend of somin shorai ( 蘇民将来 ) . this legend relates that mutō , a god from the northern sea , embarked on a long journey to court the daughter of the god of the southern seas . on his way he sought lodging from a wealthy man , but was turned down . he then went to the home of a poor man ( sometimes identified as the rich man 's brother ) named somin shōrai , who gave him food and shelter . years later , mutō returned and slew the rich man and his family but spared somin shōrai 's house . some versions of the story have mutō repaying somin shōrai for his hospitality by giving the poor man 's daughter a wreath of susuki ( miscanthus sinensis ) reeds that she is to wear while declaring , '' i am the descendant of somin shōrai '' ( 蘇民将来之子孫也 , somin shōrai no shison nari ) . by doing so , she and her descendants would be spared from pestilence . the deity in this story , mutō , is often conflated with gozu tennō ( who , as his name implies , was born with the head of an ox ) in later retellings , though one version identifies gozu tennō as mutō tenjin 's son . the earliest known version of this legend , found in the fudoki of bingo province ( modern eastern hiroshima prefecture ) compiled during the nara period ( preserved in an extract quoted by scholar and shinto priest urabe kanekata in the shaku nihongi ) , has mutō explicitly identify himself as susanoo . this suggests that susanoo and mutō tenjin were already conflated in the nara period , if not earlier . sources that equate gozu tennō with susanoo only first appear during the kamakura period ( 1185–1333 ) , although one theory supposes that these three gods and various other disease-related deities were already loosely coalesced around the 9th century , probably around the year 877 when a major epidemic swept through japan . . analysis . the image of susanoo that can be gleaned from various texts is rather complex and contradictory . in the kojiki and the shoki he is portrayed first as a petulant young man , then as an unpredictable , violent boor who causes chaos and destruction before turning into a monster-slaying culture hero after descending into the world of men , while in the izumo fudoki , he is simply a local god apparently connected with rice fields , with almost none of the traits associated with him in the imperial mythologies being mentioned . due to his multifaceted nature , various authors have had differing opinions regarding susanoo 's origins and original character . the edo period kokugaku scholar motoori norinaga , in his kojiki-den ( commentary on the kojiki ) , characterized susanoo as an evil god in contrast to his elder siblings amaterasu and tsukuyomi , as the unclean air of the land of the dead still adhered to izanagi 's nose from which he was born and was not purified completely during izanagi 's ritual ablutions . philippi ( 2015 ) . p . 402 . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . pp . 166-167 . the early 20th century historian : ja : 津田左右吉 , who put forward the then-controversial theory that the kojiki 's accounts were not based on history ( as edo period kokugaku and state shinto ideology believed them to be ) but rather propagandistic myths concocted to explain and legitimize the rule of the imperial ( yamato ) dynasty , also saw susanoo as a negative figure , arguing that he was created to serve as the rebellious opposite of the imperial ancestress amaterasu . ethnologist : ja : 大林太良 , speaking from the standpoint of comparative mythology , opined that the stories concerning the three deities were ultimately derived from a continental ( southeast asian ) myth in which the sun , the moon and the dark star are siblings and the dark star plays an antagonistic role ( cf . rahu and ketu from hindu mythology ) ; ōbayashi thus also interprets susanoo as a bad hero . other scholars , however , take the position that susanoo was not originally conceived of as a negative deity . mythologist : ja : 松村武雄 for instance believed the izumo fudoki to more accurately reflect susanoo 's original character : a peaceful , simple kami of the rice fields . in matsumura 's view , susanoo 's character was deliberately reversed when he was grafted into the imperial mythology by the compilers of the kojiki . : ja : 松本信廣 , in a similar vein , interpreted susanoo as a harvest deity . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . p . 167 . while the izumo fudoki claims that the township of susa in izumo is named after its deity susanoo , it has been proposed that the opposite might have actually been the case and susanoo was named after the place , with his name being understood in this case as meaning '' man ( o ) of susa . '' gadeleva ( 2000 ) . p . 182 . while both matsumura and matsumoto preferred to connect susanoo with rice fields and the harvest , : ja : 松前健 put forward the theory that susanoo was originally worshiped as a patron deity of sailors . unlike other scholars who connect susanoo with izumo , matsumae instead saw kii province ( the modern prefectures of wakayama and mie ) as the birthplace of susanoo worship , pointing out that there was also a settlement in kii named susa ( 須佐 ) . ( in the kojiki , ōnamuji enters susanoo 's realm , ne-no-kuni , through the fork of a tree in kii . chamberlain ( 1882 ) . section xxii.—mount tema . ) matsumae proposed that the worship of susanoo was brought to other places in japan by seafaring peoples from kii , a land rich in timber ( the province 's name is itself derived from the word ki meaning 'tree ' ) . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . pp . 167-168 . a few myths , such as that of susanoo 's descent in soshimori in silla , seem to suggest a connection between the god and the korean peninsula . indeed , some scholars have hypothesized that the deities who were eventually conflated with susanoo , mutō tenjin , and gozu tennō , may have had korean origins as well , with the name 'mutō ' ( 武塔 , historical orthography : mutau ) being linked with the korean word mudang '' shamaness , '' and 'gozu ' being explained as a calque of 'soshimori ' , here interpreted as being derived from a korean toponym meaning 'bull 's ( so ) head ( mari ) ' . mcmullin ( 1988 ) . pp . 266-267 . the name 'susanoo ' itself has been interpreted as being related to the middle korean title susung ( idu script as 次次雄 or 慈充 ) , meaning 'master ' or 'shaman ' , notably applied to namhae , the second king of silla , in the samguk sagi . susanoo is thus supposed in this view to have originally been a foreign god ( 蕃神 banshin ) , perhaps a deified shaman , whose origins may be traced back to korea . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . p . 168 . emilia gadeleva ( 2000 ) sees susanoo 's original character as being that of a rain god – more precisely , a god associated with rainmaking – with his association with the harvest and a number of other elements from his myths ultimately springing from his connection with rainwater . he thus serves as a contrast and a parallel to amaterasu , the goddess of the sun . gadeleva also acknowledges the foreign elements in the god 's character by supposing that rainmaking rituals and concepts were brought to japan in ancient times from the continent , with the figure of the korean shaman ( susung ) who magically controlled the abundance of rain eventually morphing into the japanese susanoo , but at the same time stresses that susanoo is not completely a foreign import but must have had japanese roots at his core . in gadeleva 's view , while the god certainly underwent drastic changes upon his introduction in the imperial myth cycle , susanoo 's character already bore positive and negative features since the beginning , with both elements stemming from his association with rain . as the right quantity of rainwater was vital for ensuring a rich harvest , calamities caused by too much or too little rainfall ( i.e . floods , drought or epidemics ) would have been blamed on the rain god for not doing his job properly . this , according to gadeleva , underlies the occasional portrayal of susanoo in a negative light . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . p . 190-194 . . susanoo and ne-no-kuni . in the kojiki and the nihon shoki , susanoo is repeatedly associated with ne-no-kuni ( japanese : 根の国 ; the '' land of roots '' ) . while sometimes seemingly considered to be more or less identical to yomi , the land of the dead ( the kojiki speaks of ne-no-kuni as the land of susanoo 's deceased mother izanami , who is stated earlier in the narrative to have become the ruler of yomi , and calls the slope serving at its exit the yomotsu hirasaka , the 'flat slope of yomi ' ) , it would seem that the two were originally considered to be different locations . while matsumura takeo suggested that ne-no-kuni originally referred to the dimly remembered original homeland of the japanese people , emilia gadeleva instead proposes that the two locales , while similar in that both were subterranean realms associated with darkness , differed from each other in that yomi was associated with death , while ne-no-kuni , as implied by the myth about ōnamuji , was seemingly associated with rebirth . ne-no-kuni being a land of revival , as per gadeleva 's theory , is why susanoo was connected to it : susanoo , as the god that brought rain and with it , the harvest , was needed in ne-no-kuni to secure the rebirth of crops . in time , however , the two locations were confused with each other , so that by the time the kojiki and the shoki were written ne-no-kuni came to be seen like yomi as an unclean realm of the dead . gadeleva argues that this new image of ne-no-kuni as a place of evil and impurity contributed to susanoo becoming more and more associated with calamity and violence . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . p . 194-196 . . susanoo 's rampage . susanoo 's acts of violence after proving his sincerity in the ukehi ritual has been a source of puzzlement to many scholars . while edo period authors such as motoori norinaga and hirata atsutane believed that the order of the events had become confused and suggested altering the narrative sequence so that susanoo 's ravages would come before , and not after , his victory in the ukehi , don philippi criticized such solutions as '' untenable from a textual standpoint . '' philippi ( 2015 ) . p . 403 . ( note that as mentioned above , one of the variants in the shoki does place susanoo 's ravages and banishment before the performance of the ukehi ritual . ) tsuda sōkichi saw a political significance in this story : he interpreted amaterasu as an emperor-symbol , while susanoo in his view symbolized the various rebels who ( unsuccessfully ) rose up against the yamato court . philippi ( 2015 ) . p . 80 , footnote 5 . emilia gadeleva observes that susanoo , at this point in the narrative , is portrayed similarly to the hero yamato takeru ( ousu-no-mikoto ) , in that both were rough young men possessed with '' valor and ferocity '' ( takeku-araki kokoro ) ; their lack of control over their fierce temperament leads them to commit violent acts . it was therefore imperative to direct their energies elsewhere : ousu-no-mikoto was sent by his father , the emperor keikō , to lead conquering expeditions , while susanoo was expelled by the heavenly gods . this ultimately resulted in the two becoming famed as heroic figures . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . p . 173-174 . a prayer or norito originally recited by the priestly nakatomi clan in the presence of the court during the great exorcism ( 大祓 , ōharae ) ritual of the last day of the sixth month , more commonly known today as the ōharae no kotoba ( 大祓詞 , 'words of the great exorcism ' ) , lists eight '' heavenly sins '' ( japanese : 天つ罪 , tsumi ) , most of which are agricultural in nature : breaking down the ridges covering up the ditches releasing the irrigation sluices double planting setting up stakes skinning alive skinning backward defecation 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 and 8 are committed by susanoo in the kojiki , while 3 , 4 , 5 are attributed to him in the shoki . in ancient japanese society , offenses related to agriculture were regarded as abhorrent as those that caused ritual impurity . philippi ( 2015 ) . pp . 403-404 . one of the offensive acts susanoo committed during his rampage was 'skinning backward ' ( 逆剥 , sakahagi ) the ame-no-fuchikoma ( japanese : 天の斑駒 , '' heavenly-piebald horse '' ) . regarding this , william george aston observed , '' indian myth has a piebald or spotted deer or cow among celestial objects . the idea is probably suggested by the appearance of the stars . '' nelly naumann ( 1982 ) meanwhile interpreted the spotted horse as a lunar symbol , with susanoo 's action being equivalent to the devouring or killing of the moon . to naumann , the act of flaying itself , because it is performed in reverse , is intended to be a magical act that caused death . indeed , in the kojiki when susanoo throws the flayed horse ( or its hide ) to amaterasu 's weaving hall , one of the weaving maidens injures herself and dies . ( in the shoki , it is amaterasu herself who is alarmed and injured . ) emilia gadeleva meanwhile connects susanoo 's act of skinning and flinging the horse with ancient korean rainmaking rituals , which involved animal sacrifice . gadeleva ( 2000 ) . p . 190-191 . the gods punish susanoo for his rampages by cutting off his beard , fingernails , and toenails . one textual tradition in which the relevant passage is read as '' cutting off his beard and causing the nails of his hands and feet to be extracted '' ( 亦切鬚及手足爪令拔而 ) suggests that this was something along the lines of corporal punishment . another tradition which reads the passage as '' cutting off his beard and the nails of his hands and feet , had him exorcised '' ( 亦切鬚及手足爪令祓而 ) meanwhile suggests that this was an act of purification , in which the sins and pollution that adhered to susanoo are removed , thus turning him from a destroyer of life into a giver of life . naumann ( 1982 ) . pp . 29-30 . philippi ( 2015 ) . p . 86 , footnote 26-27 . . family . consorts . susanoo 's consorts are : kushinadahime ( 櫛名田比売 ) , daughter of ashinazuchi and tenazuchi , children of kamiumi , a son of izanagi and elder brother of susanoo ( kojiki , nihon shoki ) : also known under the following names : : kushiinadahime ( 奇稲田姫 , nihon shoki ) : inadahime ( 稲田媛 , shoki ) : makami-furu-kushiinadahime ( 真髪触奇稲田媛 , shoki ) : kushiinada-mitoyomanurahime-no-mikoto ( 久志伊奈太美等与麻奴良比売命 , izumo fudoki ) kamu-ōichihime ( 神大市比売 ) , another daughter of ōyamatsumi ( kojiki ) samirahime-no-mikoto ( 佐美良比売命 ) , a goddess worshiped in yasaka shrine reckoned as a consort of susanoo . offspring . susanoo 's child by kushinadahime is variously identified as yashimajinumi-no-kami ( 八島士奴美神 ) in the kojiki and as ōnamuchi-no-kami ( 大己貴神 ) in the nihon shoki 's main narrative . ( in the kojiki and in variant accounts contained in the shoki , ōnamuchi / ōnamuji ( ōkuninushi ) is instead susanoo 's descendant . ) susanoo 's children by kamu-ōichihime meanwhile are : toshigami ( 大年神 ) ukanomitama ( 宇迦之御魂神 ) susanoo 's children who are either born without a female partner or whose mother is unidentified are : the munakata goddesses of munakata taisha in munakata , fukuoka prefecture : takiribime-no-mikoto ( 多紀理毘売命 ) : also known as tagorihime ( 田心姫 ) : ichikishimahime-no-mikoto ( 市寸島比売命 ) : also known as okitsushimahime ( 瀛津島姫 ) : tagitsuhime-no-mikoto ( 多岐都比売命 ) suseribime-no-mikoto ( 須勢理毘売命 ) : also known as wakasuserihime-no-mikoto ( 和加須世理比売命 ) in the izumo fudoki isotakeru / itakeru-no-mikoto ( 五十猛命 ) ōyatsuhime-no-mikoto ( 大屋津姫命 ) tsumatsuhime-no-mikoto ( 枛津姫命 ) deities identified as susanoo 's children found only in the izumo fudoki are : kunioshiwake-no-mikoto ( 国忍別命 ) aohata-sakusahiko-no-mikoto ( 青幡佐草日古命 ) iwasakahiko-no-mikoto ( 磐坂日子命 ) tsukihoko-tooruhiko-no-mikoto ( 衝桙等番留比古命 ) tsurugihiko-no-mikoto ( 都留支日子命 ) yanowakahime-no-mikoto ( 八野若日女命 ) an edo period text , the wakan sansai zue ( 和漢三才図会 , lit . '' illustrated sino-japanese encyclopedia '' ) , identifies a monstrous goddess known as amanozako ( 天逆毎 ) as an offspring of susanoo . worship . in addition to his connections with the sea and tempests , due to his mythical role as the slayer of the yamata no orochi and his historical association with pestilence deities such as gozu tennō , susanoo is also venerated as a god who wards off misfortune and calamity , being invoked especially against illness and disease . as his heroic act helped him win the hand of kushinadahime , he is also considered to be a patron of love and marriage , such as in hikawa shrine in saitama prefecture ( see below ) . . shrines . susanoo is worshiped in a number of shrines throughout japan , especially in shimane prefecture ( the eastern part of which is the historical izumo province ) . a few notable examples are : susa shrine ( 須佐神社 ) in izumo , shimane prefecture : listed in the izumo fudoki as one of five shrines in iishi district that were registered with the department of divinities , this shrine is identified as the place in what was formerly the township of susa where susanoo chose to enshrine his spirit . the shrine was also known as jūsansho daimyōjin ( 十三所大明神 ) and susa no ōmiya ( 須佐大宮 'great shrine of susa ' ) during the medieval and early modern periods . the shrine 's priestly lineage , the susa ( or inada ) clan ( 須佐氏 / 稲田氏 ) , were considered to be the descendants of susanoo via his son yashimashino-no-mikoto ( 八島篠命 , the kojiki 's yashimajinumi-no-kami ) or ōkuninushi . besides susanoo , his consort kushinadahime and her parents ashinazuchi and tenazuchi are also enshrined here as auxiliary deities . : ja : 須我神社 ( 須我神社 ) in unnan , shimane prefecture : this shrine , claimed to stand on the site of the palace susanoo built after defeating the yamata no orochi , enshrines susanoo , kushinadahime , and their son suga-no-yuyamanushi-minasarohiko-yashima-no-mikoto ( 清之湯山主三名狭漏彦八島野命 , i.e . yashimajinumi-no-kami ) . listed in the izumo fudoki as one of sixteen shrines in ōhara district not registered with the department of divinities . : ja : 八重垣神社 ( 八重垣神社 ) , in matsue , shimane prefecture : dedicated to susanoo , kushinadahime , ōnamuchi ( ōkuninushi ) and aohata-sakusahiko , the shrine takes its name from the 'eightfold fence ' ( yaegaki ) mentioned in susanoo 's song . the shrine 's legend claims that susanoo hid kushinadahime in the forest within the shrine 's precincts , enclosing her in a fence , when he slew the yamata no orochi . identified with the sakusa shrine ( 佐久佐社 ) mentioned in the izumo fudoki . : ja : 熊野大社 ( 熊野大社 ) in matsue , shimane prefecture : reckoned as izumo province 's ichinomiya alongside izumo taisha . not to be confused with the kumano shrine shrine complex in wakayama prefecture . its deity , known under the name 'izanagi-no-himanago kaburogi kumano-no-ōkami kushimikenu-no-mikoto ' ( 伊邪那伎日真名子加夫呂伎熊野大神櫛御気野命 , '' beloved child of izanagi , divine ancestor and great deity of kumano , kushimikenu-no-mikoto ' ) , is identified with susanoo . the shrine is also considered in myth to be where the use of fire originated ; two ancient fire making , a bow drill ( 燧杵 hikiri-kine ) and a hearthboard ( 燧臼 hikiri-usu ) are kept in the shrine and used in the shrine 's fire lighting ceremony ( 鑚火祭 kiribi-matsuri or sanka-sai ) held every october . susa shrine ( 須佐神社 ) in arida , wakayama prefecture the following shrines were originally associated with gozu tennō : yasaka shrine ( 八坂神社 ) in gion , higashiyama , kyoto , kyoto prefecture - head shrine of the yasaka shrine network tsushima shrine ( 津島神社 ) in tsushima , aichi prefecture - head shrine of the tsushima shrine network : ja : 広峯神社 ( 広峰神社 ) in himeji , hyōgo prefecture the hikawa shrine network concentrated in saitama and tokyo ( historical musashi province ) also has susanoo as its focus of worship , often alongside kushinadahime . hikawa shrine ( 氷川神社 ) in ōmiya , saitama , saitama prefecture hikawa shrine in kawagoe , saitama prefecture hikawa shrine in akasaka , minato , tokyo . in japanese performing arts . the iwami kagura - orochi the jōruri - nihon furisode hajime by chikamatsu monzaemon . see also . izumo province izanagi ama no fuchigoma amaterasu kusanagi gion matsuri . notes . references . bibliography . aoki , michiko y . , tr . ( 1997 ) . records of wind and earth : a translation of fudoki , with introduction and commentaries . association for asian studies , inc . aston , william george , tr . ( 1896 ) . nihongi : chronicles of japan from the earliest times to a.d . 697 . 2 vols . kegan paul . 1972 tuttle reprint . chamberlain , basil h . , tr . ( 1919 ) . the kojiki , records of ancient matters . 1981 tuttle reprint . philippi , donald l . ( 2015 ) . kojiki . princeton university press . external links . susanoo , encyclopedia of shinto susano-o no mikoto , kimberley winkelmann , in the internet archive as of 5 december 2008 shaji enza no kai organization official website of susa shrine ( in japanese ) official website of yasaka shrine ( in japanese ) official website of kumano taisha ( in japanese ) official website of hikawa shrine ( saitama ) ( in japanese ) official website of akasaka hikawa shrine ( in japanese ) susanoo vs yamata no orochi animated depiction