Max Nordau

biography . simon ( simcha ) maximilian südfeld ( later max nordau ) was born in pest , kingdom of hungary , then part of the austrian empire . his father , gabriel südfeld , was a rabbi , liberalism , nationalism and degeneration : the case of max nordau but earned his livelihood as a hebrew tutor . issues of assimilation , language and identity in the lives of young max nordau and tivadar herzl as an orthodox jew , nordau attended a jewish elementary school and earned a medical degree from the university of pest in 1872 . he then traveled for six years , visiting the principal countries of europe . he changed his name before going to berlin in 1873 . in 1878 , he began the practice of medicine in budapest . in 1880 he went to paris . he worked in paris as a correspondent for die neue freie presse , and it was in paris that he spent most of his life . before entering the university , he had begun his literary career at budapest as contributor and dramatic critic for der zwischenact . subsequently , he was an editorial writer and correspondent for several other newspapers . his newspaper writings were collected and furnished the material for his earlier books . he was a disciple of cesare lombroso . nordau was an example of a fully assimilated and acculturated european jew . despite being raised religious , nordau was an agnostic . he married a christian woman of danish origin . unrequited love , haaretz despite his hungarian background , he felt affiliated to german culture , writing in an autobiographical sketch , '' when i reached the age of fifteen , i left the jewish way of life and the study of the torah . judaism remained a mere memory and since then i have always felt as a german and as a german only . '' max nordau was the father of painter maxa nordau ( 1897–1993 ) . nordau 's conversion to zionism was eventually triggered by the dreyfus affair . many jews , amongst them theodor herzl , saw in the dreyfus affair evidence of the universality of antisemitism . max nordau and the making of racial zionism nordau went on to play a major role in the zionist organisation ; indeed nordau 's relative fame certainly helped bring attention to the zionist movement . he can be credited with giving the organisation a democratic character . when world war i broke out he , a native of hungary , was accused of german sympathies . he denied the charge and afterward went to reside in madrid . an attempt to assassinate him was made in the latter part of 1903 . . zionism . dreyfus affair . nordau 's conversion to zionism is in many ways typical of the rise of zionism amongst western european jewry . the dreyfus affair was central to theodor herzl 's conviction that zionism was now necessary . herzl 's views were formed during his time in france where he recognised the universality of antisemitism ; the dreyfus affair cemented his belief in the failure of assimilation . nordau also witnessed the paris mob outside the école militaire crying '' à morts les juifs ! '' . his role of friend and advisor to herzl , who was working as the correspondent for the viennese neue freie presse , began here in paris . this trial went beyond a miscarriage of justice and in herzl 's words '' contained the wish of the overwhelming majority in france , to damn a jew , and in this one jew , all jews . '' whether or not the antisemitism manifested in france during the dreyfus affair was indicative of the majority of the french or simply a very vocal minority is open to debate . however the very fact that such sentiment had manifested itself in france was particularly significant . this was the country often seen as the model of the modern enlightened age , that had given europe the great revolution and beginnings of jewish emancipation . failure of emancipation . nordau 's work as a critic of european civilisation and where it was heading certainly contributed to his eventual role in zionism . one of the central tenets of nordau 's beliefs was evolution , in all things , and he concluded that emancipation was not born out of evolution . french rationalism of the 18th century , based on pure logic , demanded that all men be treated equally . nordau perceived jewish emancipation the result of ' a regular equation : every man is born with certain rights ; the jews are human beings , consequently the jews are born to own the rights of man . ' this emancipation was written in the statute books of europe , but contrasted with popular social consciousness . it was this which explained the apparent contradiction of equality before the law . yet the existence of antisemitism , and in particular 'racial ' antisemitism , was no longer based on old religious bigotry . nordau cited england as an exception to this continental antisemitism that proved the rule . '' in england , emancipation is a truth…it had already been completed in the heart before legislation expressly confirmed it . '' only if emancipation came from changes within society , as opposed to abstract ideas imposed upon society , could it be a reality . nordau 's rejection of the accepted idea of emancipation was not based entirely on the dreyfus affair . it had manifested itself much earlier in the conventional lies of our civilisation ( die konventionellen lügen der kulturmenschheit ) ( 1883 ) , and in reviling 'degenerate ' and 'lunatic ' antisemitism in degeneration ( die entartung ) ( 1892 ) . muscular judaism . nordau also , at the 1898 zionist congress , coined the term '' muscular judaism '' ( muskeljudentum ) as a descriptor of a jewish culture and religion which directed its adherents to reach for certain moral and corporeal ideals which , through discipline , agility and strength , would result in a stronger , more physically assured jew who would outshine the long-held stereotype of the weak , intellectually sustained jew . he would further explore the concept of the '' muscle jew '' in a 1900 article of the jewish gymnastics journal . . world zionist congress . nordau was central to the zionist congresses which played such a vital part in shaping what zionism would become . herzl had favoured the idea of a jewish newspaper and an elitist '' society of jews '' to spread the ideas of zionism . it was nordau , convinced that zionism had to at least appear democratic , despite the impossibility of representing all jewish groups , who persuaded herzl of the need for an assembly . this appearance of democracy certainly helped counter accusations that the '' zionists represented no one but themselves . '' there would be eleven such congresses in all . the first , which nordau organised , was in basle , 29–31 august 1897 . his fame as an intellectual helped draw attention to the project . indeed , the fact that max nordau , the trenchant essayist and journalist , was a jew came as a revelation for many . herzl obviously took centre stage , making the first speech at the congress ; nordau followed him with an assessment of the jewish condition in europe . nordau used statistics to paint a portrait of the dire straits of eastern jewry and also expressed his belief in the destiny of jewish people as a democratic nation state , free of what he saw as the constraints of emancipation . nordau 's speeches to the world zionist congress reexamined the jewish people , in particular stereotypes of the jews . he fought against the tradition of seeing the jews as merchants or business people , arguing that most modern financial innovations such as insurance had been invented by gentiles . he saw the jewish people as having a unique gift for politics , a calling which they were unable to fulfil without their own nation-state . whereas herzl favoured the idea of an elite forming policy , nordau insisted the congress have a democratic nature of some sort , calling for votes on key topics . according to a 2004 article in the left-wing newspaper haaretz , nordau was at one time a staunch eugenicist . in future human evolution , p . 85 nordau died in paris , france in 1923 . degeneration ( 1892 ) . nordau 's major work entartung ( degeneration ) is a moralistic attack on what he believed to be degenerate art , as well as a polemic against the effects of a range of the rising social phenomena of the period , such as rapid urbanization and its perceived effects on the human body . in réflexions sur la question gay ( translated into english as insult and the making of the gay self insult and the making of the gay self ( originally réflexions sur la question gay ( 1999 ) ) . translated by michael lucey . duke university press , 440 pages . july 2004 ) , didier eribon refers to a whole section in nordau 's book targeting oscar wilde in aggressive terms : '' wilde loves immorality , sin , and crime '' . according to eribon , the two volumes of degeneration are centred around a description of the artistic and literary currents of an '' end-of-century '' that was leading society to '' ruin '' . nordau attacks symbolists , mystics , pre-raphaelites , wagnerism , aestheticism , decadentism . huysmans and zola are also targeted by him as '' neurosis '' and '' the worst kind of enemies of society '' , against whom the latter had '' a duty to defend itself '' . he sustained that society was '' at the highest of a serious intellectual epidemic , some kind of black death of degeneration and hysteria , such that it is only natural to hear a generalized , anguished questioning : ‘ what is going to happen ? ’ '' therefore , he called upon judges , teachers , politicians , all those who wished to protect civilization , to organize repression and censorship . as for psychiatrists , their role would be predominant in such academia of '' honest people '' in charge of condemning '' works that speculate on immorality '' . any artist whom this small cluster of '' the most qualified men of the people '' might dislike would be doomed , because in such case '' both the man and his work would be annihilated '' . nordau 's degeneration is cited by william james in his lecture on neurology and religion at the beginning of the varieties of religious experience . james mocks the author for his '' bulky book '' on the grounds that he exemplifies the then-current school of medical materialism , stating that nordau '' has striven to impugn the value of works of genius in a wholesale way ( such works of contemporary art , namely , as he himself is unable to enjoy , and they are many ) by using medical arguments '' . . commemoration . in 1926 nordau 's remains were moved to tel aviv 's trumpeldor cemetery . a major tel aviv street is named : he : שדרות נורדאו . published works . pariser studien und bilder ( paris studies and sketches , 1878 ) seifenblasen ( soap bubbles , 1879 ) vom kreml zur alhambra ( from the kremlin to the alhambra , 1880 ) paris unter der dritten republik ( paris under the third republic , 1881 ) die konventionelle lügen der kulturmenschheit , in which he shows what he believes to be the essential falsity of some of the social , ethical and religious standards of modern civilization ( conventional lies of society , 1883 ) please see above link to the original text at wikisource . entartung ( degeneration , 1892 ) paradoxe ( paradoxes , 1885 ) die krankheit des jahrhunderts ( the malady of the century , 1887 ) seelen analysen ( analysis of souls , 1892 ) die drohnenschlacht ( battle of the drones , 1897 ) gefühlskomödie , a novel ( a comedy of sentiment , 1891 ) der krieg der millionen , a drama ( the war of the millions , 1882 ) das recht zu lieben , a drama ( the right to live , 1893 ) die kugel , a drama ( the ball , 1894 ) dr . kuhn , a drama ( 1898 ) the drones must die ( 1899 ) zeitgenossiche franzosen ( contemporary french people , 1901 ) morganatic ( 1904 ) on art and artists ( 1907 ) die sinn der geschichte ( the sense of history , 1909 ) zionistische schriften ( zionist writings , 1909 ) mörchen ( crumbs of ruins , 1910 ) der lebenssport ( the sport of life , 1912 )