Sociology of sport

race and sports . historical racist theories . sport has always been characterized by racial social relationships . the first scientific look at race came at the end of the 19th century , when count arthur de gobineau attempted to prove the physical and intellectual superiority of the white race . darwin 's theory of natural selection was used in service of racism as well . after the athletic ability of black sportspeople was proven , the theory shifted toward physical ability at the expense of intellect . several racist theories were advanced . black people were athletically able because animals ate all the slow ones . the myth of '' middle passage '' posited only the most athletically able of black people were able to survive the slave trade and plantation work . the matriarchal theory suggested that father absence made black people channel their anger into sports , with coaches becoming father figures . the mandigo theory assumed that the most physically potent black men were bred with the most physically potent black women . the psychological theory claimed that black athletes did n't have the intellectual capacity to assume leadership positions in sports . the '' dumb jock theory '' saw black people enrolling on sport scholarships as they were unable to find success in academia . lastly , the genetic theory suggested that black sportspeople had more of certain muscle fibers . . current sociology . young african-americans see sports as means of upward social mobility , which is denied to them through conventional employment . race often interplays with class , gender and ethnicity to determine how accessible certain sports are , and how the athlete is perceived . for example , golf is inaccessible to african-americans less because of race , and more because of the high economic and social capital needed . race is often connected to gender , with women having less opportunities to access and succeed in sports . once a woman does succeed , her race is downplayed and her sexuality is accentuated . in certain cultures , especially muslim ones , women are denied access to sports all-together . in team sports , white players are often placed in central positions which demand intelligence , decisiveness , leadership , calmness and reliability . black players are in turn place in positions that demand athletic ability , physical strength , speed and explosiveness . for example , white players in the role of central midfielders and black players as wingers . . gender in sports . female participation in sports is influenced by patriarchy surrounding the body , as well as ideas of femininity and sexuality . physical exertion inevitably leads to development of muscle , which is connected to masculinity , which is in contrast to the idea of women as presented by modern consumer culture . women who enter sports early are more likely to challenge these stereotypes . television networks and corporations focus on showcasing female athlete which are considered as attractive , which trivializes the achievements of these sportswomen . women 's sports are less covered by news than male sports . during sporting events , the camera focuses on specifically on attractive women . allen guttman argues that erotic component of sports can not be rooted out , and as such remains one of its key components . further , attractive male and female athletes will always be more sought after . the erotic component of sports should be researched , instead of being outright rejected . jennifer hargreaves sees three political strategies for women in sports : co-option : this strategy rejects conservative claims of biological differences and traditional gender values . liberal feminists believe women will gradually take over more roles within sport created and controlled by men . separatism : position held by radical feminists , which advocates self-realization through organization of sport events and governing bodies independent of men . it would further increase the number of women competing in various sports . cooperation : advocated by socialist feminists who believe that cooperation between men and women would help to establish new sporting models that would negate gender differences . they recognize the diversity of struggles within modern capitalist societies , and aims at liberation from them . unlike separatism it engages with men , and is more extensive than co-option . co-operation posits that men are n't inherently oppressive , but are socialized into reproducing oppressive roles . theories in sociology of sport . functionalism . structural functionalist theories see society as a complex system whose parts work together to promote solidarity and stability . sport itself developed from religious ceremonies , which served to promote social and moral solidarity of the community . bromberger saw similarities between religious ceremonies and football matches . matches are held in a particular spatial configuration , pitches are sacred and may not be polluted by pitch invaders , and lead to intense emotional states in fans . as with religious ceremonies , spectators are spatially distributed according to social distribution of power . football seasons have a fixed calendar . group roles on match day are ceremonial , with specially robed people performing intense ritual acts . as a church , football has an organizational network , from local to global levels . matches have a sequential order that guides the actions of participants , from pre-match to post-match actions . lastly , football rituals create a sense of communitas . songs and choreography can be seen as an immanent ceremony through which spectators transfer their strength to the team . accounting for the fact that not all actions support the existing societal structure , robert k . merton saw five ways a person could react to the existing structure , which can be applied to sports as well : conformism , innovation , ritualism , withdrawal , and rebellion . erving goffman drew on durkheim 's conception of positive rituals , emphasizing the sacred status of an individual 's '' face '' . positive ( compliments , greetings , etc . ) and negative ( avoiding confrontation , apologies , etc . ) rituals all serve to protect one 's face . sport journalists , for example , utilize both the positive and negative rituals to protect the face of the athlete they wish to maintain good relations with . birrell furthermore posits sport events are ritual competitions in which athletes show their character through a mix of bravery , good play and integrity . a good showing serves to reinforce the good face of the athlete . . interpretative sociology . interpretative sociology explores the interrelations of social action to status , subjectivity , meaning , motives , identities and social change . it avoids explaining human groups through general laws and generalizations , preferring what max weber called verstehen - understanding and explaining individual motivations . it allows for a more complete understanding of diverse social meanings , symbols and roles withing sport . sport allows for creation of various social identities within the framework of a single game or match , which may change during it or throughout the course of multiple matches . ones role as a sportsperson further affects how they act outside of a game or a match , i.e . acting out the role of a student athlete . weber introduced the notion of rationalization . in modern society , relationship are organized to be as efficient as possible , based on technical knowledge , instead of moral and political principles . this creates bureaucracies that are efficient , impersonal and homogeneous . allen guttmann identified several key aspects of rationalization , which can likewise be applied to sports : secularization : modern sports have become independent of the religious institutions from which they 've evolved . in the pre-modern societies , sport and religious festivities were interconnected . religion does hold some importance in sports , which can be seen in the pre-match rituals , superstitions and prayer . meritocracy : sports promote fair competition , while pre-modern sports were exclusive . for example , the ancient olympics excluded women and non-citizens . in contrast , modern sports offer opportunities to the disadvantaged , while fair judging/refereeing offer a level playing field . social status still plays a role in sport access and success . richer countries will have more numerous and successful athletes , while the higher class will have access to better training and preparation . specialization : modern sports , just like industry , has a complex division of labor . athletes have a very specialized role inside of a team , which they must learn and perform , i.e . the kicker in american football . this does not apply to all sports , as some value the ability to cover a number of roles as necessary . rationalization : modern sports identify the most efficient way to achieve the desired goal . on the other hand , giulianotti points out that sports are dominated by irrational actions . bureaucratization : sports are controlled by organizations , committees and supervisory boards on local , continental and global levels . leading positions are supposed to be given based on qualifications and experience , instead of charisma and nepotism . this is n't always the case , as powerful and charismatic personage are often put in charge of said organizations and committees . quantification : statistics measure and compare modern sport events , often throughout multiple generations , reducing complex events to understandable information which can be easily grasped by the mass public . statistics are n't the dominant factor in sport culture , with the socio-psychological and aesthetically pleasing factors still being the most important . neo marxism . karl marx saw sports as rooted in its economic context , subject to commodification and alienation . neo marxism sees sport as an ideological tool of the bourgeoisie , used to deceive the masses , in order to maintain control . as laborers , athletes give up their labour power , and suffer the same fate as the alienated worker . aside from supporting industrial capitalism , sport propagates heavy physical exertion and overworking as something positive . specialized division of labor force athletes to constantly perform the same movements , instead of playing creatively , experimentally and freely . the athlete if often under the illusion of being free , unaware of losing control over his labor power . spectators themselves support the alienation of athletes ' labor through their support and participation . marxist theories have been used to research the commodification of sport , for example , how players themselves become goods or promote them , the hyper-commercialization of sports during the 20th century , how clubs become like traditional firms , and how sport organizations become brands . this approach has been criticized for their tendency toward raw economism , and supposing that all current social structures function to maintain the existing capitalist order . supporting sport teams does n't necessarily contradict the development of class consciousness and participating in the class conflict . sport events have a number of examples of political protest . neo marxist analysis of sports often underestimate the aesthetic side of sport as well . cultural studies . hegemony research describes the relations of power , as well as methods and techniques used by dominant groups to achieve ideological consent , without resorting to physical coercion . this ideological consent aims to make the exploratory social order seem natural , guaranteeing that the subordinate groups live out their subordination . a hegemony is always open to contestation , and thus counter-hegemonic movements may emerge . the dominant groups may use sports to steer the use of the subordinate classes in the desired direction , or towards consumerism . however , the history of sport shows that colonized are n't necessarily manipulated through sport , while sport professionalization , and their own popular culture , helped the working class avoid mass subordination to bourgeois values . resistance is a key concept in cultural studies , which describes how subordinate groups engage in particular cultural practices to resist their domination . resistance can be overt and deliberate or latent and unconscious , but always counters the norms and conventions of the dominant groups . john fiske differentiated between confrontational semiotics and avoidance . . body and sports . body became a subject of research in the 80s , with the work of michel foucault . for him , power is exercise in two different ways - through biopower and disciplinary power . biopower centers on the political control of key biological aspects of the human body and whole populations , such as birth , reproduction , death , etc . disciplinary power is exercised by means of the everyday disciplining of bodies , particularly through controlling time and space . eichberg sees three different types of bodies as highlighting the difference between disciplined and undisciplined bodies in sport : the dialogic body , of different shapes and sizes , which are given to freeing oneself from control , and were he main type in pre-modern festivals and carnivals . the streamlined , improved body for sports accomplishment and competition . the healthy , straight body , which is shaped through disciplined regimes of fitness . the grotesque body could be seen in pre-modern festivals and carnivals , i.e . folk wrestling or three-legged race . modern sport pedagogy fluctuates between strictness and freedom , discipline and control , but the hierarchical relations of power and knowledge between the coach and athlete remain . segel claimed that the cultural raise of sports reflected the wider turn of modern society toward phsycial expresion , which revived militarism , war and fascism . some representatives of the frakfurt school , saw sport as a cult of the fascistic idea of the body . tännsjö claimed that overly complimenting sport prowess reflects the fascistic elements in society , as it normalizes the ridicule of the weak and defeated . sports and injury . prizefighting allows research into the violent body . prizefighters trasform their bodily capital into prizefighting capital , for the purpose of winning fame , status and wealth . their bodies are exploited by managers , of which they are aware , describing themselves alternatively as prostitutes , slaves and stallions . prizefighters accept the routine damage their bodies sustain , while at the same time fearing the effects of such damage . a frequent response to this is attempting to turn themselves into heroic personalities . all contact sports have violence as part of strategy to a certain extent . sports violence is n't individual , but is a product of socialization . finn see footballers as socializing into a culture of quasi-violence , which accentuates different values than those in regular life . it accepts violence as central to the game . physical injury of sportspeople can be seen through beck 's theory of a '' risk society '' . a risk society is characterized by reflexive modernity , where members of society are well informed , critical and participate in the shaping of social structures . unlike the routine risk of traditional society , modern societies identify and minimize risks . reflexive modernity in sports is evinced in isolation , minimizing and removal of causes of physical injury , while at the same time keeping the techniques and strategies particular to those sports . the lower classes have lower access to risk assessment and avoidance , and as such have a higher rate of participation in riskier sports . despite this , athletes are still thought to ignore and attempt to overcome pain , as overcoming pain is seen as brave and heroic . the capacity of the athlete to make the body seem invincible is an integral part of sports professionalism . this ignoring of pain is often a key part of some sport subcultures . children are also often exposed to acute pain and injuries , i.e . gymnastics . . emotion in sports . emotion has always been a huge part of sports as it can affect both athletes and the spectators themselves . theorists and sociologists who study the impact of emotions in sports try to classify emotions into categories . controversial , debated , and discussed intensely , these classifications are not definitive or set in stone . emotion is very important in sports ; athletes can use them to convey specific and significant information to their teammates and coaches and they can use emotion to send false signals to confuse their opponents . in addition to athletes using emotion to their advantage , emotion can also have a negative impact on athletes and their performances . for example , '' stage fright , '' or nervousness and apprehension , can impact their performance in their sport , be it in a positive or negative way . depending on the level of sports , the level of emotion differs . in professional sports , emotions can be extremely intense because there are many more people in many distinct roles who are involved . there are the professional athletes , the coaching staff , the referees , the television crew , the commentators , and last but not least , the fans and spectators . there is much more public press , pressure , and self-pressure . it is extremely difficult to not get emotionally invested in sports ; sports are very good at bringing out the worst qualities in people . there have been violent brawls when one team beats another in an intense game , loud fighting and yelling , and intense verbal arguments as well . emotion is also highly contagious , especially if there are many emotional people in one space . . binary divisions within sports . there are many perspectives through which sport can be viewed . therefore , very often some binary divisions are stressed , and many sports sociologists have shown that those divisions can create constructs within the ideologies of gender and affect the relationships between genders , as well as advocate or challenge social and racial class structures . some of these binary divisions include : professional vs . amateur , mass vs . top-level , active vs . passive/spectator , men vs . women , sports vs . play ( as an antithesis to organized and institutionalized activity ) . not only can binary divisions be seen within sports themselves , but they are also seen in the research of sports . the field of research has mainly been dominated by men because many believe that women 's input or research is inauthentic compared to men 's research . some women researchers also feel as though they have to '' earn '' their place within the sports research field whereas men , for the most part , do not . while women researchers in this field do have to deal with gender-related issues when it comes to their research , it does not prevent them from being able to gather and understand the data they are collecting . sports sociologists believe that women can have a unique perspective when gathering research on sports since they are able to more closely look at and understand the female fan side of sporting events . following feminist or other reflexive and tradition-breaking paradigms , sports are sometimes studied as contested activities , i.e . as activities in the center of various people/groups interests ( connection of sports and gender , mass media , or state-politics ) . these perspectives provide people with different ways to think about sports and figure out the differences between the binary divisions . sports have always been of tremendous impact to the world as a whole , as well as individual societies and the people within them . there are so many positive aspects to the world of sport , specifically , organized sport . sports involve community values , attempting to establish and exercise good morals and ethics . spectator sports provide watchers with an enlivenment through key societal values displayed in the '' game '' . becoming a fan teaches you a large variety of skills as well that are a very important part of everyday life in the office , at home , and on the go . some of these skills include teamwork , leadership , creativity , and individuality . see also . history of sport women 's sport anti-jock movement physical cultural studies harry edwards physical culture fitness culture sociology of the body fitness fashion the outsourced self quantified self exercise trends . references . further reading . - examines how social factors that exclude participation in sports , including poverty , age , ethnicity , gender , etc . . external links . international sociology of sport association north american society for the sociology of sport sociology of sport journal