Grand Staircase–Escalante National Monument

management . the monument is managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) rather than the national park service . this was the first u.s . national monument managed by the blm . visitor centers are located in cannonville , big water , escalante , and kanab . geography . the monument stretches from the towns of big water , glendale , and kanab , utah in the southwest , to the towns of escalante and boulder in the northeast . originally encompassing , the monument was slightly larger in area than the state of delaware . after a reduction ordered by presidential proclamation in december 2017 , the monument now encompasses . the western part of the monument is dominated by the paunsaugunt plateau and the paria river , and is adjacent to bryce canyon national park . this section shows the geologic progression of the grand staircase . features include the slot canyons of bull valley gorge , willis creek , and lick wash which are accessed from skutumpah road . the center section is dominated by a single long ridge , called the kaiparowits plateau from the west , and fifty-mile mountain when viewed from the east . fifty-mile mountain stretches southeast from the town of escalante to the colorado river in glen canyon . the eastern face of the mountain is a escarpment . the western side ( the kaiparowits plateau ) is a shallow slope descending to the south and west . east of fifty-mile mountain are the canyons of the escalante . the monument is bounded by glen canyon national recreation area on the east and south . the popular hiking , backpacking and canyoneering areas include calf creek falls off utah state route 12 , and zebra canyon , harris wash , and the devils garden . the latter areas are accessed via the hole-in-the-rock road which extends southeast from escalante , near the base of fifty-mile mountain . the coyote gulch dry fork and lower coyote gulch are also located off the hole-in-the-rock road ; however , since december 2017 , they are no longer within monument boundaries ( see map ) . . paleontology . since 2000 , numerous dinosaur fossils over 75 million years old have been found at grand staircase–escalante . in 2002 , a volunteer at the monument discovered a 75-million-year-old dinosaur near the arizona border . on october 3 , 2007 , the dinosaur 's name , gryposaurus monumentensis ( hook-beaked lizard from the monument ) was announced in the zoological journal of the linnean society . g . monumentensis was at least long and tall , and has a powerful jaw with more than 800 teeth . many of the specimens from the kaiparowits formation are reposited at the natural history museum of utah in salt lake city . two ceratopsid ( horned ) dinosaurs , also discovered at the monument , were introduced by the utah geological survey in 2007 . they were uncovered in the wahweap formation , which is just below the kaiparowits formation where the duckbill was extracted . they lived about 80 million or 81 million years ago . the two fossils are called the diabloceratops and the nipple butte skull . they were found in 2002 and 2001 , respectively . both were later identified as belonging to diabloceratops . in 2013 the discovery of a new species , lythronax , was announced . it is a tyrannosaur that is approximately 13 million years older than tyrannosaurus , named for its great resemblance to its descendant . the specimen can be seen at the natural history museum of utah . human history . humans did not settle permanently in the area until the basketmaker iii era , somewhere around ad 500 . grand staircase escalante national monument . kane county utah office of tourism and film commission . retrieved 2011-10-14 . both the fremont and ancestral puebloan people lived here ; the fremont hunting and gathering below the plateau and near the escalante valley , and the ancestral puebloans farming in the canyons . both groups grew corn , beans , and squash , and built brush-roofed pithouses and took advantage of natural rock shelters . ruins and rock art can be found throughout the monument . the first record of white settlers in the region dates from 1866 , when captain james andrus led a group of cavalry to the headwaters of the escalante river . in 1871 jacob hamblin of kanab , on his way to resupply the second john wesley powell expedition , mistook the escalante river for the dirty devil river and became the first anglo to travel the length of the canyon . in 1879 the san juan expedition crossed through the monument on their way to a proposed mormon colony in the far southeastern corner of utah . traveling on a largely unexplored route , the group eventually arrived at the 1200-foot ( 400 m ) sandstone cliffs that surrounded glen canyon . they found the only breach for many miles in the otherwise vertical cliffs , which they named hole-in-the-rock . the narrow , steep , and rocky crevice eventually led to a steep sandy slope in the lower section and eventually down to the colorado river . with winter settling in , the company decided to go down the crevice , rather than retreat . after six weeks of labor , including excavation and the use of explosives to shift rock , they rigged a pulley system to lower their wagons and animals down the resulting road and off the cliff . there they built a ferry , crossed the river and climbed back out through cottonwood canyon on the other side . controversy . the national monument was declared on september 18 , 1996 at the height of the 1996 presidential election campaign by president bill clinton , and was controversial from the moment of creation . the declaration ceremony was held at grand canyon national park in arizona , rather than in utah . local officials such as democratic u.s . representative bill orton from utah objected to the designation of the national monument , questioning whether the antiquities act allowed such vast amounts of land to be designated . however , united states supreme court decisions have long established the president 's discretion to protect land under the antiquities act , and several lawsuits filed in an effort to overturn the designation were dismissed by federal courts . utah ass ' n of counties v . george w . bush , district court , d . utah , 2004 . the monumental legacy of the antiquites act of 1906 , mark squillace , georgia law review , 2003 . monument designation also nixed the andalex coal mine that was proposed for a remote location on the kaiparowits plateau . wilderness designation for the lands in the monument had long been sought by environmental groups ; however , designation of the monument is not the same as wilderness designation , as activities such as motorized vehicle and mountain bike use are allowed . there are contentious issues peculiar to the state of utah . certain plots of land were assigned when utah became a state ( in 1896 ) as school and institutional trust lands ( sitla , a utah state agency ) , to be managed to produce funds for the state school system . these lands included scattered plots in the monument that could no longer be developed . the sitla plots within the monument were exchanged for federal lands elsewhere in utah , plus equivalent mineral rights and 50 million cash by an act of congress , the utah schools and lands exchange act of 1998 , supported by democrats and republicans , and signed into law as public law 105-335 on october 31 , 1998 . a more difficult problem is the resolution of united states revised statute 2477 ( r.s . 2477 ) road claims . r.s . 2477 ( section 8 of the 1866 mining act ) states : '' the right-of-way for the construction of highways over public lands , not reserved for public uses , is hereby granted . '' the statute was repealed by the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) of 1976 , but the repeal was subject to valid existing rights . a process for resolving disputed claims has not been established , and in 1996 , the 104th united states congress passed a law which prohibited the r.s . 2477 ( proposed resolution regulations ) written by the clinton administration from taking effect without congressional approval . the right to maintain and improve the many unpaved roads in the national monument is disputed , with county officials placing county road signs on the roads they claim and occasionally applying bulldozers to grade claimed roads , while the blm tries to exert control over the same roads . litigation between the state and federal government over r.s . 2477 and road maintenance in the national monument is an ongoing issue . on december 4 , 2017 , president donald trump ordered that the monument 's size be reduced by nearly 47 % to , with the remainder divided into three areas , two of which border one another along the paria river . bears ears national monument was significantly reduced in size at the same time . conservation , angling , hunting , and outdoor recreation groups filed suit to block any reduction in the national monument , arguing that the president has no legal authority to materially shrink a national monument . environmental , conservation groups sue trump over monument changes . cnn , 4 december 2017 the cases were still pending at the 2020 election . . see also . cottonwood canyon road dixie national forest escalante petrified forest state park grosvenor arch kodachrome basin state park paria canyon-vermilion cliffs wilderness silvestre vélez de escalante . footnotes . references . paul larmer ( editor ) , give and take : how the clinton administration 's public lands offensive transformed the american west ( high country news books , 2004 ) bureau of land management , grand staircase–escalante nm , grand staircase–escalante national monument management plan ( u.s . dept . of the interior bureau of land management , 1999 ) david urmann , trail guide to grand staircase–escalante ( gibbs smith , 1999 ) robert b . keiter , sarah b . george and joro walker ( editors ) , visions of the grand staircase–escalante : examining utah 's newest national monument ( utah museum of natural history and wallace stegner center , 1998 ) julian smith , '' moon handbooks four corners '' ( avalon travel publishing , 2003 ) fleischner , thomas lowe , singing stone : a natural history of the escalante canyons ( university of utah press , 1999 ) . external links . bureau of land management : official grand staircase–escalante national monument website grand staircase escalante partners support for public awareness , interpretive , educational , scientific , scenic , historical , and cultural activities . united states . congress . house . ( 1997 ) . establishing the grand staircase–escalante national monument : oversight hearing before the subcommittee on national parks and public lands of the committee on resources , house of representatives , one hundred fifth congress , first session , on establishment . by president clinton on september 18 , 1996 : april 29 , 1997 washington . d.c : g.p.o .