Hans Krebs (biochemist)

biography . early life and education . krebs was born in hildesheim , germany , to georg krebs , an otolaryngology surgeon , and alma krebs ( née davidson ) . he descended from jewish-silesian ancestry and was the middle of three children , older sister elisabeth and younger brother wolfgang . krebs attended the famous old gymnasium andreanum in his home town . near the end of world war i , in september 1918 , six months short of completing his secondary school education , he was conscripted into the imperial german army . he was allowed to take an emergency examination for his high school diploma , which he passed with such a high score that he suspected the examiners of being '' unduly lenient and sympathetic '' . with the end of the war two months later , his conscription ended . krebs decided to follow his father 's profession and entered the university of göttingen in december 1918 to study medicine . in 1919 he transferred to the university of freiburg . in 1923 he published his first scientific paper on a histology . he did this work under the guidance of wilhelm von mollendorf starting it in 1920 . he completed his medical course in december 1923 . to obtain a doctor of medicine degree , and a medical license , he spent one year at the third medical clinic in the university of berlin . by then he had turned his professional goal from becoming a practising physician to becoming a medical researcher , particularly in biochemistry . in 1924 he studied at the department of chemistry at the pathological institute of the charité hospital , in berlin , for training in chemistry and biochemistry . he earned his md degree in 1925 from the university of hamburg . . career . in 1926 krebs joined otto heinrich warburg as a research assistant at the kaiser wilhelm institute for biology in dahlem , berlin . he was paid a modest 4800 marks per year . after four years in 1930 , with 16 publications to his credit , his mentor warburg urged him to move on and he took up the position of assistant in the department of medicine at the municipal hospital in altona ( now part of hamburg ) . the next year he moved to the medical clinic of the university of freiburg . at freiburg he was in charge of about 40 patients , and was at liberty to do his own research . before a year was over at freiburg , he , with research student kurt henseleit , published their discovery of the ornithine cycle of urea synthesis , which is the metabolic pathway for urea formation . it is now known as the urea cycle , and is sometimes also referred to as the krebs–henseleit cycle . together they also developed a complex aqueous solution ( a buffer ) , or perfusion ex vivo , for studying blood flow in arteries , which is now called the krebs–henseleit buffer . ) in 1932 he published the basic chemical reactions of the urea cycle , which established his scientific reputation . krebs 's life as a respected german scientist came to an abrupt halt in 1933 because of his jewish ancestry . with the rise of hitler 's nazi party to power , germany decreed the law for the restoration of the professional civil service , which decreed the removal of all non-germans , and anti-nazis , from professional occupations . krebs received his official dismissal from his job in april 1933 , and his service was terminated on 1 july 1933 . an admirer , sir frederick gowland hopkins at the university of cambridge , immediately came to his rescue , and persuaded the university to recruit krebs to work with him in the department of biochemistry . by july 1933 he was settled in cambridge with financial support from the rockefeller foundation . although germany restricted him to bringing only his personal belongings , he was fortunate that the government agents allowed him to take his equipment and research samples to england . they proved to be pivotal to his later discoveries , especially the manometer developed by warburg specifically for the measurement of oxygen consumption in thin slices of tissues ; it was the basis for his research . he was appointed as demonstrator in biochemistry in 1934 and in 1935 the university of sheffield offered him a post of lecturer in pharmacology , with a more spacious laboratory and double the salary . he worked there for 19 years . university of sheffield opened a department of biochemistry , now department of molecular biology and biotechnology , in 1938 and krebs became its first head , and eventually a professor in 1945 . krebs took over the running of the sorby research institute in 1943 . in 1944 , the british medical research council established the mrc unit for cell metabolism research at sheffield , and krebs was appointed the director . with this his laboratory became so large that the locals jokingly nicknamed it '' krebs 's empire '' . he moved with his mrc unit to the university of oxford in 1954 as whitley professor of biochemistry , the post he held till his retirement in 1967 . the editorial board of biochemical journal extended their good wishes on his retirement , but in return he promised to keep them busy , by producing scientific papers . he continued his research , and took his mrc unit to the nuffield department of clinical medicine at the radcliffe infirmary , oxford . from there he published over 100 research papers . . personal life and death . krebs met margaret cicely fieldhouse ( 30 october 1913 – may 1993 ) when he moved to sheffield in 1935 . they married on 22 march 1938 . krebs later described his life in sheffield as '' 19 happy years '' . they had two sons , paul ( born 1939 ) and john ( born 1945 ) , and a daughter , helen ( born 1942 ) . john ( john krebs , baron krebs ) became a renowned ornithologist , professor at the university of oxford , principal of jesus college , oxford , and british house of lords . after a brief illness , krebs died on 22 november 1981 in oxford . . achievements . urea cycle ( krebs–henseleit cycle ) . in 1932 krebs worked out the outlines of the urea cycle with a medical student kurt henseleit at the university of freiburg . while working at the medical clinic of the university of freiburg , krebs met kurt henseleit , with whom he investigated the chemical process of urea formation . in 1904 , two germans a . kossel and h . d . dakin had shown that arginine could be hydrolysed by the enzyme arginase to form ornithine and urea in inorganic reaction . based on this reaction , krebs and henseleit postulated that in living cells , similar reaction could occur , and that ornithine and citrulline could be the intermediate reactions . krebs started working on the possible method for the synthesis of arginine . using his warburg manometer , he mixed a slice of liver with purified ornithine and citrulline . he found that citrulline acted as a catalyst in the metabolic reactions of urea from ammonia and carbon dioxide . he and henseleit published their discovery in 1932 . thus the urea cycle ( or '' ornithine cycle '' ) was established , and it was the first metabolic cycle to be discovered . . citric acid cycle ( krebs cycle ) . at the university of sheffield , krebs and william johnson investigated cellular respiration by which oxygen was consumed to produce energy from the breakdown of glucose . krebs had earlier suggested to warburg while they worked together in germany that by using a manometer it could be possible to detect the oxygen consumption and identify the chemical reaction in glucose metabolism . warburg had flatly rejected the idea . in sheffield krebs vigorously worked to identify a possible chemical reaction and came up with numerous hypothetical pathways . using the manometer he tested those hypotheses one by one . one hypothesis involving succinate , fumarate , and malate proved to be useful because all these molecules increased oxygen consumption in the pigeon breast muscle . in 1937 german biochemists franz koop and carl martinus had demonstrated a series of reactions using citrate that produced oxaloacetate . krebs realised that these molecules could be the missing intermediates for such reaction . after four months of experimental works to fill in the gaps , krebs and johnson succeeded in establishing the sequence of the chemical cycle , which they called the '' citric acid cycle '' . it is also known as the '' krebs cycle '' or '' tricarboxylic acid ( tca ) cycle '' . krebs sent a short manuscript account of the discovery to nature on 10 june 1937 . on 14 june he received a rejection letter from the editor , saying that the journal had '' already sufficient letters to fill correspondence columns for seven or eight weeks '' , and encouraging krebs to '' submit it for early publication to another periodical . '' krebs immediately prepared a longer version titled '' the role of citric acid in intermediate metabolism in animal tissues '' , which he sent to the dutch journal enzymologia after two weeks and was published in two months . it was followed by a series of papers in different journals . . glyoxylate cycle . krebs continued to add more details to his citric acid cycle . the discovery of acetyl-coa in 1947 by fritz albert lipmann was another major contribution . however , this new discovery posed a problem in his classic reaction . in 1957 he , with hans kornberg , found that there were additional crucial enzymes . one was malate synthase , which condenses acetate with glyoxylate to form malate , and the other was isocitrate lyase , which provides glyoxylate for the reaction by cleaving it from isocitrate . these two reactions did not follow the normal citric acid cycle , and hence the pathway was named the glyoxylate bypass of the citric acid cycle , but is now known as the glyoxylate cycle . . honours and awards . krebs became a naturalised british citizen in 1939 . he was elected fellow of trinity college , oxford , 1954–1967 . he was elected to the royal society in 1947 . in 1953 he received the nobel prize in physiology or medicine for his '' discovery of the citric acid cycle . '' ( he shared the nobel prize with fritz lipmann . ) for the same reason he was given the albert lasker award for basic medical research in 1953 . the royal society awarded him its royal medal in 1954 , and copley medal in 1961 . in 1958 he received the gold medal of the netherlands society for physics , medical science and surgery . he was knighted in 1958 and was elected honorary fellow of girton college , cambridge university in 1979 . he was the original member of the society for general microbiology , which conferred him honorary membership in 1980 . he received an honorary doctorate from 21 universities . in july 2015 , krebs 's nobel prize medal was auctioned off for £225,000 ( around 351,225 ) . the proceeds were used to found the sir hans krebs trust , which provides funding for doctoral students in the biomedical field and support chemists who had to flee their home countries . . legacy . the university of oxford had a building named hans krebs tower , which was occupied by the department of biochemistry . in 2008 a new building for the department of biochemistry was constructed , on which a plaque was placed on 20 may 2013 by the association of jewish refugees . the plaque was unveiled by john , lord krebs , and the inscription reads : the university of sheffield has the krebs institute , founded in 1988 . it is a research centre covering interdisciplinary programmes in biochemical research . in 1990 the federation of european biochemical societies instituted the sir hans krebs medal , which was endowed by the lord rank centre for research . it is awarded for outstanding achievements in biochemistry and molecular biology . the society of friends of hannover medical school gives the sir hans krebs prize , which is worth 10,000 euros . the biochemical society offers krebs memorial scholarship to a postgraduate ( phd ) student working in biochemistry or an allied biomedical science at any british university . as of 2014 , the scholarship is worth £18,500 and is given for a year , but is extendable up to three years . . see also . list of jewish nobel laureates . references . bibliography . . external links . including the nobel lecture , december 11 , 1953 the citric acid cycle 1953 prize in physiology or medicine nobel prizes deconstructing the tour , university of sheffield ( biography ) sir hans adolf krebs at whonamedit catalogue of the papers and correspondence of sir hans adolf krebs , frs ( 1900–1981 ) hans a . krebs , nobel luminaries – jewish nobel prize winners , on the beit hatfutsot-the museum of the jewish people website .