Possessed (1947 film)

plot . a woman ( joan crawford ) is found wandering los angeles , unable to say anything other than '' david '' . admitted to a hospital , she is coaxed into recounting her life . she reveals herself as louise howell , an emotionally unstable woman who had worked as a nurse to the patient wife of dean graham ( raymond massey ) in the graham home . louise fell in love with neighbor david sutton ( van heflin ) , an engineer , who loathes her smothering obsession with him ; he ends the relationship and leaves the area . shortly after , graham 's wife drowns . it is undetermined whether she committed suicide or not . louise remains with the family as they move to washington , d.c . , to care for the two graham children : young wynn and college-age carol ( geraldine brooks ) . time passes and david re-enters the scene , having taken an engineering job with graham . he is surprised to find louise with the family . louise — still obsessed with david — makes a pass and is rebuffed . moments later , graham proposes to louise and she accepts to salvage her pride . she tells him outright that she is not in love with him , but graham pledges to make it work in spite of that . carol takes a fancy to david , much to the consternation of louise , who tries to dissuade carol from establishing a relationship with him . louise 's mind begins to decline with her obsession over david ; she hears voices , has hallucinations , and believes her husband 's first wife is still alive . when david and carol consider marriage , louise tries to end their relationship . graham is concerned about louise 's mental state and tries to persuade her to see a doctor . believing her husband is trying to put her away , louise bursts into david 's apartment and kills him in a schizophrenic episode . the psychiatrist to whom louise has recounted her story pronounces her insane and not responsible for her actions . he laments that he had not seen her sooner , as he is sure that if he had , the tragedy could have been avoided . he tells graham that he intends to help louise back to sanity , though the process will be long and arduous , with much pain and suffering in store for her . graham pledges his full support and vows that he will always be there for her , no matter how difficult it becomes . cast . joan crawford as louise howell van heflin as david sutton raymond massey as dean graham geraldine brooks as carol graham jakob gimpel as the concert pianist stanley ridges as dr . willard john ridgely as chief investigator moroni olsen as dr . ames erskine sanford as dr . sherman . production . crawford spent time visiting mental wards and talking to psychiatrists to prepare for her role , and said the part was the most difficult she ever played . during production director curtis bernhardt accidentally kept referring to crawford as '' bette '' as he had just finished filming a stolen life with bette davis . crawford tried unsuccessfully to convince warner bros . to change the film 's title to the secret since she had already starred in a film of the same title ( possessed ) earlier in her career . the musical score is by franz waxman , and makes extensive use of a piano piece by robert schumann , the '' chopin '' movement from the carnaval ( schumann ) op . 9 . the schumann piece is played on the piano by david near the beginning of the movie , and is used throughout the score to underscore louise 's obsession with david . critical reception . when the film was released , the staff at variety magazine praised the work of crawford , yet questioned bernhardt 's direction . they wrote , '' joan crawford cops all thesping honors in this production with a virtuoso performance as a frustrated woman ridden into madness by a guilt-obsessed mind . actress has a self-assurance that permits her to completely dominate the screen even vis-a-vis such accomplished players as van heflin and raymond massey . despite its overall superiority , possessed is somewhat marred by an ambiguous approach in curtis bernhardt ’ s direction . film vacillates between being a cold clinical analysis of a mental crackup and a highly surcharged melodramatic vehicle for crawford ’ s histrionics . '' variety , film review , 1947 . accessed : july 14 , 2013 . james agee in time wrote , '' most of it is filmed with unusual imaginativeness and force . the film is uncommonly well acted . miss crawford is generally excellent '' , while howard barnes in the new york herald tribune argued , '' crawford has obviously studied the aspects of insanity to recreate a rather terrifying portrait of a woman possessed by devils . '' quirk , lawrence j . the films of joan crawford . the citadel press , 1968 . more recently , film critic dennis schwartz gave the film a mixed review , writing , '' in german émigré director curtis bernhardt 's melodrama possessed , joan crawford plays a mentally disturbed person who ca n't distinguish reality from her imagination . through use of german expressionism techniques and many familiar film noir shadowy shots , the b/w film takes on a penetrating psychological tone and makes a case for a not guilty of murder plea due to insanity . though joan has a powerful presence in this movie , she played her mad role in a too cold and campy way to be thought of as a sympathetic figure . all the psychological treatment therapy sounded like psycho-babble and joan 's acting was overstuffed , though some of her morbid imaginations were gripping and held my attention . too heavy with german stimmung it still is fun to watch the melodramatics play out in this tale of overbearing love , painful rejection , paranoia and murder . '' schwartz , dennis . ozus ' world movie reviews , film review , december 20 , 2003 . accessed : july 14 , 2013 . film historian bob porfirio notes , '' by developing the plot from the point-of-view of a neurotic and skillfully using flashback and fantasy scenes in a straightforward manner , the distinction between reality and louise 's imagination is blurred . that makes possessed a prime example of oneirism , the dreamlike tone that is a seminal characteristic of film noir . '' . . academy awards . at the 20th academy awards , joan crawford was nominated for academy award for best actress , losing to loretta young in the farmer 's daughter . . box office and exhibition . the movie was a hit , earning 3,027,000 at the worldwide box office on a budget of 2,592,000 . this consisted of 1,987,000 domestic and 1,085,000 foreign . the film was entered into the 1947 cannes film festival . . references . external links .