Strychnine

pharmacokinetics . absorption . strychnine may be introduced into the body orally , by inhalation , or by injection . it is a potently bitter substance , and in humans has been shown to activate taste receptor bitter tas2r10 and tas2r46 . strychnine is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract . . distribution . strychnine is transported by plasma and erythrocytes . due to slight protein binding , strychnine leaves the bloodstream quickly and distributes to the tissues . approximately 50 % of the ingested dose can enter the tissues in 5 minutes . also within a few minutes of ingestion , strychnine can be detected in the urine . little difference was noted between oral and intramuscular administration of strychnine in a 4 & nbsp ; mg dose . in persons killed by strychnine , the highest concentrations are found in the blood , liver , kidney and stomach wall . the usual fatal dose is 60–100 & nbsp ; mg strychnine and is fatal after a period of 1–2 hours , though lethal doses vary depending on the individual . metabolism . strychnine is rapidly metabolized by the liver microsomal enzyme system requiring nadph and o 2 . strychnine competes with the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine resulting in an excitatory state . however , the toxicokinetics after overdose have not been well described . in most severe cases of strychnine poisoning , the patient dies before reaching the hospital . the biological half-life of strychnine is about 10 hours . this half-life suggests that normal hepatic function can efficiently degrade strychnine even when the quantity ingested is high enough to cause severe poisoning . excretion . a few minutes after ingestion , strychnine is excreted unchanged in the urine , and accounts for about 5 to 15 % of a sublethal dose given over 6 hours . approximately 10 to 20 % of the dose will be excreted unchanged in the urine in the first 24 hours . the percentage excreted decreases with the increasing dose . of the amount excreted by the kidneys , about 70 % is excreted in the first 6 hours , and almost 90 % in the first 24 hours . excretion is virtually complete in 48 to 72 hours . . treatment . there is no specific antidote for strychnine but recovery from exposure is possible with early supportive medical treatment . strychnine poisoning demands aggressive management with early control of muscle spasms , intubation if loss of airway control , toxin removal ( decontamination ) , intravenous hydration and potentially active cooling efforts in the context of hyperthermia as well as hemodialysis in kidney failure ( to note , strychnine has not been shown to be removed by hemodialysis ) . strychnine poisoning in today 's age generally results from herbal remedies and strychnine-containing rodenticides . moreover , management should be tailored to the patient 's history of chief complaint and workup to rule out other causes . if a poisoned person is able to survive for 6 to 12 hours subsequent to initial dose , they have a good prognosis . the patient should be kept in a quiet and darkened room , because excessive manipulation and loud noises may cause convulsions . because these convulsions are extremely painful , appropriate analgesics should be administered . treatment of strychnine poisoning involves oral administration of activated charcoal which adsorbs strychnine within the digestive tract ; unabsorbed strychnine is removed from the stomach by gastric lavage , along with tannic acid or potassium permanganate solutions to oxidize strychnine . activated charcoal may be beneficial , but its benefit remains unproven , to note its use should be avoided in any patient with a tenuous airway or altered mental status . seizures are controlled by anticonvulsants , such as phenobarbital or diazepam , along with muscle relaxants such as dantrolene to combat muscle rigidity . historically chloroform or heavy doses of chloral , bromide , urethane or amyl nitrite were used to restrain the convulsions . because medications such as diazepam are not effective to relieve convulsions in all cases , concurrent use of barbiturates and/or propofol can be utilized . the sine qua non of strychnine toxicity is the '' awake '' seizure , in which tonic-clonic activity occurs but the patient is alert and oriented throughout and afterwards . accordingly , george harley ( 1829–1896 ) showed in 1850 that curare ( wourali ) was effective for the treatment of tetanus and strychnine poisoning . it is important to note that if seizure activity is present , the use of muscle paralysis will only mask the signs of ongoing seizure activity despite otherwise ongoing present brain damage . . history . strychnine was the first alkaloid to be identified in plants of the genus strychnos , family loganiaceae . strychnos , named by carl linnaeus in 1753 , is a genus of trees and climbing shrubs of the gentianales order . the genus contains 196 various species and is distributed throughout the warm regions of asia ( 58 species ) , america ( 64 species ) , and africa ( 75 species ) . the seeds and bark of many plants in this genus contain strychnine . the toxic and medicinal effects of strychnos nux-vomica have been well known from the times of ancient india , although the chemical compound itself was not identified and characterized until the 19th century . the inhabitants of these countries had historical knowledge of the species strychnos nux-vomica and saint-ignatius ' bean ( strychnos ignatii ) . strychnos nux-vomica is a tree native to the tropical forests on the malabar coast in southern india , sri lanka and indonesia , which attains a height of about . the tree has a crooked , short , thick trunk and the wood is close grained and very durable . the fruit has an orange color and is about the size of a large apple with a hard rind and contains five seeds , which are covered with a soft wool-like substance . the ripe seeds look like flattened disks , which are very hard . these seeds are the chief commercial source of strychnine and were first imported to and marketed in europe as a poison to kill rodents and small predators . strychnos ignatii is a woody climbing shrub of the philippines . the fruit of the plant , known as saint ignatius ' bean , contains as many as 25 seeds embedded in the pulp . the seeds contain more strychnine than other commercial alkaloids . the properties of s . nux-vomica and s . ignatii are substantially those of the alkaloid strychnine . strychnine was first discovered by french chemists joseph bienaimé caventou and pierre-joseph pelletier in 1818 in the saint-ignatius ' bean . in some strychnos plants a 9,10-dimethoxy derivative of strychnine , the alkaloid brucine , is also present . brucine is not as poisonous as strychnine . historic records indicate that preparations containing strychnine ( presumably ) had been used to kill dogs , cats , and birds in europe as far back as 1640 . it was also used during world war ii by the dirlewanger brigade against civilian population . the structure of strychnine was first determined in 1946 by sir robert robinson and in 1954 this alkaloid was synthesized in a laboratory by robert b . woodward . this is one of the most famous syntheses in the history of organic chemistry . both chemists won the nobel prize ( robinson in 1947 and woodward in 1965 ) . strychnine has been used as a plot device in the author agatha christie 's murder mysteries . . performance enhancer . strychnine was popularly used as an athletic performance enhancer and recreational drug use in the late 19th century and early 20th century , due to its convulsant effects . maximilian theodor buch proposed it as a cure for alcoholism around the same time . it was thought to be similar to coffee . its effects are well-described in h . g . wells ' novella the invisible man : the title character states '' strychnine is a grand tonic . to take the flabbiness out of a man . '' the protagonist replies : '' it 's the devil , . it 's the palaeolithic in a bottle . ''