Interplanetary Transport Network

history . interplanetary transfer orbits are solutions to the gravitational three-body problem , which , for the general case , does not have analytical solutions , and is addressed by numerical analysis approximations . however , a small number of exact solutions exist , most notably the five orbits referred to as '' lagrange points '' , which are orbital solutions for circular orbits in the case when one body is significantly more massive . the key to discovering the interplanetary transport network was the investigation of the nature of the winding paths near the earth-sun and earth-moon lagrange points . they were first investigated by henri poincaré in the 1890s . he noticed that the paths leading to and from any of those points would almost always settle , for a time , on an orbit about that point . there are in fact an infinite number of paths taking one to the point and away from it , and all of which require nearly zero change in energy to reach . when plotted , they form a tube with the orbit about the lagrange point at one end . the derivation of these paths traces back to mathematicians charles c . conley and richard p . mcgehee in 1968 . hiten , japan 's first lunar probe , was moved into lunar orbit using similar insight into the nature of paths between the earth and the moon . beginning in 1997 , martin lo , shane d . ross , and others wrote a series of papers identifying the mathematical basis that applied the technique to the genesis ( spacecraft ) , and to lunar and jovian missions . they referred to it as an interplanetary superhighway ( ips ) . lo , martin w . and ross , shane d . ( 2001 ) the lunar l1 gateway : portal to the stars and beyond , aiaa space 2001 conference , albuquerque , new mexico . . paths . as it turns out , it is very easy to transit from a path leading to the point to one leading back out . this makes sense , since the orbit is unstable , which implies one will eventually end up on one of the outbound paths after spending no energy at all . edward belbruno coined the term '' weak stability boundary '' or '' fuzzy boundary '' for this effect . with careful calculation , one can pick which outbound path one wants . this turned out to be useful , as many of these paths lead to some interesting points in space , such as the earth 's moon or between the galilean moons of jupiter . ross , s.d . , w.s . koon , m.w . lo and j.e . marsden ( 2003 ) design of a multi-moon orbiter . 13th aas/aiaa space flight mechanics meeting , ponce , puerto rico , paper no . aas 03–143 . as a result , for the cost of reaching the earth–sun point , which is rather low energy value , one can travel to a number of very interesting points for a little or no additional fuel cost . but the trip from earth to mars or other distant locations would likely take thousands of years . the transfers are so low-energy that they make travel to almost any point in the solar system possible . on the downside , these transfers are very slow . for trips from earth to other planets , they are not useful for manned or unmanned probes , as the trip would take many generations . nevertheless , they have already been used to transfer spacecraft to the earth–sun point , a useful point for studying the sun that was employed in a number of recent missions , including the genesis mission , the first to return solar wind samples to earth . lo , m . w . , et al . 2001 . genesis mission design , the journal of the astronautical sciences 49:169–184 . the network is also relevant to understanding solar system dynamics ; belbruno , e . , and b.g . marsden . 1997 . resonance hopping in comets . the astronomical journal 113:1433–1444 comet shoemaker–levy 9 followed such a trajectory on its collision path with jupiter . smith , d . l . 2002 . next exit 0.5 million kilometers . engineering and science lxv ( 4 ) :6–15 ross , s . d . 2003 . statistical theory of interior–exterior transition and collision probabilities for minor bodies in the solar system , libration point orbits and applications ( eds . g gomez , m.w . lo and j.j . masdemont ) , world scientific , pp . 637–652 . . further explanation . the itn is based around a series of orbital paths predicted by chaos theory and the restricted three-body problem leading to and from the orbits around the lagrange points – points in space where the gravity between various bodies balances with the centrifugal force of an object there . for any two bodies in which one body orbits around the other , such as a star/planet or planet/moon system , there are five such points , denoted through . for instance , the earth–moon point lies on a line between the two , where gravitational forces between them exactly balance with the centrifugal force of an object placed in orbit there . these five points have particularly low delta-v requirements , and appear to be the lowest-energy transfers possible , even lower than the common hohmann transfer orbit that has dominated orbital navigation since the start of space travel . although the forces balance at these points , the first three points ( the ones on the line between a certain large mass , e.g . a star , and a smaller , orbiting mass , e.g . a planet ) are not stable equilibrium points . if a spacecraft placed at the earth–moon point is given even a slight nudge away from the equilibrium point , the spacecraft 's trajectory will diverge away from the point . the entire system is in motion , so the spacecraft will not actually hit the moon , but will travel in a winding path , off into space . there is , however , a semi-stable orbit around each of these points , called a halo orbit . the orbits for two of the points , and , are stable , but the halo orbits for through are stable only on the order of months . in addition to orbits around lagrange points , the rich dynamics that arise from the gravitational pull of more than one mass yield interesting trajectories , also known as low energy transfers . for example , the gravity environment of the sun–earth–moon system allows spacecraft to travel great distances on very little fuel , albeit on an often circuitous route . missions . launched in 1978 , the isee-3 spacecraft was sent on a mission to orbit around one of the lagrange points . the spacecraft was able to maneuver around the earth 's neighborhood using little fuel by taking advantage of the unique gravity environment . after the primary mission was completed , isee-3 went on to accomplish other goals , including a flight through the geomagnetic tail and a comet flyby . the mission was subsequently renamed the international cometary explorer ( ice ) . the first low energy transfer using what would later be called the itn was the rescue of japan 's hiten lunar mission in 1991 . another example of the use of the itn was nasa 's 2001–2003 genesis mission , which orbited the sun–earth point for over two years collecting material , before being redirected to the lagrange point , and finally redirected from there back to earth . the 2003–2006 smart-1 of the european space agency used another low energy transfer from the itn . in a more recent example , the chinese spacecraft chang ' e 2 used the itn to travel from lunar orbit to the earth-sun point , then on to fly by the asteroid 4179 toutatis . asteroids . the asteroid 39p/oterma 's path from outside jupiters orbit , to inside , and back to outside is said to use these low energy paths . . see also . gravity assist gravitational keyhole orbital mechanics interplanetary spaceflight hill sphere horseshoe orbit halo orbit lunar cycler mars cycler . sources and notes . external links . '' the interplanetary transport network '' by shane d . ross , american scientist , may–june 2006 ( subscription ) '' ride the celestial subway '' new scientist , 27 march 2006 '' tube route '' science , 18 november 2005 '' navigating celestial currents '' science news , 18 april 2005 '' next exit 0.5 million kilometers '' engineering and science , 2002 '' mathematics unites the heavens and the atom , '' space daily , 28 september 2005 '' asteroids lost in space '' physical review focus , 14 june 2002 interplanetary transport network lecture ( youtube ) by shane d . ross , 2004 '' cylindrical manifolds and tube dynamics in the restricted three-body problem '' - phd dissertation by shane d . ross capture dynamics and chaotic motions in celestial mechanics : with the construction of low energy transfers - a mathematical analysis of aspects of the itn , edward belbruno ( 2004 ) the dynamical mechanism of ballistic lunar capture transfers in the four-body problem from the perspective of invariant manifolds and hill 's regions by edward belbruno dynamical systems , the three-body problem , and space mission design , by wang sang koon , martin lo , jerrold e . marsden , shane d . ross ( book available as pdf ) . 2007-10-08 audio interview with belbruno on low-energy transfer