Muscular system

muscles . there are three distinct types of muscles : skeletal muscles , cardiac muscle , and smooth muscle . muscles provide strength , balance , posture , movement and heat for the body to keep warm . . skeletal muscle . skeletal muscles , like other striated muscles , are composed of myocytes , or muscle fibers , which are in turn composed of myofibrils , which are composed of sarcomeres , the basic building block of striated muscle tissue . upon stimulation by an action potential , skeletal muscles perform a coordinated contraction by shortening each sarcomere . the best proposed model for understanding contraction is the sliding filament model of muscle contraction . within the sarcomere , actin and myosin fibers overlap in a contractile motion towards each other . myosin filaments have club-shaped heads that project toward the actin filaments . larger structures along the myosin filament called myosin heads are used to provide attachment points on binding sites for the actin filaments . the myosin heads move in a coordinated style ; they swivel toward the center of the sarcomere , detach and then reattach to the nearest active site of the actin filament . this is called a ratchet type drive system . this process consumes large amounts of adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) , the energy source of the cell . atp binds to the cross bridges between myosin heads and actin filaments . the release of energy powers the swiveling of the myosin head . when atp is used , it becomes adenosine diphosphate ( adp ) , and since muscles store little atp , they must continuously replace the discharged adp with atp . muscle tissue also contains a stored supply of a fast acting recharge chemical , creatine phosphate , which when necessary can assist with the rapid regeneration of adp into atp . calcium ions are required for each cycle of the sarcomere . calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcomere when a muscle is stimulated to contract . this calcium uncovers the actin binding sites . when the muscle no longer needs to contract , the calcium ions are pumped from the sarcomere and back into storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum . there are approximately 639 skeletal muscles in the human body . image : muscles anterior labeled.png skeletal muscles , viewed from the front image : muscle posterior labeled.png skeletal muscles , viewed from the back . cardiac muscle . heart muscles are distinct from skeletal muscles because the muscle fibers are laterally connected to each other . furthermore , just as with smooth muscles , their movement is involuntary . heart muscles are controlled by the sinus node influenced by the autonomic nervous system . . smooth muscle . smooth muscles are controlled directly by the autonomic nervous system and are involuntary , meaning that they are incapable of being moved by conscious thought . functions such as heartbeat and lungs ( which are capable of being willingly controlled , be it to a limited extent ) are involuntary muscles but are not smooth muscles . physiology . contraction . neuromuscular junctions are the focal point where a motor neuron attaches to a muscle . acetylcholine , ( a neurotransmitter used in skeletal muscle contraction ) is released from the axon terminal of the nerve cell when an action potential reaches the microscopic junction called a synapse . a group of chemical messengers cross the synapse and stimulate the formation of electrical changes , which are produced in the muscle cell when the acetylcholine binds to receptors on its surface . calcium is released from its storage area in the cell 's sarcoplasmic reticulum . an impulse from a nerve cell causes calcium release and brings about a single , short muscle contraction called a muscle twitch . if there is a problem at the neuromuscular junction , a very prolonged contraction may occur , such as the muscle contractions that result from tetanus . also , a loss of function at the junction can produce paralysis . skeletal muscles are organized into hundreds of motor units , each of which involves a motor neuron , attached by a series of thin finger-like structures called axon terminals . these attach to and control discrete bundles of muscle fibers . a coordinated and fine tuned response to a specific circumstance will involve controlling the precise number of motor units used . while individual muscle units contract as a unit , the entire muscle can contract on a predetermined basis due to the structure of the motor unit . motor unit coordination , balance , and control frequently come under the direction of the cerebellum of the brain . this allows for complex muscular coordination with little conscious effort , such as when one drives a car without thinking about the process . . tendon . a tendon is a piece of connective tissue that connects a muscle to a bone . mediline.gov vorvick , linda '' tendon vs . ligament '' when a muscle contracts , it pulls against the skeleton to create movement . a tendon connects this muscle to a bone , making this function possible . aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity . at rest , the body produces the majority of its atp aerobically in the mitochondria without producing lactic acid or other fatiguing byproducts . during exercise , the method of atp production varies depending on the fitness of the individual as well as the duration and intensity of exercise . at lower activity levels , when exercise continues for a long duration ( several minutes or longer ) , energy is produced aerobically by combining oxygen with carbohydrates and fats stored in the body . during activity that is higher in intensity , with possible duration decreasing as intensity increases , atp production can switch to anaerobic pathways , such as the use of the phosphocreatine and the phosphagen system or anaerobic glycolysis . aerobic atp production is biochemically much slower and can only be used for long-duration , low-intensity exercise , but produces no fatiguing waste products that can not be removed immediately from the sarcomere and the body , and it results in a much greater number of atp molecules per fat or carbohydrate molecule . aerobic training allows the oxygen delivery system to be more efficient , allowing aerobic metabolism to begin quicker . anaerobic atp production produces atp much faster and allows near-maximal intensity exercise , but also produces significant amounts of lactic acid which renders high-intensity exercise unsustainable for more than several minutes . the phosphagen system is also anaerobic . it allows for the highest levels of exercise intensity , but intramuscular stores of phosphocreatine are very limited and can only provide energy for exercises lasting up to ten seconds . recovery is very quick , with full creatine stores regenerated within five minutes . . clinical significance . multiple diseases can affect the muscular system . see also . major systems of the human body intramuscular coordination . references . external links . online muscle tutorial getbody smart muscle system tutorials and quizzes medbio.info use and formation of atp in muscle