Syntactic ambiguity

different forms . globally ambiguous . a globally ambiguous sentence is one that has at least two distinct interpretations . in this type of ambiguity , after one has read or heard the entire sentence , the ambiguity is still present . rereading the sentence can not resolve the ambiguity because no feature of the representation ( i.e . word order ) distinguishes the distinct interpretations . global ambiguities are often unnoticed because the reader tends to choose the meaning he or she understands to be more probable . one example of a global ambiguity is '' the woman held the baby in the green blanket . '' in this example , the baby could be wrapped in the green blanket or the woman could be using the green blanket as an instrument to hold the baby . locally ambiguous . a locally ambiguous sentence is a sentence that contains an ambiguous phrase but has only one interpretation . the ambiguity in a locally ambiguous sentence briefly persists and is resolved , i.e . , disambiguated , by the end of the utterance . sometimes , local ambiguities can result in garden path sentence , in which a structurally sound sentence is difficult to interpret because one interpretation of the ambiguous region is not the ultimate coherent interpretation . examples . : the duke yet lives that henry shall depose . — henry vi ( 1.4.30 ) , by william shakespeare : :amphiboly occurs frequently in poetry , sometimes owing to the alteration of the natural order of words for metrical reasons . the sentence could be taken to mean that henry will depose the duke , or that the duke will depose henry . : — edward ii by christopher marlowe : : according to legend , isabella of france and roger mortimer , 1st earl of march famously plotted to murder edward ii of england in such a way as not to draw blame on themselves , sending a famous order in latin which , depending on where the comma was inserted , could mean either '' do not be afraid to kill edward ; it is good , '' which can mean either edward , killing him , or being afraid to kill him is good ; or '' do not kill edward ; it is good to fear , '' which could mean that either edward or killing him is good to fear . : i 'm glad i 'm a man , and so is lola . — lola by ray davies : :can mean '' lola and i are both glad i 'm a man '' , or '' i 'm glad lola and i are both men '' , or '' i 'm glad i 'm a man , and lola is also glad to be a man '' . ray davies deliberately wrote this ambiguity into the song , referring to a cross-dresser . : john saw the man on the mountain with a telescope . : : can mean that john , using a telescope , saw a man on a mountain , or john saw a man on a mountain , with a mountain holding a telescope , or john seeing a man with a telescope . : the word of the lord came to zechariah , son of berekiah , son of iddo , the prophet . : :is the prophet zechariah , berekiah , or iddo ? : the title of the comedy-horror film lesbian vampire killers . : : is the title referring to lesbians that kill vampires , vampires that kill lesbians , killers of lesbian vampires , or lesbian vampires that are killers ? : british left waffles on falkland islands . : : two words are ambiguous . the word left may refer to ( noun ) a politically left-wing party , or ( verb ) the past tense of leave behind . waffles may be ( noun ) a type of batter cake , or ( verb ) the present tense of to talk at length . the sentence may be parsed as either : '' british left-leaning politicians talk at length about the falklands '' or '' the british left cakes behind on the falklands . '' aristotle writes about an influence of ambiguities on arguments and also about an influence of ambiguities depending on either combination or division of words : . in headlines . newspaper headlines are written in a telegram style ( headlinese ) which often zero copula , creating syntactic ambiguity . a common form is the garden path type . the name crash blossoms was proposed for these ambiguous headlines by danny bloom in the testy copy editors discussion group in august 2009 . he based this on the headline '' violinist linked to jal 123 blossoms '' that mike o'connell had posted , asking what such a headline could be called . ben zimmer , '' on language : crash blossoms '' , new york times magazine , january 27 , 2010 online text the columbia journalism review regularly reprints such headlines in its '' the lower case '' column , and has collected them in the anthologies '' squad helps dog bite victim '' gloria cooper , ed . , squad helps dog bite victim , and other flubs from the nation 's press , dolphin books , 1980 , and '' red tape holds up new bridge '' . gloria cooper , red tape holds up new bridge , and more flubs from the nation 's press , perigee books , 1987 . language log also has an extensive archive of crash blossoms , for example '' infant pulled from wrecked car involved in short police pursuit '' . many purported crash blossoms are apocryphal or recycled . 1997 headlines at snopes.com . one celebrated one from world war i is '' french push bottles up german rear '' ; life imitated art in the world war ii headline '' eighth army push bottles up germans '' . fritz spiegl , what the papers did n't mean to say scouse press , liverpool , 1965 . in humor and advertising . syntactic or structural ambiguities are frequently found in humor and advertising . one of the most enduring jokes from the famous comedian groucho marx was his quip that used a modifier attachment ambiguity : '' i shot an elephant in my pajamas . how he got into my pajamas i do n't know . '' another sentence , which emerged from early 1960s machine translation research , is '' time flies like an arrow ; fruit flies like a banana '' . more than one movie has used the comic line '' the peasants are revolting '' , which allows an interpretation of revolting as both a verb or adjective . in the realm of advertising and marketing , one of the enduring advertisements for glad garbage bags states '' do n't get mad . get glad . '' in this advertisement the phrase '' get glad '' could be interpreted as having a linking verb followed by an adjective ( e.g . '' become happy '' ) or as having a transitive verb followed by a noun direct object ( e.g . '' buy glad garbage bags '' ) . significantly enough , structural ambiguities may be created by design when one understands the kinds of syntactic structures that will lead to ambiguity , however for the respective interpretations to work , they must be compatible with semantic and pragmatic contextual factors . . syntactic and semantic ambiguity . in syntactic ambiguity , the same sequence of words is interpreted as having different syntactic structures . in contrast , in semantic ambiguity the structure remains the same , but the individual words are interpreted differently . layman e . allen '' some uses of symbolic logic in law practice '' 1962j m.u.l.l . 119 , at 120 ; l.e . allen & m.e . caldwell '' modern logic and judicial decision making : a sketch of one view '' in h.w . baade ( ed . ) '' jurimetrics '' basic books inc . , new york , usa , 1963 , 213 , at 228 controlled natural languages are often designed to be unambiguous so that they can be parsed into a logical form . . kantean . immanuel kant employs the term '' amphiboly '' in a sense of his own , as he has done in the case of other philosophical words . he denotes by it a confusion of the notions of the pure understanding with the perceptions of experience , and a consequent ascription to the latter of what belongs only to the former . adapted from garden , francis a dictionary of english philosophical terms ( 1878 ) . models . competition-based model . competition-based models hold that differing syntactic analyses rival each other during syntactic ambiguity resolution . if probabilistic and linguistic constraints offer comparable support for each analysis , especially strong competition occurs . on the other hand , when constraints support one analysis over the other , competition is weak and processing is undemanding . after van gompel et al . 's experiments ( 2005 ) , the reanalysis model has become favored over competition-based models . convincing evidence against competition-based models includes the fact that globally ambiguous sentences are easier to process than disambiguated sentences , signifying that there is no competition of analyses in a globally ambiguous sentence . plausibility tends to support one analysis and eliminate competition . however , the model has not been completely rejected . some theories hold that competition contributes to processing complications , if only briefly . . reanalysis model . according to the reanalysis model , processing difficulty occurs once the reader has realized that their sentence analysis is false ( with regards to the already adopted syntactic structure ) , and they must then return and reevaluate the structure . most reanalysis models , like the unrestricted race model , are serial in nature , which implies that only one analysis can be evaluated at a time . consider the following statements : '' the dog of the woman that had the parasol was brown . '' '' the woman with the dog that had the parasol was brown . '' '' the dog with the woman that had the parasol was brown . '' research supports the reanalysis model as the most likely reason for why difficulty occurs in processing these ambiguous sentences . results of many experiments tracking the eye-movements of subjects has demonstrated that it is just as difficult to process a globally ambiguous statement ( 1 ) as an unambiguous statement ( 2 and 3 ) because information before the ambiguity does not provide a strong bias for either syntactic possibility . additionally , globally ambiguous sentences are as simple to process as syntactically unambiguous sentences . . unrestricted race model . the unrestricted race model states that analysis is affected prior to the introduction of ambiguity and affects which meaning is adopted ( based on probability ) before multiple analyses are able to be introduced . van gompel and pickering refer to the unrestricted race model explicitly as a two-stage reanalysis model . in contrast to constraint-based theories , only one analysis is constructed at a time . because only a single analysis is available at any time , reanalysis may sometimes be necessary if information following the initial analysis is inconsistent with it . however , the name '' unrestricted race '' comes directly from its adopted properties of the constraint-based models . as in constraint-based theories , there is no restriction on the sources of information that can provide support for the different analyses of an ambiguous structure ; hence it is unrestricted . in the model , the alternative structures of a syntactic ambiguity are engaged in a race , with the structure that is constructed fastest being adopted . the more sources of information support a syntactic analysis and the stronger the support is , the more likely this analysis will be constructed first . consider the following statements : '' the maid of the princess who scratched herself in public was terribly humiliated . '' '' the son of the princess who scratched himself in public was terribly humiliated . '' '' the son of the princess who scratched herself in public was terribly humiliated . '' research showed that people took less time to read ambiguous sentences ( sentence 1 ) compared to sentences with temporary ambiguities that were disambiguated later ( sentences 2 and 3 ) . in sentences 2 and 3 , the reflexive pronouns “ himself ” and “ herself ” clarify that “ who scratched ” is modifying the son and the princess . thus , the readers are forced to reanalyze and will result in an increase in reading times . in sentence 1 , however , the ambiguity of the reflexive pronoun “ herself ” is consistent with both the maid and the princess . this means the readers do not have to reanalyze . thus , ambiguous sentences will take a shorter time to read compared to disambiguated sentences . this is referred to as the underspecification account as readers do not commit to a meaning when not provided with disambiguating information . the reader understands someone scratched herself but does not seek to determine whether it was the maid or the princess . this is also known as the “ good-enough ” approach to understanding language . . the good-enough approach . the good-enough approach to understanding language hypothesizes that semantic representations are usually incomplete and language processing partial . a good-enough interpretation may occur when the linguistic representation is not robust or supported by context and must cope with potentially interfering information . thus , interfering information is inhibited for successful comprehension . . differences in processing . children and adults . children interpret ambiguous sentences differently from adults due to lack of experience . children have not yet learned how the environment and contextual clues can suggest a certain interpretation of a sentence . they have also not yet developed the ability to acknowledge that ambiguous words and phrases can be interpreted multiple ways . as children read and interpret syntactically ambiguous sentences , the speed at which initial syntactic commitments are made is slower in children than in adults . furthermore , children appear to be less skilled at directing their attention back to the part of the sentence that is most informative in terms of aiding reanalysis . other evidence attributes differences in interpreting ambiguous sentences to working memory span . while adults tend to have a higher working memory span , they sometimes spend more time resolving the ambiguity but tend to be more accurate in their final interpretation . children , on the other hand , can decide quickly on an interpretation because they consider only the interpretations their working memory can hold . . low reading span vs . high reading span adults . for low reading span adults who had the worst verbal working memory , the latency of response took longer to process the sentences with the reduced relative cause compared to the relative clause and had no contribution from animacy . for high reading span subjects who had the best verbal working memory , they were overall faster than the low reading span subjects . within the high reading span subjects , however , they responded faster to inanimate subjects and took longer to respond to animate subjects . this was because the animate subjects had a greater propensity to create a garden-path sentence despite greater verbal working memory . this suggested that since the low reading span subjects had less cognitive resources , only syntactic cues could be processed while high reading span subjects had more cognitive resources and could thus get tripped up with the garden path sentence . . see also . ambiguous grammar dangling modifier eats , shoots & leaves equivocation garden path sentence ibis redibis nunquam per bella peribis list of linguistic example sentences natural language processing paraprosdokian reading span task the purple people eater transderivational search . references . external links . a detailed discussion of syntactic ambiguity differentiating syntactic ambiguity ( structural ambiguity ) from other types of ambiguity