Hugh Grant

personality . grant has expressed boredom with playing the celebrity in the press and is known in the media for his guarded privacy . on probing of his personal life , he has remained steadfast in '' offering a dead bat to any question he feels is not general enough '' . he has described himself as a reluctant actor , has called being a successful actor a mistake and has repeatedly talked of his hope that film stardom would just be '' a phase '' in his life , lasting no more than ten years . a 2007 vogue profile referred to him as a man with a '' professionally misanthropic mystique '' . he has expressed distaste for focus groups , market research , and emphasis on opening weekend box-office numbers , saying : '' it 's so destructive to the filmmaking process . what was wrong with the way they used to release films , more slowly , let them build ? '' the director mike newell has said : '' there is at least as much of hugh that is charismatic , intellectual , and whose tongue is maybe too clever for its own good as there is of him that 's gorgeous and kind of woolly and flubsy . '' filmmaker paul weitz said that grant is funny and that '' he perceives flaws in himself and other people , and then he cares about their humanity nonetheless '' . british newspapers regularly refer to him as '' grumpy '' . grant is a self-confessed '' committed and passionate '' perfectionist on a film set . the american film critic dave kehr has written that grant '' is known in the film industry as a meticulous performer who takes his time to prepare a role – someone who works hard to make it look easy – though that is n't a trait he admires in himself '' . he is noted by co-workers for demanding endless takes until he achieves the desired shot according to his own standard . he dropped his agent in 2006 , ending a 10-year relationship with caa . he has proclaimed in interviews that he does not listen to external views on his career : '' they 've known for years that i have total control . i 've never taken any advice on anything . '' . in the media . libel lawsuits . in 1996 , grant won substantial damages from news ( uk ) ltd over what his lawyers called a '' highly defamatory '' article published in january 1995 . the company 's newspaper , today , which ceased publication the following november , had falsely claimed that grant verbally abused a young extra with a '' foul-mouthed tongue lashing '' on the set of the englishman who went up a hill but came down a mountain . on 27 april 2007 , he accepted undisclosed damages from associated newspapers over claims made about his relationships with his former girlfriends in three separate tabloid articles , which were published in the daily mail and the mail on sunday on 18 , 21 and 24 february . his lawyer stated that all of the articles ' '' allegations and factual assertions are false '' . grant said , in a written statement , that he took the action because : '' i was tired of the daily mail and mail on sunday papers publishing almost entirely fictional articles about my private life for their own financial gain . '' he went on to take the opportunity to stress , '' i 'm also hoping that this statement in court might remind people that the so-called 'close friends ' or 'close sources ' on which these stories claim to be based almost never exist . '' . legal issues . on 27 june 1995 , grant was arrested in los angeles , california , in a police vice operation near sunset boulevard for receiving oral sex in a public place from hollywood sex worker divine brown . he pleaded no contest and was fined 1,180 , placed on two years ' summary probation , and was ordered to complete an aids education program by judge robert j . sandoval . the arrest occurred about two weeks before the release of his first major studio film , nine months , which he was scheduled to promote on several american television shows . the tonight show with jay leno had him booked for the same week . in the much-watched interview , he did not make excuses for the incident after leno asked him , '' what the hell were you thinking ? '' grant answered , '' i think you know in life what 's a good thing to do and what 's a bad thing , and i did a bad thing . and there you have it . '' on larry king live , he declined host larry king 's repeated invitations to probe his psyche , saying that psychoanalysis was '' more of an american syndrome '' and he himself was '' a bit old fashioned '' . he told the host : '' i do n't have excuses . '' cnn reported that '' many are also applauding grant for his refreshing honesty in a culture that has become fed up with overuse of the word 'abuse , ' but grant did not resort to an excuse . '' radio host scott shannon said , '' he went ahead and faced the music and handled it with tongue in cheek . '' in april 2007 , he was arrested on allegations of assault made by paparazzi ian whittaker . grant made no official statement and did not comment on the incident . charges were dropped on 1 june 2007 by the crown prosecution service on the grounds of '' insufficient evidence '' . . phone hacking exposé . in april 2011 , grant published an article in the new statesman titled '' the bugger , bugged '' about a conversation ( following an earlier encounter ) with paul mcmullan , a former journalist and paparazzo for news of the world . in unguarded comments which were secretly taped by grant , mcmullan alleged that editors at the daily mail and news of the world , particularly andy coulson , had ordered journalists to engage in illegal phone tapping and had done so with the full knowledge of senior british politicians . mcmullan also said that every british prime minister from margaret thatcher onwards had cultivated a close relationship with rupert murdoch and his senior executives . he stressed the friendship between david cameron and rebekah brooks ( née wade ) , agreeing when asked that both of them must have been aware of illegal phone tapping , and asserting that cameron 's inaction could be explained by self-interest : '' cameron is very much in debt to rebekah wade for helping him not quite win the election . so that was my submission to parliament – that cameron 's either a liar or an idiot . '' when asked by grant whether cameron had encouraged the metropolitan police to '' drag their feet '' on investigating illegal phone tapping by murdoch 's journalists , mcmullan agreed this had happened , and stated that police themselves had taken bribes from tabloid journalists : '' 20 percent of the met has taken backhanders from tabloid hacks . so why would they want to open up that can of worms ? . and what 's wrong with that , anyway ? it does n't hurt anyone particularly . '' grant 's article attracted considerable interest , due to both the revelatory content of the taped conversation , and the novelty of his '' turning the tables '' on a tabloid journalist . whilst the allegations regarding the news of the world continued to receive coverage in the broadsheets and similar media ( grant appeared , for example , on bbc radio 4 ) it was only with the revelation that the voicemail of murdered milly dowler had been hacked , and evidence for her murder enquiry had been deleted , that the coverage turned from media interest to widespread public ( and eventually political ) outrage . grant became something of a spokesman against murdoch 's news corporation , culminating in his appearance on bbc television 's question time in july 2011 . grant later said : '' it 's been fascinating to have a little excursion into another world . i really needed that and also to be dealing with real life instead of creating synthetic life , which is what i 've been doing for the last 25 years . '' on 5 february 2018 , mirror group newspapers apologised for its actions towards grant and other public figures , calling the affair '' morally wrong '' . this came after grant accepted a six-figure sum to settle a high court action . he donated the payout to the press campaign group hacked off . . personal life . relationships . in 1987 , while playing lord byron in the spanish production remando al viento ( 1988 ) , grant met actress elizabeth hurley , who was cast in a supporting role as byron 's former lover claire clairmont . he began dating hurley during filming and their relationship was subsequently the subject of much media attention . she accompanied him to the los angeles premiere of four weddings and a funeral . after 13 years together , they separated in may 2000 . he is godfather to her son damian , born in 2002 . the book the trouble with men : masculinities in european and hollywood cinema writes of their relationship : grant has had five children with two women . in september 2011 , he had a daughter , tabitha , with tinglan hong , who was sometimes misreported in the press as a receptionist at a chinese restaurant in london . his daughter 's chinese name is xiao xi , meaning '' happy surprise '' . grant and hong had a '' fleeting affair '' , according to his publicist . he has said that hong has been '' badly treated '' by the media ; the press intrusion prevented him from attending the birth of his daughter , with hong obtaining an injunction to allow him to visit them in peace . in september 2012 , grant had his second child , a son , with swedish television producer anna eberstein . hong and grant reunited briefly and she gave birth to grant 's third child , a son called felix , in december of that same year . in december 2015 , he and eberstein had their second child , a girl . in march 2018 , their third child , grant 's fifth , another girl , was born . grant and eberstein married on 25 may 2018 . . political views . in 2011 , grant appeared at the liberal democrats ' conference on the news international phone hacking scandal , where he briefly met then-party leader nick clegg . grant said that he was attending the conservative and labour conferences as well , but told lib dem activists that '' you , more than any of the other parties , have a good bill of health . you have never been in bed with these scumbags . '' emma griffiths , hugh grant reverts to type to charm lib dems , bbc news ( 18 september 2011 ) . in the 2015 uk general election , grant expressed support for liberal democrat mp danny alexander and later hosted a dinner for the liberal democrats , in which he met the winner of a draw of donors to the liberal democrats . tom watson should be prime minister , says hugh grant , express & star ( 4 may 2015 ) . in an email sent by former liberal democrat leader paddy ashdown , grant wrote : '' i am not a lib dem , a tory , a socialism or anything in particular but i recognise political guts . '' in the 2015 election , he endorsed two labour candidates : tom watson and his former agent , michael foster . katy forrester , hugh grant jokes about seeing his former agent in the bath in hilarious video for labour mp candidate , mirror ( 20 april 2015 ) . during the 2019 uk general election grant campaigned for tactical voting to stop a conservative majority and brexit . he was seen canvassing with liberal democrats candidates , labour candidates , and independent dominic grieve . . sports . as a young boy , he played rugby union on his school 's first xv team at centre and also played football . he is a fan of fulham and is also a supporter of scottish football club rangers . he continued to play in a sunday-morning football league in south-west london after college and remains an '' impassioned fulham supporter '' . his other interests include tennis and snooker . in 2011 , the bbc apologised after grant made an offhand joke about homosexuality and rugby when he was invited into the commentary box during coverage of an england vs scotland game at twickenham stadium . talking about playing rugby during his school days , grant said : '' i discovered it hurt less if you tackled hard than if you tackled like a queen '' . . relationships with co-stars . after production on restoration ended , grant 's co-star , robert downey jr . , revealed to gayl murphy on hollywood correspondent that he and grant did not get along during filming . downey went on to say that : '' i kinda think he 's a jerk . do n't know , i just think he is . my personal experience with him is i think he 's this kind of self-important , kind of , like , boring flash-in-the-pan a—hole brit . '' in 2018 , grant confirmed the on-set tension he and downey had had , stating : '' he downey hated me . he took one look at me and wanted to kill me . i was so hurt . '' as a result of grant 's confirmation of their decades-long feud , downey later went to twitter to make amends with grant , to which grant agreed . in addition to the confirmation , grant also said that he and drew barrymore did not get along during production of music & lyrics . '' well , drew , i think did hate me a bit . but i admired her . we just were very different human beings '' , grant said . '' she was very l.a . and i was an old grumpy londoner . the funny thing is , although it was fractionally tense on the set of that film , i think the chemistry is rather good between us . sometimes tension makes a good crackle . '' barrymore had also been one out of three leading ladies grant listed whom he did not get along with , the others being julianne moore and rachel weisz . however , on a graham norton show appearance , grant stated he did not know why he mentioned weisz and he was probably '' going for a 'comedy triple ' '' . the graham norton show . episode dated 15 april 2016 . there are several co-stars with whom grant enjoyed working , some becoming great friends with him afterwards , such as sandra bullock and sarah jessica parker . he has also praised meryl streep , who co-starred with him on florence foster jenkins , calling her '' a genius '' , while only noting that she had trouble with her eyesight during production . he also got along well with his bridget jones 's diary co-star renée zellweger , calling her 'delightful ' . other leading ladies he enjoyed working with include emma thompson , who collaborated with grant on love actually , impromptu , sense and sensibility , and the remains of the day . he also recalled having good experiences with four weddings and a funeral co-star andie macdowell , whom he called a '' southern peach charmer '' , and nine months co-star robin williams , whom he called '' a genius on another level '' and '' very kind '' . . philanthropy . grant is a patron of the dipex charity , which operates the website healthtalkonline . amanda williams , docs honoured in uk health awards ( 24 may 2011 ) , oxford mail . hugh grant backs bipolar disorder experience website , equilibrium : the bipolar foundation ( 13 january 2010 ) . fiona barr , patient experience pioneer dies , digitalhealth.net ( 31 may 2011 ) . he is also patron of the fynvola foundation , named after his late mother ; the foundation supports the lady dane farmhouse , a home in faversham for adults with learning disabilities . actor hugh grant drops into faversham to support fynvola foundation , kent online ( 28 june 2010 ) . since the death of his mother in 2001 , grant has worked as a fundraiser and ambassador for marie curie cancer care , promoting the charity 's annual great daffodil appeal on several occasions . hugh grant backs marie curie cancer care appeal in his mother 's memory , telegraph ( 25 february 2008 ) . hugh grant backs wiltshire daffodil appeal , gazette & herald ( 8 february 2009 ) . hugh grant in video plea for marie curie fund , bolton news ( 9 march 2010 ) . he is also a patron of pancreatic cancer action . mary elizabeth williams , pancreatic cancer action charity should realise that the disease is not a competition , independent ( 6 february 2014 ) . hugh grant holds a purple p to show his support for pancreatic cancer awareness month ( press release ) , pancreatic cancer action ( 7 november 2013 ) . . filmography . awards and honours .