1949 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1949 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . notable films released in 1949 . united states unless stated . a . abbott and costello meet the killer , boris karloff , starring bud abbott and lou costello the accused , starring loretta young and robert cummings adam 's rib , directed by george cukor , starring spencer tracy , katharine hepburn , david wayne , tom ewell , judy holliday the adventures of ichabod and mr . toad , narrated by basil rathbone and bing crosby africa screams , starring bud abbott and lou costello alexander popov , starring nikolai cherkasov – ( u.s.s.r . ) alias nick beal , starring ray milland and audrey totter all the king 's men , directed by robert rossen , starring broderick crawford , john ireland , mercedes mccambridge always leave them laughing , starring milton berle and bert lahr andaz ( style ) , starring dilip kumar and nargis – ( india ) any number can play , starring clark gable , alexis smith , audrey totter aventurera ( adventuress ) – ( mexico ) . b . the bad lord byron , starring dennis price the barkleys of broadway , the last of 10 films starring fred astaire and ginger rogers barsaat ( rain ) , directed by and starring raj kapoor – ( india ) battleground , starring van johnson , ricardo montalbán , george murphy the beautiful blonde from bashful bend , starring betty grable begone dull care , experimental animated film featuring music of oscar peterson – ( canada ) beyond the forest , starring bette davis the big cat , starring lon mccallister , preston foster , forrest tucker , peggy ann garner the big steal , starring robert mitchum , jane greer , patric knowles bitter rice ( riso amaro ) , starring vittorio gassman and silvana mangano – ( italy ) the blue lagoon , starring jean simmons – ( gb ) the blue swords , directed by wolfgang schleif ( east germany ) border incident , starring ricardo montalbán boys from the streets ( gategutter ) – ( norway ) the bribe , starring robert taylor , ava gardner , charles laughton , vincent price , john hodiak bride for sale , starring claudette colbert and robert young . c . canadian pacific , starring randolph scott and jane wyatt caught , directed by max ophüls , starring barbara bel geddes and robert ryan chains ( catene ) – ( italy ) champion , starring kirk douglas , arthur kennedy , marilyn maxwell chicken every sunday , directed by george seaton , starring dan dailey and celeste holm the chiltern hundreds , directed by john paddy carstairs – ( gb ) christopher columbus , directed by david macdonald , starring fredric march – ( gb ) colorado territory , directed by raoul walsh , starring joel mccrea and virginia mayo come to the stable , starring loretta young and celeste holm a connecticut yankee in king arthur 's court , starring bing crosby and rhonda fleming criss cross , starring burt lancaster and yvonne de carlo the crooked way , starring john payne and sonny tufts crows and sparrows ( wuya yu maque ) , directed by zheng junli – ( china ) . d . dancing in the dark , starring william powell and betsy drake a dangerous profession , starring george raft and ella raines distant journey ( daleká cesta ) – ( czechoslovakia ) down to the sea in ships , starring richard widmark and lionel barrymore dulari , starring madhubala and geeta bali ( india ) . e . east side , west side , starring barbara stanwyck , ava gardner , james mason , van heflin , nancy davis easy living , starring victor mature and lucille ball edward , my son , directed by george cukor , starring spencer tracy and deborah kerr – ( u.s./gb ) the emperor of capri ( l'imperatore di capri ) , directed by luigi comencini – ( italy ) the emperor 's nightingale ( císařův slavík ) , an animated film narrated by boris karloff – ( czechoslovakia ) everybody does it , starring paul douglas and linda darnell . f . father was a fullback , starring fred macmurray the fighting kentuckian , starring john wayne and oliver hardy flamingo road , starring joan crawford flaxy martin , starring virginia mayo the forbidden street , starring maureen o'hara for them that trespass , directed by alberto cavalcanti , starring richard todd – ( gb ) the fountainhead , directed by king vidor , starring gary cooper and patricia neal . g . give us this day , directed by edward dmytryk , starring sam wanamaker – ( gb ) the great gatsby , starring alan ladd , betty field , ruth hussey the great madcap ( el gran calavera ) , directed by luis buñuel , starring fernando soler – ( mexico ) . h . hardly a criminal ( apenas un delincuente ) , directed by hugo fregonese – ( argentina ) the hasty heart , starring ronald reagan and patricia neal – ( u.s./gb ) the heiress , directed by william wyler , starring olivia de havilland , montgomery clift , miriam hopkins holiday affair , starring robert mitchum and janet leigh home of the brave , starring jeff corey house of strangers , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring edward g . robinson , richard conte , susan hayward . i . i married a communist , starring laraine day and robert ryan i shot jesse james , starring preston foster and john ireland i was a male war bride , starring cary grant impact , starring brian donlevy and ella raines in the good old summertime , starring judy garland and van johnson in the name of the law ( in nome della legge ) , directed by pietro germi – ( italy ) the inspector general , starring danny kaye the interrupted journey , starring richard todd and valerie hobson – ( gb ) intruder in the dust , directed by clarence brown it happens every spring , starring ray milland it 's not cricket directed by alfred roome , starring basil radford and naunton wayne – ( gb ) . j . janika – ( hungary ) johnny stool pigeon , starring shelley winters and howard duff jolson sings again , starring larry parks and barbara hale jour de fête ( festival day ) , directed by and starring jacques tati – ( france ) . k . kind hearts and coronets , directed by robert hamer , starring alec guinness , dennis price , valerie hobson – ( gb ) a kiss in the dark , starring jane wyman and david niven knock on any door , directed by nicholas ray , starring humphrey bogart . l . late spring ( banshun ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) life ( vazhkai ) , directed by a . v . meiyappan , starring vyjayanthimala in her screen debut – ( india ) a letter to three wives , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring jeanne crain , linda darnell , ann sothern , paul douglas , kirk douglas little women , directed by mervyn leroy , starring june allyson , peter lawford , margaret o'brien , elizabeth taylor , janet leigh , mary astor love happy , starring the marx brothers the lucky stiff , starring dorothy lamour and claire trevor lust for gold , starring ida lupino and glenn ford . m . ma and pa kettle , starring marjorie main and percy kilbride madame bovary , starring jennifer jones and james mason mahal ( the mansion ) , starring ashok kumar and madhubala – ( india ) malaya , starring spencer tracy and james stewart la malquerida ( the bad mistress ) , starring dolores del río and pedro armendáriz – ( mexico ) the man from colorado , starring glenn ford and william holden manhandled , starring dorothy lamour , dan duryea , sterling hayden manon , directed by henri-georges clouzot – ( france ) the marriage of figaro ( figaros hochzeit ) – ( east germany ) mighty joe young , directed by ernest b . schoedsack , starring terry moore and ben johnson miss mink of 1949 , starring lois collier mother is a freshman , starring loretta young and van johnson my foolish heart , starring susan hayward and dana andrews my friend irma , film debut of dean martin and jerry lewis . n . neptune 's daughter , starring esther williams never fear , directed by ida lupino , starring sally forrest and hugh o'brian night unto night , directed by don siegel , starring ronald reagan no way back , starring terence de marney , eleanor summerfield – ( gb ) . o . obsession , directed by edward dmytryk , starring robert newton – ( gb ) oh , you beautiful doll , starring june haver on the town , starring gene kelly , frank sinatra , vera-ellen , ann miller , betty garrett . p . the passionate friends , directed by david lean , starring ann todd and claude rains – ( gb ) passport to pimlico , starring stanley holloway and margaret rutherford – ( gb ) pinky , starring jeanne crain prince of foxes , starring tyrone power and orson welles prison ( fängelse ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) . q . the queen of spades , starring anton walbrook and edith evans – ( gb ) the quiet duel ( shizukanaru ketto ) , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) . r . the reckless moment , starring james mason and joan bennett red , hot and blue , starring betty hutton and victor mature red light , starring george raft and virginia mayo the red pony , starring myrna loy and robert mitchum the rocking horse winner , starring valerie hobson and john howard davies – ( gb ) rope of sand , starring burt lancaster , paul henreid , claude rains rotation ( sowjetische zone ) – ( east germany ) a run for your money , starring donald houston , moira lister , alec guinness – ( gb ) rustlers , starring tim holt and martha hyer . s . samson and delilah , directed by cecil b . demille , starring hedy lamarr and victor mature sands of iwo jima , directed by allan dwan , starring john wayne the secret garden , starring margaret o'brien and herbert marshall the set-up , starring robert ryan she wore a yellow ribbon , starring john wayne , joanne dru , ben johnson shockproof , starring cornel wilde une si jolie petite plage ( such a pretty little beach ) , directed by yves allégret – ( france ) le silence de la mer , directed by jean-pierre melville – ( france ) slattery 's hurricane , starring richard widmark , veronica lake , linda darnell the small back room , directed by michael powell and emeric pressburger – ( gb ) sons of matthew ( aka the rugged o'riordans ) – ( australia ) sorrowful jones , starring bob hope and lucille ball south of st . louis , starring joel mccrea and alexis smith the stratton story , starring james stewart and june allyson stray dog ( nora inu ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) streets of laredo , starring william holden , macdonald carey , william bendix the sun comes up , starring jeanette macdonald , lloyd nolan , lassie . t . take one false step , starring shelley winters and william powell tension , starring richard basehart , audrey totter , cyd charisse that dangerous age , starring myrna loy and peggy cummins – ( gb ) that forsyte woman , starring greer garson and walter pidgeon that midnight kiss , starring kathryn grayson and mario lanza thieves ' highway , directed by jules dassin , starring richard conte the third man , directed by carol reed , starring joseph cotten , alida valli , trevor howard , orson welles – ( gb ) too late for tears , starring lizabeth scott and dan duryea train of events , starring valerie hobson , jack warner , peter finch – ( gb ) tulsa , starring susan hayward and robert preston twelve o'clock high , starring gregory peck . u . under capricorn , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring ingrid bergman – ( gb ) the undercover man , starring glenn ford and nina foch . w . waga koi wa moenu ( flame of my love ) , directed by kenji mizoguchi – ( japan ) the walls of malapaga ( au-delà des grilles ) , directed by rené clément , starring jean gabin – ( france/italy ) we were strangers , starring jennifer jones and john garfield whirlpool , directed by otto preminger , starring gene tierney whisky galore ! , directed by alexander mackendrick ( debut ) , starring basil radford and joan greenwood – ( gb ) white heat , directed by raoul walsh , starring james cagney , virginia mayo , edmond o'brien the window , starring barbara hale and arthur kennedy without honor , starring laraine day women side by side , directed by chen liting , starring shangguan yunzhu and zhao dan – ( china ) . y . you , the rich ( ustedes los ricos ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) you 're my everything , directed by walter lang , starring dan dailey and anne baxter . serials . adventures of sir galahad , starring george reeves and charles king batman and robin , starring robert lowery bruce gentry , starring tom neal federal agents vs . underworld , inc , starring kirk alyn and rosemary laplanche ghost of zorro , starring clayton moore and pamela blake the james brothers of missouri , starring keith richards and noel neill king of the rocket men , starring tris coffin and mae clarke radar patrol vs spy king , starring kirk alyn . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1952 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) donald duck ( 1934–1956 ) pluto ( 1937–1951 ) chip and dale ( 1943–1956 ) andy panda ( 1939–1949 ) goofy ( 1939–1953 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) the fox and the crow ( 1941–1950 ) woody woodpecker ( 1941–1949 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) blackie the sheep ( 1947–1949 ) red hot riding hood ( 1943–1949 ) jan wickman shorts ( 1949–1994 ) noveltoons ( 1943–1967 ) . births . mbissine thérèse diop , senegalese actress january 12 – wayne wang , hong kong-born director january 14 – lawrence kasdan , american director and screenwriter january 16 – caroline munro , english actress and model january 17 – andy kaufman , american actor and comedian ( died 1984 ) january 24 – john belushi , american actor and comedian ( died 1982 ) january 27 – zbigniew rybczyński , polish film and video cinematographer and director february 8 – brooke adams , american actress march 12 – rob cohen , american director , producer and writer march 16 – victor garber , canadian actor march 22 – fanny ardant , french actress april 14 – john shea , american actor april 20 jessica lange , american actress veronica cartwright , english-born actress may 20 - dave thomas , canadian comedian , actor and television writer may 24 – jim broadbent , english actor may 26 – pam grier , american actress may 31 – tom berenger , american actor june 15 – jim varney , american actor and comedian ( died 2000 ) june 22 – meryl streep , american actress july 5 - ed o'ross , american actor july 7 – shelley duvall , american actress july 27 - maury chaykin , american-canadian actor ( died 2010 ) august 8 – keith carradine , american actor august 17 – julian fellowes , english actor , writer , director and screenwriter august 21 – loretta devine , american actress august 23 – shelley long , american actress august 25 – john savage , american actor august 31 – richard gere , american actor september 1 – luminița gheorghiu , romanian actress september 4 – eero spriit , estonian actor and producer september 16 – ed begley , jr . , american actor september 18 - beth grant , american character actress september 19 - ernie sabella , american actor september 25 – pedro almodóvar , spanish director october 4 – armand assante , american actor october 8 – sigourney weaver , american actress october 10 – jessica harper , american actress november 29 – garry shandling , american stand-up comedian , actor , director , writer and producer ( died 2016 ) november 30 – nicholas woodeson , english actor december 4 – jeff bridges , american actor december 12 – bill nighy , english actor december 15 – don johnson , american actor december 25 – sissy spacek , american actress . deaths . january 6 – victor fleming , 59 , american director and producer , the wizard of oz , gone with the wind , captains courageous , dr . jekyll and mr . hyde january 19 – william wright , 38 , american actor , philo vance returns , eve knew her apples january 20 – nora gregor , 47 , austrian actress , the rules of the game , but the flesh is weak february 19 – jean gillie , 33 , english actress , decoy april 15 – wallace beery , 64 , american actor , grand hotel , the champ , robin hood , viva villa ! april 18 – will hay , 60 , english comedian , actor and director , oh , mr . porter ! , hey ! hey ! usa april 22 – charles b . middleton , 74 , american actor ( born 1874 ) , flash gordon august 9 – harry davenport , 83 , american actor ( born 1866 ) , gone with the wind , the ox-bow incident september 4 – olof ås , 56 , swedish actor , stage manager ( born 1892 ) september 14 – romuald joubé , 73 , french actor ( born 1876 ) september 18 – frank morgan , 59 , american actor ( born 1890 ) , the wizard of oz september 20 – richard dix , 56 , american actor ( born 1893 ) , cimarron , redskin october 14 – fritz leiber , sr . , 67 , american actor ( born 1882 ) november 25 – bill robinson , 72 , american dancer and actor ( born 1878 ) , stormy weather , the little colonel november 27 – tom walls , 66 , english actor and director ( born 1883 ) , stormy weather , lady in danger december 16 – sidney olcott , 76 , canadian-born american film director ( born 1873 ) . film debuts . julie andrews – the singing princess yul brynner – port of new york richard burton – women of dolwyn tony curtis – city across the river denholm elliott – dear mr . prohack jerry lewis – my friend irma mercedes mccambridge – all the king 's men liza minnelli – in the good old summertime patricia neal – john loves mary philippe noiret – gigi max von sydow – only a mother james whitmore – the undercover man nimmi - barsaat ( 1949 film ) . references .