René Lévesque

public figure . image : levesqueinterviewspearsoninmoscow.jpg thumb lévesque interviews lester b . pearson in moscow for radio-canada in 1955.in 1960 , lévesque entered politics as a star candidate and was elected to the legislative assembly of quebec in the 1960 election as a liberal party member in the riding of montréal-laurier . in the government of jean lesage , he served as minister of hydroelectric resources and public works from 1960 to 1961 , and minister of natural resources from 1961 to 1965 . while in office , he played a pivotal role in the nationalization of hydroelectric companies , greatly expanding hydro-québec , one of the reforms that was part of the quiet revolution . from 1965 to 1966 , he served as minister of family and welfare . lévesque , with friend the minister of health , eric kierans , was heavily involved in negotiations with the government of canada to fund both quebec and federal mandates for social programs . in a surprise , the liberals lost the 1966 election to the union nationale but lévesque retained his own seat of laurier . believing that the canadian federation was doomed to fail , lévesque began to openly champion separation from canada as part of the liberal platform at the upcoming party conference . kierans , who had been elected party president , led the movement against the motion , with future premier robert bourassa attempting to mediate before siding with kierans . the resolution was handily defeated , and lévesque walked out with his followers . founding of the parti québécois . the parti québécois would gain 25 % of the vote in the 1970 election , running on a platform of declaring independence if government was formed . the pq only won six seats , and lévesque continued to run the party from montreal by communicating with the caucus in quebec city . the 1973 election saw a large liberal victory , and created major tensions within the party , especially after lévesque was unable to gain a seat . a quarrel with house leader robert burns almost ended lévesque 's leadership shortly thereafter . first term as premier . lévesque and his party won a landslide victory at the 1976 election , with lévesque finally re-entering the assembly as the member for taillon in downtown longueuil . his party assumed power with 41.1 per cent of the popular vote and 71 seats out of 110 , and even managed to unseat bourassa in his own riding . lévesque became premier of quebec ten days later . the night of lévesque 's acceptance speech included one of his most famous quotations : '' i never thought that i could be so proud to be québécois . '' on february 6 , 1977 , lévesque 's car fatally struck edgar trottier , a homeless man who had been lying on the road . trottier had in the past repeatedly used the maneuver to secure a hospital bed for the night . police officers at the scene did not administer the breathalyzer test to lévesque , because they did not suspect that he was impaired . stars and stripes ( washington , d.c . ) , 23 february 1977 , p.31 . levesque was later fined 25 for failing to wear his glasses while driving a car on the night in question . the brandon sun ( manitoba ) , 15 july 1977 , p.3 . the incident gained further notoriety when it was revealed that the female companion in the vehicle was not his wife , but his longtime secretary , corinne côté . lévesque ’ s marriage ended in divorce soon thereafter ( the couple had already been estranged for some time ) , and in april 1979 , he married côté . lévesque 's act to govern the financing of political parties banned corporate donations and limited individual contributions to political parties to 3,000 . this key legislation was meant to prevent wealthy citizens and organizations from having a disproportionate influence on the electoral process . a referendum act was passed to allow for a province-wide vote on issues presented in a referendum , giving a '' yes '' and '' no '' side equal funding and legal footing . his government 's signature achievement was the quebec charter of the french language ( introduced in the legislature and still colloquially known as bill 101 ) , whose stated goal was to make french '' the normal and everyday language of work , instruction , communication , commerce and business '' . in its first enactment , it reserved access to english-language public schools to children whose parents had attended english school in quebec . all other children were required to attend french schools in order to encourage immigrants to integrate themselves into the majority francophone culture ( lévesque was more moderate on language than some of the pq , including the language minister , camille laurin . he would have resigned as leader rather than eliminate english-language public schools , as some party members proposed ) . bill 101 also made it illegal for businesses to put up exterior commercial signs in a language other than french at a time when english dominated as a commercial and business language in quebec . on may 20 , 1980 , the pq held , as promised before the elections , the 1980 quebec referendum on its sovereignty-association plan . the result of the vote was 40 % in favour and 60 % opposed ( with 86 % turnout ) . lévesque conceded defeat in the referendum by announcing that , as he had understood the verdict , he had been told '' until next time '' . lévesque led the pq to victory in the 1981 election , increasing the party 's majority in the national assembly and increasing its share of the popular vote from 41 to 49 per cent . second term . a major focus of his second mandate was the patriation of the canadian constitution . lévesque was criticized by some in québec who said he had been tricked by canadian prime minister pierre trudeau and the english-canadian provincial premiers . to this day , no québec premier of any political side has endorsed the 1982 constitutional amendment . the pq government 's response to the recession of the early 1980s by cutting the provincial budget to reduce growing deficits that resulted from the recession angered labour union members , a core part of the constituency of the pq and the sovereignty movement . lévesque had argued that the party should not make sovereignty the object of the 1985 election and instead opt for the '' beau risque '' strategy of seeking an understanding with the federal government of brian mulroney , which angered the strongest supporters of sovereignty within the party . he said the issue in the upcoming election would not be sovereignty . instead , he expressed hope , '' that we can finally find government leaders in ottawa who will discuss québec 's demands seriously and work with us for the greater good of québecers '' . his new position weakened his position within the party . some senior members resigned ; there were by-election defeats . lévesque resigned as leader of the parti québécois on june 20 , 1985 , and as premier of québec on october 3 , 1985 . lévesque , a constant smoker , graham fraser , ivon owen . rené lévesque & the parti québécois in power , p.13 . mcgill-queen 's press , 2001 , was hosting a dinner party in his montreal apartment on the evening of november 1 , 1987 when he experienced chest pains ; he died of a heart attack that night at montreal general hospital . paulin , marguerite . rené lévesque , p.123 . xyz publishing , 2004 , a brief resurgence of separatist sentiment followed . over 100,000 viewed his body lying in state in montréal and québec city , over 10,000 went to his funeral in the latter city , and hundreds wept daily at his grave for months . conway , john frederick . debts to pay , pp.128–29 . james lorimer & company , 2004 , lévesque was made a grand officer of the france légion d'honneur . he was posthumously made a grand officer of the national order of quebec in 2008 . legacy . despite a perceived weakening of his sovereigntist resolve in the last years of his government , he reaffirmed his belief to friends and , notably , to a crowd of université laval students months before his death , of the necessity of independence . his state funeral and funeral procession was reportedly attended by 100,000 québécois . during the carrying out of his coffin from the church , the crowd spontaneously began to applaud and sing quebec 's unofficial national anthem '' gens du pays '' , replacing the first verse with mon cher rené ( my dear rené ) , as is the custom when this song is adapted to celebrate someone 's birthday . two major boulevards now bear his name , one in montreal and one in quebec city . in montreal , the édifice hydro-québec and the maison radio-canada are both located on rené lévesque boulevard , fittingly as lévesque once worked for hydro-québec and the cbc , respectively . on june 22 , 2010 , hydro-québec and the government of quebec commemorated lévesque 's role in quebec 's quiet revolution and his tenure as premier by renaming the 1244-megawatt manic-3 generating station in his honour . on june 3 , 1999 , a monument in his honour was unveiled on boulevard rené-lévesque outside the parliament building in quebec city . the statue is popular with tourists , who snuggle up to it , to have their pictures taken '' avec rené '' ( with rené ) , despite repeated attempts by officials to keep people from touching the monument or getting too close to it . the statue had been the source of an improvised , comical and affectionately touching tribute to lévesque . the fingers of his extended right hand are slightly parted , just enough so that tourists and the faithful could insert a cigarette , giving the statue an unusually realistic appearance . this practice is less often seen now , however , as the statue was moved to new carlisle and replaced by a similar , but bigger one . this change resulted from considerable controversy . some believed that the life-sized statue was not appropriate for conveying his importance in the history of quebec . others noted that a trademark of lévesque was his relatively small stature . lévesque today remains an important figure of the quebec nationalism , and is considered sovereigntism 's spiritual father . after his death , even people in disagreement with some of those convictions now generally recognize his importance to the history of quebec . many in quebec regard him as the father of the nation . according to a study made in 2006 by le journal de montréal and léger marketing , lévesque was considered by far , according to québécois , the best premier to run the province over the last 50 years . of the things he left as his legacy , some of the most memorable and still robust are completing the nationalization of hydroelectricity through hydro-québec , the quebec charter of the french language , the political party financing law , and the parti québécois itself . his government was the first in canada to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in the province 's charte des droits de la personne in 1977 . he also continued the work of the lesage government in improving social services , in which social needs were taken care of by the state , instead of the catholic church ( as in the duplessis era ) or the individual . lévesque is still regarded by many as a symbol of democracy and tolerance . lévesque was notably portrayed in the television series rené lévesque . in 2006 , an additional television miniseries , rené lévesque , was aired on the cbc . he was also portrayed in an episode of kevin spencer , a canadian cartoon show . in it , his ghost attempted a camaraderie with kevin because of their similarities in political beliefs , as well as the fact that the title character , like rené 's ghost , claims to smoke '' five packs a day '' . a song by les cowboys fringants named '' lettre à lévesque '' on the album la grand-messe was dedicated to him . they also mention the street bearing his name in the song called '' la manifestation '' . he was the co-subject , along with pierre trudeau , of the donald brittain-directed documentary miniseries the champions . personality . lévesque was a man capable of great tact and charm , but who could also be abrupt and choleric when defending beliefs , ideals , or morals essential to him , or when lack of respect was perceived , for example , when he was famously snubbed by françois mitterrand at their first meeting . he was also a proud gaspésien ( hailing from the gaspé peninsula ) , and had hints of the local accent . considered a major defender of the québécois , lévesque was , before the 1960s , more interested in international affairs than quebec matters . the popular image of lévesque was his ever-present cigarette and his small physical stature , as well as his unique comb over that earned him the nickname of ti-poil , literally , '' li ' l hair '' , but more accurately translated as '' baldy '' . lévesque was a passionate and emotional public speaker . those close to lévesque have described him as having difficulty expressing his emotions in private , saying that he was more comfortable in front of a crowd of thousands than with one person . while many quebec intellectuals are inspired by french philosophy and high culture , lévesque favoured the united states . while in london during the second world war , his admiration for britons grew when he witnessed their courage in the face of the german bombardments . he was a faithful reader of the new york times , and took his vacations in new england every year . he also stated that , if there had to be one role model for him , it would be us president franklin delano roosevelt . lévesque was disappointed with the cold response by the american economic elite to his first speech in new york city as premier of quebec , in which he compared quebec 's march towards sovereignty to the american revolution . his first speech in france was , however , more successful , leading him to a better appreciation of the french intelligentsia and of french culture . works . my québec , 1979 , methuen , 191 pages , quotations from rené lévesque , 1977 , éditions héritage , 105 pages an option for quebec , 1968 , mcclelland and stewart , 128 pages '' for an independent quebec '' , in foreign affairs , july , 1976 ) option québec ( 1968 ) la passion du québec ( 1978 ) oui ( 1980 ) attendez que je me rappelle ( 1986 ) ( although the title is literally translated as wait while i remember , the title of the english-language version was memoirs . ) lévesque book skirts many painful memories . ottawa citizen , 16 october 1986 . retrieved 21 april 2012 . . see also . list of gaspésiens list of premiers of quebec list of quebec general elections politician nicknaming in quebec politics of quebec separatism . references . further reading . desbarats , peter ( 1976 ) . rene : a canadian in search of a country , mcclelland and stewart , 223 pages dupont , pierre ( 1977 ) . how levesque won , lorimer , 136 pages ( translated by sheila fischman ) fennario , david ( 2003 ) . the death of rené lévesque , talonbooks , march 10 , 72 pages fournier , claude ( 1995 ) . rené lévesque : portrait of a man alone , mcclelland & stewart , april 15 , 272 pages fraser , graham ( 2002 ) . pq : rené lévesque and the parti québécois in power , montreal , mcgill-queen 's university press ; 2nd edition , 434 pages paulin , marguerite ( 2004 ) . rené lévesque : charismatic leader , xyz publishing , 176 pages ( translated by jonathan kaplansky ) provencher , jean and ellis , david ( 1977 ) . rené lévesque : portrait of a québécois , paperjacks , vacante , jeffery . '' the posthumous lives of rené lévesque , '' journal of canadian studies/revue d'études canadiennes ( 2011 ) 45 2 pp 5–30 online , historiography '' rené lévesque 's separatist fight '' , in the cbc archives web site . external links .