DragonQuest

system . character generation . character generation is much more involved than d & d , with the player using 10 sided die to determine everything from the character 's race to handedness to the number of points they have to distribute amongst the primary characteristics ( strength , agility , manual dexterity , magical aptitude , endurance , and willpower ) which determine the character 's strengths and weaknesses . being able to control the value of these attributes allows for greater flexibility in character generation . for example , players seeking a powerful magic user can divert points to magical aptitude and possibly willpower . those seeking pure fighters can invest their points in strength , agility and manual dexterity . by carefully balancing these numbers , fighter/mages , thief/assassins , and other combinations can be devised . magic . the magic system in dragonquest features distinct magical colleges , each with its own group of spells and rituals . player characters who enter magical study are assumed to have apprenticed with a mage of their particular magic college , and have learned all the basic spells and a ritual or two from their former master . player characters can not change magic colleges in the context of game play , and so are all essentially specialists in a college of magic . some of the magic colleges include : earth magic , air magic , fire magic , water magic , illusions , ensorcelments , greater & lesser summoning , and necromantic conjurations . the revised second edition and third edition ( released by tsr ) added some colleges and removed others . players expend fatigue points to cast spells , and must roll percentile dice to succeed . many of the more powerful spells have a very low chance of success , and may backfire with random results ( many quite unpleasant ) . by expending experience points , a mage may improve their ability to cast specific spells by gaining rank in them . there are also advanced spells which can be obtained from more powerful mages in one 's magic college . this advanced knowledge may require a substantial cash payment or some kind of quest to obtain , however . certain spells require expensive or rare elements to work properly , while the majority are merely spoken . specific rules exist for player adepts to invest objects to create magic items ( such as rings , amulets , weapons , etc . ) for later use by themselves or other party members . such items are also found on occasion during an expedition or exploration . skills . any player character may choose to learn various skills in dragonquest . vocations such as ranger , thief , assassin , merchant , courtesan , navigator , healer , military scientist , mechanician , beastmaster , troubador may be acquired by expending the necessary experience points . certain other skills , such as stealth , horseback riding , reading and/or writing a language can also be practiced and improved . characters are not limited to any particular set of skills , and a halfling assassin who speaks perfect elvish is technically possible . weapons are learned in much the same manner as vocations . the limitation is that weapons have various maximum ranks ( levels ) which can be achieved , while other skills usually top out at rank 10 . magic spells gain improved chances of success and better strength when rank is gained in them also , and this is done on a spell-by-spell basis ( e.g . character is a fire mage and has improved his skill to rank 6 in fireball , but rank 0 in many other spells of his magic college which he considers less important ) . characters are required to spend many weeks training after an experience-generating adventure in order to increase skill levels . weapons training typically requires the aid of a person of greater skill than the player , and hiring a weapon-master can be expensive as well . often , a group will return to town laden with gold , only to realize that between the several months spent training ( room & board ) and the cost of experts to assist them with training , most of the money is already spent ! it is also possible that a character may actually be the expert in his/her local area , and thus might have to travel some distance to receive instruction from a person of greater ability . combat . dq uses a hex grid and miniatures for combat . unlike other systems , where the miniatures are merely placeholders , dq requires that characters know their facing , as attacks from the flanks and rear are more effective than frontal assaults . combat takes place in 5-second '' pulses '' and characters may only move short distances while actively engaged in a meleè . each character has a strike chance % based on ( mostly ) their manual dexterity and the base chance of the weapon used to attack . additional factors , such as running into an attack or achieving surprise—as in an ambush—modify this base chance . the defender 's defensive % is subtracted from this number , and percentile dice rolled to see if a hit is achieved . when a hit is delivered , the attacker rolls a d10 , adds the weapon 's attack bonus , and subtracts the target 's armor rating . in some cases , such as a target with plate armor , few weapons can do much damage directly . only certain special hits can damage the target severely . but with time , even the most heavily armored knight can usually be worn-down . unlike other systems , which use '' hit points '' to tally damage , dq has a two-tiered system of fatigue and endurance . normally a weapon does fatigue damage only , but an especially lucky hit may immediately cause endurance damage or even a grievous injury , which allows the attacker to roll again on a table of nasty hits to the eyes , guts , etc . once a character has lost all of his fatigue , he begins taking endurance damage instead . this is bad , since endurance damage requires magical intervention or extended bed rest to be recovered . fatigue can be recovered by simply relaxing and getting a hot meal and a good night 's sleep . endurance damage may also increase susceptibility to infection , at the discretion of the referee . another dq feature is a three-tiered combat range system : ranged , melee , and close combat . ranged combat typically involves bows , slings , and thrown knives , while melee is swords , spears , maces and most other weapons . close combat in dq is wrestling on the ground with knives , fists , rocks , etc . dq allows a party of adventurers to be surrounded and ultimately overwhelmed by large numbers of peasants , who rather than attacking singly and being cut to ribbons , will instead seek to surround and leap into close combat to subdue and pin down player characters . some weapons , such as daggers , can be used at all ranges , but most can not and are useless when the character is being shot with bows or engaged in close combat . dragonquest combat falls midway in complexity between d & d and systems such as runequest or hârnmaster . it can take several hours to resolve battles . tactics , choice of weapon , and use of spells are keys to victory . a feature of dq is that novice characters and mighty adventurers have nearly the same ability to absorb damage—i.e . they can both be killed fairly easily ( unlike d & d in which high-level characters can take remarkable amounts of damage without dying , but similar to runequest where character hit points are mostly static ) . this requires parties to have a balance of fighting and magic skills , since a party can not be centered on a single nigh-invulnerable figure ( a '' conan the barbarian '' type ) . experience . an experience points system is utilized that enables characters to increase their skill levels in spells and vocations , making their characters more formidable . experience is used to 'purchase ' new and improved abilities , rather than conferring a blanket increase in character skills as in d & d . as characters grow in skills and proficiency , the cost to raise to higher skill levels increases greatly , but the amount of base experience points awarded at the successful completion of an adventure increases as well . in addition , the dungeon master may award characters bonus experience points for valiant , clever or outstanding performance during gameplay . history . dragonquest appeared in three editions : a first edition published in 1980 , a second edition published by spi in conjunction with bantam books in 1982 , and a third edition published by tsr in 1989 after they acquired spi . as of 2016 , the game belongs to wizards of the coast , a wholly owned subsidiary of hasbro , through acquisition of tsr . the original working title for dragonquest was '' dragonslayer '' ( ares magazine 2 ) , but this had to be changed to avoid a conflict with walt disney pictures ' movie , dragonslayer . spi later ( in 1981 ) published a board game titled dragonslayer , a tie-in with the movie . the dragonquest trademark prevented the dragon quest video game series from being published in north america under that title ; the video game was retitled dragon warrior when it debuted in that market in 1989 , and subsequent sequels also used this name until 2003 . in 2003 , square enix registered the dragon quest trademark in the us . this trademark abandonment by wizards of the coast indicates that they have no interest in future dragonquest publications . the first spi edition came in a cardboard box containing three separate , softcover books , '' character generation , '' '' magic '' and a '' monster/skills '' manual . the second edition came as an all-in-one softcover version published by spi . the third edition published by tsr came in yet another all-in-one softcover version with different cover graphics . the differences between editions lies mainly in the addition and subtraction of some magical colleges as well as some modifications to combat mechanics . there were supplemental materials released during the game 's publication . there are several pre-written gaming adventures made for the dragonquest system . a rolling screen for game masters was offered at one point , bearing helpful charts and tables necessary during gameplay . a large map of the fictional kingdom of alusia was released as well , which provided game masters a variety of habitats , environments and islands on which to place the action . despite the game 's relative obscurity and continued neglect by its copyright holders , the game continues to be played by dragonquest devotees . over the years , dq groups throughout the world have devised and playtested additional secondary skills ( such as swimming and hunting ) , magic colleges , races ( rules for half-elves , half-orcs , etc . ) , and monsters for the game since it ceased being actively published . an unofficial player 's association exists online . publications . sourcebooks . frontiers of alusia ( 1981 ) gamemaster 's screen ( 1981 ) heroes and villains ( 1982 ) . adventures . the blade of allectus ( 1980 ) the enchanted wood ( 1981 ) the palace of ontoncle ( 1981 ) magebird quest ( 1982 ) starsilver trek ( 1982 ) . reception . in the september 1980 edition of the space gamer ( issue no . 31 ) , forrest johnson liked the system despite some flaws . '' despite its faults , it still presents a pleasing contrast to the sloppiness of the fantasy trip , the illogic of dungeons & dragons , the incoherence of chivalry & sorcery . it borrows good ideas liberally from the older systems , and offers noteworthy innovations of its own . at the price , dragonquest is a terrific buy . '' in the november 1980 edition of dragon ( issue 43 ) , douglas bachmann had issues with lack of balance in the skills system , but found the character generation system '' a delight '' . bachmann also liked the combat system , saying , '' the great strength of this combat system is that time and activity are closely related and regulated . the result is to allow one to imagine rather detailed combat scenes and to keep each player character ’ s activity within bounds . it is a very nice system and , when one becomes comfortable with it , moves along quite nicely . '' he concluded , '' dragonquest does have some problems , but i have found it to be an exciting game which has succeeded in setting limits and structuring activity while also encouraging creativity . for 10 you should get your money ’ s worth from the game . '' in 1996 , heidi kaye did a retrospective review of dragonquest for arcane magazine , stating that '' dragonquests system remains eminently playable , offering an intriguing glimpse of the game world hidden beneath , itself there to be further developed and moulded by the referee . it sought to create a more logical , understandable and flexible fantasy system , and its direct style and conspicuous organisation made it an appealing option for the novice roleplayer . '' . awards . dragonquest was awarded the h.g . wells award for '' best roleplaying rules of 1980 '' . . reviews . different worlds 11 ( march , 1982 ) casus belli 20 ( april 1984 ) . notes . external links . dragonquest players association homepage a dragonquest wiki for the nz multi-gm campaign known as 'the seagate guild of adventurers '