Madame du Barry

early life . jeanne bécu was born at vaucouleurs , in the present-day meuse department in lorraine , france , as the illegitimate daughter of anne bécu , a seamstress . haslip , joan , madame du barry : the wages of beauty , grove weidenfeld , new york , 1992 . jeanne 's father was possibly jean jacques gomard , a friar known as frère ange . during her childhood , one of her mother 's acquaintances ( possibly briefly a lover ) , monsieur billiard-dumonceaux , and possibly father of jeanne 's half-brother claude ( who died in infancy when only ten months old ) took both anne and three-year-old jeanne into his care when they traveled from vaucouleurs to paris and installed anne as a cook in his italy mistress 's household . little jeanette was well liked by dumonceaux 's mistress francesca ( known in french as madame or la frédérique ) , who pampered her in all luxury . dumonceaux funded jeanette 's education at the couvent ( convent ) de saint-aure . haslip , p . 3 . at the age of fifteen , jeanne left the convent , for she had '' come of age '' . for some reason – possibly either due to la frédérique 's jealousy of jeanne 's beauty and youth , or because dumonceaux 's passion for anne revived – both mother and daughter were thrown out . they then moved into the very small household of anne 's husband , nicolas rançon . jeanne had to find some sort of income to help herself live , and thus traveled the dingy streets of paris carrying a box full of trinkets for sale . over time she worked at different occupations ; she was first offered a post as assistant to a young hairdresser named lametz ; jeanne had a brief relationship with him that may have produced a daughter , although it is highly improbable . haslip , p . 6 . on the instigation of a gomard ( possibly the brother of her supposed father ) , jeanne was then employed as a companion ( dame de compagnie ) to an elderly widow , madame de la garde , but was sent away when again , her youth and beauty went against her . jeanne 's presence began to meddle in the marital affairs of both la garde 's two sons . later , jeanne worked as a milliner 's assistant ( known as a grisette ) in a haberdashery shop named ' à la toilette ' , owned by madame labille , and run by her husband . labille 's daughter , the future famed painter adélaïde labille-guiard , became a good friend of jeanne . as reflected in art from the time , jeanne was a remarkably attractive blonde woman with thick golden ringlets and almond-shaped blue eyes . her beauty came to the attention of jean-baptiste du barry , a high-class pimp/procurer haslip , p . 13 . nicknamed le roué . du barry owned a casino , and jeanne came to his attention in 1763 when she was entertaining in madame quisnoy 's brothel-casino . stoeckl , agnes de , mistress of versailles : the life of madame du barry , john murray , london , 1966 , p . 23 . she introduced herself as jeanne vaubernier . du barry installed her in his household and made her his mistress . giving her the appellation of mademoiselle lange , du barry helped establish jeanne 's career as a courtesan in the highest circles of parisian society ; this enabled her to take several aristocratic men , even courtiers , as brief lovers or clients . haslip , p . 16 : such reference is made in the sentence that jeanne was a talented courtesan , whom sometimes ' ( jean ) du barry regretted when necessity forced him to merchandise what he would willingly have kept for himself ' , obviously indicating that jeanne ( who was well aware her beauty and sexual charms ) was a very good means whereby he could climb the ladder of success . she is referred to many times in many books as a courtesan , which in common language means a high-class prostitute ( though by no means should one think that she was a common soliciting streetwalker ) . life as a courtesan and official mistress of louis xv . as mademoiselle lange , jeanne immediately became a sensation in paris , building up a large aristocratic clientele . she had many lovers from the king 's ministers to his courtiers . herman , an indecent pitch of luxury as to insult the poverty of the people , p.175 the dashing yet old maréchal de richelieu became one of her recurring lovers . because of this , jean du barry saw her as a means of influence over louis xv , who became aware of her in 1768 while she was on an errand at versailles . the errand involved the duc de choiseul , minister of foreign affairs , who found her rather ordinary , in contrast to what most other men thought of her . the king took a great interest in her and obtained her identity with the help of his personal valet and procurer , dominique guillaume lebel . jeanne was escorted to the royal boudoir frequently , and it was soon becoming a worrying issue to lebel when this liaison was seemingly becoming more than just a passing fling . in any case , jeanne could not qualify as a maîtresse-en-titre unless she had a title ; however after divulging with the king that jeanne was nothing but a harlot , the king ordered that jeanne be wedded to a man of strong lineage so she may be brought to court as per protocol . this was solved by her marriage on 1 september 1768 to du barry 's brother , comte guillaume du barry . the marriage ceremony included a false birth certificate created by jean du barry himself , making jeanne younger by three years and of fictitious noble descent . haslip , p . 27 . jeanne was now installed above the king 's quarters in lebel 's former rooms . she lived a lonely life , unable to be seen with the king since no formal presentation had taken place as yet . very few if any of the nobility at court deigned to become acquainted with her , for none could accept the fact that a woman of the street had the audacity to mingle with those above her station and thrive in trying to become like them . comte du barry constantly pestered jeanne and urged her to speak of presentation with the king . louis xv , in turn , asked her to find a proper sponsor to be able to have one . richelieu took responsibility of doing so , and after those women approached asked too high a price to take the role , her official sponsor , madame de béarn , was found after having her huge gambling debts paid off . on the first occasion when the presentation was to take place , de béarn was panicked by fear and feigned a sprained ankle . on a second occasion , the king was badly hurt when he fell off his horse during a hunt and broke his arm . finally , jeanne was presented to the court at versailles on 22 april 1769 ; an occasion which was long-awaited for by the gathering crowds outside the palace gates , and by the gossiping courtiers within the hall of mirrors . jeanne was described as wearing a queenly silvery white gown brocaded with gold , bedecked in jewels sent by the king the night before , and with huge panniers at the sides . the dress had been specifically ordered by richelieu especially for jeanne ; many courtiers claimed that its like had never been seen before . her hairdo was also noticeably spectacular , being the cause of her late arrival . jeanne first befriended claire françoise , better known as 'chon ' , brought from languedoc by her brother jean du barry to accompany her then-friendless sister-in-law , being also a means of companionship and tutor in helping jeanne let go of her peasant past and take a more court-like demeanour . later on , she also befriended the maréchale de mirepoix . other women of nobility were bribed into forming her entourage . jeanne quickly accustomed herself to living in luxury ( to which she had already been introduced whilst living with dumonceaux ) . louis xv had also given her a young bengali slave , zamor , whom she dressed in elegant clothing to show him off . according to stanley loomis ’ biography ‘ du barry ’ , jeanne 's everyday routine began at 9am , when zamor would bring her morning cup of chocolate . later she would be dressed in a fine gown of choice and dressed in her jewellery . accordingly , either hairdresser nokelle for special occasions , or berline for everyday styles , would come to do her hair in powders and curls . she would then receive friends , dressmakers , jewellers and artists showing off their new stock hoping she would be interested in buying something of their offers . she was indeed extravagant , but her good nature was not spoiled . when the old comte and comtesse de lousene were forcibly evicted from their château due to heavy debts , they were sentenced to beheading because the comtesse had shot dead a bailiff and a police officer while resisting . de stoeckl , p . 43 . to their great fortune , they were good friends with madame de béarn , who told jeanne of their situation . though warned by richelieu of her possible failure , she asked the king to pardon them , refusing to rise from her kneeling posture if he did not accept her request . louis xv was astounded and his heart thawed , saying , '' madame , i am delighted that the first favour you should ask of me should be an act of mercy ! '' stanley loomisdu barry : a biography , lippincott , philadelphia , 1959 , re-ed . 1965 , pp . 55–56 . a second similar act happened when jeanne was visited by a certain monsieur mandeville who asked pardon in the name of a young girl condemned to the gallows convicted of infanticide for giving birth to a still-born and not informing the authorities . jeanne wrote a letter to the chancellor of france , who granted the pardon . jeanne was a tremendous triumph . she now wore extravagant gowns of great proportions both in creation and cost , exhausting the treasury all the more . haslip , p . 32 : 'the carriages , jewels.reclaim the money from the royal treasury . with diamonds covering her delicate neck and ears , she was now the king 's maîtresse déclarée . due to her new position at court , she made both friends and enemies . her most bitter rival was the duchesse de gramont , choiseul 's sister , who had in vain tried her best to acquire the place of the late madame de pompadour , and according to diane adélaïde de mailly , béatrix de gramont would have disdained the comtesse no matter what . she had , since the beginning , plotted with her brother for the removal of jeanne , even going to the extent of slandering her name as well as the king 's on gutter pamphlets . in time jeanne became acquainted with the duc d ’ aiguillon , nephew of richelieu , who sided with her against the opposing duc de choiseul . as jeanne 's power in court grew stronger , choiseul began feeling his was waning , and against the king 's wishes after the terrible seven years ' war incident , he decided france was capable of war again and sided with the spanish against the british for possession of the falkland islands . when this plot came to light to the du barry clan , the mistress exposed all to the king and , on christmas eve of 1771 , choiseul was dismissed of his ministerial role and from court , ordered by his majesty to exile to his chanteloup property along with his wife and sister . jeanne 's golden age had finally truly arrived . she was rid of choiseul and grammont , comte jean du barry was dealt with and her family had the benefits they deserved as relations to the mistress . her mother , anne , was now marquise de montrabé , residing in a luxurious apartment in the couvent ( convent ) de sainte-elisabeth . while jeanne was part of the faction that brought down the duc de choiseul , she was unlike her late predecessor , madame de pompadour , in that she had little interest in politics , preferring rather to pass her time ordering new ravishing gowns and all sorts of complementary jewellery . however , the king went so far as to let her participate in state councils . mme . campan , souvenirs a note in a modern edition of the souvenirs of mme . campan recalls an anecdote : the king said to the duc de noailles , that with madame du barry he had discovered new pleasures ; '' sire '' – answered the duke – '' that 's because your majesty has never been in a brothel . '' herman , sex with the king . p.22 while jeanne was known for her good nature and support of artists , she grew increasingly unpopular because of the king 's financial extravagance towards her . she was forever in debt despite her huge monthly income from the king – at one point three hundred thousand livres . herman , pensions , p.146 she remained in her position until the death of the king , and the attempt to depose her made by duc de choiseul and d'aiguillon by trying to arrange a secret marriage between the king and mme pater was unsuccessful . fleury , maurice & comte , louis xv intime et les petites maîtresses . , paris , 1909 . relationship with marie antoinette . her relationship with marie antoinette , who was married to the dauphin of france ( the future louis xvi ) , was contentious . the first meeting of the two was during a family supper at the château de la muette on 15 may 1770 , a day before the great wedding . jeanne had only been official mistress a little over a year , and many thought she would not be included in the list of guests for the occasion . it ended up being otherwise , to the disgust of most of those present . marie antoinette noticed jeanne , who stood out from the rest of the crowd with her attractive extravagant appearance and a high talkative voice . the anne d'arpajon informed marie antoinette that the role of that woman was to give pleasure to the king , and the innocent 14-year-old archduchess added that she would thus be her rival at such a role . the comte de provence soon after divulged the true nature of such pleasure , causing instant hatred in antoinette towards du barry for such immorality . this rivalry kept on for quite some time , especially since also the dauphine supported choiseul as the proponent of the alliance with austria . marie antoinette defied court protocol by refusing to speak to madame du barry , owing not only to her disapproval of the latter 's background , but also after hearing from the comte de provence of du barry 's amused reaction to a story told by the prince de rohan during one of her dinner parties , in which marie antoinette 's mother , maria theresa , was slandered , adding therefore yet another foe to her list . haslip , p . 78 : '' prince de rohan had made fun of the pious old empress . no one , it appears , had laughed so heartily as the hostess '' madame du barry furiously complained to the king , who complained to the austrian ambassador mercy , who in turn did his best in convincing marie antoinette to ease her ways . eventually , during a ball on new year 's day 1772 , marie antoinette spoke indirectly to du barry by casually observing '' there are many people at versailles today , '' giving her the option to respond or not . diamond necklace . in 1772 , the infatuated louis xv requested that parisian jewellers boehmer and bassenge create an elaborate and spectacular jeweled necklace for du barry , one that would surpass all known others in grandeur , at an estimated cost of two million livres . the necklace , still not completed nor paid for when louis xv died , would eventually trigger a scandal involving jeanne de la motte-valois , in which queen marie antoinette herman , jewels , p.135 would be wrongly accused of bribing the cardinal de rohan , archbishop of strasbourg , alsace , to purchase it for her , accusations which would figure prominently in the onset of the french revolution . . death of louis xv and exile . in time , the king started to show his age by constantly thinking of death and repentance , and began missing appointments in jeanne 's boudoir . haslip , p . 81 : '' she never dared go out for long , . rest for a while in peace '' during a stay at the petit trianon with her , louis xv felt the first symptoms of smallpox . he was brought back to the palace at night and put to bed , where his three daughters and madame du barry stayed beside him . on 4 may 1774 , the king suggested to madame du barry that she leave versailles , both to protect her from infection and so that he could prepare for confession and last rites . she was relieved of her duties by doctor lemonnier and immediately retired to aiguillon 's estate near rueil , as were his wishes . following the death of louis xv and his grandson 's ascension to the throne , marie antoinette had her husband exile jeanne to the abbey du pont-aux-dames near meaux . bernier , pp . 246–249 . at first she was not met warmly by the nuns , who knew that in their midst they had the thirty-one-year-old former royal mistress , but soon enough they grew accustomed to her timid ways and opened up to her , most of all the abbess madame de la roche-fontenelle . life after louis xv . after a year at the convent , jeanne was granted permission to visit the surrounding countryside on the condition she returned by sundown . a month later , she was given permission to leave the abbey but not to venture closer than ten miles towards versailles , thus cancelling her idea of going to her beloved château de louveciennes . she then managed to purchase property belonging to the family of the wife of madame de la garde 's younger son , whom she knew from her teen-age years . two years later , she moved to louveciennes . herman , p . 203 in the following years , she had a liaison with louis hercule timoléon de cossé-brissac . haslip , p . 133 . she later also fell in love with henry seymour ( redland ) , haslip , p . 121 whom she met when he moved with his family to the neighbourhood of the château . in time , seymour became fed up with his secret love affair and sent a painting to madame du barry with the words 'leave me alone ' written in english at the bottom , which the painter lemoyne copied in 1796 . the duc de brissac proved the more faithful in this ménage-a-trois , having kept madame du barry in his heart even though he knew of her affair with seymour . during the french revolution , brissac was captured while visiting paris , and was slaughtered by a mob . late one night , jeanne heard the sound of a small drunken crowd approaching the château , and into the opened window where she looked out someone threw a blood-stained cloth . to jeanne 's horror , it contained brissac 's head , at which sight she fainted . imprisonment , trial and execution . du barry 's bengali slave zamor , along with another member of du barry 's domestic staff , had joined the jacobin club . he became a follower of the revolutionary george grieve and then an office-bearer in the committee of public safety . du barry found out about this and questioned zamor about his connections with grieve . upon realizing the depth of his involvement , she gave him three days ’ notice to quit her service . this zamor did without hesitation , and promptly proceeded to denounce his mistress to the committee . based largely on zamor 's testimony , madame du barry was suspected of financially assisting émigrés who had fled the french revolution . the denunciation by zamor happened in 1792 , and madame du barry was finally arrested in 1793 . in 1792 , when the revolutionary tribunal of paris accused her of treason and condemned her to death , she vainly attempted to save herself by revealing the location of gems she had hidden . stoeckl , p . 174 . during the ensuing trial , zamor gave chittagong as his birthplace ; he was likely of siddi origin . his testimony , along with that of many others , sent the comtesse to the guillotine . on 8 december 1793 , madame du barry was beheaded by the guillotine on the place de la concorde ( now the place de la concorde ) . on the way to the guillotine , she collapsed in the tumbrel and cried '' you are going to hurt me ! why ? ! '' terrified , she screamed for mercy and begged the watching crowd for help . her last words to the executioner are said to have been : « de grâce , monsieur le bourreau , encore un petit moment ! » - '' one more moment , mr . executioner , i beg you ! '' she was buried in the madeleine cemetery , like many others executed during the reign of terror—including louis xvi and marie antoinette . although her french estate went to the tribunal de paris , the jewels she had smuggled out of france to england were sold by auction at christie 's in london in 1795 . colonel johann keglevich , the brother of major general stephan bernhard keglevich , took part in the battle of mainz in 1795 with hessian ( soldiers ) who were financed by the british empire with the money from this sale . in popular culture . food many dishes are named after du barry . all dishes '' du barry '' have a creamy white sauce , and many have cauliflower in them . the cauliflower may be an allusion to her powdered wigs , which had curls piled high on top of each other like cauliflower curds . film du barry was portrayed in film by : mrs . leslie carter in the 1915 film dubarry directed by edoardo bencivenga theda bara in the 1917 film madame du barry directed by j . gordon edwards pola negri in the 1919 film madame dubarry directed by ernst lubitsch norma talmadge in the 1930 film du barry , woman of passion dolores del río in the 1934 film madame du barry , directed by william dieterle gladys george in the 1938 mgm film , marie antoinette , which starred norma shearer in the title role lucille ball in the 1943 movie version of dubarry was a lady margot grahame in the 1949 film black magic as mme du barry . it also starred orson welles in the lead role of count cagliostro martine carol in the 1954 film madame du barry directed by christian-jaque italian actress asia argento in sofia coppola 's 2006 film marie antoinette japanese voice actress ryoko kinomiya in the famous anime the rose of versailles , as a villainous , scheming enemy of marie antoinette ; her struggles with the young princess are a major concern of the story in its early stages . literature in the idiot , by fyodor dostoyevsky , the character lebedev tells the story of her life and execution and prays for her soul , among other souls . du barry is one of the central characters in sally christie 's the enemies of versailles ( 2017 ) . references . ; citations ; bibliography antoine , michel , louis xv , librairie arthème fayard . paris . 1989 ( french ) . bernier , oliver , louis the beloved , the life of louis xv , doubleday & company , inc . : garden city , new york . 1984 . castelot , andré , madame du barry , perrin , paris , 1989 . haslip , joan , madame du barry : the wages of beauty , grove weidenfeld , new york , 1992 , , . herman , eleanor . ( 2005 ) . sex with kings : 500 years of adultery , power , rivalry , and revenge . william morrow paperbacks . la croix de castries , rené de , madame du barry , hachette , paris , 1967 . stanley loomis , du barry : a biography , lippincott , philadelphia , 1959 . saint-andré , claude , a king 's favourite , madame du barry , and her times from hitherto unpublished documents , with an introduction by pierre de nolhac , new york , mc bride , nast & company , 1915 ; translated from the french madame du barry , published by tallandier , paris , 1909 . saint victor , jacques de , madame du barry , un nom de scandale , perrin , paris , 2002 . stoeckl , agnes , ( baroness de ) , mistress of versailles : the life of madame du barry , john murray , london , 1966 . vatel , charles , histoire de madame du barry , l . bernard , paris , 1883 . external links . full text of memoirs of the comtesse du barry from project gutenberg the french revolution & nbsp ; — madame du barry and princess de lamballe