Saskatoon

first nations . the saskatoon area was inhabited long before any permanent settlement was established , to which the ongoing archaeological work at wanuskewin heritage park and other locations bears witness . canada 's first nations population has been increasingly urbanized , and nowhere is that more apparent than in saskatoon , where the first nations population increased by 382 % from 1981 to 2001 ; aboriginal conditions in census metropolitan areas , 1981–2001 , statistics canada , , table 1 . however , a portion of this increase , possibly as much as half , is believed to be due to more people identifying themselves as aboriginal in the census rather than migration or birth rate . saskatoon has the second highest percentage of first nations population among major canadian cities at nearly 9 % , aboriginal conditions in census metropolitan areas , 1981–2001 , statistics canada , , figure 3 . behind winnipeg at 10 % and regina close by with 8 % ; in certain neighbourhoods such as pleasant hill , this percentage exceeds 40 % . most first nations residents are of cree or sioux cultural background although to a lesser extent saulteaux , assiniboine , and dene communities also exist . saskatoon also has a substantial métis population and is close to the historically significant southbranch settlements to the north , as well as the prairie ronde settlement near dundurn , saskatchewan . culture . events and festivals . saskatoon 's major arts venue is tcu place , which is next to midtown plaza downtown . since opening in 1967 , it has hosted scores of concerts , theatrical performances , live events such as the telemiracle telethon , high school graduation and university convocation ceremonies , and conventions . it is also home to the saskatoon symphony orchestra . it recently underwent a multimillion-dollar renovation to its main theatre ( named in honour of former mayor and senator sidney buckwold ) . saskatoon was the 2007 host city for the juno awards , canada 's foremost music industry honours . for rock concerts and major shows , sasktel centre is the main venue . it is saskatchewan's largest arena , with a capacity of 15,195 for sporting events and 14,000 for concerts . musical acts from saskatoon include joni mitchell , kyle riabko , wide mouth mason , the northern pikes , the sheepdogs , and the deep dark woods , as well as countless others popular at both local and regional levels . saskatoon hosts many festivals and events in the summer , including the shakespeare on the saskatchewan , the great plains comedy festival , the jazz festival , the saskatchewan children 's festival , the saskatoon fringe theatre festival ( a showcase of alternative theatre ) , saskatoon folkfest ( a cultural festival ) , doors open saskatoon , fairy door tours saskatoon and the canada remembers airshow . for over 25 years , saskatoon has hosted a gathering of antique automobiles , ( mainly from the 1960s ) that has grown into an event called '' cruise weekend '' . the event is usually held on the last weekend ( friday , saturday and sunday ) in august . activities include a poker derby , dances , and a show ' n ' shine with over 800 cars from all over western canada . no admission is charged and everyone is free to walk around and enjoy the atmosphere . the city 's annual exhibition ( now called the saskatoon exhibition but also known in previous years as pioneer days and '' the ex '' ) is held every august at prairieland park . in the late 1990s , the saskatoon exhibition was rescheduled to august so that it no longer was in direct competition with the calgary stampede , which frequently overlapped the event . saskatoon 's sikh community celebrates the festival of vaisakhi with a parade held in may . the francophone community is represented by the fédération des francophones de saskatoon which organizes many cultural events . galleries and museums . art museums in saskatoon include the remai modern , located at river landing , a development along the shoreline of the south saskatchewan river , in the central business district . the art museum is situated in a building designed by bruce kuwabara , and houses over 8,000 works in its collection . the design for the museum won the award of excellence from the canadian architect magazine in 2011 . pablo picasso , georges braque and other 20th-century artists have a home in the remai modern museum . opened in october 21 , 2017 , the remai modern has been listed at no . 18 in the new york times '' 52 places to go in 2018 : a starter kit for escaping into the world . '' the remai modern inherited the collection of the defunct mendel art gallery , which operated in city park from 1964 to 2015 . the saskatchewan craft council gallery is on the main floor of the saskatchewan craft council building in the broadway avenue area . it is saskatchewan 's only public exhibition gallery dedicated to fine craft as an art form . saskatchewan craft council gallery presents seven to eight exhibitions each year . the scc fine craft boutique , located in the gallery , features the work of over 75 scc fine craft artists . the ukrainian museum of canada is on the banks of the south saskatchewan river . the foremost attraction for ukrainian culture in saskatoon , it houses various artifacts such as textiles , tools , musical instruments , and clothing , with many pieces on display for public viewing . the ukrainian museum of canada has other branches in vancouver , edmonton , calgary , winnipeg , and toronto . the meewasin valley centre , in friendship park , has information on saskatoon 's history , the south saskatchewan river , and the future of the meewasin valley . saskatoon is also home of the saskatchewan western development museum . this museum , one of four throughout the province , documents early pioneer life in saskatchewan . it is noted for its interior recreation of a '' boom town '' main street , including one original building relocated from its original site . the saskatchewan railway museum is just outside the city and includes displays of rolling stock and historic railway buildings from various parts of the province . the forestry farm park and zoo is a national historic site situated in the northeast region of the city . the forestry farm was a historic nursery ( dating from 1913 ) responsible for growing many of the trees planted within the prairie provinces . in 1966 the nursery operations were discontinued and part of the region turned into a municipal park . the city zoo is also housed within the park and features over 80 species of animals . zoo brochure wanuskewin heritage park is a national historic site situated five km to the north of saskatoon . it is an aboriginal archaeological site and features displays , special events , and activities , recent renovations are on hold due to a lack of funds during the renovations . theatres . live theatre is a central , vibrant part of saskatoon 's culture . saskatoon is host to a number of live theatre venues such as the persephone theatre , which is in the remai arts centre at river landing in downtown saskatoon , the refinery and the saskatchewan native theatre company . the broadway theatre primarily shows art film – while the two-screen roxy theatre is an '' atmospheric-style '' discount theater that reopened in 2005 after sitting unused for over a decade . the remainder of the city 's theatres are multiplexes . the only movie theatre in the downtown core is the cineplex entertainment ; the capitol 4 shut down on april 3 , 2008 . the city 's other movie theatres are the landmark theatre in the new subdivision of brighton , rainbow cinemas ( a second-run cinema ) and the centre cinemas in the centre mall on the city 's east side . among the many movie theatres of the past that have come and gone was the capitol theatre , which opened in 1929 with a showing of the first talkie to be exhibited in saskatoon . the capitol closed in the early 1980s to make way for the scotia centre office tower ; its name was transferred to the aforementioned capitol 4 a block away . saskatoon is home to a large blues/jazz community that frequents many bars and clubs known for their blues- and jazz-related acts , including amigo 's , buds on broadway , the black cat tavern , village guitar & amp co . , the bassment , capitol and formerly lydia 's . the canadian rock band the sheepdogs are from saskatoon . joni mitchell calls saskatoon her hometown . the deep dark woods are from saskatoon . other attractions . one of the city 's landmarks is the delta bessborough hotel , known to locals as the bez . built by the canadian national railway , it was among the last railway hotels to be started before the great depression of the 1930s brought their era to a close . although the building was completed in 1932 , it did not open its doors until 1935 due to the depression . the bessborough and the mendel art gallery are the only major structures on the river side of spadina crescent . one of the most frequently circulated photographs of saskatoon is of the hotel framed in one of the arches of the broadway bridge . the meewasin valley trail follows the south saskatchewan river through saskatoon . summer activities include cycling , jogging and walking through parks and natural areas . cross-country skiing is popular during the winter months , along with skating in kiwanis memorial park . access points are found throughout the city with interpretive signage and washrooms along the route . there are parks throughout the meewasin valley , with washrooms , picnic facilities , and lookout points along the river bank . in the winter the meewasin skating rink is open free to the public ; it is in kiwanis memorial park beside the delta bessborough hotel . the outdoor rink has been open since 1980 . for years , a parcel of land west of the traffic bridge , south of 19th street , and east of avenue c has been the subject of on-again , off-again redevelopment plans . the site formerly held the saskatoon arena , a power plant , a branch of the royal canadian legion , and the head offices of the saskatoon public school division ; all these structures have been demolished to make way for redevelopment , with plans for same dating back to the 1980s . the most recent version of the plan called river landing is ongoing . calgary developer lake placid has proposed a 200 million dollar mega hotel/condo project to be built on the site although lake placid had difficulty securing financing and missed an october 30 , 2009 , deadline to submit a 4.5 million dollar payment for the parcel of land which seemingly killed the deal . lake placid fails deadline on november 16 , 2009 , it was revealed by lake placid that the financing should be secure within a week . in april 2010 , saskatoon city council voted in favour of entering new negotiations with lake placid over the site . lake placid back in the game the saskatoon farmers ' market and some commercial sites have also been developed . future plans separate from lake placid include the development of a new art gallery to replace the mendel art gallery by 2014 . other landmarks in the city include the iconic traffic bridge ( which was demolished in 2016 and is currently being replaced by a new structure evoking the appearance of the original ) , the university of saskatchewan campus , and the large viterra grain terminal which has dominated the western skyline of the city for decades and is large enough to be visible from pike lake provincial park 32 & nbsp ; km away . shopping centres . blairmore shopping centre the centre confederation mall erindale centre/university heights mall the mall at lawson heights market mall midtown plaza preston crossing river city mall stonegate shopping centre ( in stonebridge ) . economy . the economy of saskatoon has been associated with potash , oil and agriculture ( specifically wheat ) , resulting in the moniker '' pow city '' . various grains , livestock , oil and gas , potash , uranium , gold , diamond , coal and their spin off industries fuel the economy . the world 's largest publicly traded uranium company , cameco , and the world 's largest potash producer , nutrien , have corporate headquarters in saskatoon . saskatoon is also the new home of bhp billiton 's diamonds and specialty products business unit . nearly two-thirds of the world 's recoverable potash reserves are in the saskatoon region . innovation place founded in 1980 brings together almost 150 agriculture , information technology , and environmental , life sciences and agricultural biotechnology industries in a science park or technology park setting . saskatoon is also home to the canadian light source , canada 's national synchrotron facility . saskatoon ’ s digital media scene is growing with start-up tech companies such as noodlecake , point2 , vendasta technologies , and zu . one of saskatoon 's nicknames , '' hub city '' , refers to its ideal central location within canada for distribution and logistics . saskatoon john g . diefenbaker international airport with 105,620 aircraft movements in 2008 was listed as the list of the busiest airports in canada . passenger traffic passenger statistics from airport saskatoon is developing the south central business district , or block 146 , which is called the river landing project . river landing . retrieved february 4 , 2007 . the partnership . retrieved february 4 , 2007 . long range planning is underway for an expected city population of 325,000 by 2028 ( 2011 mxd report ) . saskatoon was expected to see a 4.2 percent growth in gross domestic product for the year 2012 . the city saw a 3.4 % growth in 2004 , 5.1 % increase in 2005 and a 2.8 % increase in 2006 . saskatoon held canada 's no . 1 economic growth spot for canada in 2005 according to the conference board of canada . the conference board again predicted the city would rate first for economic increase in 2012 , showing a growth rate of 4.2 % . the saskatoon regional economic development authority ( sreda ) has also been ranked amongst canada 's top ten economic development organizations by site selection magazine . . infrastructure . health care . the saskatchewan health authority is responsible for health care delivery in the area . they operate three hospitals within the city boundaries , these include royal university hospital , saskatoon city hospital , and st . paul 's hospital ( saskatoon ) . royal university hospital is a teaching and research hospital that operates in partnership with the university of saskatchewan . the health authority also operates hospitals in smaller neighbouring communities . in addition to hospitals the health authority operates long-term care facilities , clinics and other health care services . jim pattison children 's hospital began construction in 2014 and opened in 2019 under the auspices of what was then the saskatoon health region , since absorbed into the saskatchewan health authority . . policing . the saskatoon police service is the primary police service for the city of saskatoon and holds both municipal and provincial jurisdiction . the following services also have jurisdiction in saskatoon : corman park police service , royal canadian mounted police , cn police and the canadian pacific railway police service . as of december 31 , 2012 , the sps had 442 sworn members , 59 special constables , and 136 civilian positions . most recent sps annual report on sps website . january 26 , 2015 . crime . the 2006 census crime data , released july 18 , 2007 , showed saskatoon leading canada in violent crime , with 1,606 violent crimes per 100,000 residents annually . however , crime statistics produced by the saskatoon police service shows that crime is on the decline . in 2010 , total crimes against people went up 1.28 % and total crimes against property fell by 11.75 % . there were accusations in the early 1990s that the saskatoon police were engaging in starlight tours , where officers would arrest aboriginal men and drive them out of the city in the dead of winter to abandon them . the majority of the accusations turned out to be true ; however , several starlight tour cases lacked evidence . . transportation . saskatoon is on the yellowhead highway spur of the trans-canada highway system , also known as highway 16 , which connects saskatchewan , manitoba , alberta , and british columbia . highways 5 , 7 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 41 , 219 , 684 , and 762 all meet at saskatoon , with highway 60 terminating just outside the southwestern city limits . the following bridges cross the south saskatchewan river in saskatoon ( in order from upstream ) : grand trunk bridge ( rail ) gordie howe bridge senator sid buckwold bridge traffic bridge broadway bridge university bridge cpr bridge ( rail ) circle drive bridge chief mistawasis bridge construction of saskatoon 's beltway , circle drive , began in the mid-1960s ( after first being proposed in 1913 ) , and was completed on july 31 , 2013 with the opening of the 300 million south circle drive project . saskatoon 's south bridge finally becoming a reality , saskatoon starphoenix , june 20 , 2008 . retrieved july 11 , 2008 . the canadian pacific railway and the canadian national railway have connections to saskatoon . both railways operate intermodal facilities and trans-load centres ; while canadian national railway also operates an automotive transfer facility . saskatoon is a stop on the canadian passenger transcontinental rail route operated by via rail . the saskatoon railway station is in the city 's west end ; it opened in the late 1960s as a replacement for saskatoon 's original main station which was on 1st avenue downtown—the relocation of the station sparked a major redevelopment of the downtown that included the construction of the midtown plaza , tcu place ( originally named the centennial auditorium ) and other developments . the many provincial transportation connections and geographic location of saskatoon give it one of its nicknames the hub city . the saskatchewan railway museum is just outside the city . recent debates about moving all the railways out of the city are raising questions about a future lrt system , but the city 's mayor says the population is too small . saskatoon/john g . diefenbaker international airport , located in the city 's northwest , provides scheduled and charter airline service for the city , and is a significant hub for mining and remote locations in northern saskatchewan . non-stop scheduled destinations include calgary , edmonton , las vegas , minneapolis , ottawa , prince albert , regina , toronto , vancouver , and winnipeg . seasonal and charter service is provided to mexico , cuba , dominican republic , phoenix and churchill , mb . air canada , westjet and purolator courier all have cargo facilities at the airport . saskatoon/corman air park is a general aviation airport 15 & nbsp ; km southeast of saskatoon . transit services in saskatoon are provided by saskatoon transit . the route system was revamped on july 2 , 2006 , creating increased access to most parts of the city . an up-to-date schedule is posted at saskatoon transit route & schedule adjustments . saskatoon was serviced by greyhound canada for inter-provincial bus service between manitoba and alberta until greyhound discontinued service on october 31 , 2018 . . education . saskatoon has a number of higher education institutions : university of saskatchewan st . thomas more college is a catholic federated college of the university of saskatchewan . affiliated with the university of saskatchewan are the lutheran theological seminary , college of emmanuel and st . chad ( anglican church of canada ) , and st . andrew 's college ( united church of canada ) . all three are on the university campus . the first nations university of canada – saskatoon campus . saskatchewan polytechnic gabriel dumont institute saskatchewan indian institute of technologies saskatoon has 78 elementary schools and 14 high schools , serving about 37,000 students . saskatoon has three main school boards , the saskatoon public school division , the saskatoon catholic school division and the conseil des ecoles fransaskoises . the western annexation of what is now called the blairmore sda also brought the yarrow youth farm within the city limits ; operated by the province of saskatchewan , this was a correction facility for at-risk youth . the facility was subsequently closed in march 2015 and the land , located within the under-development kensington community , was out up for sale the following autumn . . sports and recreation . ice hockey is one of the most popular sports in saskatoon and is home to numerous amateur teams such as the saskatoon blades of the whl , who host their games in sasktel centre ( formerly known as credit union centre and saskatchewan place ) . saskatoon is also home to amateur teams at the junior b and midget aaa levels , as well as several youth teams . saskatoon was a major league hockey city from 1921 to 1926 when the wchl/whl saskatoon sheiks played . they made it as far as the league semi-finals twice , not far enough to challenge for the stanley cup . the biggest chance for a return of major professional hockey came in 1982 . bill hunter , a local sports promoter , attempted to purchase the st . louis blues of the nhl and move it to saskatoon , but the move was prevented by the league . this was due to saskatchewan 's and especially saskatoon 's small size in relation to both st . louis and the other cities in the nhl at the time . however , it did cause the building of the credit union centre , on the city 's northern edge . prior to hosting the 2010 world junior hockey tournament , the arena underwent a major expansion which increased seating capacity to approximately 15,000 and also created several new box suites . starting in 2016 , the saskatchewan rush played in the national lacrosse league after moving from edmonton . the saskatchewan rush won the league championship against the buffalo bandits that same year . canadian football is one of the most successful on field sports in saskatoon . the university of saskatchewan huskies are one of the top university football programs in canada , with three vanier cup national championships and 19 hardy trophy canada west championships . the huskies have made nine vanier cup appearances since 1990 , and were the first team from outside of ontario to host the vanier cup , hosting the game in 2006 . as well , the saskatoon hilltops of the canadian junior football league host their games at gordie howe bowl . the hilltops have won 19 national junior championships throughout their history . the university of saskatchewan huskies play canadian interuniversity sport league games at the university campus . their facilities include 6,171 seat griffiths stadium , 700 seat rutherford arena , and the state-of-the-art physical activity complex , opened august 2003 in conjunction with the new college of kinesiology building . the huskies participate in twelve sports at the cis level and have been most successful in football ( conference champions 18 times/national champions 3 times ) , men 's volleyball ( conference champions 11 times/national champions 4 times ) women 's basketball national champions once and men 's and women 's track and field ( conference champions 37 times/ national champions 12 times ) . saskatoon is also currently constructing a new arena to be home of the university hockey team . this complex will consist of two areas and a hard court surface for indoor sports events such as soccer . the area is being constructed on the university campus . in 2007 , two new sports teams came into being in saskatoon , the saskatchewan swat of the rocky mountain lacrosse league and the saskatoon accelerators in the canadian major indoor soccer league . the accelerators play at the kinsmen/henk ruys soccer centre , while the swat play at the gordie howe kinsmen arena . there are currently no baseball teams in saskatoon . in the past there have been various teams including the saskatoon yellow jackets , saskatoon riot , saskatoon smokin ' guns , saskatoon stallions , and the saskatoon legends . motor racing is a popular sport in saskatoon . saskatchewan international raceway has been in operation for over 40 years ; sir is home to 1/4 mile nhra drag racing and holds racing events from may to september . as well , just north of the city lies wyant group raceway the paved oval track is home to local stock car racing , as well as races for several different western canadian series . in 2009 , the nascar canadian tire series make its inaugural stop at wyant group raceway , formerly known as auto clearing motor speedway , signaling a move to a larger profile track in saskatoon . marquis downs at prairieland park offers live horse racing from may to october . the city also is home to a number of sports and recreation centres , including two full size soccer facilities under the control of the non-profit saskatoon soccer centre organization . the kinsmen/henk ruys soccer centre is composed of four sport court indoor fields and the sasktel sports centre hosts two full sized outdoor turf fields , one indoor full sized turf field , one indoor half sized turf field , and one sport court field . lions skatepark was built in the riversdale area in 2003 . as well saskatoon is home to several golf courses and various parks which include tennis courts , ball diamonds and soccer pitches for spring , summer and fall use and outdoor rinks for winter use . blackstrap ski hill is also 30 minutes south of the city , however , has been closed since 2006 due to financial difficulty . the crown in saskatoon . saskatoon has welcomed members of the royal family since 1919 . the queen most recently visited for a gala concert at credit union centre , before a live audience of 12,000 and television viewers nationwide in 2005 . the queen was presented with the key to the city on the same visit , after touring the canadian light source synchrotron and greeting thousands of well-wishers on a walkabout at the university of saskatchewan ( the queen traditionally stays at the on-campus residence of the president of the university of saskatchewan when she visits the city ) . sovereigns and consorts who have visited include edward viii as prince of wales in 1919 , king george vi and queen elizabeth in 1939 , and elizabeth ii and the duke of edinburgh , as princess elizabeth in 1951 and afterwards as queen in 1959 , 1978 , 1987 and 2005 . other members of the royal family who have visited include princess margaret , countess of snowdon in 1980 , the prince of wales ( charles ) in 2001 , the princess anne in 1982 and ( as princess royal ) in 2004 , the duke and duchess of york ( andrew and sarah ) in 1989 , and the prince edward in 1978 . governors general and lieutenant governors also pay regular visits to saskatoon . saskatonian ray hnatyshyn is credited with popularising his office as governor general from 1990 to 1995 . saskatchewan lieutenant governors barnhart , fedoruk , mcnab , monroe , porteous and worobetz were all former residents of saskatoon . connections to the crown include the royal namesakes of about one hundred neighbourhoods , parks , streets , schools and other places . these include king george , queen elizabeth and massey place neighbourhoods , and victoria , coronation and princess diana parks . it was at one time considered that saskatoon 's broadway bridge would be renamed george v bridge . key to landmarks landmarks and institutions also have connections and these include the royal university hospital , one of four royal designations in saskatchewan . grade schools named for royals include ecole victoria school , king george school , queen elizabeth school , prince philip school and princess alexandra school . existing and historic hotels with royal namesakes include the king george hotel which has been recently converted to ultra-luxury condominiums , the king edward hotel , the queen 's hotel and the patricia hotel . the hotel bessborough was named for a canadian governor general who visited the landmark under construction in the 1930s . the queen elizabeth power station is within the city and named after queen elizabeth . the prince of wales promenade along the south saskatchewan river is a focal point on the riverfront trails . in 2002 , 378 saskatoon residents were presented with canada 's golden jubilee medal by vice-regals to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the queen 's accession to the throne . government house canadian honours database . media . notable people . notes . see also . list of place names in canada of indigenous origin . references . external links .