Dugald Stewart

early life . he was the son of matthew stewart ( 1715–1785 ) , professor of mathematics at the university of edinburgh ( 1747–1772 ) , and was born in his father 's quarters at old college . his mother was marjory stewart , his father 's cousin . he was educated at the high school and the university of edinburgh , where he studied mathematics and moral philosophy under adam ferguson . in 1771 , in the hope of gaining a snell exhibition scholarship and proceeding to oxford to study for the english church , he went to the university of glasgow to attend the classes of thomas reid . to reid he later owed his theory of morality . in glasgow , stewart boarded in the same house as archibald alison , author of the essay on taste , and a lasting friendship sprang up between them . after a single session in glasgow university , at the age of nineteen , dugald was asked by his father , whose health was beginning to fail , to give his mathematical classes in the university of edinburgh . after three years there , in 1775 , dugald was elected joint professor of mathematics in conjunction with his father . three years later ferguson was appointed secretary to the commissioners sent out to the 13 colonies , and at his request stewart lectured as his substitute during the session 1778–1779 , delivering an original course of lectures on morals . in his early years he was influenced by lord monboddo , with whom he corresponded . professor at edinburgh . in 1785 stewart succeeded ferguson in the chair of moral philosophy , which he filled for twenty-five years , making it a centre of intellectual and moral influence . young men were attracted by his reputation from england , europe and america . greatly influenced by the irish presbyterian francis hutcheson who , in the preceding generation , had held the chair of moral philosophy at the university of glasgow , stewart 's course on moral philosophy embraced , besides ethics proper , lectures on political philosophy or the theory of government . william drennan , whose father thomas drennan had been secretary to hutcheson , and who 1791 moved the formation of the society of united irishmen in belfast and in dublin , was a student and friend . ian mcbride ( 1993 ) , '' william drennan and the dissenting tradition '' , in d . dickson , d . keogh and k . whelan , the united irishmen : republicanism , radicalism and rebellion . dublin : lilliput press . isbn 0946640955 . p . 60 it is from stewart that drennan is said to have '' imbibed the classical tradition of repubican theory , in its most famous english embodiment in the works of john locke , and its contemporary reincarnation in the works of richard price and joseph priestley '' . stewart 's dissident rationalism greatly influenced maria edgeworth and elizabeth hamilton . they drew extensively on his work in constructing educational programmes that rested on the assumption that women , and especially mothers , were intellectually capable of understanding the importance of the early association of ideas in the training of children 's emotions and reasoning powers . stewart spent the summers of 1788 and 1789 in france , where he met suard , degérando , and raynal , and came to sympathise with the revolutionary movement . his political teaching , after the french revolution , drew suspicion on him . his edinburgh residence for several years was whitefoord house on the royal mile . edinburgh and district : ward lock travel guide 1930 from 1800 to 1801 , stewart gave lectures to undergraduate students on the subject of political economy , the first person to do so . the early years at university of edinburgh school of economics 's official website . accessed 24 february 2013 . stewart made himself the leading disciple of adam smith and , after smith 's death became his first biographer . in 1793 stewart had read his account of the life and writings of adam smith to the royal society of edinburgh . in 1800 he appears as '' dougald stewart , professor of moral philosophy '' living at lothian house near the bottom of the canongate . edinburgh post office directory 1800 . family . in 1783 stewart married helen bannatyne ( a distant cousin ) , who died in 1787 , leaving him an only son , matthew stewart frse ( 1784-1851 ) . in 1790 he married helen d'arcy cranstoun , sister of george cranstoun . his second wife was well-born and accomplished , and he was in the habit of submitting to her criticism whatever he wrote . they had a son and a daughter . the son 's death in 1809 brought about his retirement from the active duties of his chair . his sister , janet stewart , married rev thomas miller of cumnock , and they were parents to dr patrick miller frse ( 1782-1871 ) . . later life . in 1806 stewart received in lieu of a pension the nominal office of the writership of the edinburgh gazette , with a salary of £300 . when he ceased lecturing during the session of 1809–1810 , his place was taken , at his own request , by thomas brown , who in 1810 was appointed conjoint professor . on the death of brown in 1820 stewart retired altogether from the professorship . his successor was john wilson , known as '' christopher north '' . from 1809 onwards stewart lived mainly at kinneil house , bo'ness , which was placed at his disposal by the duke of hamilton . he was elected to the american philosophical society in 1791 . in june 1814 stewart was elected a fellow of the royal society . he was elected a foreign honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1817 . . freemasonry . like his father , rev dr matthew stewart , he was a scottish freemason . he was initiated in the lodge of his father - lodge canongate kilwinning , no.2 , on 4 december 1775 . history of the lodge canongate kilwinning , no.2 , compiled from the records 1677-1888 . by alan mackenzie . 1888 . p.245 . his friend and fellow freemason , robert burns , made him an honorary member of lodge st david , tarbolton , no . 133 , on 25 july 1787 . this was whilst stewart was staying at the family seat at catrine , ayrshire . robert burns - the freemason . ed . john weir . dso , obe , jp , ma , feis . 1996 . p.14 . . death . in 1822 he was struck with paralysis , but recovered a fair degree of health , sufficient to enable him to resume his studies . he died in edinburgh on 11 june 1828 , where he was buried in canongate churchyard , close to his edinburgh residence . he is buried in an enclosed vault in the lower section , on its west side . memorials . in 1831 , and of great public note , a monument was erected by the city on calton hill . this is to a design by william henry playfair and holds a commanding position in the city skyline , forming one of the city 's iconic landmarks . buildings of scotland : edinburgh by gifford , mcwilliam and walker his memory is also honoured by the '' dugald stewart building '' ( erected 2011 ) for the university of edinburgh to house its philosophy department , on charles street , off george square . works . stewart as a student in glasgow wrote an essay on dreaming . in 1792 he published the first volume of the elements of the philosophy of the human mind ; the second volume appeared in 1814 , the third not till 1827 . in 1793 he printed a textbook , outlines of moral philosophy , which went through many editions ; and in the same year he read before the royal society of edinburgh his account of the life and writings of adam smith . similar memoirs of robertson the historian and of reid were afterwards read before the same body and appear in his published works . in 1805 stewart published pamphlets defending john leslie against the charges of unorthodoxy made by the presbytery of edinburgh . in 1810 appeared the philosophical essays , in 1814 the second volume of the elements , in 1811 the first part and in 1821 the second part of the '' dissertation '' written for the encyclopædia britannica supplement , entitled '' a general view of the progress of metaphysical , ethical , and political philosophy since the revival of letters . '' in 1827 he published the third volume of the elements , and in 1828 , a few weeks before his death , the philosophy of the active and moral powers . stewart 's works were edited in 11 vols . ( 1854–1858 ) by sir william hamilton and completed with a memoir by john veitch . . influence . among stewart 's pupils were lord palmerston , walter scott , francis jeffrey , henry thomas cockburn , francis horner , sydney smith , john william ward , lord brougham , dr . thomas brown , james mill , james mackintosh and sir archibald alison . his reputation rested as much on his eloquence , populism , and style as on original work . he was principally responsible for making the '' scottish philosophy '' predominant in early 19th-century europe . in the second half of the century , stewart 's reputation fell to that of a follower of the work of thomas reid . stewart upheld reid 's psychological method and expounded the scottish common sense realism , selections from the scottish philosophy of common sense , ed . by g . a . johnston ( 1915 ) , essays by thomas reid , adam ferguson , james beattie , and dugald stewart ( online version ) . which was attacked by james mill and john stuart mill . part of his originality lay in his incorporation of elements of moderate empiricism and the french ideologists laromiguière , cabanis and destutt de tracy . he opposed the argument of ontology , and condillac 's sensationalism . immanuel kant , he said , he could not understand . jonathan friday ( 2005 ) : dugald stewart on reid , kant and the refutation of idealism , british journal for the history of philosophy , 13:2 , 263–286 . references . further reading . corsi , pietro . '' the heritage of dugald stewart : oxford philosophy and the method of political economy . '' nuncius ( 1987 ) 2 2 pp : 89-144 ( online ) . haakonssen , knud . '' from moral philosophy to political economy : the contribution of dugald stewart . '' in philosophers of the scottish enlightenment ( 1984 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 211–32 . rashid , salim . '' dugald stewart , 'baconian ' methodology , and political economy . '' journal of the history of ideas ( 1985 ) : 245-257 ( online on jstor ) . wood , paul . '' dugald stewart and the invention of “ the scottish enlightenment ” . '' the scottish enlightenment : essays in reinterpretation ( 2000 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 1–35 . primary sources . stewart , dugald , and john veitch . the collected works of dugald stewart ( 1877 ) ( online ) . external links . dugald stewart at the online library of liberty lodge canongate kilwinning , no.2 grand lodge of scotland freemasonry and the leaders of victorian britain