Western blot

applications . the western blot is extensively used in biochemistry for the qualitative detection of single proteins and protein-modifications ( such as post-translational modifications ) . at least 8-9 % of all protein-related publications are estimated to apply western blots . it is used as a general method to identify the presence of a specific single protein within a complex mixture of proteins . a semi-quantitative estimation of a protein can be derived from the size and color intensity of a protein band on the blot membrane . in addition , applying a dilution series of a purified protein of known concentrations can be used to allow a more precise estimate of protein concentration . the western blot is routinely used for verification of protein production after cloning . it is also used in medical diagnostics , e.g . , in the hiv test or bse-test . the confirmatory hiv test employs a western blot to detect anti-hiv antibody in a human serum sample . proteins from known hiv-infected cells are separated and blotted on a membrane as above . then , the serum to be tested is applied in the primary antibody incubation step ; free antibody is washed away , and a secondary anti-human antibody linked to an enzyme signal is added . the stained bands then indicate the proteins to which the patient 's serum contains antibody . a western blot is also used as the definitive test for variant creutzfeldt-jakob disease , a type of prion disease linked to the consumption of contaminated beef from cattle with bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , commonly referred to as 'mad cow disease ' ) . another application is in the diagnosis of tularemia . an evaluation of the western blot 's ability to detect antibodies against f . tularensis revealed that its sensitivity is almost 100 % and the specificity is 99.6 % . some forms of lyme disease testing employ western blotting . a western blot can also be used as a confirmatory test for hepatitis b infection and hsv-2 ( herpes type 2 ) infection . in veterinary medicine , a western blot is sometimes used to confirm fiv+ status in cats . further applications of the western blot technique include its use by the world anti-doping agency ( wada ) . blood doping is the misuse of certain techniques and/or substances to increase one 's red blood cell mass , which allows the body to transport more oxygen to muscles and therefore increase stamina and performance . there are three widely known substances or methods used for blood doping , namely , erythropoietin ( epo ) , synthetic oxygen carriers and blood transfusions . each is prohibited under wada 's list of prohibited substances and methods . the western blot technique was used during the 2014 fifa world cup in the anti-doping campaign for that event . in total , over 1000 samples were collected and analyzed by reichel , et al . in the wada accredited laboratory of lausanne , switzerland . recent research utilizing the western blot technique showed an improved detection of epo in blood and urine based on novel velum sar precast horizontal gels optimized for routine analysis . with the adoption of the horizontal sar-page in combination with the precast film-supported velum sar gels the discriminatory capacity of micro-dose application of repo was significantly enhanced . procedure . the western blot method is composed of a gel electrophoresis to separate native proteins by 3-d structure or denatured proteins by the length of the polypeptide , followed by an electrophoretic transfer onto a membrane ( mostly pvdf or nitrocellulose ) and an immunostaining procedure to visualize a certain protein on the blot membrane . sds-page is generally used for the denaturing electrophoretic separation of proteins . sds is generally used as a buffer ( as well as in the gel ) in order to give all proteins present a uniform negative charge , since proteins can be positively , negatively , or neutrally charged . this type of electrophoresis is known as sds-page ( sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ) . prior to electrophoresis , protein samples are often boiled to denature the proteins present . this ensures that proteins are separated based on size and prevents proteases ( enzymes that break down proteins ) from degrading samples . following electrophoretic separation , the proteins are transferred to a membrane ( typically nitrocellulose or pvdf ) , where they are blocked with milk ( or other blocking agents ) to prevent non-specific antibody binding , and then stained with antibody specific to the target protein . lastly , the membrane will be stained with a secondary antibody that recognizes the first antibody staining , which can then be used for detection by a variety of methods . the gel electrophoresis step is included in western blot analysis to resolve the issue of the cross-reactivity of antibodies . gel electrophoresis . the proteins of the sample are separated using gel electrophoresis . separation of proteins may be by isoelectric point ( pi ) , molecular weight , electric charge , or a combination of these factors . the nature of the separation depends on the treatment of the sample and the nature of the gel . by far the most common type of gel electrophoresis employs polyacrylamide gels and buffers loaded with sodium dodecyl sulfate ( sds ) . sds-page ( sds polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ) maintains polypeptides in a denatured state once they have been treated with strong reducing agents to remove secondary and tertiary structure ( e.g . disulfide bonds s-s to sulfhydryl groups sh and sh ) and thus allows separation of proteins by their molecular mass . sampled proteins become covered in the negatively charged sds , effectively becoming anionic , and migrate towards the positively charged ( higher voltage ) anode ( usually having a red wire ) through the acrylamide mesh of the gel . smaller proteins migrate faster through this mesh , and the proteins are thus separated according to size ( usually measured in kilodaltons , kda ) . the concentration of acrylamide determines the resolution of the gel – the greater the acrylamide concentration , the better the resolution of lower molecular weight proteins . the lower the acrylamide concentration , the better the resolution of higher molecular weight proteins . proteins travel only in one dimension along the gel for most blots . samples are loaded into wells in the gel . one lane is usually reserved for a marker or ladder , which is a commercially available mixture of proteins of known molecular weights , typically stained so as to form visible , coloured bands . when voltage is applied along the gel , proteins migrate through it at different speeds dependent on their size . these different rates of advancement ( different electrophoretic mobility ) separate into bands within each lane . protein bands can then be compared to the ladder bands , allowing estimation of the protein 's molecular weight . it is also possible to use a two-dimensional gel which spreads the proteins from a single sample out in two dimensions . proteins are separated according to isoelectric point ( ph at which they have a neutral net charge ) in the first dimension , and according to their molecular weight in the second dimension . transfer . to make the proteins accessible to antibody detection , they are moved from within the gel onto a membrane made of nitrocellulose ( nc ) or polyvinylidene difluoride ( pvdf ) . the most commonly used method for transferring the proteins is called electroblotting . electroblotting uses an electric current to pull the negatively charged proteins from the gel towards the positively charged anode , and into the pvdf or nc membrane . the proteins move from within the gel onto the membrane while maintaining the organization they had within the gel . an older method of transfer involves placing a membrane on top of the gel , and a stack of filter papers on top of that . the entire stack is placed in a buffer solution which moves up the paper by capillary action , bringing the proteins with it . in practice this method is not commonly used due to the lengthy procedure time . as a result of either transfer process , the proteins are exposed on a thin membrane layer for detection . both varieties of membrane are chosen for their non-specific protein binding properties ( i.e . binds all proteins equally well ) . protein binding is based upon hydrophobic interactions , as well as charged interactions between the membrane and protein . nitrocellulose membranes are cheaper than pvdf , but are far more fragile and can not withstand repeated probings . total protein staining . total protein staining allows the total protein that has been successfully transferred to the membrane to be visualised , allowing the user to check the uniformity of protein transfer and to perform subsequent normalization of the target protein with the actual protein amount per lane . normalization with the so-called '' loading control '' was based on immunostaining of housekeeping proteins in the classical procedure , but is heading toward total protein staining recently , due to multiple benefits . at least seven different approaches for total protein staining have been described for western blot normalization : ponceau s , stain-free techniques , sypro ruby , epicocconone , coomassie r-350 , amido black , and cy5 . in order to avoid noise of signal , total protein staining should be performed before blocking of the membrane . nevertheless , post-antibody stainings have been described as well . . blocking . since the membrane has been chosen for its ability to bind protein and as both antibodies and the target are proteins , steps must be taken to prevent the interactions between the membrane and the antibody used for detection of the target protein . blocking of non-specific binding is achieved by placing the membrane in a dilute solution of protein – typically 3–5 % bovine serum albumin ( bsa ) or powdered milk ( both are inexpensive ) in tris-buffered saline ( tbs ) or i-block , with a minute percentage ( 0.1 % ) of detergent such as tween 20 or triton x-100 . although non-fat dry milk is preferred due to its availability , an appropriate blocking solution is needed as not all proteins in milk are compatible with all the detection bands . the protein in the dilute solution attaches to the membrane in all places where the target proteins have not attached . thus , when the antibody is added , it can not bind to the membrane , and therefore the only available binding site is the specific target protein . this reduces background in the final product of the western blot , leading to clearer results , and eliminates false positives . incubation . during the detection process the membrane is '' probed '' for the protein of interest with a modified antibody which is linked to a reporter enzyme ; when exposed to an appropriate substrate , this enzyme drives a colorimetric reaction and produces a color . for a variety of reasons , this traditionally takes place in a two-step process , although there are now one-step detection methods available for certain applications . primary antibody . the primary antibody are generated when a host species or immune cell culture is exposed to the protein of interest ( or a part thereof ) . normally , this is part of the immune response , whereas here they are harvested and used as sensitive and specific detection tools that bind the protein directly . after blocking , a solution of primary antibody ( generally between 0.5 and 5 micrograms/ml ) diluted in either pbs or tbst wash buffer is incubated with the membrane under gentle agitation for typically an hour at room temperature , or overnight at 4°c . the antibody solution is incubated with the membrane for anywhere from 30 minutes to overnight . it can also be incubated at different temperatures , with lesser temperatures being associated with more binding , both specific ( to the target protein , the '' signal '' ) and non-specific ( '' noise '' ) . following incubation , the membrane is washed several times in wash buffer to remove unbound primary antibody , and thereby minimize background . typically , the wash buffer solution is composed of buffered saline solution with a small percentage of detergent , and sometimes with powdered milk or bsa . secondary antibody . after rinsing the membrane to remove unbound primary antibody , the membrane is exposed to another antibody known as the secondary antibody . antibodies come from animal sources ( or animal sourced hybridoma cultures ) . the secondary antibody recognises and binds to the species-specific portion of the primary antibody . therefore , an anti-mouse secondary antibody will bind to almost any mouse-sourced primary antibody , and can be referred to as an 'anti-species ' antibody ( e.g . anti-mouse , anti-goat etc . ) . to allow detection of the target protein , the secondary antibody is commonly linked to biotin or a reporter enzyme such as alkaline phosphatase or horseradish peroxidase . this means that several secondary antibodies will bind to one primary antibody and enhance the signal , allowing the detection of proteins of a much lower concentration than would be visible by sds-page alone . horseradish peroxidase ( hrp ) is commonly linked to secondary antibodies to allow the detection of the target protein by chemiluminescence . the chemiluminscent substrate is cleaved by hrp , resulting in the production of luminescence . therefore , the production of luminescence is proportional to the amount of hrp-conjugated secondary antibody , and therefore , indirectly measures the presence of the target protein . a sensitive sheet of photographic film is placed against the membrane , and exposure to the light from the reaction creates an image of the antibodies bound to the blot . a cheaper but less sensitive approach utilizes a 4-chloronaphthol stain with 1 % hydrogen peroxide ; the reaction of peroxide radicals with 4-chloronaphthol produces a dark purple stain that can be photographed without using specialized photographic film . as with the elispot and elisa procedures , the enzyme can be provided with a substrate molecule that will be converted by the enzyme to a colored reaction product that will be visible on the membrane ( see the figure below with blue bands ) . another method of secondary antibody detection utilizes a near-infrared ( nir ) fluorophore-linked antibody . the light produced from the excitation of a fluorescent dye is static , making fluorescent detection a more precise and accurate measure of the difference in the signal produced by labeled antibodies bound to proteins on a western blot . proteins can be accurately quantified because the signal generated by the different amounts of proteins on the membranes is measured in a static state , as compared to chemiluminescence , in which light is measured in a dynamic state . a third alternative is to use a radioactive label rather than an enzyme coupled to the secondary antibody , such as labeling an antibody-binding protein like staphylococcus protein a or streptavidin with a radioactive isotope of iodine . since other methods are safer , quicker , and cheaper , this method is now rarely used ; however , an advantage of this approach is the sensitivity of auto-radiography-based imaging , which enables highly accurate protein quantification when combined with optical software ( e.g . optiquant ) . one step . historically , the probing process was performed in two steps because of the relative ease of producing primary and secondary antibodies in separate processes . this gives researchers and corporations huge advantages in terms of flexibility , reduction of cost , and adds an amplification step to the detection process . given the advent of high-throughput protein analysis and lower limits of detection , however , there has been interest in developing one-step probing systems that would allow the process to occur faster and with fewer consumables . this requires a probe antibody which both recognizes the protein of interest and contains a detectable label , probes which are often available for known protein tags . the primary probe is incubated with the membrane in a manner similar to that for the primary antibody in a two-step process , and then is ready for direct detection after a series of wash steps . detection and visualization . after the unbound probes are washed away , the western blot is ready for detection of the probes that are labeled and bound to the protein of interest . in practical terms , not all westerns reveal protein only at one band in a membrane . size approximations are taken by comparing the stained bands to that of the marker or ladder loaded during electrophoresis . the process is commonly repeated for a structural protein , such as actin or tubulin , that should not change between samples . the amount of target protein is normalized to the structural protein to control between groups . a superior strategy is the normalization to the total protein visualized with trichloroethanol or epicocconone . this practice ensures correction for the amount of total protein on the membrane in case of errors or incomplete transfers . ( see western blot normalization ) . colorimetric detection . the colorimetric detection method depends on incubation of the western blot with a substrate that reacts with the reporter enzyme ( such as peroxidase ) that is bound to the secondary antibody . this converts the soluble dye into an insoluble form of a different color that precipitates next to the enzyme and thereby stains the membrane . development of the blot is then stopped by washing away the soluble dye . protein levels are evaluated through densitometry ( how intense the stain is ) or spectrophotometry . chemiluminescent detection . chemiluminescent detection methods depend on incubation of the western blot with a substrate that will luminesce when exposed to the reporter on the secondary antibody . the light is then detected by ccd cameras which capture a digital image of the western blot or photographic film . the use of film for western blot detection is slowly disappearing because of non linearity of the image ( non accurate quantification ) . the image is analysed by densitometry , which evaluates the relative amount of protein staining and quantifies the results in terms of optical density . newer software allows further data analysis such as molecular weight analysis if appropriate standards are used . radioactive detection . radioactive labels do not require enzyme substrates , but rather , allow the placement of medical x-ray film directly against the western blot , which develops as it is exposed to the label and creates dark regions which correspond to the protein bands of interest ( see image above ) . the importance of radioactive detections methods is declining due to its hazardous radiation , because it is very expensive , health and safety risks are high , and ecl ( enhanced chemiluminescence ) provides a useful alternative . fluorescent detection . the fluorescently labeled probe is excited by light and the emission of the excitation is then detected by a photosensor such as a ccd camera equipped with appropriate emission filters which captures a digital image of the western blot and allows further data analysis such as molecular weight analysis and a quantitative western blot analysis . fluorescence is considered to be one of the best methods for quantification but is less sensitive than chemiluminescence . . secondary probing . one major difference between nitrocellulose and pvdf membranes relates to the ability of each to support '' stripping '' antibodies off and reusing the membrane for subsequent antibody probes . while there are well-established protocols available for stripping nitrocellulose membranes , the sturdier pvdf allows for easier stripping , and for more reuse before background noise limits experiments . another difference is that , unlike nitrocellulose , pvdf must be soaked in 95 % ethanol , isopropanol or methanol before use . pvdf membranes also tend to be thicker and more resistant to damage during use . 2-d gel electrophoresis . two-dimensional sds-page uses the principles and techniques outlined above . 2-d sds-page , as the name suggests , involves the migration of polypeptides in 2 dimensions . for example , in the first dimension , polypeptides are separated according to isoelectric point , while in the second dimension , polypeptides are separated according to their molecular weight . the isoelectric point of a given protein is determined by the relative number of positively ( e.g . lysine , arginine ) and negatively ( e.g . glutamate , aspartate ) charged amino acids , with negatively charged amino acids contributing to a low isoelectric point and positively charged amino acids contributing to a high isoelectric point . samples could also be separated first under nonreducing conditions using sds-page , and under reducing conditions in the second dimension , which breaks apart disulfide bonds that hold subunits together . sds-page might also be coupled with urea-page for a 2-dimensional gel . in principle , this method allows for the separation of all cellular proteins on a single large gel . a major advantage of this method is that it often distinguishes between different isoforms of a particular protein – e.g . a protein that has been phosphorylated ( by addition of a negatively charged group ) . proteins that have been separated can be cut out of the gel and then analysed by mass spectrometry , which identifies their molecular weight .