Carlos Kleiber

early life . kleiber was born as karl ludwig bonifacius kleiber in berlin in 1930 , the son of the eminent austrian conductor erich kleiber and american ruth goodrich , from waterloo , iowa . in 1935 , the kleiber family emigrated to buenos aires and karl was renamed carlos . as a youth , he had an english governess and grew up in english boarding schools . he also composed , sang , and played piano and timpani . while his father noticed his son 's musical talents , he nevertheless dissuaded carlos from pursuing a musical career : '' what a pity the boy is musically talented '' , wrote erich to a friend . carlos first studied chemistry at eth zurich but soon decided to dedicate himself to music . he was répétiteur at the gärtnerplatz theatre in munich in 1952 and made his conducting debut with the operetta gasparone at potsdam theatre in 1954 . from 1958 to 1964 he was kapellmeister at the deutsche oper am rhein in düsseldorf and duisburg , and then at the opera in zurich from 1964 to 1966 . between 1966 and 1973 he was first kapellmeister in stuttgart , his last permanent post . during the following years , he often conducted at the bavarian state opera in munich . mature career . during his freelance career , kleiber restricted his conducting appearances to select occasions . he made his british debut in 1966 with a performance at the edinburgh festival of alban berg 's wozzeck , a work whose premiere his father had conducted in 1925 . kleiber 's repertoire at the royal opera house included der rosenkavalier , elektra , la bohème and otello . he made his bayreuth debut in 1974 conducting richard wagner 's tristan und isolde . his american debut came in 1978 with the chicago symphony orchestra , where he again conducted in 1983 , his only us orchestra appearances . his metropolitan opera debut was in 1988 , conducting la bohème with luciano pavarotti and mirella freni . in 1989 , following herbert von karajan 's resignation from the berlin philharmonic , kleiber was offered , but declined , the opportunity to succeed him as music director . jacobs , arthur ( 1990 ) '' kleiber , carlos '' the penguin dictionary of musical performers viking , london he returned to the met in 1989 to conduct la traviata , and in 1990 for otello and der rosenkavalier . kleiber kept out of the public eye , and apparently gave an interview only once in his lifetime , frühe ausnahme von der regel – das bislang einzige überlieferte interview von carlos kleiber contrary to reports that he never gave any . after he resigned from the bavarian state opera , his appearances became less frequent and he made only a few recordings . most of these studio recordings are highly regarded ; they include ludwig van beethoven 's fifth and seventh symphony with the vienna philharmonic , johannes brahms 's symphony no . 4 and franz schubert 's third and eighth ( '' unfinished '' ) symphonies , also with the vienna philharmonic , recordings of dvořák 's piano concerto ( dvořák ) with sviatoslav richter , carl maria von weber 's der freischütz , johann strauss ' die fledermaus and giuseppe verdi 's la traviata . his last studio recording was richard wagner 's tristan und isolde with the staatskapelle dresden . recording sessions began in 1980 . kleiber left before they were completed , but since a musically complete performance had been set down , deutsche grammophon released it , much to kleiber 's anger . kleiber 's small studio discography has been increased by a number of releases of live recordings , often sourced from broadcast relays . these have included his two vienna new year 's concerts , and performances of beethoven 's fourth , sixth and seventh symphonies with the bavarian state orchestra . the sixth is especially notable as the only occasion on which kleiber conducted the work ; in this instance the source came not from a radio broadcast but a c-90 compact cassette recorded for his son . . later years . kleiber retired from concert life in the early 1990s , occasionally reappearing for private or benefit concerts . for one such event in ingolstadt , part of his payment consisted of a new audi made to his specifications . his performances were painstakingly rehearsed , but often seemed spontaneous and inspired . in the opinion of many of his colleagues and audiences , he was an eccentric genius whom some placed among the greatest conductors of all time despite the paucity of his appearances . '' kleiber , carlos '' current biography yearbook , 1991 edition , h . w . wilson , new york , p . 338 bernheimer , martin ( october 2004 ) '' obituaries : carlos kleiber '' opera news 69 ( 4 ) : p . 85 ; '' carlos kleiber , 74 , widely admired conductor '' by panos kakaviatos , chicago sun-times , 20 july 2004 he was buried in the slovenian village of konjšica near litija , where he died in 2004 , next to his wife stanislava brezovar , a ballet dancer , who had died seven months earlier . '' obituary section : kleiber , carlos '' current biography yearbook , 2004 edition ( new york : wilson , 650 ) . they had two children , a son marko and a daughter lillian . preserved performances . kleiber 's unique conducting style is preserved on video in a number of performances : beethoven 's symphony no . 4 and symphony no . 7 from the concertgebouw in amsterdam , johann strauss ' die fledermaus from munich , richard strauss ' der rosenkavalier from both munich and vienna , wolfgang amadeus mozart 's 36th symphony and brahms ' second symphony from the musikverein in vienna ; beethoven 's coriolan overture , mozart 's 33rd and brahms ' fourth symphonies from munich and bizet 's carmen again from vienna . he led the new year 's concert of the vienna philharmonic in 1989 and 1992 , and these are both preserved on video . legacy . documentary tributes . in 2008 rai radio 3 ( italian national radio channel 3 ) , inside its evening program radio3 suite , broadcast a 10-episode program dedicated to kleiber 's legacy : il sorriso della musica : un ritratto di carlos kleiber ( '' the smile of music : a portrait of carlos kleiber '' ) , organized and hosted by andrea ottonello , with participation by claudio abbado , mirella freni , maurizio pollini , and above all carlos kleiber 's sister , veronica . in his interview , abbado termed kleiber '' one of the greatest , if not the greatest , conductors of the 20th century '' ( '' carlos è stato uno dei più grandi , se non il più grande , direttore del novecento . '' ) on 26 september 2009 , bbc radio 3 transmitted a documentary , who was carlos kleiber ? . produced by paul frankl and presented by ivan hewett with research by ruth thomson , this feature was based on interviews with four who knew kleiber well : tenor and conductor plácido domingo , music administrator and intendant sir peter jonas , music journalist and critic christine lemke-matvey and conductor–pianist charles barber . beginning in july 2014 , upon the tenth anniversary of his death , a syndicate of public broadcasters in canada , great britain and the united states aired a two-hour documentary , carlos kleiber : a conductor unlike any other , about kleiber as remembered by his colleagues . producer jon tolansky , who himself played for kleiber at the royal opera house covent garden , interviewed singers ileana cotrubaș , thomas hampson , dame felicity lott , the late dame margaret price and jonathan summers , members of the chicago symphony , royal opera house , london symphony and vienna philharmonic orchestras , conductor and kleiber friend charles barber , administrators sir peter jonas and sir john tooley , and recording executive costa pilavachi . this audio essay incorporated numerous excerpts from kleiber 's most important recordings , including beethoven 's fifth and seventh symphonies , verdi 's la traviata , richard strauss ' der rosenkavalier , and weber 's der freischütz . . honors and posthumous evaluation . on 21 june 2010 , ljubljana celebrated carlos kleiber 's 80th birthday with a concert by the vienna philharmonic directed by kleiber 's friend riccardo muti . bbc music magazine announced on 17 march 2011 that kleiber had been selected as '' the greatest conductor of all time . '' some 100 current conductors , including sir colin davis , gustavo dudamel , valery gergiev and mariss jansons , participated in the bbc poll . kleiber , who conducted just 96 concerts and around 400 operatic performances in his 74 years , was voted ahead of leonard bernstein and claudio abbado , who took second and third places respectively . susanna mälkki , music director , ensemble intercontemporain , and one of the conductors polled , commented : '' carlos kleiber brought an incredible energy to music . yes , he did have about five times as much time to rehearse than conductors do today , but he deserved it because his vision was remarkable , he knew what he wanted , and his attention to detail was truly inspiring . '' jeremy pound , deputy editor of bbc music magazine , added : '' asking 100 of today 's conducting greats to name their idols and inspirations was a fascinating experience . not least when so many named carlos kleiber , who in the course of his whole lifetime conducted fewer concerts than most of them direct in just a couple of years . kleiber 's incredible attention to detail , sheer enthusiasm for music , and astonishingly accomplished level of performance could never be doubted – perhaps 'less is more ' is the real path to true greatness ? '' according to charles barber , biographer , friend and pen-pal of kleiber , another factor contributed to his legendary and unusual career . '' uniquely , carlos kleiber combined the rigors of german analysis , form and discipline with the expressive vitality of latin dance , pulse and joy . for nearly twenty years at the formative outset , a conductor baptized karl gradually became carlos . he never turned his back on that fascinating cultural biochemistry . it would shape everything he did . '' kleiber was voted into the gramophone hall of fame in 2012 . clemens hellsberg ( gramophone , may 2012 ) said : what was it that propelled carlos kleiber to near mystical heights ? it was the unforgettable experience of surpassing one 's own boundaries , yet also the utter helplessness when he stormed off in the last minutes of a final rehearsal . this was not pretension but rather the expression of deepest despair , even though the orchestra had performed at the highest level – or perhaps for that very reason . extreme contradictions characterised his personality : one constantly feared catastrophe , yet he was always available to musicians for private conversations . he had a vast repertoire , yet restricted himself to a very few works . his outbursts of rage could be directed at anyone , yet his interaction with children was characterised by a precious and fragile tenderness . in art there are no upward limits . yet each generation needs at least one artist who exemplifies this . kleiber reached to the stars for us ; even when he broke down in his efforts , he still proved that they exist . . honours and awards . cultural honour of the city of munich ( 1978 ) pour le mérite for science and art ( germany , 1990 ) austrian medal for science and art ( 1992 ) golden baton of la scala ( milan , 1995 ) german record prize bavarian order of merit bavarian maximilian order for science and art grand merit cross with star of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany . discography .