Namur

history . the town began as an important trading settlement in celtic times , straddling east–west and north–south trade routes across the ardennes . the romans established a presence after julius caesar defeated the local aduatuci tribe . namur came to prominence during the early middle ages when the merovingians built a castle or citadel on the rocky spur overlooking the town at the confluence of the two rivers . in the 10th century , it became a county in its own right . the town developed somewhat unevenly , as the counts of namur could only build on the north bank of the meuse - the south bank was owned by the bishops of liège and developed more slowly into the town of jambes ( now effectively a suburb of namur ) . in 1262 , namur fell into the hands of the count of flanders , and was purchased by duke philip the good of burgundy in 1421 . after namur became part of the spanish netherlands in the 1640s , its citadel was considerably strengthened . louis xiv of france invaded in 1692 , capturing the town and annexing it to france . his renowned military engineer vauban rebuilt the citadel . french control was short-lived , as william iii of england captured namur only three years later in 1695 during the war of the grand alliance . under the barrier treaty of 1709 , the dutch gained the right to garrison namur , although the subsequent treaty of utrecht of 1713 gave control of the formerly spanish netherlands to the austrian house of habsburg . thus , although the austrians ruled the town , the citadel was controlled by the dutch . it was rebuilt again under their tenure . general jean-baptiste cyrus de valence 's column laid siege to the city on 19 november 1792 during the war of the first coalition and , after 12 days , the city surrendered on 1 december and its whole garrison of 3,000 men was taken prisoner . france invaded the region again in 1794 , annexing namur and imposing a repressive regime . after the defeat of napoleon in 1815 , the congress of vienna incorporated what is now belgium into the united kingdom of the netherlands . belgium broke away from the netherlands in 1830 following the belgian revolution , and namur continued to be a major garrison town under the new government . the citadel was rebuilt yet again in 1887 . namur was a major target of the german invasion of belgium in 1914 , which sought to use the meuse valley as a route into france . on august 21 , 1914 , siege of namur ( 1914 ) of namur without warning . several people were killed . despite being billed as virtually impregnable , the citadel fell after only three days ' fighting and the town was occupied by the germans for the rest of the war . namur fared little better in world war ii ; it was in the front lines of both the battle of the ardennes in 1940 and the battle of the bulge in 1944 . the town suffered heavy damage in both wars . namur continued to host the belgian army 's paratroopers until their departure in 1977 . after the creation of the wallonia , namur was chosen as the seat of its executive and parliament . in 1986 , namur was officially declared capital of wallonia . its position as regional capital was confirmed by the parliament of wallonia in 2010 . . economy . namur is an important commercial and industrial centre , located on the walloon industrial backbone , the sambre and meuse valley . it produces machinery , leather goods , metals and porcelain . its railway station is also an important junction situated on the north–south line between brussels and luxembourg city , and the east–west line between lille and liège . river barge traffic passes through the middle of the city along the meuse . culture and sights . namur has taken on a new role as the capital of the federal region of wallonia . its location at the head of the ardennes has also made it a popular tourist centre , with a casino located in its southern district on the left bank of the meuse . the town 's most prominent sight is the citadel , now demilitarised and open to the public . namur also has a distinctive 18th-century st aubin 's cathedral and a belfry classified by unesco as part of the belfries of belgium and france which are listed as a world heritage site . the sisters of notre dame de namur used to contain masterpieces of mosan art by hugo d'oignies , currently presented in the musée des arts anciens ( rue de fer ) . elsewhere there is an archeological museum and a museum dedicated to félicien rops . an odd namurois custom is the joust on stilts ( dating back to 1411 ) practiced by the stiltwalkers of namur . the annual combat de l'échasse d'or ( fight for the golden stilt ) , held on the third sunday in september , is the most important joust of the year . two teams , the mélans and the avresses , dress in medieval clothes while standing on stilts and do battle in one of the town 's principal squares . namur possesses a distinguished university , the université de namur ( previously known as the facultés universitaires notre-dame de la paix , fundp ) , founded in 1831 . the uclouvain ( uclouvain ) also has several facilities in the city through its chu uclouvain namur ( chu uclouvain namur ) , the provinces ' largest employer . since 1986 namur has been home to the festival international du film francophone de namur . 22ème festival international du film francophone de namur retrieved may 14 , 2007 . ( french language ) a jazz ( nam'in'jazz ) and a rock ( verdur rock ) festival both take place in namur annually . the local football team is named union royale namur . the local baseball team is named namur angels . the annual namur cyclo-cross race , part of the uci cyclo-cross world cup , takes place on the hills around the citadel . sights near namur include maredsous abbey , floreffe abbey , and annevoie castle with its surrounding jardins d'annevoie . file:01-namur-100109 ( 2 ) jpg.jpg the citadel and the meuse river file:01-namur-300605 ( 1 ) . jpg the belfry of namur file : namur ca1jpg.jpg st aubin 's cathedral is the only baroque cathedral in belgium . file : cheval bayard namur.jpg the horse bayard carrying the four sons of aymon , created by olivier strebelle for expo 58 . file : la sambre in namur viewed from quai de l'abbaye ( dscf5606 ) . jpg sambre river file : arcs namur.jpg old town file : echasseurs-echasse-or-fetes-de-wallonie-3-skuds.jpg alt joust on stilts in namur . the stiltwalkers fights dates back to 1411. joust on stilts in namur . the stiltwalkers fights dates back to 1411 . . twin towns — sister cities . namur is twinned with : bandung , indonesia '' namur , bandung ink sister-city partnership '' quebec city , quebec , canada subotica , serbia bourg-en-bresse , france ōgaki , gifu prefecture , japan belmont , california , united states lafayette , louisiana , united states empoli , toscana , italy cluj-napoca , cluj , romania tierp , sweden . notable people . rémy belvaux ( 1966–2006 ) , actor , film director and screenwriter julie billiart canonized saint and foundress of the sisters of notre dame de namur , died in namur in 1816 . francy boland ( 1929–2005 ) , jazz pianist and arranger cécile de france ( born 1975 ) , actress count edouard de woelmont , belgian canon . olivier gourmet ( born 1963 ) , actor ludivine henrion ( born 1984 ) , cyclist friedrich hermann otto , prince of hohenzollern-hechingen ( 1776–1838 ) , prince of hohenzollern-hechingen pierre jonckheer ( born 1951 ) , politician , member of european parliament 1999-2009 philippe kirsch ( born 1947 ) , canadian jurist and diplomat , former president of the icc louis leloir ( 1911–1992 ) , benedictine monk and orientalist henri michaux ( 1899–1984 ) , french-speaking poet and painter benoît poelvoorde ( born 1964 ) , actor and comedian jacques françois rosart ( 1714–1777 ) , engraver of metal type christophe rochus ( born 1978 ) , tennis player olivier rochus ( born 1981 ) , tennis player félicien rops ( 1833–1898 ) , graphic artist and illustrator ( symbolism ) thierry zéno ( born 1950 ) , director and screenwriter denzel jubitana ( born 1999 ) , football player . see also . rhisnes ( suburb ) a suburb to the north of the city . references . sources . jean-pol hiernaux : namur , capitale de la wallonie , in encyclopédie du mouvement wallon , tome ii , charleroi , institut jules destrée , 2000 , ( or 2d ed . , cd-rom , 2003 , . external links . the municipal website of the city of namur ( in french ) namur tourism