Islamic philosophy

introduction . islamic philosophy refers to philosophy produced in an islamic society . islamic philosophy is a generic term that can be defined and used in different ways . in its broadest sense it means the world view of islam , as derived from the islamic texts concerning the creation of the universe and the will of the creator . in another sense it refers to any of the schools of thought that flourished under the islamic empire or in the shadow of the arab-islamic culture and islamic civilization . in its narrowest sense it is a translation of falsafa , meaning those particular schools of thought that most reflect the influence of greek systems of philosophy such as neoplatonism and aristotelianism . it is not necessarily concerned with religious issues , nor exclusively produced by muslims . oliver leaman , routledge encyclopedia of philosophy . nor do all schools of thought within islam admit the usefulness or legitimacy of philosophical inquiry . some argue that there is no indication that the limited knowledge and experience of humans can lead to truth . it is also important to observe that , while '' reason '' ( aql ) is sometimes recognised as a source of islamic law , this may have a totally different meaning from '' reason '' in philosophy . the historiography of islamic philosophy is marked by disputes as to how the subject should be properly interpreted . some of the key issues involve the comparative importance of eastern intellectuals such as ibn sina ( avicenna ) and of western thinkers such as ibn rushd , see henry corbin , history of islamic philosophy and also whether islamic philosophy can be read at face value or should be interpreted in an esoteric fashion . supporters of the latter thesis , like leo strauss , maintain that islamic philosophers wrote so as to conceal their true meaning in order to avoid religious persecution , but scholars such as oliver leaman disagree . . formative influences . the main sources of classical or early islamic philosophy are the religion of islam itself ( especially ideas derived and interpreted from the quran ) and greek philosophy which the early muslims inherited as a result of conquests , along with pre-islamic indian philosophy and persian philosophy . many of the early philosophical debates centered around reconciling religion and reason , the latter exemplified by greek philosophy . early islamic philosophy . in early islamic thought , which refers to philosophy during the '' islamic golden age '' , traditionally dated between the 8th and 12th centuries , two main currents may be distinguished . the first is kalam , which mainly dealt with islamic theology questions , and the other is falsafa , which was founded on interpretations of aristotelianism and neoplatonism . there were attempts by later philosopher-theologians at harmonizing both trends , notably by avicenna who founded the school of avicennism , averroes who founded the school of averroism , and others such as ibn al-haytham ( alhazen ) and abū rayhān al-bīrūnī . kalam . ʿilm al-kalām ( ) . hamka or haji abdul malik karim amirullah was a prominent indonesian author , ulema politician , philosophical thinker , and author of tafir al azhar . he was head of indonesia 's mufti council ( mui ) . he resigned when his fatwa against the celebration of christmas by muslims was condemned by the suharto regime . highly respected in his country , he was also appreciated in malaysia and singapore . murtaza motahhari , the best student of allamah tabatabai , a martyr of the iranian revolution in 1979 , and author of numerous books ( an incomplete compilation of his works comprises 25 volumes ) . he , like his teachers allama tabatabai and ayatollah khomeini , belong to the philosophical schools of hikmat-ul-mutaliya sayyid abul ala maududi , who is credited with creating modern islamist political thought in the 20th century , was the founder of jamaat-e-islami and spent his life attempting to revive the islamic intellectual tradition . israr ahmed , ( 1932–2010 ) was a pakistani islamic theologian followed particularly in south asia and also among the south asian diaspora in the middle east , western europe , and north america . founder of the tanzeem-e-islami , an offshoot of the jamaat-e-islami , he was significant scholar of islam and the quran . muhammad hamidullah ( 1908–2002 ) belonged to a family of scholars , jurists , writers and sufis . he was a world-renowned scholar of islam and international law from india , who was known for contributions to the research of the history of hadith , translations of the koran , the advancement of golden age islamic learning , and to the dissemination of islamic teachings in the western world . fazlur rahman was professor of islamic thought at the university of chicago . wahid hasyim first indonesian minister of religious affairs . former head of indonesian nahdwatul ulema , and founder of islamic state universities in indonesia . he is best known for reformation of the madrasah curriculum . seyyed hossein nasr , iranian university professor of islamic studies at george washington university . javed ahmad ghamidi is a well-known pakistani islamic scholar , exegete , and educator . a former member of the jamaat-e-islami , who extended the work of his tutor , amin ahsan islahi . in malaysia , syed muhammad naquib al-attas is a prominent metaphysical thinker . ali shariati iranian revolutionary thinker and sociologist who focused on marxism and islam . abu abd al-rahman ibn aqil al-zahiri ( born 1942 ) is a saudi arabian polymath primarily focused on the reconciliation of reason and revelation . mohammad baqir al-sadr ( died 1980 ) is a shi'ite grand ayatollah and one of the most influential islamic philosophers of the 20th century . his two most important contributions to philosophy are his books '' our philosophy '' and '' the logical foundations of induction . '' he is also widely known for his work on economics , including '' our economics '' and '' the non-usury banking system '' which are two of the most influential works in contemporary islamic economics . criticism . philosophy has not been without criticism amongst muslims , both contemporary and past . the imam ahmad ibn hanbal , for whom the hanbali school of thought is named , rebuked philosophical discussion , once telling proponents of it that he was secure in his religion , but that they were '' in doubt , so go to a doubter and argue with him ( instead ) . '' al-hilyah ( 6/324 ) today , islamic philosophical thought has also been criticized by scholars of the modern salafi movement . there would be many islamic thinkers who were not enthusiastic about its potential , but it would be incorrect to assume that they opposed philosophy simply because it was a '' foreign science '' . oliver leaman , an expert on islamic philosophy , points out that the objections of notable theologians are rarely directed at philosophy itself , but rather at the conclusions the philosophers arrived at . even the 11th century al-ghazali , known for his incoherence of the philosophers critique of philosophers , was himself an expert in philosophy and logic . his criticism was that they arrived at theologically erroneous conclusions . in his view the three most serious of these were believing in the co-eternity of the universe with god , denying the bodily resurrection , and asserting that god only has knowledge of abstract universals , not of particular things , though not all philosophers subscribed to these same views . leaman , o . ( 1999 ) . a brief introduction to islamic philosophy polity press . p 21 . in recent studies by muslim contemporary thinkers that aim at '' renewing the impetus of philosophical thinking in islam , '' the philosopher and theorist nader el-bizri offers a critical analysis of the conventions that dominate mainstream academic and epistemic approaches in studying islamic philosophy . these approaches , of methodology and historiography are looked at from archival standpoints within oriental and mediaevalist studies , fail to recognize the fact that philosophy in islam can still be a living intellectual tradition . he maintains that its renewal requires a radical reform in ontology and epistemology within islamic thought . el-bizri 's interpretations of avicenna ( ibn sina ) from the standpoint of heidegger 's critique of the history of metaphysics , and specifically against the background of the unfolding of the essence of technology , aim at finding new pathways in ontology that are not simply avicennian nor heideggerian , even though el-bizri 's approach in rethinking falsafa amounts to a '' neo-avicennism '' that carries resonances with novel modern philosophical ways of reading aristotelianism and thomism . el-bizri engages contemporary issues in philosophy through a fundamental critical analytic of the evolution of key concepts in the history of ontology and epistemology . nader el-bizri is a modernist in outlook since he aims at bringing newness to the tradition rather than simply reproduce it or being in rupture with it . nader el-bizri , '' the labyrinth of philosophy in islam '' , in comparative philosophy 1.2 ( 2010 ) : 3–23 . refer also to his article : nader el-bizri , 'le renouvellement de la falsafa ? ' , les cahiers de l ’ islam i ( 2014 ) : 17–38 . see also references above in this section of the footnotes to some of nader el-bizri 's other related earlier studies . . opposition to philosophy . some muslims oppose the idea of philosophy as un-islamic . the popular salafist website islamqa.info ( supervised by shaykh muhammad al-munajjid of saudi arabia ) declares philosophy to be an '' alien entity '' : the terminology of islamic philosophy did not emerge as a branch of knowledge that is taught in the curriculum of islamic studies until it was introduced by shaykh mustafa abdel-razek – the shaykh of al-azhar – as a reaction to western attacks on islam based on the idea that islam has no philosophy . but the fact of the matter is that philosophy is an alien entity in the body of islam . the fatwa claims that '' the majority of faqīh experts in fiqh have stated that it is haram to study philosophy , and lists some of these : ibn nujaym ( hanafi ) writing in al-ashbaah wa ’ l-nazaa ’ im ; al-dardeer ( maaliki ) said in al-sharh al-kabeer ; al-dasooqi in his haashiyah ( 2/174 ) ; zakariya al-ansaari ( shaafa ’ i ) in asna al-mataalib ( 4/182 ) ; al-bahooti ( hanbali ) said in kashshaaf al-qinaa ’ ( 3/34 ) ; islamqa quotes al-ghazali who declares that of the '' four branches '' of philosophy ( geometry and mathematics , logic , theology , and natural sciences ) , some of the natural sciences '' go against shari ’ ah , islam and truth '' , and that except for medicine , '' there is no need for the study of nature '' . al-ghazaali ihya ' ulum al-din , '' revival of religious sciences '' ( 1/22 ) maani ’ hammad al-juhani , ( a member of the consultative council and general director , world assembly of muslim youth ) is quoted as declaring that because philosophy does not follow the moral guidelines of the sunnah , '' philosophy , as defined by the philosophers , is one of the most dangerous falsehoods and most vicious in fighting faith and religion on the basis of logic , which it is very easy to use to confuse people in the name of reason , interpretation and metaphor that distort the religious texts '' . al-mawsoo ’ ah al-muyassarah fi ’ l-adyaan al-madhaahib wa ’ l-ahzaab al-mu ’ aasirah 1/419–423 ibn abi al-izz , a commentator on al-tahhaawiyyah , condemns philosophers as the ones who '' most deny the last day and its events . in their view jannah and hell are no more than parables for the masses to understand , but they have no reality beyond people ’ s minds . '' . see also . al- ‘ aql al-fa ‘ ‘ al contemporary islamic philosophy early islamic philosophy islam and modernity islamic ethics islamic golden age islamic metaphysics islamic science list of islamic studies scholars list of muslim philosophers islamic advice literature islamic literature