Jefferson Starship

history . origins . in 1970 , while jefferson airplane was on break from touring , singer-guitarist paul kantner recorded blows against the empire . this was a concept album featuring an ad hoc group of musicians ( centered on kantner , grace slick , joey covington , and jack casady of jefferson airplane ; david crosby and graham nash ; and grateful dead members jerry garcia , mickey hart , and bill kreutzmann ) credited on the lp as paul kantner and '' jefferson starship '' , marking the first use of that name . this agglomeration was informally known as the planet earth rock and roll orchestra , a moniker later used on a kantner album in the early 1980s . on blows against the empire , kantner and slick sang about a group of people escaping earth in a hijacked starship . in 1971 , the album was nominated for the prestigious science fiction prize , the hugo award , a rare honor for a musical recording . kantner and slick were a couple during this period . slick was pregnant during the recording of the album . their daughter , china , was born shortly thereafter . kantner and slick with the planet earth rock and roll orchestra released two follow-up albums : sunfighter , an environmentalism-tinged album released in 1971 to celebrate china 's birth , and 1973 's baron von tollbooth & the chrome nun , titled after the nicknames david crosby had given to the couple . bassist/keyboardist/vocalist david freiberg was given equal billing alongside kantner and slick on the latter album . a founding member of quicksilver messenger service , freiberg had known and played with kantner on the folk circuit in the early 1960s and sang background vocals on blows against the empire . following a marijuana arrest that resulted in his departure from quicksilver in 1971 , he joined jefferson airplane as a vocalist for their 1972 tour , documented on the live album thirty seconds over winterland ( 1973 ) . kantner was introduced to the teenage guitarist craig chaquico through his friend and fellow musician , jack traylor , during this time . chaquico , a high school english student of traylor 's and a member in his band steelwind , played guitar on the song '' earth mother '' from sunfighter chaquico would go on to perform with kantner and slick on their subsequent album collaborations , then with jefferson starship , and finally with starship until 1990 . early in 1974 , slick released manhole , her first solo album . appearing along with slick on manhole were kantner , freiberg , chaquico , jack casady , david crosby , and the london symphony orchestra . it was on that album that kantner , slick , and freiberg next worked with bassist and keyboard player pete sears ( who had first played on papa john creach 's first solo album ) . sears , was co-producing a kathi mcdonald album in the same studio . sears wrote the music to slick 's lyrics for the song '' better lying down , '' and also played bass on the song '' epic 38 '' . it was during this session at wally heider studios in san francisco that kantner and slick first approached sears about playing in what would eventually become jefferson starship . sears would eventually join jefferson starship in june 1974 , replacing peter kaukonen . in early 1974 , with guitarist jorma kaukonen and bass player jack casady having moved on to hot tuna full-time , kantner decided to put together a touring band without them . the musicians on baron von tollbooth & the chrome nun formed the core of a new lineup that was formally reborn as jefferson starship . they appropriated the name from kantner 's blows against the empire , with manager bill thompson convincing the group that keeping the connection to jefferson airplane made sense from a business standpoint . it included the other five remaining members of jefferson airplane , including kantner on rhythm guitar and vocals ; slick on vocals and percussion , david freiberg on vocals and keyboards , john barbata , who had played with the turtles and crosby , stills and nash , on drums and papa john creach , from hot tuna , on electric violin . jorma kaukonen 's brother , peter ( who had appeared on the albums blows against the empire and sunfighter ) , was on bass . on lead guitar was craig chaquico who had played on three of kantner and slick 's solo albums , as well as in the band steelwind . the band began rehearsals in january 1974 and opened its first tour in chicago on march 19 . by april , it was decided that the band would go into the studio to record an album . british veteran pete sears , who had worked on slick 's solo album , manhole , and played with rod stewart and john cipollina , was selected to replace peter kaukonen as the band 's bass player . 1974–1978 . in 1974 , after touring as '' jefferson starship , '' kantner , slick , freiberg , chaquico , pete sears , papa john creach , and john barbata recorded the album dragon fly . jorma kaukonen 's brother peter had played bass during the group 's spring tour in 1974 , but was replaced by pete sears who , like freiberg , played bass and keyboards . kantner collaborated with marty balin on the song '' caroline '' during the recording sessions , for which balin sang vocals on the album . dragon fly was certified gold , and included the single '' ride the tiger '' ( 84 us billboard ) and its b-side '' hyperdrive '' . balin then appeared on-stage with the band to perform the song '' caroline '' for a show at the winterland ballroom on november 24 , 1974 . their followup album , 1975 's red octopus , had even greater success . marty balin , who had contributed and sung the ballad '' caroline '' on the previous album , officially returned to the jefferson fold as a full-time member in january 1975 and stayed with the group for nearly the remainder of the decade . the balin penned single '' miracles ” peaked at no . 3 on the chart , and along with the single “ play on love ” ( 49 us billboard chart ) , helped to propel the album to eventual multiple-platinum status and topping the billboard 200 chart . it would be the biggest selling album of the band 's career . creach quietly left the group soon after in august 1975 to pursue a solo career . the next album , spitfire , was released in june 1976 and went platinum . it spent six weeks at no . 3 on the billboard charts , and included the singles '' with your love '' ( 12 us billboard chart ) and '' st . charles '' ( 64 us billboard chart ) . regardless of this success , the band considered the album 's sales to be relatively disappointing compared to its predecessor and requested an audit from rca records , distributor of their grunt label . rca subsequently put a reported 500,000 into the next jefferson starship project . earth was released in february 1978 and also went platinum . the album featured the singles '' count on me '' ( no . 8 us billboard chart ) , '' runaway '' ( no . 12 us billboard chart ) , and '' crazy feelin ' '' ( no . 54 us billboard chart ) . tours of the u.s . and europe would soon follow . balin 's reluctance to tour had kept the band off the road for over a year , and slick 's alcoholism increasingly became a problem , which led to two consecutive nights of disastrous concerts in west germany in june 1978 . on the first night , the band was scheduled to play at the loreley amphitheatre , on the bill with leo kottke and the atlanta rhythm section , but slick was unable to perform and the show was cancelled . the show was rescheduled for july 2 , but the audience were unhappy with this and began rioting , destroying or stealing some of the band 's gear . the band acquired replacement gear for the following day 's show in hamburg , which was marred by a drunken slick continually swearing and insulting the audience throughout the show . she repeatedly asked '' who won the war ? '' , and implied that all germans were responsible for the wartime atrocities . jefferson starship cite note-5 5jefferson starship cite note-6 6 kantner subsequently asked for slick 's resignation from the band , and she left the group at this time . towards the end of 1978 , a jefferson starship that was now without grace slick but still including marty balin recorded the single '' light the sky on fire '' ( no . 66 us billboard chart ) for television 's star wars holiday special . it was released as a promotional tie-in to the special ( backed with '' hyperdrive '' from dragon fly ) , and was also included as a bonus with their greatest hits album gold ( 1979 ) , which highlighted their work from 1974 's dragon fly to 1978 's earth . . 1979–1984 . in october 1978 , marty balin left the group , leaving the band without a lead singer . mickey thomas ( who had sung lead on elvin bishop 's '' fooled around and fell in love '' ) was invited to audition and then joined the group in april 1979 . barbata had been seriously injured in a car accident in october 1978 and in january 1979 was replaced by aynsley dunbar , who had previously played with journey . in 1979 , the band released the first album without marty balin or grace slick , the gold selling freedom at point zero . the single '' jane ” ( freiberg , mcpherson , chaquico and kantner ) , peaked at no . 14 on the billboard hot 100 and spent three weeks at no . 6 on the cash box top 100 . freedom at point zero cite note-3 3 the new lineup toured , augmented by saxophonist steve schuster . ( schuster , along with horn player david farey , had played on jefferson starship 's 1978 tour , and he had also appeared on freedom at point zero . ) in early 1981 , grace slick returned to the band , rejoining in time to sing on one song , '' stranger , '' ( no . 48 on the billboard hot 100 chart ) , on the group 's next album , modern times ( 1981 ) . modern times , which also went gold , included the song '' find your way back '' ( no . 29 ) , as well as the humorous '' stairway to cleveland '' , in which the band defended the numerous changes it had undergone in its musical style , personnel , and even name . modern times also featured the promo single , '' save your love '' , ( no . 104 ) . slick remained in the band for jefferson starship 's next two albums , winds of change ( 1982 ) and nuclear furniture ( 1984 ) , both of which were certified gold . winds of change featured the singles '' be my lady , '' which reached no . 26 in the us , and '' winds of change '' ( no . 38 ) . by august 1982 , after the recording of winds of change but prior to the supporting tour , dunbar was replaced by donny baldwin , who had performed with thomas in the elvin bishop group . paul kantner 's 1983 solo album , planet earth rock and roll orchestra , included the track '' circle of fire '' , which had been recorded by jefferson starship during the winds of change sessions in 1982 . other members of the band also appeared on additional tracks on this effort . nuclear furniture , produced by ron nevison , reached no . 28 and featured the singles , '' layin ' it on the line '' and '' sorry me , sorry you '' . around this time , the band began enthusiastically embracing the rock-video age , making elaborate videos typical of the era 's superstar bands . they would appear frequently on mtv and other music-oriented television shows as solid gold , and 1984 's super night of rock and roll , giving the band a high visibility in the mtv era . the band continued to release top 40 singles like '' no way out '' ( no . 23 ) . departure of paul kantner and transition . , and continued to tour and record music . david freiberg was dismissed from the band shortly after the lawsuit was settled . pete sears departed in 1987 . grace slick left starship in early 1988 , going on to join the reformed jefferson airplane for an album and tour in 1989 . craig chaquico departed in 1990 . the band has been billed as '' starship featuring mickey thomas '' since 1992 . 1992–2016 : the next generation . shortly after leaving jefferson starship , kantner formed the kbc band with ( among others ) his former bandmates marty balin and jack casady . they released an eponymous album in 1986 , but soon broke up after balin lost interest . in 1988 , kantner toured with casady in hot tuna . this led to a full jefferson airplane reunion in 1989 , which also resulted in an eponymous album and subsequent tour . in 1991 , kantner toured with an acoustic ensemble called '' paul kantner 's wooden ships , '' a trio that included slick aguilar and tim gorman from the kbc band . the group was soon reestablished as '' jefferson starship : the next generation '' in january 1992 , for which kantner recruited jack casady , papa john creach , slick aguilar , tim gorman , former tubes drummer prairie prince , and former world entertainment war vocalist darby gould . in 1993 , balin joined . creach died in february 1994 , weeks after touring europe . concurrently , vocalist diana mangano joined the group ( after a brief spell by original jefferson airplane singer signe toly anderson ) as gould 's replacement . after the first couple of years , the band dropped the use of '' the next generation '' , and began to perform as simply jefferson starship . in 1995 they released deep space / virgin sky , a live album recorded at the house of blues in west hollywood , california on january 21 , 1995 . the album featured eight new and seven classic tunes . grace slick joined the band for five songs , '' lawman '' , '' wooden ships '' , '' somebody to love '' and '' white rabbit '' and '' volunteers '' . in 1999 jefferson starship released the studio album windows of heaven , which featured slick on background vocals on one song , '' i 'm on fire '' . balin continued as a full-time member of the reunited band until 2003 and continued to occasionally join them in concert up until 2008 . casady remained a member until 2000 and has also ( since 1983 ) played with jorma kaukonen in a reunited hot tuna . gorman left in 1995 and was replaced by gary cambra ( from the tubes ) , barry flast and then t lavitz , who stayed with the band for the recording of windows of heaven but was replaced by former supremes keyboardist chris smith before the album 's release . in 2005 , twenty years after leaving , david freiberg rejoined the group . freiberg had apologized to kantner for not departing the group with him back in 1984 , ending their estrangement . jefferson starship played three songs on nbc 's the today show on june 30 , 2007 . in 2007 , jefferson starship began working with corporate sponsors . the owners of the name jefferson starship , grace slick along with manager bill thompson , objected . they sued kantner for the sponsorship and for touring under the jefferson starship name , citing their initial separation agreement in 1985 . all parties later agreed that kantner could go forward , after paying slick and thompson an undisclosed fee . mangano was replaced by vocalist cathy richardson in early 2008 , and prince was replaced by the reinstated baldwin . in march and may 2008 , tracks were recorded for the new studio album released on september 2 , 2008 , jefferson 's tree of liberty . in addition to the current members , grace slick made contributions to the bonus track on the album , and marty balin and jack casady appear on a recording originally made for windows of heaven . in july and august 2008 , they played a two-part uk tour , including three nights at the 100 club in london and an appearance at the rhythm festival . in 2009 they toured as part of the heroes of woodstock tour with jeff pevar ( jazz is dead , crosby , pevar & raymond ) on bass . other musicians included in this tour were canned heat , ten years after , country joe mcdonald , tom constanten , big brother and the holding company , melanie , john sebastian , mountain , quicksilver messenger service and levon helm band , although not all artists appeared at every show . on july 3 , 2009 , jefferson starship ( kantner , freiberg , baldwin , aguilar , smith , and richardson ) performed at the roswell ufo parade and festival , along with guest musicians tom constanten , jack traylor , barry sless , plus former band members pete sears and darby gould . a four disc live album of this concert , tales from the mothership , was released in november 2012 . on june 5 , 2011 jefferson starship ( kantner , freiberg , richardson and smith ) performed with the contemporary youth orchestra at jacobs pavilion at nautica in cleveland , oh . the show was broadcast live on hdnet for the hdnet concert series . in 2012 , longtime guitarist slick aguilar departed the band due to falling ill with hepatitis c , and was replaced by jude gold . in november 2015 , a new lead vocalist , rachel rose , was phased in to replace the departing cathy richardson ; sharing the stage with one-time jefferson starship vocalist darby gould until richardson announced her return to the band in march 2016 . the band has featured guest musicians such as balin , gould , gorman , jeff pevar , tony morley , richard newman , and former jefferson starship bassist and keyboardist pete sears . paul kantner died from multiple organ failure and septic shock at the age of 74 on january 28 , 2016 . signe toly anderson , a member of both the initial jefferson airplane lineup and the revived jefferson starship in the 1990s , also died on january 28 , 2016 at age 74 . . 2016–present : post-kantner era . following paul kantner 's death , the band received the approval of both kantner 's family and grace slick to keep performing . jefferson starship has continued to tour with a line-up consisting of remaining members david freiberg ( vocals , guitar ) , donny baldwin ( drums ) , chris smith ( keyboards ) , jude gold ( lead guitar ) , and cathy richardson ( vocals ) . when jefferson starship announced the 'carry the fire ' tour in march 2017 , richardson stated that the band 's continuation is a tribute to both kantner and grace slick , and noted that slick had granted the current members a lifetime license to use the name jefferson starship after kantner 's death . in april 2017 , former jefferson starship member craig chaquico filed a lawsuit against the five individual members ( freiberg , baldwin , smith , gold , and richardson ) currently performing as jefferson starship for breaching the 1985 contract and for using chaquico 's name and likeness in their promotional materials . about this , chaquico has said he had only given permission to paul kantner to use the name , and by this point , '' freiberg and baldwin are performing with others who have no connection to the original group , using the name in violation of that agreement . if any of the members who signed the '85 agreement want to use the name , they need the permission of all the other members who signed the agreement and freiberg and baldwin do not have my permission . '' on august 11 , 2017 , u.s . magistrate judge maria-elena james said the guitarist craig chaquico may pursue a breach of contract claim against david freiberg , donny baldwin and the other musicians for performances and merchandising since january 2016 , but dismissed chaquico 's claims of earlier alleged contract breaches and a trademark claim over the use of his likeness . on august 16 , 2018 , judge maria-elena james denied chaquico 's motion to strike the counter-claims by the current jefferson starship band members of intentional interference to gain a potential economic advantage and defamation . the defendants alleged that the plaintiff caused economic harm and attempted to prevent the band from operating by actions such as chaquico posting statements on his website that they were a '' fake band , '' they created '' fake recordings , '' they were a '' lesser cover band , '' and the members were '' lesser artists . '' on december 4 , 2018 , the lawsuit concerning the use of the name jefferson starship was dismissed after an undisclosed settlement was reached between chaquico and the current members of the band . in july 2018 , jefferson starship announced plans to release a new album in 2019 that will include their new song '' what are we waiting for . '' marty balin died on september 27 , 2018 at the age of 76 . on february 1 , 2019 , rhino entertainment acquired the catalogues of jefferson starship , starship , grace slick and hot tuna for albums released between the years of 1972 and 1991 . on august 21 , 2020 , jefferson starship released the new studio album mother of the sun . the first single from the album , '' it 's about time '' , was co-written by jude gold , cathy richardson and former vocalist grace slick . mother of the sun features former bassist pete sears on three songs , and the album includes both a song written by former singer marty balin and a live version of the jefferson airplane song '' embryonic journey '' . . members . current members david freiberg – vocals , acoustic guitar ( 1974–1984 , 2005–present ) donny baldwin – drums , percussion , backing vocals ( 1982–1984 , 2008–present ) chris smith – keyboards , bass ( 1998–present ) cathy richardson – vocals , rhythm guitar ( 2008–2015 , 2016–present ) jude gold – lead guitar ( 2012–present ) . discography . dragon fly ( 1974 ) red octopus ( 1975 ) spitfire ( 1976 ) earth ( 1978 ) freedom at point zero ( 1979 ) modern times ( 1981 ) winds of change ( 1982 ) nuclear furniture ( 1984 ) windows of heaven ( 1998 ) jefferson 's tree of liberty ( 2008 ) mother of the sun ( 2020 )