Athlone

location and access . the part of the town that lies east of the shannon is in the province of leinster , the county of westmeath , the barony of brawny , and the civil parish of st mary's . placenames database of ireland - barony of brawny unusually , the barony is coterminous with a single civil parish . in terms of ecclesiastical boundaries , the eastern part of the town is in the roman catholic diocese of ardagh and clonmacnoise and the parish of st mary's . official website of the roman catholic diocese of ardagh and clonmacnoise - st mary 's parish there are several others churches in the town including the imposing st . peter and st . pauls , a franciscan friary and a chapel of the society of saint pius x . however , seven townlands , or sections of the town , lie west of the shannon : athlone and big meadow , bellaugh , bogganfin , canal and banks , doovoge , part of monksland , and ranelagh . although surrounded by county roscommon in the province of connacht , they are designated as part of county westmeath to preserve the integrity of the town . these townlands lie in st peter 's civil parish in the barony of athlone south . placenames database of ireland - barony of athlone south in terms of ecclesiastical boundaries , the townlands west of the shannon are part of the roman catholic diocese of elphin and the parish of saints peter and paul . roman catholic diocese of elphin - parish of saints peter and paul . river . athlone is a popular stop for pleasure craft along the river shannon . lough ree , the largest lake on the shannon , is a short distance upstream from athlone , and many boat companies are based out of the town . for craft to pass through athlone , it is necessary to use a lock in the river , which is beside the weir and downstream of the current road bridge . the lock , weir , and bridge were all constructed by the shannon navigation commissioners in the 1840s . before then , boats used a canal , about a mile and a half long , to the west of the river . the canal was built by thomas omer for the commissioners of inland navigation . ruth delany , the shannon navigation , lilliput press , dublin 2008 . work started in 1757 and involved the work of over 300 men . omer built a single lock , 120 ' x 19 ' with a rise of 4.5 ' , but there was also a guard lock , further upstream , with a single set of gates to protect the canal against floods . there were also two lay-bys , or harbours , one above the lock and another at the upstream end . the old canal is no longer navigable . rail . athlone railway station opened on 3 october 1859 , with irish rail services travelling eastwards to portarlington , kildare and dublin heuston and westwards to the westport/ballina lines as well as to athenry , oranmore and galway . connections from athlone via a train transfer at athenry railway station extend to ennis and limerick , while a transfer at portarlington connects limerick junction and limerick . there are trains from portarlington to mallow , and from mallow to cork , killarney , farranfore and tralee . travel between athlone and killdare enables connections to carlow , kilkenny and waterford . bus . a bus éireann bus station is located beside the railway station and provides hourly services to dublin and galway . there are also services to limerick , dundalk , waterford , cavan , belfast , longford and roscommon . the town is also home to a number of privately operated services , including the flagline bus company , which operates local bus routes as well as service to tullamore . bus éireann also operates a local athlone bus service . the local services are as follows : route a1 : bus station , willow park ( norwood court ) via golden island shopping centre , dublin road and athlone institute of technology ; and route a2 : monksland ( river village ) ; garrycastle ( moydrum road ) via galway road , st . peter 's avenue , saint anne 's terrace , the batteries , connaught street , northgate street , bus station , golden island shopping centre , dublin road and athlone institute of technology . road . the town is located alongside the n6 road ( ireland ) , which is effectively a section of the m6 motorway connecting galway to dublin . the n6 passes along the northern side of the town , crossing the river shannon into county roscommon . a number of national secondary roads connect athlone with other towns and regions , namely the n55 to ballymahon and cavan , the n61 to roscommon and the n62 to birr , roscrea , and southern ireland . culture . theatres in athlone include the dean crowe theatre and the little theatre . rté all-ireland drama festival takes place annually in athlone , bringing together nine amateur drama groups from across ireland . the festival is supported by an active fringe which involves street theatre , art exhibitions , workshops and events for young people . athlone literary festival is an annual event which began in 1999 , originally as a weekend celebration of the life and works of john broderick , but which now features a great variety of speakers and debaters . count john mccormack was born in athlone , and for many years , an annual festival held in the town has celebrated this world-renowned tenor . athlone school of music opened in 2005 , and is a grant aided project aimed at developing music education and services in the midlands region . abbey road artists ' studios launched in 2011 in a unique building constructed in 1841 . the studios offer a dedicated space in athlone for local and visiting artists . the artists ' studios consist of four individual artists ' studios as well as a large multi-purpose upstairs space suitable for a variety of community cultural events , including exhibitions , performances , workshops and seminars . abbey road artist 's studios exhibition space athlone art and heritage ltd . athloneartandheritage.ie . the abbey road artists ' studios work closely with the luan art gallery . in 1954 , athlone became the first branch of the inland waterways association of ireland and the town had a large part in the organisation 's creation . iwai – chronology . iwai.ie . michael scott , architect : in ( casual ) conversation with dorothy walker michael scott , dorothy walker the ritz cinema , one of the finest provincial cinemas in the country , is located in an historic spot between the old and the new bridges in athlone 's very centre . to build a cinema in this particular position wu a problem , particularly on account of ita proximity to the shannon . the building ; had to be constructed on the fllled-in banki of the river , and it waa , therefore , essential that the structure , though as . light as possible , should be extremely strong and safe . . literature . american crime writer james m . cain refers to athlone in his 1937 book , serenade , in a passage where two characters discuss tenor john mccormack : '' -- there 's the language he was born to . john mccormack comes from dublin '' . '' he does not . he comes from athlone '' . '' did n't he live in dublin ? '' . '' no matter . they speak a fine brogue in athlone , almost as fine as in belfast '' . '' it 's a fine brogue , but it 's not brogue . it 's the english language as it was spoken before all the other countries of the world forgot how to speak it . there 's two things a singer ca n't buy , beg or steal , and that no teacher , coach or conductor can give him . one is his voice , the other is the language that was born in his mouth . when mccormack was singing handel he was singing english , and he sings it as no american and no englishman will ever sing english '' . the irish poet aubrey thomas de vere wrote a poem the ballad of athlone which is an account of an incident in the 1691 siege . . tourism and amenities . the promenade on the river shannon is popular among anglers , birdwatchers and swimmers . the lake shore is accessed from coosan point and hodson bay . the town is also home to lough ree yacht club . athlone is a major retail destination within the midlands region of ireland . the town centre extends from church street in the west to seán costello street in the east . located centrally is the athlone town centre , a shopping centre built in 2007 , containing 54 shops , cafés and a four-star hotel . the golden island shopping centre , which opened in 1997 , is also located in the town centre . athlone has a number of hotels , including chains such the radisson blu and sheraton hotels , as well as a number of locally owned ones . athlone regional sports centre , developed by the former town council in 2002 , is located on the outskirts of the town . the facility contains a swimming pool , gym and astroturf pitches . burgess park stands near the centre of the town , on the banks of the river shannon . sean 's bar , located on the west bank of the river , is certified by the guinness book of world records as the oldest pub in ireland . athlone castle is open to the public as a museum . the luan gallery was opened in 2012 . it is the first purpose-built , modern visual art gallery in the midlands . it was designed by keith williams , who also designed the athlone town civic centre . the gallery was opened by jimmy deenihan , the minister for arts , heritage and the gaeltacht . the luan gallery opened with an exhibition from the irish museum of modern art , featuring the work of several national and international artists . . other attractions include the glendeer open farm and the viking cruise of the shannon . baysports , a boat training and watersports centre with the world 's largest floating inflatable water slide , is located a ten-minute drive from the town . there is a tourist office on church street . there are many fine golf courses within easy reach of athlone including athlone golf club , glasson golf & country club and mount temple golf club . greenway . the dublin-galway greenway will run through athlone . the disused athlone-mullingar railway has been designated to form part of the greenway in the east and a new bridge is planned to be built for bicycle and pedestrian traffic beside the luan gallery . . education and industry . athlone 's major employers include alkermes , a pharmaceutical company that succeeded elan in athlone ; bioclin laboratories , another pharmaceutical company ; ericsson , a telecommunications business ; tyco healthcare , a medical equipment supplier ; utah medical , another medical equipment supplier ; pharmaplaz , another pharmaceutical company ; alienware , a computer hardware business ; ict eurotel , a contact centre ; and athlone extrusions , a polymer supplier . athlone is the regional centre for a large number of state-run and semi-state-run organisations . the department of education , state examinations commission , revenue commissioners , fás midlands region , bus éireann , iarnród éireann , ida ireland and enterprise ireland all have bases in the town . athlone is also a major irish military centre , as the custume barracks , which lie on the west bank of the shannon in the town , is the headquarters of the western command of the irish army . the athlone institute of technology ( ait ) is the regional third level college . athlone forms part of the midlands gateway , an in-progress infrastructure initiative , along with mullingar and tullamore . alongside the waterford institute of technology , ait aims to attain university status , as there is no institution providing university-level education in the irish midlands . the ait has a campus size of 44 acres , and has new , purpose-built facilities include the hospitality , tourism and leisure studies building , built in 2003 ; the nursing and health science building , built in 2005 ; the midlands innovation and research centre , also built in 2005 ; the engineering and informatics building , built in 2010 ; and the postgraduate research hub , also built in 2010 . campus developments . athlone institute of technology . rté 's midlands studio and office are located at ait . the athlone institute of technology has memorandum of understanding with the rio de janeiro state university , one of the largest universities in the brazilian city . . ait also has agreements with the pontifícia universidade católica de minas gerais , one of the largest brazilian private universities . the institute also founded agreements with two leading beijing universities , the capital university of economics and business and the beijing union university . 2010 press releases . athlone institute of technology . ( 30 march 2010 ) . 2010 press releases . athlone institute of technology . ( 12 may 2010 ) . the agreements were signed by the chinese ambassador to ireland and university representatives . other agreements exist between the ait and tvtc , in saudi arabia , and a memorandum of understanding exists with the georgia institute of technology . 2010 press releases . athlone institute of technology . ( 1 march 2010 ) . 2009 press releases . athlone institute of technology . ( 21 january 2009 ) . further agreements exist with the bharati vidyapeeth , one of the largest universities in india . 2009 press releases . athlone institute of technology . ( 25 august 2009 ) . there are four major secondary schools in the athlone area , the athlone community college , a coeducational school ; our lady 's bower school , a girls ' school ; marist college , a boys ' school ; coláiste chiaráin , the new secondary school resulting from the amalgamation of st . aloysius ' college and st joseph 's college , summerhill . in june 2010 , taoiseach brian cowen announced his support of the proposed european and chinese training hub in athlone . in may 2012 , the project was given the go-ahead by an bord pleanála . when completed , it will comprise a total of nine exhibition halls , nine smaller independent exhibition buildings , one temporary exhibition space , several offices , administrative services , some living quarters , hotels , shops , restaurants , pubs , a school and railway station . . broadcasting . between 1931 and 1975 the main radio transmission centre for irish radio was located at moydrum , athlone . the original call sign was 2rn , a wordplay on the song '' come back to erin '' . the station subsequently became known as '' radio athlone '' and could clearly be heard throughout europe , and as far away as moscow . this changed as bandwidth allocations were accorded at the helsinki declaration . the station originally operated at a power of 60 & nbsp ; kw , which during the 1950s , was increased to 100 & nbsp ; kw . for antenna , a t-antenna was and is still used , which spins between two 100-metre tall guyed masts with square cross sections and which are insulated against ground . many old radio sets in europe had the '' athlone '' dial position marked near the end of their tuning scales . in the late 1970s the station reopened on a new dial position of 612 & nbsp ; khz for '' radio 2 '' , later known as rté 2fm . moydrum was also the location of ireland 's short-lived shortwave international radio service , which was closed down in 1948 due to lack of money . today , rté 's midlands studios are located in athlone , at st . mary 's square . the local radio station is midlands 103 . many also tune into the shannonside station . a radio station , i102-104fm , was launched in 2008 , geared to the 15–34 age group of the midlands and northeast . the athlone community taskforce and several members of the roscommon community radio station , rosfm , have begun broadcasting from the athlone area under the banner of athlone community radio . their first broadcast was on 15 march 2008 and the broadcasts were originally set to run every saturday and sunday for the following 15 weeks , until their temporary licence expired . they received a 10-year licence on 14 january 2011 from the broadcasting authority of ireland , and they currently broadcast on the frequency of 88.4 fm . . print . local newspapers include the westmeath independent located on sean costello street which was established in 1846 and the athlone topic . sport . in addition to being home to the athlone regional sports centre , the town has a variety of sporting organisations . namely , there is the athlone town f.c . , who play their home games at athlone town stadium in lissywollen , an arena with a 5,000 person capacity . the athlone town football club won the league of ireland championship in 1981 and 1983 , as well as the fai cup in 1924 . the team also qualified for the 1975–76 uefa cup , where they played 0–0 against ac milan . the newly opened , ten million euro , athlone it international arena , is now ireland 's first world class indoor athletics arena , boasting a floor space of nearly 10,000 square metres . athletics : athlone it unveil €10m indoor 'field of dreams ' . independent.ie ( 25 january 2013 ) . 2013 press releases . athlone institute of technology . ( 15 february 2013 ) . the arena was opened by taoiseach enda kenny , and has been admired by sporting legends such as sonia o'sullivan . it has also hailed by senator eamonn coghlan as the '' best news story in irish athletics history '' . 2013 press releases . athlone institute of technology . ( 23 january 2013 ) . the stadium hosts the annual ait grand prix event , broadcast by tg4 on the island of ireland and internationally via vinco and runnerspace . athlone hosted the european triathlon championships in 2010 , when approximately 5,000 athletes participated in the event . alistair brownlee of great britain won the event . two years later he won a gold medal in the triathlon at the 2012 summer olympics in london . athlone is home to several gaelic football teams , including tubberclair gaa , garrycastle gaa , and athlone gaa , with st . brigids ( roscommon ) gaa and clann na ngael gaa being located outside athlone itself . garrycastle gaa qualified for the 2012 all-ireland senior club football championship for the first time in the club 's history by beating connacht champions , st . brigids gaa , in an all-athlone semi-final . garrycastle eventually lost the final to crossmaglen rangers in a replay of the final , the first match having ended in a draw by a scoreline of 1–12 to 0–15 . athlone is also home to buccaneers rfc , whose the club 's grounds are at dubarry park . dubarry park , with a 10,000 person capacity , is also home to the connacht eagles , dubarry park announced as the home of the connacht eagles connacht rugby website . connachtrugby.ie ( 11 october 2012 ) . the team that represents connacht in the british and irish cup b & i cup set to arrive in connacht connacht rugby website . connachtrugby.ie ( 11 may 2012 ) . and in the all ireland inter-provincial championship . the european capital of sport awarded athlone the title of european town of sport for 2013 . athlone chosen as a european town of sport . westmeath independent . ( 11 september 2012 ) . . people . earl of athlone pat barlow , ( 1914–1986 ) professional footballer . robbie benson , ( b.1992 ) professional footballer . paul brock , ( b.1989 ) accordionist . john broderick , ( 1924–1989 ) irish novelist . james j . browne , former president of the national university of ireland , galway ( 2008–2018 ) jack carty ( b.1992 ) connaught and ireland rugby union player michael joseph curley , ( 1879–1947 ) catholic archbishop and educationalist . stephen donohoe , ( b.1984 ) jockey and sailor . thomas duffy , ( 1806-1868 ) recipient of the victoria cross . lisa dwan , ( b.1977 ) actress . jimmy elliott , ( 1838–1883 ) irish-american world heavyweight boxing champion from 1865 to 1868 . thomas flynn , ( 1842–1892 ) an irish recipient of the victoria cross . john ellard gore , ( 1845–1910 ) astronomer one of the founding members of british astronomical association . robbie henshaw , ( b.1993 ) irish rugby union player . henry kelly , ( b.1946 ) journalist and television presenter , born in athlone . declan lynch , ( b.1961 ) novelist and playwright . david madigan , ( b.1962 ) statistician . john mccormack , ( 1884-1945 ) tenor . nicky mcfadden , ( 1962–2014 ) teachta dála . jacksepticeye , ( b.1990 ) youtube game commentator known by the name of jacksepticeye . stefan molyneux , ( b.1966 ) far-right podcaster and youtuber . t . p . o'connor , ( 1848–1929 ) journalist and member of parliament . caroline o'donnell , ( b.1974 ) architect and author . mary o'rourke , ( b.1937 ) a politician of various ministry roles and an author . feargal o'rourke , ( b.1964 ) accountant and taxation pioneer . richard rothwell , ( 1800–1868 ) a nineteenth-century irish portrait and genre painter . marcus seoige , ( b.1976 ) actor . brendan shine , ( b.1947 ) folk/country singer . george thomas stokes , ( 1843–1898 ) ecclesiastical historian . sean mcevoy , ( b.1976 ) irish-american town crier victor fagg , ( 1906-1988 ) irish republican . sister cities . athlone , victoria , australia . twin towns . chateaubriant , france . see also . athlone pursuivant corlea trackway list of towns and villages in the republic of ireland list of market houses in the republic of ireland midland railway action group . notes and references . external links . athlone.ie – official town portal