Efficient-market hypothesis

theoretical background . suppose that a piece of information about the value of a stock ( say , about a future merger ) is widely available to investors . if the price of the stock does not already reflect that information , then investors can trade on it , thereby moving the price until the information is no longer useful for trading . note that this thought experiment does not necessarily imply that stock prices are unpredictable . for example , suppose that the piece of information in question says that a financial crisis is likely to come soon . investors typically do not like to hold stocks during a financial crisis , and thus investors may sell stocks until the price drops enough so that the expected return compensates for this risk . how efficient markets are ( and are not ) linked to the random walk theory can be described through the fundamental theorem of asset pricing . this theorem states that , in the absence of arbitrage , the price of any stock is given by : p_t e_tm_ and researchers have disputed the efficient-market hypothesis both empirically and theoretically . behavioral finance attribute the imperfections in financial markets to a combination of cognitive biases such as overconfidence , overreaction , representative bias , information bias , and various other predictable human errors in reasoning and information processing . these have been researched by psychologists such as daniel kahneman , amos tversky and paul slovic and economist richard thaler . empirical evidence has been mixed , but has generally not supported strong forms of the efficient-market hypothesis . empirical papers questioning emh : francis nicholson . price-earnings ratios in relation to investment results . financial analysts journal . jan/feb 1968:105–109 . rosenberg b , reid k , lanstein r . ( 1985 ) . persuasive evidence of market inefficiency . journal of portfolio management 13:9–17 . according to dreman and berry , in a 1995 paper , low p/e ( price-to-earnings ) stocks have greater returns . in an earlier paper , dreman also refuted the assertion by ray ball that these higher returns could be attributed to higher beta , ; ball r . ( 1978 ) . anomalies in relationships between securities ' yields and yield-surrogates . journal of financial economics 6:103–126 dreman 's research had been accepted by efficient market theorists as explaining the anomaly dreman d . ( 1998 ) . contrarian investment strategy : the next generation . simon and schuster . in neat accordance with modern portfolio theory . behavioral psychology . behavioral psychology approaches to stock market trading are among some of the more promising alternatives to emh ( investment strategies such as momentum trading seek to exploit exactly such inefficiencies ) . but nobel laureate co-founder of the programme daniel kahneman —announced his skepticism of investors beating the market : '' they 're just not going to do it . it 's just not going to happen . '' indeed , defenders of emh maintain that behavioral finance strengthens the case for emh in that it highlights biases in individuals and committees and not competitive markets . for example , one prominent finding in behavioral finance is that individuals employ hyperbolic discounting . it is demonstrably true that bonds , mortgages , annuities and other similar financial instruments subject to competitive market forces do not . any manifestation of hyperbolic discounting in the pricing of these obligations would invite arbitrage thereby quickly eliminating any vestige of individual biases . similarly , diversification , derivative ( finance ) and other hedging strategies assuage if not eliminate potential mispricings from the severe risk-intolerance ( loss aversion ) of individuals underscored by behavioral finance . on the other hand , economists , behavioral psychologists and mutual fund managers are drawn from the human population and are therefore subject to the biases that behavioralists showcase . by contrast , the price signals in markets are far less subject to individual biases highlighted by the behavioral finance programme . richard thaler has started a fund based on his research on cognitive biases . in a 2008 report he identified complexity and herd behavior as central to the global financial crisis of 2008 . thaler rh . ( 2008 ) . 3q2008 . fuller & thaler asset management . further empirical work has highlighted the impact transaction costs have on the concept of market efficiency , with much evidence suggesting that any anomalies pertaining to market inefficiencies are the result of a cost benefit analysis made by those willing to incur the cost of acquiring the valuable information in order to trade on it . additionally , the concept of liquidity is a critical component to capturing '' inefficiencies '' in tests for abnormal returns . any test of this proposition faces the joint hypothesis problem , where it is impossible to ever test for market efficiency , since to do so requires the use of a measuring stick against which abnormal returns are compared —one can not know if the market is efficient if one does not know if a model correctly stipulates the required rate of return . consequently , a situation arises where either the asset pricing model is incorrect or the market is inefficient , but one has no way of knowing which is the case . the performance of stock markets is correlated with the amount of sunshine in the city where the main exchange is located . . emh anomalies and rejection of the capital asset pricing model ( capm ) . while event studies of stock splits are consistent with the emh ( fama , fisher , jensen , and roll , 1969 ) , other empirical analyses have found problems with the efficient-market hypothesis . early examples include the observation that small neglected stocks and stocks with high book-to-market ( low price-to-book ) ratios ( value stocks ) tended to achieve abnormally high returns relative to what could be explained by the capm . further tests of portfolio efficiency by gibbons , ross and shanken ( 1989 ) ( gjr ) led to rejections of the capm , although tests of efficiency inevitably run into the joint hypothesis problem ( see roll 's critique ) . following gjr 's results and mounting empirical evidence of emh anomalies , academics began to move away from the capm towards risk factor models such as the fama-french 3 factor model . these risk factor models are not properly founded on economic theory ( whereas capm is founded on modern portfolio theory ) , but rather , constructed with long-short portfolios in response to the observed empirical emh anomalies . for instance , the '' small-minus-big '' ( smb ) factor in the ff3 factor model is simply a portfolio that holds long positions on small stocks and short positions on large stocks to mimic the risks small stocks face . these risk factors are said to represent some aspect or dimension of undiversifiable systematic risk which should be compensated with higher expected returns . additional popular risk factors include the '' hml '' value factor ( fama and french , 1993 ) ; '' mom '' momentum factor ( carhart , 1997 ) ; '' illiq '' liquidity factors ( amihud et al . 2002 ) . see also robert haugen . view of some economists . economists matthew bishop and michael green claim that full acceptance of the hypothesis goes against the thinking of adam smith and john maynard keynes , who both believed irrational behavior had a real impact on the markets . economist john quiggin has claimed that '' bitcoin is perhaps the finest example of a pure bubble '' , and that it provides a conclusive refutation of emh . while other assets used as currency ( such as gold , tobacco ) have value independent of people 's willingness to accept them as payment , quiggin argues that '' in the case of bitcoin there is no source of value whatsoever '' and thus should be priced at zero or worthless . tshilidzi marwala surmised that artificial intelligence influences the applicability of the theory of the efficient market hypothesis in that the more artificial intelligence infused computer traders there are in the markets as traders the more efficient the markets become . warren buffett has also argued against emh , most notably in his 1984 presentation '' the superinvestors of graham-and-doddsville '' . he says preponderance of value investing among the world 's money managers with the highest rates of performance rebuts the claim of emh proponents that luck is the reason some investors appear more successful than others . burton malkiel in his a random walk down wall street ( 1973 ) malkiel , a random walk down wall street , 1996 , p . 175 argues that '' the preponderance of statistical evidence '' supports emh , but admits there are enough '' gremlins lurking about '' in the data to prevent emh from being conclusively proved . in his book the reformation in economics , economist and financial analyst philip pilkington has argued that the emh is actually a tautology masquerading as a theory . pilkington , p ( 2017 ) . the reformation in economics : a deconstruction and reconstruction of economic theory . palgrave macmillan . pp261-265 . he argues that , taken at face value , the theory makes the banal claim that the average investor will not beat the market average—which is a tautology . when pressed on this point , pinkington argues that emh proponents will usually say that any actual investor will converge with the average investor given enough time and so no investor will beat the market average . but pilkington points out that when proponents of the theory are presented with evidence that a small minority of investors do , in fact , beat the market over the long-run , these proponents then say that these investors were simply 'lucky ' . pilkington argues that introducing the idea that anyone who diverges from the theory is simply 'lucky ' insulates the theory from falsification and so , drawing on the philosopher of science and critic of neoclassical economics hans albert , pilkington argues that the theory falls back into being a tautology or a pseudoscientific construct . pilkington , p ( 2014 ) . hans albert expands robinson 's critique of the law of demand . fixing the economists . nobel prize-winning economist paul samuelson argued that the stock market is '' micro efficient '' but not '' macro efficient '' : the emh is much better suited for individual stocks than it is for the aggregate stock market . research based on regression and scatter diagrams , published in 2005 , has strongly supported samuelson 's dictum . peter lynch , a mutual fund manager at fidelity investments who consistently more than doubled market averages while managing the magellan fund , has argued that the emh is contradictory to the random walk hypothesis—though both concepts are widely taught in business schools without seeming awareness of a contradiction . if asset prices are rational and based on all available data as the efficient market hypothesis proposes , then fluctuations in asset price are not random . but if the random walk hypothesis is valid , then asset prices are not rational . joel tillinghast , also a fund manager at fidelity with a long history of outperforming a benchmark , has written that the core arguments of the emh are '' more true than not '' and he accepts a '' sloppy '' version of the theory allowing for a margin of error . joel tillinghast ( 2017 ) . big money thinks small : biases , blind spots and smarter investing . columbia business school publishing but he also contends the emh is not completely accurate or accurate in all cases , given the recurrent existence of economic bubbles ( when some assets are dramatically overpriced ) and the fact that value investing ( who focus on underpriced assets ) have tended to outperform the broader market over long periods . tillinghast also asserts that even staunch emh proponents will admit weaknesses to the theory when assets are significantly over- or under-priced , such as double or half their value according to fundamental analysis . late 2000s financial crisis . the financial crisis of 2007–08 led to renewed scrutiny and criticism of the hypothesis . market strategist jeremy grantham stated flatly that the emh was responsible for the current financial crisis , claiming that belief in the hypothesis caused financial leaders to have a '' chronic underestimation of the dangers of asset bubbles breaking '' . noted financial journalist roger lowenstein blasted the theory , declaring '' the upside of the current great recession is that it could drive a stake through the heart of the academic nostrum known as the efficient-market hypothesis . '' former federal reserve chairman paul volcker chimed in , saying it 's '' clear that among the causes of the recent financial crisis was an unjustified faith in rational expectations and market efficiencies . '' one financial analyst noted '' by 2007–2009 , you had to be a fanatic to believe in the literal truth of the emh . '' quote on p . & nbsp ; 7 . at the international organization of securities commissions annual conference , held in june 2009 , the hypothesis took center stage . martin wolf , the chief economics commentator for the financial times , dismissed the hypothesis as being a useless way to examine how markets function in reality . paul mcculley , managing director of pimco , was less extreme in his criticism , saying that the hypothesis had not failed , but was '' seriously flawed '' in its neglect of human nature . the financial crisis led richard posner , a prominent judge , university of chicago law professor , and innovator in the field of law and economics , to back away from the hypothesis . posner accused some of his chicago school colleagues of being '' asleep at the switch '' , saying that '' the movement to deregulate the financial industry went too far by exaggerating the resilience—the self healing powers—of laissez-faire capitalism . '' others , such as fama , said that the hypothesis held up well during the crisis and that the markets were a casualty of the recession , not the cause of it . despite this , fama has conceded that '' poorly informed investors could theoretically lead the market astray '' and that stock prices could become '' somewhat irrational '' as a result . jon e . hilsenrath , stock characters : as two economists debate markets , the tide shifts . wall street journal 2004 . efficient markets applied in securities class action litigation . the theory of efficient markets has been practically applied in the field of securities class action litigation . efficient market theory , in conjunction with '' fraud-on-the-market theory '' , has been used in securities class action litigation to both justify and as mechanism for the calculation of damages . in the supreme court case , erica p . john fund , inc . v . halliburton co . , the use of efficient market theory in supporting securities class action litigation was affirmed . supreme court justice roberts wrote that '' the court ’ s ruling was consistent with the ruling in 'basic ' because it allows 'direct evidence when such evidence is available ' instead of relying exclusively on the efficient markets theory . '' . see also . adaptive market hypothesis financial market efficiency dumb agent theory index fund insider trading investment theory noisy market hypothesis perfect market transparency ( market ) random walk hypothesis . notes . references . bogle , john ( 1994 ) . bogle on mutual funds : new perspectives for the intelligent investor , dell , lo , andrew and mackinlay , craig ( 2001 ) . a non-random walk down wall st . princeton paperbacks malkiel , burton g . ( 1987 ) . '' efficient market hypothesis , '' the new palgrave : a dictionary of economics , v . 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 120–23 . malkiel , burton g . ( 1996 ) . a random walk down wall street , w . w . norton , pilkington , p ( 2017 ) . the reformation in economics : a deconstruction and reconstruction of economic theory . palgrave macmillan . samuelson , paul ( 1972 ) . '' proof that properly anticipated prices fluctuate randomly . '' industrial management review , vol . 6 , no . 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 41–49 . reproduced as chapter 198 in samuelson , collected scientific papers , volume iii , cambridge , m.i.t . press . sharpe , william f . '' the arithmetic of active management '' . external links . e-m-h.org '' earnings quality and the equity risk premium : a benchmark model '' abstract from contemporary accounting research '' as the index fund moves from heresy to dogma . what more do we need to know ? '' remarks by john bogle on the superior returns of passively managed index funds . proof that properly discounted present values of assets vibrate randomly paul samuelson human behavior and the efficiency of the financial system ( 1999 ) by robert j . shiller handbook of macroeconomics