1992 in music

specific locations . 1992 in british music 1992 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1992 in country music 1992 in heavy metal music 1992 in hip hop music 1992 in latin music 1992 in jazz . events . january–february . january 11 nirvana 's nevermind album goes to no . 1 in the us billboard 200 chart , establishing the widespread popularity of the grunge movement of the 1990s . paul simon is the first major artist to tour south africa after the end of the united nations cultural boycott . january 16 – mick jagger attends the hollywood première of his new movie , freejack , at mann 's chinese theatre . january 25 – the inaugural big day out festival takes place in sydney , australia , headlined by violent femmes and nirvana . february 5 – new kids on the block interrupt their tour to perform on the arsenio hall show in response to rumors that the group lip-synchs its concerts . february 16 – slavic music is featured at the oulu music festival , with concerts and opera productions in oulu , finland , until february 26 . tas toth , '' finnland : viele festivals im norden europas '' , die zeit no . 6 ( february 21 , 1992 ) . february 18 – vince neil leaves mötley crüe after 11 years as the band 's lead singer , to spend more time on his career as a racing car driver . february 24 nirvana 's kurt cobain marries hole 's courtney love . the u.s . postal service unveils two potential designs for its proposed elvis presley postage stamp for fans to vote on . one design is of a young , 1950s elvis , and the other is of a much older , 1970s elvis . the young elvis wins the vote , and the stamp is issued the following january . february 25 six major record companies reach an agreement to phase out the longbox form of compact disc packaging by april 1993 , due to complaints that the packaging is environmentally wasteful . the 34th annual grammy awards are presented in new york , hosted by whoopi goldberg . natalie cole 's unforgettable… with love wins album of the year , while her '' virtual duet '' cover of '' unforgettable '' with her late father , nat king cole , wins both record of the year and song of the year . marc cohn wins best new artist . march–april . march 10 – at the 1992 soul train music awards , prince wins the '' heritage '' award for lifetime achievement . march 14 – farm aid five takes place in irving , texas , usa , hosted by willie nelson . artists performing at the event include john mellencamp , neil young and paul simon . approximately 40,000 people attend the event . march 16 – mariah carey performs at mtv unplugged , shows critics her 5-octave range , and gets rave reviews . march 24 – a judge in chicago , illinois , usa , approves cash rebates of up to us 3 to anyone proving they bought milli-vanilli recordings prior to the beginning of the lip synching scandal on november 27 , 1990 . april 1 – billy idol , on trial for punching a woman in the face , pleads no contest . idol is fined and ordered to make public service announcements against alcohol and drug abuse . april 20 – the freddie mercury tribute concert takes place at wembley stadium in london , england . all proceeds go to aids research . april 24 – david bowie marries fashion model iman . april 30 – in los angeles , california , usa , madonna 's bustier is stolen from a display in frederick 's of hollywood . a us 1,000 reward is offered for its return . . may–june . may 6 the first europäisches jugendchorfestival , ( ejcf ) ( european festival of youth choirs ) is held in basel , switzerland . organizers decide to make it a triennial event . rob halford announces he is leaving judas priest . selena releases her album entre a mi mundo which contains her first no . 1 hit , '' como la flor '' . may 7 – john frusciante of the red hot chili peppers leaves the band prior to the publication of a rolling stone magazine cover featuring them ; he has to be digitally edited out of the photo . frusciante returned to the red hot chili peppers in 1998 . may 9 – the 1992 eurovision song contest , held at malmö isstadion in malmö , sweden , is won by ireland 's linda martin with the song '' why me ? '' , notably written by 1980 and 1987 winner johnny logan . at 41 years old , martin becomes , and still remains , the oldest woman to win the contest . may 11 – a . r . rahman 's debut film roja is released . the soundtrack is regarded as a milestone that changed the face of tamil film music and subsequently contemporary indian music . time magazine 's film critic , richard corliss , stated in 2005 that the '' astonishing debut work parades rahman 's gift for alchemizing outside influences until they are totally tamil , totally rahman , '' naming it one of the magazine 's '' 10 best soundtracks '' of all time . june 5 – the sata häme accordion festival takes place until june 14 in ikaalinen , finland . june 27 michael jackson starts the dangerous world tour , supporting his dangerous album in munich , germany . guitarist stefanie sargent of up-and-coming punk rock band 7 year bitch dies of asphyxiation after returning home from a party in which she had drunk alcohol and taken a small amount of heroin . she was 24 . june 29 – the northern accordion festival takes place in tornio-haaparanta , finland , until july 5 . . july–august . july 4 the budafest summer opera and ballet festival is launched in budapest , hungary . budapest tourist guide mark heard suffers a heart attack while performing at the cornerstone festival in illinois , usa . heard goes to hospital immediately after finishing his set , but dies two weeks after being discharged in august . july 10 – seinäjoki ( finland ) tango festival ( to july 12 ) . tas toth , '' finnland : viele festivals im norden europas '' , die zeit no . 6 , february 21 , 1992 ) . july 11 – '' november rain '' by guns n ' roses enters the world record books when it becomes the longest single , at 8 minutes , 57 seconds , to reach the us top 20 . the single 's video has a budget of over us 1.5 million , becoming the most expensive at the time . july 12 – opening of the chamber-music festival of kuhmo , finland ( until july 26 ) . july 18 – whitney houston marries bobby brown . july 28 – ice-t announces that the controversial track '' cop killer '' is being pulled from body count 's self-titled album . august 2 rozalla becomes the first artist from zimbabwe to chart on the us billboard magazine chart . former beatle george harrison tells billboard magazine that he recently discovered that he was born on february 24 , and not february 25 as he had thought for most of his life . haitian military authorities ban the playing of ram 's single '' fèy '' ; first performed at the port-au-prince carnival in february , the song was widely interpreted as an anthem of support for exiled president jean-bertrand aristide . american pop-punk band blink-182 form in the suburbs of san diego but known as blink until 1995 . august 3 – lahti organ festival ( finland ) ( until august 9 ) . august 5 – jeff porcaro , arguably the most highly regarded studio drummer in rock from the mid-'70s to the early '90s , dies aged 38 . august 8 – during the guns n ' roses/metallica stadium tour , metallica frontman james hetfield is burned by a pyrotechnics blast during a concert at montreal 's olympic stadium , forcing the group to cancel the second hour of the show . co-headliners guns n ' roses take the stage , but walk off early with axl rose complaining of throat problems . the abbreviated show causes angry fans to riot in the streets of montreal . the tour resumed on august 25 , but with a guitar technician replacing hetfield on guitar for the remainder of the tour . august 14 – opening of the sibelius-festival in loviisa , finland . august 18 – kurt cobain and courtney love become parents of a daughter , frances bean cobain . august 20 – opening of the helsinki festival , with the theme : music of the baltics ( orchestral and chamber-music concerts , opera productions , song recitals , ballet , theater , jazz , pop , and rock concerts ) until september 6 . . september–october . september 17 – frank zappa , in his final professional public appearance , conducts the ensemble modern at the frankfurt festival in germany . zappa , who is seriously ill with prostate cancer , receives a 20-minute ovation . october 3 – sinéad o'connor stirs up controversy when she rips up a picture of the pope on the us television show , saturday night live . october 16 – a massive bob dylan tribute concert is held at madison square garden in new york . john mellencamp , neil young , eric clapton , june carter cash , johnny cash and tracy chapman are among the many performers , but much attention becomes focused on sinéad o'connor , who is loudly booed by much of the audience in response to the saturday night live incident two weeks earlier . october 20 – singer-songwriter madonna releases her fifth studio album , erotica , which became one of her most controversial albums to date due to overtly sexual content . october 31 '' end of the road '' by boyz ii men posts a 12th consecutive week at no . 1 in the us charts , ending a 36-year record previously held by elvis presley . boyz ii men 's record was broken on march 6 , 1993 , by whitney houston 's '' i will always love you '' . mcteague , an opera based on the progressive era-novel by frank norris , premieres at the lyric opera of chicago . november–december . november 9 – australian-born singer kylie minogue ends her working relationship with uk songwriters and record producers stock aitken waterman and the record label pwl . november 15 megan jasper of sub pop creates the grunge speak hoax , tricking the new york times into printing an article on supposed slang used in the grunge scene in seattle , usa . ozzy osbourne plays the final concert of his '' retirement '' tour at the pacific amphitheatre in costa mesa , california . he is joined on stage by his three former black sabbath bandmates for a reunion performance . black sabbath opened the show with rob halford as lead vocalist , filling in for ronnie james dio who had left the band days earlier . the jacksons : an american dream , a two-part miniseries based on the jackson family , premieres on abc . november 17 – the the bodyguard ( soundtrack ) , whitney houston 's debut film , is released . the album went on to be certified 17 times platinum by the riaa and sell 45 million copies worldwide . to date the album is still the best selling soundtrack of all time and also one of the best selling albums of all time . november 22 – manchester-based post-punk & electronic music label factory records declares bankruptcy . the label had been placed in dire financial straits following the spending of most of their funds by happy mondays during the recording of their album yes please ! , which would end up a commercial failure . additionally , plans for a buyout from london records folded when it was discovered that none of factory 's artists were actually signed onto the label ; most of these artists , most notably new order , would end up signing onto london records anyhow following factory 's foreclosure . december 3 – bill wyman announces he is quitting the rolling stones . december 31 dietrich fischer-dieskau announces his retirement from the stage to an audience at the bavarian state opera in munich . the twenty-first annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by tlc , bell biv devoe , slaughter , jon secada , village people and barry manilow . also in 1992 . david isberg quits opeth from his vocalist position . current guitarist mikael åkerfeldt fills his position . vibe , a new magazine focusing on r & b and hip-hop music , launches with a special fall preview issue . the mp3 file format is developed as part of a video compression standard . richard campbell , '' media essentials , a brief introduction , '' 2013 . . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1992 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1992 . bands reformed . the tubes april wine madness . albums released . january–march . . top hits on record . top ten best albums of the year . all albums have been named albums of the year for their hits in the charts . r.e.m . – automatic for the people rage against the machine – rage against the machine pavement – slanted & enchanted alice in chains – dirt tori amos – little earthquakes dr . dre – the chronic faith no more – angel dust sublime – 40 oz . to freedom sonic youth – dirty beastie boys – check your head . classical music . torstein aagaard-nilsen – arctic landscape for military band milton babbitt septet , but equal counterparts for brass quintet leonardo balada symphony no . 4 lausanne celebracio for orchestra mario davidovsky – synchronisms no . 10 for guitar and electronic sounds lorenzo ferrero la ruta de cortés ( symphonic poem ) movimento americano poi andro in america peter gahn – auch ohne sprache , for guitar philip glass – symphony no . 1 low vagn holmboe – svaerm for string quartet ( partially arranged from earlier violin duos ) elena kats-chernin – clocks ka nin chan – saxophone quartet andreas kunstein string quartet no . 1 10 epigrams for toy piano witold lutosławski – symphony no . 4 william mathias – flute concerto younghi pagh-paan – u-mul krzysztof penderecki – symphony no . 5 korean alwynne pritchard – glimpsed most clearly from the corner of your eye , for seven cellos roger reynolds – kokoro , for solo violin david sawer – byrnan wood kurt schwertsik uluru , op . 64 for orchestra baumgesänge , op . 65 for orchestra drei späte liebeslieder , op . 66 for cello and piano human existence , for voice and chamber ensemble john serry sr . – the lord 's prayer , for organ & chorus karlheinz stockhausen – signale zur invasion , for trombone and electronic music , or unaccompanied trombone joan tower – violin concerto malcolm williamson – requiem for a tribe brother iannis xenakis – la déesse athéna ( oresteïa iii ) ( 1992 ) , for baritone solo and mixed ensemble of 11 instruments . opera . antonio braga – 1492 epopea lirica d'america karel goeyvaerts – aquarius ingvar lidholm – ett drömspel jukka linkola – elina . jazz . musical theater . crazy for you – broadway production opened at the shubert theatre and ran for 1622 performances falsettos – broadway production opened at the john golden theatre and ran for 487 performances guys and dolls – broadway revival jelly 's last jam – broadway production opened at the virginia theatre and ran for 569 performances the most happy fella – broadway revival . musical films . aladdin – animated feature film by walt disney animation studios deep blues : a musical pilgrimage to the crossroads celibidache – you do n't do anything , you just let it evolve ( documentary by jan schmidt-garre ) chnam oun 16 khiladi the muppet christmas carol pure country roja – tamil indian film by mani ratnam un cœur en hiver , featuring music by maurice ravel . soundtracks . aladdin academy award winner for best song and best film score batman returns – score danny elfman the bodyguard – whitney houston boomerang – boyz ii men , tribe called quest , p.m . dawn , babyface dracula ( 1992 film ) coneheads – paul simon , r.e.m . , red hot chili peppers cool world – david bowie , the cult , ministry , moby , brian eno deep cover – dr . dre & snoop dogg far and away – score by john williams juice – naughty by nature , too short , epmd , cypress hill the last of the mohicans – score by trevor jones and randy edelman lethal weapon 3 – eric clapton , sting malcolm x – arrested development ( group ) , billie holiday , ella fitzgerald , ray charles mambo kings – los lobos , linda ronstadt , tito puente medicine man – score by jerry goldsmith mo ' money – color me badd , public enemy , bell biv devoe , janet jackson rush – eric clapton singles – alice in chains , pearl jam , the smashing pumpkins , jimi hendrix , soundgarden sister act – etta james , whoopi goldberg , c+c music factory south central – scarface , cameo ( band ) , boo-yaa t.r.i.b.e . toys – tori amos , enya , frankie goes to hollywood wayne 's world – queen , jimi hendrix , red hot chili peppers , alice cooper , black sabbath . births . january 2 – alden richards , filipino actor , model and singer january 7 – børns , american singer and songwriter january 16 – maja keuc , slovenian singer january 19 – mac miller , american rapper , singer , record producer , musician ( d . 2018 ) january 20 – maria harfanti , indonesian social activist , pianist , and beauty pageant titleholder january 21 – emma birdsall , australian singer-songwriter , contestant on the voice australia january 23 – jordan '' rizzle '' stephens of rizzle kicks , sometimes works under names : wildhood and al , the native . january 28 – simone egeriis , danish singer january 31 – christopher nissen , danish singer february 3 – milo , american rapper and producer february 7 – jain ( singer ) , french musician and singer-songwriter . february 9 – avan jogia , canadian actor and singer february 14 – elley duhé , american singer-songwriter february 17 – marika hackman , english vocalist , multi-instrumentalist and songwriter . february 23 – tabitha nauser , singaporean pop and r & b singer and musician march 6 – sarah de bono , australian singer-songwriter , contestant on the voice australia march 7 – im hyun-sik ( singer ) , south korean singer-songwriter march 10 – emily osment , american actress and singer march 14 – jasmine murray , american singer kash doll , american rapper april 3 – young m.a . , american rapper april 4 – christina metaxa , cypriot singer-songwriter april 11 – naya , lebanese singer april 16 – ronnie flex , dutch rapper april 18 – chloe bennet , chinese american singer , actress and activist april 22 – dyro , dutch dj , producer and musician april 23 syd ( singer ) , american singer , songwriter , record producer , disc jockey , and audio engineer zelim bakaev , chechen singer april 26 – jon cozart , american musician and comedian ( dodie , malinda kathleen reese , thomas sanders ) april 27 – allison iraheta , american singer april 30 – travis scott , american rapper , songwriter , singer ( kylie jenner ) may 8- chelcee grimes , british singer-songwriter and footballer may 6 – vanesa gabriela leiro , argentine actress and singer may 10 – jake zyrus , filipino singer 1992 – malcolm david kelley , american rapper and actor may 19 sam smith ( singer ) , english singer-songwriter marshmello , american electronic dance music producer and dj . ( anne-marie , selena gomez ) may 21 – chloe angelides , american singer , songwriter and producer may 23 – jinny ng , hong kong cantopop singer june 14 – princess nokia , american rapper of afro-puerto rican and taíno descent june 20 – sage the gemini , american rapper ( the hbk gang ) june 21 – max schneider , american singer-songwriter and actor june 25 – dorian electra , american singer-songwriter , musician , video and visual artist june 26 melanie amaro , american singer jennette mccurdy , american actress and singer june 30 – prussian blue ( duo ) july 1 – caleb nott , new zealand musician , producer and songwriter ( broods ) july 2 – william singe , australian rapper , singer july 3 maasa sudo , japanese singer nathalia ramos , spanish actress and singer july 5 – mirna radulović , serbian singer-songwriter july 8 – sky ferreira , american singer , songwriter , model , and actress july 10 – angel haze , american rapper , activist and singer-songwriter july 11 – karise eden , australian singer and activist july 13 – rich the kid , american rapper july 18 – bishop briggs , british singer-songwriter and musician july 19 – ellie rowsell , english singer-songwriter and musician ( lead vocalist and guitarist of the indie rock band wolf alice ) . july 22 – selena gomez , american actress , television producer , advocate , and singer-songwriter ( demi lovato , taylor swift , selena gomez & the scene , julia michaels ) july 27 – tory lanez , canadian rapper , songwriter , producer august 2 – charli xcx , british singer-songwriter , advocate , record executive , businesswoman , music video director and musician august 4 – tiffany evans , american singer august 12 – cara delevingne , british singer/musician/actor/writer august 18 – frances bean cobain , american artist , model , creator , activist , daughter of kurt cobain and courtney love august 20 – demi lovato , american singer-songwriter , actress , advocate , philanthropist , entrepreneur and businesswoman august 25 emily warren , american singer/songwriter , producer kaytranada , haitian-canadian dj and record producer august 27 kim petras , german singer-songwriter blake jenner , american actor & singer august 29 – mallu magalhães , brazilian singer , songwriter and musician september 2 madilyn bailey , american singer and songwriter . rae morris , british singer and songwriter september 11 – desireé bassett , american guitarist and recording artist september 12 – shigga shay , singaporean rapper september 16 – nick jonas , member of the american band jonas brothers , solo artist , songwriter , singer , musician , actor ( miley cyrus , priyanka chopra ) september 18 – joji ( musician ) , japanese ( australian ) singer , songwriter , rapper , record producer , former internet personality and comedian october 5 – rupi kaur , canadian-punjabi poet and performer october 10 – gabrielle aplin , english singer and songwriter october 7 – grace bawden , australian independent classical crossover singer , october 11 – cardi b , american rapper/singer/songwriter october 16 – jaden michaels , american songwriter , singer and musician ( sister of julia michaels ) october 19 – lewis watson ( musician ) , english singer-songwriter . ( dodie clark ) october 22 carrie hope fletcher , english singer-songwriter , actress , author 21 savage , rapper and songwriter october 26 – lido ( musician ) , norwegian record producer , singer , and songwriter , frequent collaborator with halsey october 30 – greeicy rendón , colombian actress and singer november 5 – ming bridges , australian singaporean singer-songwriter , actress and model november 12 – giulietta , australian singer-songwriter and dancer erika costell , american singer-songwriter and musician november 19 – tove styrke , swedish singer-songwriter november 21 – conor maynard , british singer november 23 – miley cyrus , american singer-songwriter , actress , performer and activist ( formerly lead character on disney musical comedy : hannah montana ) december 4 – jin , south korean singer-songwriter and member of bts december 9 – maelyn jarmon , american musician , winner of the voice , team john legend december 14 – tori kelly , american musician , singer and songwriter december 18 – bridgit mendler , american actress and singer december 26 – jade thirlwall , english singer-songwriter , dancer and member of little mix december 28 – gordi ( musician ) , australian folktronica singer/songwriter . deaths . january 14 – jerry nolan , drummer for the new york dolls , 45 january 15 – dee murray , bassist for elton john , 45 ( cancer ) january 17 – charlie ventura , tenor saxophonist and bandleader , 75 january 23 – marie-thérèse gauley , french opera singer prominent at the opéra-comique , 88 january 27 – allan jones , singer and actor , 84 january 29 – willie dixon , blues singer-songwriter & musician , 76 february 12 – stella roman , operatic soprano , 87 february 21 – jane pickens langley of the pickens sisters march 4 – mary osborne , jazz guitarist , 70 ( liver cancer ) march 10 – giorgos zampetas , greek composer , 67 march 20 – georges delerue , composer , 66 march 21 – shaik dawood khan , tabla virtuoso , 75 march 27 – harald sæverud , composer , 95 april 4 – arthur russell , cellist and disco musician , 40 ( aids ) april 20 – johnny shines , guitarist , 76 april 25 – yutaka ozaki , japanese singer , 26 ( pulmonary edema ) april 27 – olivier messiaen , composer , 83 april 30 – toivo kärki , composer , arranger and producer , 76 may 7 – tiny timbrell , guitarist , 75 may 12 – sylvia syms , american singer , 74 may 17 – lawrence welk , accordion player and bandleader , 89 may 23 – joyce barker , operatic soprano , 60 june 3 – ettore campogalliani , music teacher and composer , 89 june 8 – alfred uhl , composer , 83 june 18 – peter allen , australian songwriter , 48 ( aids ) june 20 – sir charles groves , conductor , 77 july 4 – ástor piazzolla , tango musician and composer , 71 july 5 – paul hackman , canadian musician , 38 ( car accident ) july 21 – aloys fleischmann , composer and musicologist , 82 july 25 – alfred drake , us singer and actor , 77 july 26 – mary wells , motown singer , 49 ( laryngeal cancer ) july 29 – william mathias , composer , 57 august 2 – michel berger , french composer and songwriter , 44 ( heart attack ) august 5 – jeff porcaro , drummer , toto , 38 ( heart attack ) august 12 – john cage , u.s . composer , 79 august 16 – mark heard , u.s . singer , 40 ( heart attack ) september 19 – sir geraint evans , operatic baritone , 70 october 3 – peter klein , lyric tenor , 85 october 5 – eddie kendricks , singer , ( the temptations ) 52 ( lung cancer ) october 7 – harold truscott , composer , pianist , broadcaster and writer on music , 78 october 25 – roger miller , singer , 56 ( lung cancer ) november 10 – hilda hölzl , operatic soprano , 65 november 13 – ronnie bond ( the troggs ) , 52 november 14 – teddy riley , new orleans jazz trumpeter and bandleader november 21 – severino gazzelloni , flautist november 23 – roy acuff , '' king of country music '' , fiddler , 89 november 27 – daniel santos , singer and composer of bolero november 29 – paul ryan , singer , songwriter and record producer , 44 ( cancer ) december 9 – cesar gonzmart , violinist , 72 december 10 – kate buchdahl , violinist , 28 ( hodgkin 's lymphoma ) december 15 – otto lington , composer , orchestra leader and violinist , 89 december 21 philip farkas , horn player , 78 albert king , blues guitarist and singer , 69 nathan milstein , violinist , 88 december 26 – nikita magaloff , pianist , 80 . awards . country music hall of fame inductees : george jones and frances preston eurovision song contest 1992 filmfare best male playback award : awarded to kumar sanu 34th annual grammy awards 34th japan record awards mercury music prize : awarded to primal scream for screamadelica ramon magsaysay award : awarded to ravi shankar 1992 rthk top 10 gold songs awards : first prize awarded to '' 暗戀你 '' sung by jacky cheung rock and roll hall of fame inductees : bobby blue bland , booker t . and the m.g.s , johnny cash , the isley brothers , the jimi hendrix experience , sam & dave , and the yardbirds . see also . 1992 in british music list of hot 100 number-one singles of 1992 ( u.s . ) record labels established in 1992 . references .