The Vampire Lestat

plot summary . set in the late 18th century to the late 1980s , the story follows the 200-year-long life of the vampire lestat de lioncourt , and his rise from humble beginnings as impoverished nobility in the countryside of the auvergne , to the cosmopolitan city of paris , to becoming transformed by the dark gift into a vampire . after escaping his family and running off to paris with his lover and confidant nicolas de lenfent , lestat is kidnapped and bitten by the reclusive elder vampire magnus , who kills himself that night but leaves lestat with a tower fortress and a vast fortune . lestat abandons nicolas for fear of causing him harm and shuns contact with his loved ones . instead , he decides to shower them with gifts and riches from his newfound wealth as a means to compensate his departure from their lives . lestat 's mother , gabrielle , arrives to say goodbye to him , herself dying of consumption . in order to save her , lestat transforms her into a vampire as well . the pair run afoul of the children of darkness , an ancient coven of devil-worshipping vampires led by armand , who attack them and kidnap nicolas to punish them for breaking vampire law . lestat and gabrielle rescue nicolas . after a heated debate with armand , lestat causes the coven to dissolve by denouncing the old ways and encouraging the cultists to modernize . lestat later turns nicolas into a vampire , but the transformation drives him mad , and his resentment of lestat quickly destroys their friendship . severely depressed , nicolas later commits suicide by exposing himself to the sun . armand '' shows '' lestat the history of how he was made by the powerful vampire marius de romanus . compelled by the idea of marius , lestat leaves markings carved into rock in numerous places while traveling with gabrielle , hoping that one day , marius will see them and find lestat . whilst in egypt , abandoned by gabrielle , lestat sleeps in the ground after being burned by the sun . he is recovered by marius and is taken to his secret mediterranean island . there , marius shares his past with lestat , and shows him those who must be kept , akasha and enkil , who are the progenitors of all vampires . once marius has given his warning to lestat not to go see them again , and leaves on a short outing , lestat takes nicolas 's old violin and plays for the king and queen , awakening them . akasha feeds from lestat as lestat feeds from her . then , enkil , furious at the intrusion , attacks and nearly kills lestat , who is saved by marius and then sent away . publication . the vampire lestat was released on october 31 , 1985 . told from the point of view of lestat , who was previously introduced in interview with the vampire , the novel explores the titular vampire 's backstory . the vampire lestat also reinforces and expands upon rice 's vampire mythology , and the new york times critic michiko kakutani noted , '' we learn lots of 'facts ' about vampires and vampire culture . we learn that they cry tears of blood , that they 're capable of reading other people 's minds , that they can be destroyed by fire and sunlight . we learn that 'no vampire may ever destroy another vampire , except that the coven master has the power of life and death over all of his flock ' ; and we learn that 'no vampire shall ever reveal his true nature to a mortal and allow that mortal to live ' . '' . adaptations . anne rice 's the vampire lestat . the vampire lestat was adapted into a comic and released as a 12-part miniseries by innovation comics in 1990 and 1991 . the comic , which was formally titled anne rice 's the vampire lestat and featured daerick gross and mike okamoto as lead artists , had a script adapted from the novel by rice and faye perozich . in 1991 the entire series was published as a graphic novel by ballantine . anne rice 's the vampire lestat ballantine books , 1991 . rice , anne ; perozich , faye ; gross , daerick ; okamoto , mike . . queen of the damned . parts of the vampire lestat and the queen of the damned were loosely adapted into the 2002 film , queen of the damned . the film was seen to be a critical failure , and disappointed some viewers . rice herself has dismissed the film . on her facebook page , any time the subject is brought up , she repeatedly comments that the queen of the damned film is not something she can understand or embrace , that she encouraged them not to do the film and that it hurt her to see her work '' mutilated '' the way it was . rice , anne : wall - just fans , facebook.com . lestat : the musical . the novel formed the basis for the short-lived 2006 broadway show lestat . the musical , which was composed by elton john and bernie taupin and written by linda woolverton , had a pre-broadway tryout in california in late 2005 and ran for a total of 33 previews and 39 official performances at the palace theater in new york . lestat at the internet broadway database . future . in november 2016 , rice announced on facebook that the rights to her novels were reverted back to her despite earlier plans for other adaptations . rice said that she and her son christopher would be developing and executive producing a potential television series based on the novels . in april 2017 , they teamed up with paramount television and anonymous content to develop a series . as of early 2018 , bryan fuller was involved with the creation of a potential tv series based on the novels . on july 17 , 2018 , it was announced that the series was in development at streaming service hulu and that fuller had departed the production . as of december 2019 , hulu 's rights had expired and rice was shopping a package including all film and tv rights to the series . in may 2020 , it was announced that amc had acquired the rights to the vampire chronicles and lives of the mayfair witches for developing film and television projects . anne and christopher rice will serve as executive producers on any projects developed . . audiobooks . there have been three audiobook adaptations of the vampire lestat : a 1989 abridged version narrated by michael york ; a 1994 unabridged version narrated by frank muller ; and a 2011 unabridged version narrated by simon vance . . critical reception . the vampire lestat debuted at no . 9 on the new york times best seller list , spending a total of six weeks on the list . the new york times critic michiko kakutani found rice 's vampire mythology '' more compelling than the rest of the novel '' , and wrote , '' while lestat 's not an unlikable vampire . it 's hard to take his dilemmas all that seriously . '' kirkus reviews wrote that '' rice dots lestat 's tale with some marvelous chillers . vampire bonanza in appropriate dark , humid , spider-web narrative—rice 's specialty '' reviewing the audiobook adaptation , audiofile wrote that '' the plot twists are difficult to follow at times '' . dave langford reviewed the golden horn for white dwarf 86 , and stated that '' rice is audacious enough to propound an acceptable 'origin story ' for vampirism , and to move from dark old egyptian mysteries to the extremes of twentieth-century dionysian ecstasy as lestat gives his first live rock performance . nice one . ''