Thomas Campion

life . campion was born in london , the son of john campion , a clerk of the court of chancery , and lucy ( née searle – daughter of laurence searle , one of the queen 's serjeant-at-arms ) . upon the death of campion 's father in 1576 , his mother married augustine steward , dying soon afterwards . his stepfather assumed charge of the boy and sent him , in 1581 , to study at peterhouse , cambridge as a '' gentleman pensioner '' ; he left the university after four years without taking a degree . . he is not listed in venn , alumni cantabrigienses . he later entered gray 's inn to study law in 1586 . however , he left in 1595 without having been call to the bar . on 10 february 1605 , he received his medical degree from the university of caen . christopher r . wilson . '' thomas campion '' , grove music online , ed . l . macy ( accessed 4 march 2006 ) , grovemusic.com ( subscription access ) . campion is thought to have lived in london , practising as a physician , until his death in march 1620 – possibly of the plague . life of thomas campion ( luminarium : anthology of english literature ) . he was apparently unmarried and had no children . he was buried the same day at st dunstan-in-the-west in fleet street . he was implicated in the murder of sir thomas overbury , but was eventually exonerated , as it was found that he had unwittingly delivered the bribe that had procured overbury 's death . thomas campion ( uxl encyclopedia of world biography , 2003 ) . . poetry and songs . the body of his works is considerable , the earliest known being a group of five anonymous poems included in the '' songs of divers noblemen and gentlemen , '' appended to newman 's edition of sir philip sidney 's astrophel and stella , which appeared in 1591 . in 1595 , poemata , a collection of latin panegyrics , elegies and epigrams was published , winning him a considerable reputation . this was followed , in 1601 , by a songbook , a booke of ayres , with words by himself and music composed by himself and philip rosseter . the following year he published his observations in the art of english poesie , '' against the vulgar and unartificial custom of riming , '' in favour of rhymeless verse on the model of classical meter ( poetry ) . campion 's theories on poetry were criticized by samuel daniel in '' defence of rhyme '' ( 1603 ) . in 1607 , he wrote and published a masque lord hayes ' masque ( godfrey 's bookshelf ) . for the occasion of the marriage of lord hayes , and , in 1613 , issued a volume of songs of mourning : bewailing the untimely death of prince henry , set to music by john cooper ( also known as coperario ) . the same year he wrote and arranged three masques : the lords ' masque for the marriage of princess elizabeth ; an entertainment for the amusement of queen anne at caversham park ; and a third for the marriage of the earl of somerset to the infamous frances howard , countess of essex . if , moreover , as appears quite likely , his two bookes of ayres two books of airs ( luminarium.org ) . ( both words and music written by himself ) belongs also to this year , it was indeed his annus mirabilis . in 1615 , he published a book on counterpoint , a new way of making fowre parts in counterpoint by a most familiar and infallible rule , thomas campion , christopher r . wilson , john coperario . a new way of making fowre parts in counterpoint ( ashgate publishing , ltd . , 2003 ) . a technical treatise which was for many years the standard textbook on the subject . it was included , with annotations by christopher sympson , in playford 's brief introduction to the skill of musick , and two editions appear to have been published by 1660 . brief introduction to the skill of musick some time in or after 1617 appeared his third and fourth booke of ayres . works of thomas campion ( luminarium.org ) . in 1618 appeared the airs that were sung and played at brougham castle on the occasion of the king 's entertainment there , the music by george mason and john earsden , while the words were almost certainly by campion . in 1619 , he published his epigrammatum libri ii . umbra elegiarum liber unus , a reprint of his 1595 collection with considerable omissions , additions ( in the form of another book of epigrams ) and corrections . . legacy . campion made a oral will on 1 march 1619/20 before 'divers credible witnesses ' : a memorandum was made that he did 'not longe before his death say that he did give all that he had unto mr phillip rosseter , and wished that his estate had bin farre more ' , and rosseter was sworn before dr edmund pope to administer as principal legatee on 3 march 1619/20 . london metropolitan archives and guildhall library manuscripts section , ref . ms 9172/31 , will number 150 . while campion had attained a considerable reputation in his own day , in the years that followed his death his works sank into complete oblivion . no doubt this was due to the nature of the media in which he mainly worked , the masque and the song-book . the masque was an amusement at any time too costly to be popular , and during the commonwealth period it was practically extinguished . the vogue of the song-books was even more ephemeral , and , as in the case of the masque , the puritan ascendancy , with its distaste for all secular music , effectively put an end to the madrigal . its loss involved that of many hundreds of dainty lyrics , including those of campion , and it was due to the work of a . h . bullen ( see bibliography ) , who first published a collection of the poet 's works in 1889 , that his genius was recognised and his place among the foremost rank of elizabethan lyric poets restored . early dictionary writers , such as fétis , saw campion as a theorist . françois-joseph fétis , 'campion ' in : biographie universelle des musiciens et bibliographie générale de la musique , vol . 3 ( 2nd edition , paris , 1867 ) p . 169 . it was much later on that people began to see him as a composer . he was the writer of a poem , cherry ripe , which is not the cherry ripe ( song ) but has several similarities . in popular culture . repeated reference was made to campion in an october 2010 episode of the bbc tv series , james may 's man lab ( bbc2 ) , where his works are used as the inspiration for a young man trying to serenade a female colleague . this segment was referenced in the second and third series of the programme as well . occasional mention is made of campion ( '' campian '' ) in the comic strip 9 chickweed lane ( i.e . , 5 april 2004 ) , referencing historical context for playing the lute . see also . canons of elizabethan poetry . references . bibliography . bullen , a h ( ed . ) . songs and masques , with observations in the art of english poesy ( london : a h bullen , 1903 ) . campion , thomas . a book of airs , as written to be sung to the lute and viol ( peter pauper press , 1944 ) . davis , walter r . thomas campion ( twayne publishers , 1987 ) . davis , walter r . and j . mas patrick , eds . the works of thomas campion . w.w . norton & co . , 1970 . eldridge , muriel t . thomas campion : his poetry and music ( vantage press , 1971 ) . lindley , david . thomas campion ( leiden , 1986 ) . lowbury , edward , et al . thomas campion : poet , composer , physician . chatto & windus , 1970 . macdonagh , thomas . thomas campion and the art of english poetry ( dublin : talbot press , 1913 ) . vivian , percival ( ed . ) . campion 's works ( oxford : clarendon press , 1909 ) . watson , george & willison , ian roy . the new cambridge bibliography of english literature , volume 1 ( cambridge university press , 1971 ) pp . & nbsp ; 1905–6 . external links . text : biography ( poetry foundation ) thomas campion – life and works ( luminarium : anthology of english literature ) husoy , lance . thomas campion and the web of patronage music : midi file arrangements of several songs by campion ( tony catalano 's classical guitar midi page ) music collection in cambridge digital library which contains early copies/examples of campion 's compositions