Lieutenant

etymology . the word lieutenant derives from french ; the lieu meaning '' place '' as in a position ( cf . in lieu of ) ; and tenant meaning '' holding '' as in '' holding a position '' ; thus a '' lieutenant '' is a placeholder for a superior , during their absence ( compare the latin locum tenens ) . in the 19th century , british writers who considered this word either an imposition on the english language , or difficult for common soldiers and sailors , argued for it to be replaced by the calque '' steadholder '' . however , their efforts failed , and the french word is still used , along with its many variations ( e.g . lieutenant colonel , lieutenant general , lieutenant commander , flight lieutenant , second lieutenant and many non-english language examples ) , in both the old and the new world . pronunciation . pronunciation of lieutenant is generally split between the forms and , with the former generally associated with the armies of british commonwealth countries and the republic of ireland ; and the latter generally associated with anyone from the united states . american heritage dictionary , s.v . '' lieutenant '' the early history of the pronunciation is unclear ; middle english spellings suggest that both proununciations may have existed even then . oxford english dictionary . the majority of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century sources show pronunciations with /v/ or /f/ , but bullokar has /liu/ . the rare old french variant spelling luef for modern french lieu ( 'place ' ) supports the suggestion that a final of the old french word was in certain environments perceived as an . furthermore , in latin , the lingua franca of the era , the letter v is used for both u and v . in royal navy tradition—and other english-speaking navies outside the united states—a reduced pronunciation is used . this is not recognised as current by recent editions of the oed ( although the rn pronunciation was included in editions of oed up until the 1970s ) . army ranks . conventionally , armies and other services or branches that use army-style rank titles have two grades of lieutenant , but a few also use a third , more junior , rank . historically , the '' lieutenant '' was the deputy to a '' captain '' , and as the rank structure of armies began to formalise , this came to mean that a captain commanded a company and had several lieutenants , each commanding a platoon . where more junior officers were employed as deputies to the lieutenant , they went by many names , including second lieutenant , sub-lieutenant , ensign and cornet . some parts of the british army , including the royal artillery , royal engineers and fusilier regiments , used first lieutenant as well as second lieutenant until the end of the 19th century , and some british army regiments still preserve cornet as an official alternative to second lieutenant . lieutenant . the senior grade of lieutenant is known as first lieutenant in the united states , and as lieutenant in the united kingdom and the rest of the english language world . in countries that do not speak english , the rank title usually translates as '' lieutenant '' , but may also translate as '' first lieutenant '' or '' senior lieutenant '' . the israel defense forces rank segen ( סגן ) literally translates as '' deputy '' , which is equivalent to a lieutenant . in the finnish military there is a senior lieutenant grade that ranks above lieutenant and second lieutenant but below captain ; it does not have an english equivalent . in germany it is called oberleutnant ( high-lieutenant ) . there is great variation in the insignia used worldwide . in most english-speaking and arabic-speaking countries , as well as a number of european and south american nations , full lieutenants ( and equivalents ) usually wear two stars ( pips ) and second lieutenants ( and equivalents ) one . an example of an exception is the united states , whose armed forces distinguish their lieutenant ranks with one silver bar for first lieutenant and one gold ( brass ) bar for second lieutenant . file : australian army of-1b.svg australia file : bangladesh-army-of-1b.svg bangladesh file : bosnia and herzegovina 1st lieutenant insignia.svg bosnia and herzegovina file : primeiro-tenente-v.gif brazil ( primeiro tenente ) file : cdn-army-lt ( of-1a ) -2014.svg canada file : egypt_army_-_of01b.svg egypt file : lieutenant des eaux et forêts.png french onf file : army-fra-of-01a.svg france file : georgia army of-2.png georgia file:221-oberleutnant.png germany file : army-gre-of-01a.svg greece file : lieutenant of the indian army.svg india file:14-tni army-1lt.svg indonesia file : sotvan 1.png iran file : ie-army-of1a.png ireland file : idf segen.svg israel file : rank insignia of tenete of the army of italy ( 1973 ) . svg italy file : jasdf first lieutenant insignia ( b ) . svg japan ( jasdf ) file : dprk-navy-of-1c.svg korea , north ( navy , senior lieutenant ) file : rokmc-of-1b.svg korea , south ( marine ) file : porucnik-arm-shoulder.png north macedonia file : mexican military teniente.gif mexico file : army-pol-of-01a.svg poland file : of-1 ( b ) pakistan army.svg pakistan file : pa 1lt svc.svg philippines ( philippine army ) file : ro-army-of1a.png romania file : raf a f1fstlt 2010.png russia ( senior lieutenant ) file : saa-of-1b.svg south africa file : swe-löjtnant.svg sweden file : rta_of-1b_ ( lieutenant ) . svg thailand file : ua shoulder mark 13.svg ukrainian army ( senior lieutenant ) file : uner13.png ukrainian navy ( senior lieutenant ) file : british army of-1b.svg united kingdom file : us-of1a.svg united states file : ptteejb-gnb.png venezuelan army . second lieutenant . second lieutenant is usually the most junior grade of commissioned officer . in most cases , newly commissioned officers do not remain at the rank for long before being promoted , and both university graduates and officers commissioned from the ranks may skip the rank altogether . in non-english-speaking countries , the equivalent rank title may translate as '' second lieutenant '' , '' lieutenant '' , '' sub-lieutenant '' or '' junior lieutenant '' . non-english terms include alferes ( portuguese army and air force ) , alférez ( spanish army and air force ) , fänrik ( swedish armed forces ) , ensign , leutnant ( german army ) , letnan ( indonesian national armed forces ) , poručík ( czech army ) , segen mishne ( israel defense forces ) or løjtnant ( danish army ) . file : australian army of-1a.svg australia file : bangladesh-army-of-1a.svg bangladesh file : bosnia_and_herzegovina_lieutenant_insignia.svg bosnia and herzegovina file : segundo-tenente-v.gif brazil ( segundo tenente ) file : cdn-army-2lt ( of-1 ) -2014.svg canada file : egypt_army_-_of01a.svg egypt file : sous-lieutenant des eaux et forêts.png france file : georgia army of-1b.png georgia file:211-leutnant.png germany file : army-gre-of-01b.svg greece file:13-tni army-2lt.svg indonesia file : sotvan 2.png iran file : ie-army-of1b.png ireland file : idf segen mishne.svg israel file : rank insignia of sottotenete of the army of italy ( 1973 ) . svg italy file : jgsdf second lieutenant insignia ( b ) . svg japan ( jgsdf ) file : dprk-army-of-1a.svg korea , north ( army ) file : 소위.jpg korea , south ( air force ) file : potporucnik-arm-shoulder.png north macedonia file : mexican military subteniente.gif mexico file : army-pol-of-01b.svg poland file : of-1 ( a ) pakistan army.svg pakistan file : pa 2lt svc.svg philippines ( philippine army ) file : ro-army-of1b.png romania file : saa-of-1a.svg south africa file : swe-fänrik.svg sweden file : rta_of-1a_ ( sub_lieutenant ) . svg thailand file : ua shoulder mark 12.svg ukrainian army file : uner12.png ukrainian navy file : british army of-1a.svg united kingdom file : us-of1b.svg united states file : tteejb-gnb.png venezuelan army . third lieutenant . file : rank insignia of младши лейтенант of the bulgarian army.png bulgaria file : georgia army of-1a.png georgia junior lt . army file : sotvan 3.png iran file : raf n f1c-mllt 2010–.png russia junior lt . navy file : raf a f1-3sublt after2010.png russia junior lt . army/rvsn file : ua shoulder mark 11.svg ukrainian army ( junior lt . ) file : uner11.png ukrainian navy ( junior lt . ) . eastern european ranks . a few non-english-speaking militaries maintain a lower rank , frequently translated as '' third lieutenant '' of1c . the rank title may actually translate as '' second lieutenant '' , '' junior lieutenant '' , '' sub-lieutenant '' or '' ensign '' . warsaw pact countries ( except poland since 1957 ) standardised their ranking systems on the soviet system . some of the former soviet and warsaw pact nations have now discarded the third rank while many retain it like ukraine , georgia and armenia . other nations use the term '' senior poruchik '' or '' nadporuchik '' ( of1a ) , '' poruchik '' ( of1b ) , and '' junior poruchik '' or '' podporuchik '' ( of1c ) . russia . the soviet union used the three ranks senior lieutenant ( старший лейтенант ; starshy leytenant - of1a ) , lieutenant ( лейтенант ; leytenant - of1b ) , and junior lieutenant ( мла́дший лейтенант ; mladshy leytenant - of1c ) . the armed forces of the russian federation inherited this rank structure . if military personnel serve in a guards formation , or on a guards warship , the rank designation will be preceded by the word '' guards '' ( e.g . '' guards junior lieutenant '' ) . for civil or military personnel in the medical or judicial professions , the military rank will be preceded by the words '' legal '' or '' medical service '' . . political titles . . canada . in canada the representative of the canadian monarch in each of the canadian provinces is called the lieutenant governor . the lieutenant governor exercises all the royal prerogative powers that the monarch holds . france . in french history , '' lieutenant du roi '' was a title borne by the officer sent with military powers to represent the king in certain provinces . it is in the sense of a deputy that it has entered into the titles of more senior officers , lieutenant general and lieutenant colonel . united kingdom . the british monarch 's representatives in the counties of the united kingdom are called lord lieutenant . the lord lieutenant of ireland performed the function of viceroy in ireland . united states . the lieutenant governor is an official in state governments of 45 out of 50 united states . in most cases , the lieutenant governor is the highest officer of state after the governor , standing in for the governor when they are absent from the state or temporarily incapacitated . in the event a governor dies , resigns , or is removed from office , the lieutenant governor typically becomes governor . in the united states , a governor serves as the chief executive officer and commander-in-chief in each of the fifty states and in the five permanently inhabited territories , functioning as both head of state and head of government therein . other organisations . . the boys ' brigade . leaders , or officers of the boys ' brigade , particularly in the united kingdom , are ranked as lieutenants after having completed their formal training , before which they are ranked as warrant officers . officers serving in staff or command posts are awarded the '' brevet '' rank of captain , these officers then revert to their lieutenancy after having completed their tour of duty . national civil defence cadet corps . the rank of cadet lieutenant ( clt ) is given to officer cadet trainees who have passed their officer 's course . the rank insignia of clt is a pip and a bar below it . clts may be promoted to the rank of senior cadet lieutenant ( s/clt ) , which has a rank insignia of a pip and two bars below it . . the salvation army . the salvation army also uses lieutenant to denote first time officers , or clergymen/women . see also . captain lieutenant military rank comparative military ranks tenentism -- > . references . external links .