Swing music

overview . swing has its roots in 1920s dance music ensembles , which began using new styles of written arrangements , incorporating rhythmic innovations pioneered by louis armstrong and other jazzmen . during the world war ii swing began to decline in popularity , and after war jump blues and bebop gained popularity . swing blended with other genres to create new musical styles . in country music , artists such as jimmie rodgers , moon mullican and bob wills introduced elements of swing along with blues to create a genre called '' western swing '' . price , '' jazz guitar and western swing '' , p . 82 . famous roma guitarist django reinhardt created gypsy swing music dregni , michael ( 2008 ) . gypsy jazz : in search of django reinhardt and the soul of gypsy swing . oxford university press . pp . 10–13 . and reinhardt composed gypsy swing standard '' minor swing '' . dregni , michael ( 2004 ) . django : the life and music of a gypsy legend . oxford university press . in the late 1980s to early 1990s , new urban-styled swing-beat emerged called new jack swing ( new york go-go ) , created by young producer teddy riley . teddie riley retrieved 11 december 2020 in the late 1990s and into the 2000s , there was a swing revival , led by squirrel nut zippers , brian setzer orchestra and big bad voodoo daddy . 1920s : roots . developments in dance orchestra and jazz music during the 1920s both contributed to the development of the 1930s swing style . starting in 1923 , the fletcher henderson orchestra featured innovative arrangements by don redman that featured call-response interplay between brass and reed sections , and interludes arranged to back up soloists . the arrangements also had a smoother rhythmic sense than the ragtime-influenced arrangements that were the more typical '' hot '' dance music of the day . in 1924 louis armstrong joined the henderson band , lending impetus to an even greater emphasis on soloists . the henderson band also featured coleman hawkins , benny carter , and buster bailey as soloists , who all were influential in the development of swing era instrumental styles . during the henderson band 's extended residency at the roseland ballroom in new york , it became influential on other big bands . duke ellington credited the henderson band with being an early influence when he was developing the sound for his own band . in 1925 armstrong left the henderson band and would add his innovations to new orleans style jazz to develop chicago style jazz , another step towards swing . traditional new orleans style jazz was based on a two-beat meter and contrapuntal improvisation led by a trumpet or cornet , typically followed by a clarinet and trombone in a call-response pattern . the rhythm section consisted of a sousaphone and drums , and sometimes a banjo . by the early 1920s guitars and pianos sometimes substituted for the banjo and a string bass sometimes substituted for the sousaphone . use of the string bass opened possibilities for 4/4 instead of 2/4 time at faster tempos , which increased rhythmic freedom . the chicago style released the soloist from the constraints of contrapuntal improvisation with other front-line instruments , lending greater freedom in creating melodic lines . louis armstrong used the additional freedom of the new format with 4/4 time , accenting the second and fourth beats and anticipating the main beats with lead-in notes in his solos to create a sense of rhythmic pulse that happened between the beats as well as on them , i.e . swing . harker , brian c . , 1997 , early musical development of louis armstrong , 1921–1928 , unpublished phd dissertation , columbia university , 390 p . plus appendix in 1927 armstrong worked with pianist earl hines , who had a similar impact on his instrument as armstrong had on trumpet . hines ' melodic , horn-like conception of playing deviated from the contemporary conventions in jazz piano centered on building rhythmic patterns around '' pivot notes . '' his approaches to rhythm and phrasing were also free and daring , exploring ideas that would define swing playing . his approach to rhythm often used accents on the lead-in instead of the main beat , and mixed meters , to build a sense of anticipation to the rhythm and make his playing swing . he also used '' stops '' or musical silences to build tension in his phrasing . cook , richard ( 2005 ) , jazz encyclopedia , london : penguin , . kirchner , bill , ed . ( 2000 ) , the oxford companion to jazz , new york : oxford university press , . hines ' style was a seminal influence on the styles of swing-era pianists teddy wilson , art tatum , jess stacy , nat '' king '' cole , erroll garner , mary lou williams , and jay mcshann . black territory dance bands in the southwest were developing dynamic styles that often went in the direction of blues-based simplicity , using riffs in a call-response pattern to build a strong , danceable rhythm and provide a musical platform for extended solos . russell , ross , jazz style in kansas city and the southwest , berkeley , ca , university of california press , 1972 , 291 p . the rhythm-heavy tunes for dancing were called '' stomps . '' the requirement for volume led to continued use of the sousaphone over the string bass with the larger ensembles , which dictated a more conservative approach to rhythm based on 2/4 time signatures . meanwhile , string bass players such as walter page were developing their technique to the point where they could hold down the bottom end of a full-sized dance orchestra . the growth of radio broadcasting and the recording industry in the 1920s allowed some of the more popular dance bands to gain national exposure . the most popular style of dance orchestra was the '' sweet '' style , often with strings . paul whiteman developed a style he called '' symphonic jazz , '' grafting a classical approach over his interpretation of jazz rhythms in an approach he hoped would be the future of jazz . whiteman 's orchestra enjoyed great commercial success and was a major influence on the sweet bands . jean goldkette 's victor recording orchestra featured many of the top white jazz musicians of the day including bix beiderbecke , jimmy dorsey , frank trumbauer , pee wee russell , eddie lang , and joe venuti . the victor recording orchestra won the respect of the fletcher henderson orchestra in a battle of the bands ; henderson 's cornetist rex stewart credited the goldkette band with being the most influential white band in the development of swing music before benny goodman's . goldkette on the red hot jazz archive retrieved 22-05-2017 . nye , russell b . , 1976 , music in the twenties : the jean goldkette orchestra , prospects , an annual of american cultural studies 1:179–203 , october 1976 , doi : 10.1017/s0361233300004361 as a dance music promoter and agent , goldkette also helped organize and promote mckinney 's cotton pickers and glen gray 's orange blossoms ( later the casa loma orchestra ) , two other detroit-area bands that were influential in the early swing era . early swing . as the 1920s turned to the 1930s , the new concepts in rhythm and ensemble playing that comprised the swing style were transforming the sounds of large and small bands . starting in 1928 , the earl hines orchestra was broadcast throughout much of the midwest from the grand terrace cafe in chicago , where hines had the opportunity to expound upon his new approaches to rhythm and phrasing with a big band . hines ' arranger jimmy mundy would later contribute to the catalog of the benny goodman orchestra . the duke ellington orchestra had its new sounds broadcast nationally from new york 's cotton club , followed by the cab calloway orchestra and the jimmie lunceford orchestra . also in new york , the fletcher henderson orchestra featured the new style at the roseland ballroom and the swing powerhouse chick webb orchestra started its extended stay at the savoy ballroom in 1931 . bennie moten and the kansas city orchestra showcased the riff-propelled , solo-oriented form of swing that had been developing in the hothouse of kansas city . emblematic of the evolving music was the change in the name of moten 's signature tune , from '' moten stomp '' to '' moten swing . '' moten 's orchestra had a highly successful tour in late 1932 . audiences raved about the new music , and at the pearl theatre in philadelphia in december 1932 , the doors were let open to the public who crammed into the theatre to hear the new sound , demanding seven encores from moten 's orchestra . with the early 1930s came the financial difficulties of the great depression that curtailed recording of the new music and drove some bands out of business , including the fletcher henderson orchestra and mckinney 's cotton pickers in 1934 . henderson 's next business was selling arrangements to up-and-coming bandleader benny goodman . '' sweet '' dance music remained most popular with white audiences but the casa loma orchestra and the benny goodman orchestra went against that grain , targeting the new swing style to younger audiences . 1935–1946 : the swing era . in 1935 the benny goodman orchestra had won a spot on the radio show '' let 's dance '' and started showcasing an updated repertoire featuring fletcher henderson arrangements . goodman 's slot was on after midnight in the east , and few people heard it . it was on earlier on the west coast and developed the audience that later led to goodman 's palomar ballroom triumph . at the palomar engagement starting on august 21 , 1935 , audiences of young white dancers favored goodman 's rhythm and daring arrangements . the sudden success of the goodman orchestra transformed the landscape of popular music in america . goodman 's success with '' hot '' swing brought forth imitators and enthusiasts of the new style throughout the world of dance bands , which launched the '' swing era '' that lasted until 1946 . a typical song played in swing style would feature a strong , anchoring rhythm section in support of more loosely-tied woodwind and brass sections playing call-response to each other . the level of improvisation that the audience might expect varied with the arrangement , song , band , and band-leader . typically included in big band swing arrangements were an introductory chorus that stated the theme , choruses arranged for soloists , and climactic out-choruses . some arrangements were built entirely around a featured soloist or vocalist . some bands used string or vocal sections , or both . swing-era repertoire included the great american songbook of tin pan alley standards , band originals , traditional jazz tunes such as the “ king porter stomp ” , with which the goodman orchestra had a smash hit , and blues . hot swing music is strongly associated with the jitterbug dancing that became a national craze accompanying the swing craze . swing dancing originated in the late 1920s as the '' lindy hop , '' and would later incorporate other styles including the suzie q , truckin ' , peckin ' jive , the big apple , and the shag in various combinations of moves . a subculture of jitterbuggers , sometimes growing quite competitive , congregated around ballrooms that featured hot swing music . a dance floor full of jitterbuggers had cinematic appeal ; they were sometimes featured in newsreels and movies . some of the top jitterbuggers gathered in professional dance troupes such as whitey 's lindy hoppers ( featured in a day at the races , everybody dance , and hellzapoppin ' ) . swing ( dance ) would outlive the swing era , becoming associated with r & b and early rock & roll . as with many new popular musical styles , swing met with some resistance because of its improvisation , tempo , occasionally risqué lyrics , and frenetic dancing . audiences used to traditional '' sweet '' arrangements , such as those offered by guy lombardo , sammy kaye , kay kyser and shep fields , were taken aback by the rambunctiousness of swing music . swing was sometimes regarded as light entertainment , more of an industry to sell records to the masses than a form of art , among fans of both jazz and '' serious '' music . some jazz critics such as hugues panassié held the polyphonic improvisation of new orleans jazz to be the pure form of jazz , with swing a form corrupted by regimentation and commercialism . panassié was also an advocate of the theory that jazz was a primal expression of the black american experience and that white musicians , or black musicians who became interested in more sophisticated musical ideas , were generally incapable of expressing its core values . blowin ' hot and cool : jazz and its critics , by john remo gennari , phd ( born 1960 ) , university of chicago press ( 2006 ) , pg . 58 ; in his 1941 autobiography , w . c . handy wrote that '' prominent white orchestra leaders , concert singers and others are making commercial use of negro music in its various phases . that 's why they introduced '' swing '' which is not a musical form '' ( no comment on fletcher henderson , earl hines , duke ellington , or count basie ) . the dixieland revival started in the late 1930s as a self-conscious re-creation of new orleans jazz in reaction against the orchestrated style of big band swing . some swing bandleaders saw opportunities in the dixieland revival . tommy dorsey and bob crosby were examples of dixieland ensembles within big swing bands . between the poles of hot and sweet , middlebrow interpretations of swing led to great commercial success for bands such as those led by artie shaw , glenn miller and tommy dorsey . miller 's trademark clarinet-led reed section was decidedly '' sweet , '' but the miller catalog had no shortage of bouncy , medium-tempo dance tunes and some up-tempo tunes such as mission to moscow and the lionel hampton composition “ flying home ” . '' the sentimental gentleman of swing '' tommy dorsey made a nod to the hot side by hiring jazz trumpeter and goodman alumnus bunny berigan , then hiring jimmie lunceford 's arranger sy oliver to spice up his catalog in 1939 . new york became a touchstone for national success of big bands , with nationally broadcast engagements at the roseland and savoy ballrooms a sign that a swing band had arrived on the national scene . with its savoy engagement in 1937 , the count basie orchestra brought the riff-and-solo oriented kansas city style of swing to national attention . the basie orchestra collectively and individually would influence later styles that would give rise to the smaller '' jump '' bands and bebop . the chick webb orchestra remained closely identified with the savoy ballroom , having originated the tune “ stompin ' at the savoy , ” and became feared in the savoy 's battles of the bands . it humiliated goodman 's band , and had memorable encounters with the ellington and basie bands . the goodman band 's 1938 carnegie hall concert turned into a summit of swing , with guests from the basie and ellington bands invited for a jam session after the goodman band 's performance . coleman hawkins arrived back from an extended stay in europe to new york in 1939 , recorded his famous version of “ body and soul ” , and fronted his own big band . 1940 saw top-flight musicians such as charlie parker , dizzy gillespie , don byas , charlie christian , and gene ramey , whose careers in swing had brought them to new york , beginning to coalesce and develop the ideas that would become bebop . 1940s : decline . the early 1940s saw emerging trends in popular music and jazz that would , once they had run their course , result in the end of the swing era . vocalists were becoming the star attractions of the big bands . vocalist ella fitzgerald , after joining the chick webb orchestra in 1936 , propelled the band to great popularity and the band continued under her name after webb 's death in 1939 . in 1940 vocalist vaughn monroe was leading his own big band and frank sinatra was becoming the star attraction of the tommy dorsey orchestra , inciting mass hysteria among bobby-soxers . vocalist peggy lee joined the goodman orchestra in 1941 for a two-year stint , quickly becoming its star attraction on its biggest hits . some big bands were moving away from the swing styles that dominated the late 1930s , for both commercial and creative reasons . some of the more commercial big bands catered to more '' sweet '' sensibilities with string sections . some bandleaders such as john kirby , raymond scott , and claude thornhill were fusing swing with classical repertoire . lower manpower requirements and simplicity favored the rise of small band swing . the savoy sultans and other smaller bands led by louis jordan , lucky millinder , louis prima , and tony pastor were showcasing an exuberant '' jump swing '' style that would lead to the postwar rise of r & b . in a 1939 downbeat interview , duke ellington expressed dissatisfaction with the creative state of swing music ; '' it 's not very difficult to understand the evolution of jazz into swing . ten years ago this type of music was flourishing , albeit amidst adverse conditions and surrounded by hearty indifference.it is the repetition and monotony of present-day swing arrangements which bode ill for the future . '' downbeat , february 1939 , pp . 2–16 within a few years he and other bandleaders would be delving into more ambitious , and less danceable , forms of orchestral jazz and the creative forefront for soloists would be moving into smaller ensembles and bebop . the earl hines orchestra in 1943 featured a collection of young , forward-looking musicians who were at the core of the bebop movement and would in the following year be in the billy eckstine , the first big band to showcase bebop . as the swing era went into decline , it secured legacies in vocalist-centered popular music , '' progressive '' big band jazz , r & b , and bebop . the trend away from big band swing was accelerated by wartime conditions and royalty conflicts . in 1941 the american society of composers and producers ( ascap ) demanded bigger royalties from broadcasters and the broadcasters refused . consequently , ascap banned the large repertoire they controlled from airplay , severely restricting what the radio audience could hear . ascap also demanded pre-approval of set lists and even written solos for live broadcasts , to assure that not even a quoted fragment of ascap repertoire was broadcast . those restrictions made broadcast swing much less appealing for the year in which the ban was in place . big band swing remained popular during the war years , but the resources required to support it became problematic . wartime restriction on travel , coupled with rising expenses , curtailed road touring . the manpower requirements for big swing bands placed a burden on the scarce resources available for touring and were impacted by the military draft . in july 1942 the american federation of musicians called a ban on recording until record labels agreed to pay royalties to musicians . that stopped recording of instrumental music for major labels for over a year , with the last labels agreeing to new contract terms in november 1944 . in the meantime , vocalists continued to record backed by vocal groups and the recording industry released earlier swing recordings from their vaults , increasingly reflecting the popularity of big band vocalists . in 1943 columbia records re-released the 1939 recording of “ all or nothing at all ” by the harry james with frank sinatra , giving sinatra top billing ( '' acc . harry james and his orchestra '' ) . the recording found the commercial success that had eluded its original release . small band swing was recorded for small specialty labels not affected by the ban . these labels had limited distribution centered in large urban markets , which tended to limit the size of the ensembles with which recording could be a money-making proposition . another blow fell on the market for dance-oriented swing in 1944 when the federal government levied a 30 % excise tax on '' dancing '' nightclubs , undercutting the market for dance music in smaller venues . stomping the blues . by albert murray . da capo press . 2000 . pages 109 , 110 . , the war 's end saw the elements that had been unified under big band swing scattered into separate styles and markets . some '' progressive '' big bands such as those led by stan kenton and boyd raeburn stayed oriented towards jazz , but not jazz for dancing . much of the top instrumental talent of the period were performing in small band formats ranging from r & b to bebop . the hard core dancing niche formerly occupied by hot big band swing was occupied by small '' jump '' bands and r & b . popular music was centered on vocalists , and a full-time big band to back up a vocalist was increasingly seen as an unnecessary expense . by 1947 the economics of popular music led to the disbanding of many established big bands . big band music would experience a resurgence during the 1950s , but the connection between the later big band music and the swing era was tenuous . 1950s–1960s . swingin ' pop . swing bands and sales continued to decline from 1953 to 1954 . in 1955 , a list of top recording artists from the previous year was publicly released . the list revealed that big band sales have decreased since the early 1950s . however , big band music saw a revival in the 1950s and 1960s . one impetus was the demand for studio and stage orchestras as backups for popular vocalists , and in radio and television broadcasts . ability to adapt performing styles to various situations was an essential skill among these bands-for-hire , with a somewhat sedated version of swing in common use for backing up vocalists . the resurgent commercial success of frank sinatra with a mildly swinging backup during the mid-1950s solidified the trend . it became a sound associated with pop vocalists such as bobby darin , dean martin , judy garland , and nat king cole , as well as jazz-oriented vocalists such as ella fitzgerald and keely smith . many of these singers were also involved in the '' less swinging '' vocal pop music of this period . the bands in these contexts performed in relative anonymity , receiving secondary credit beneath the top billing . some , such as the nelson riddle and gordon jenkins orchestras , became well known in their own right , with riddle particularly associated with the success of sinatra and cole . swingin ' pop remained popular into the mid-1960s , becoming one current of the '' easy listening '' genre . big band jazz . big band jazz made a comeback as well . the stan kenton and woody herman bands maintained their popularity during lean years of the late 1940s and beyond , making their mark with innovative arrangements and high-level jazz soloists ( shorty rogers , art pepper , kai winding , stan getz , al cohn , zoot sims , serge chaloff , gene ammons , sal nistico ) . lionel hampton was a leader in the r & b genre during the late 1940s then re-entered big band jazz in the early 1950s , remaining a popular attraction through the 1960s . count basie and duke ellington had both downsized their big bands during the first half of the 1950s , then reconstituted them by 1956 . ellington 's venture back into big band jazz was encouraged by its reception at the 1956 newport jazz festival . the basie and ellington bands flourished creatively and commercially through the 1960s and beyond , with both veteran leaders receiving high acclaim for their contemporary work and performing until they were physically unable . drummer buddy rich , after briefly leading one big band during the late 1940s and performing in various jazz and big band gigs , formed his definitive big band in 1966 . his name became synonymous with the dynamic , exuberant style of his big band . other big jazz bands that drove the 1950s–60s revival include those led by thad jones , mel lewis , quincy jones , and oliver nelson . big band jazz remains a major component of college jazz instruction curricula . cross-genre swing . in country music jimmie rodgers , moon mullican , and bob wills combined elements of swing and blues to create a western swing . mullican left the cliff bruner band to pursue solo career that included many songs that maintained a swing structure . artists like willie nelson and asleep at the wheel have continued the swing elements of country music . asleep at the wheel has also recorded the count basie tunes “ one o'clock jump ” , “ jumpin ' at the woodside ” , and “ song of the wanderer ” using a steel guitar as a stand-in for a horn section . nat king cole followed sinatra into pop music , bringing with him a similar combination of swing and ballads . like mullican , he was important in bringing piano to the fore of popular music . gypsy swing is an outgrowth of the jazz violin swing of joe venuti and eddie lang . in europe it was heard in the music of guitarist django reinhardt and violinist stéphane grappelli . their repertoire overlaps 1930s swing , including french popular music , gypsy songs , and compositions by reinhardt , but gypsy swing bands are formulated differently . there is no brass or percussion ; guitars and bass form the backbone , with violin , accordion , clarinet or guitar taking the lead . gypsy swing groups generally have no more than five players . although they originated in different continents , similarities have often been noted between gypsy swing and western swing ] l , leading to various fusions . rock music hitmakers like fats domino and elvis presley included swing-era standards in their repertoire , making crooner ballads “ are you lonesome tonight ” and “ my blue heaven ” into rock and roll-era hits . the doo-wop vocal group the marcels had a big hit with their lively version of the swing-era ballad “ blue moon ” . 1960s–2000 : big band nostalgia and swing revival . though swing music was no longer mainstream , fans could attend '' big band nostalgia '' tours from the 1970s into the 1980s . the tours featured bandleaders and vocalists of the swing era who were semi-retired , such as harry james and vocalist dick haymes . historically-themed radio broadcasts featuring period comedy , melodrama , and music also played a role in sustaining interest in the music of the swing era . dan hicks and his hot licks , and later david grisman , presented adaptations of gypsy swing , rekindling interest in the musical form . other swing revivals occurred during the 1970s . the jazz , r & b , and swing revival vocal group manhattan transfer and bette midler included swing era hits on albums during the early 1970s . in seattle the new deal rhythm band and the horns o plenty orchestra revived 1930s swing with a dose of comedy behind vocalists phil '' de basket '' shallat , cheryl bentyne , and six-foot-tall '' little janie '' lambert . bentyne would leave the new deal rhythm band in 1978 for her long career with manhattan transfer . founding leader of the new deal rhythm band john holte led swing revival bands in the seattle area until 2003 . a swing revival occurred during the 1990s and 2000s led by royal crown revue , big bad voodoo daddy , the cherry poppin ' daddies , squirrel nut zippers , lavay smith , and brian setzer . many of the bands played neo-swing which combined swing with rockabilly , ska , and rock . the music brought a revival in swing dancing . in 2001 robbie williams 's album swing when you 're winning consisted mainly of popular swing covers . the album sold more than 7 million copies worldwide . in november 2013 , robbie williams released swings both ways . 1990s to present : swing house , electro swing and swing pop . another modern development consists of fusing swing ( original , or remixes of classics ) with hip hop and house techniques . '' swing house '' was particularly popular during the late 1980s and early 1990s . influences incorporated into it include louis jordan and louis prima . electro swing is mainly popular in europe , and electro swing artists incorporate influences such as tango and django reinhardt 's gypsy swing . leading artists include caravan palace and parov stelar . both genres are connected with a revival of swing dances , such as the lindy hop . see also . big band gypsy jazz list of music styles swing ( dance ) swing ( jazz performance style ) original dixieland jass band . notes . further reading . erenberg , lewis a . swingin ' the dream : big band jazz and the rebirth of american culture ( 1998 ) gitler , ira . swing to bop : an oral history of the transition in jazz in the 1940s ( 1987 ) hennessey , thomas j . from jazz to swing : african-americans and their music , 1890–1935 ( 1994 ) . schuller , gunther . the swing era : the development of jazz , 1930–1945 ( 1991 ) spring , howard . '' swing and the lindy hop : dance , venue , media , and tradition '' . american music , vol . 15 , no . 2 ( summer , 1997 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 183–207 . stowe , david . swing changes : big-band jazz in new deal america ( 1996 ) tucker , sherrie . swing shift : 'all-girl ' bands of the 1940s ( 2000 )