The Fountainhead

plot . in early 1922 , howard roark is expelled from the architecture department of the stanton institute of technology because he has not adhered to the school 's preference for historical convention in building design . roark goes to new york city and gets a job with henry cameron . cameron was once a renowned architect , but now gets few commissions . in the meantime , roark 's popular , but vacuous , fellow student and housemate peter keating ( whom roark sometimes helped with projects ) graduates with high honors . he too moves to new york , where he has been offered a position with the prestigious architecture firm , francon & heyer . keating ingratiates himself with guy francon and works to remove rivals among his coworkers . after francon 's partner , lucius heyer , suffers a fatal stroke brought on by keating 's antagonism , francon chooses keating to replace him . meanwhile , roark and cameron create inspired work , but struggle financially . after cameron retires , keating hires roark , whom francon soon fires for refusing to design a building in the classical style . roark works briefly at another firm , then opens his own office but has trouble finding clients and closes it down . he gets a job in a granite quarry owned by francon . there he meets francon 's daughter dominique , a columnist for the new york banner , while she is staying at her family 's estate nearby . they are immediately attracted to each other , leading to a rough sexual encounter that dominique later calls a rape . : '' he raped me . that 's how it began . '' shortly after , roark is notified that a client is ready to start a new building , and he returns to new york . dominique also returns to new york and learns roark is an architect . she attacks his work in public , but visits him for secret sexual encounters . ellsworth m . toohey , who writes a popular architecture column in the banner , is an outspoken socialism who shapes public opinion through his column and a circle of influential associates . toohey sets out to destroy roark through a smear campaign . he recommends roark to hopton stoddard , a wealthy acquaintance who wants to build a temple of the human spirit . roark 's unusual design includes a nude statue modeled on dominique ; toohey persuades stoddard to sue roark for malpractice . toohey and several architects ( including keating ) testify at the trial that roark is incompetent as an architect due to his rejection of historical styles . dominique speaks in roark 's defense , but he loses the case . dominique decides that since she can not have the world she wants , in which men like roark are recognized for their greatness , she will live entirely in the world she has , which shuns roark and praises keating . she marries keating and turns herself over to him , doing and saying whatever he wants , such as persuading potential clients to hire him instead of roark . to win keating a prestigious commission offered by gail wynand , the owner and editor-in-chief of the banner , dominique agrees to sleep with wynand . wynand is so strongly attracted to dominique that he pays keating to divorce her , after which wynand and dominique are married . wanting to build a home for himself and his new wife , wynand discovers that roark designed every building he likes and so hires him . roark and wynand become close friends ; wynand is unaware of roark 's past relationship with dominique . washed up and out of the public eye , keating pleads with toohey to use his influence to get the commission for the much-sought-after cortlandt housing project . keating knows his most successful projects were aided by roark , so he asks for roark 's help in designing cortlandt . roark agrees in exchange for complete anonymity and keating 's promise that it will be built exactly as designed . after taking a long vacation with wynand , roark returns to find that keating was not able to prevent major changes from being made in cortlandt 's construction . roark dynamites the project to prevent the subversion of his vision . roark is arrested and his action is widely condemned , but wynand decides to use his papers to defend his friend . this unpopular stance hurts the circulation of his newspapers , and wynand 's employees go on strike after wynand dismisses toohey for disobeying him and criticizing roark . faced with the prospect of closing the paper , wynand gives in and publishes a denunciation of roark . at his trial , roark makes a speech about the value of ego and integrity , and he is found not guilty . dominique leaves wynand for roark . wynand , who has betrayed his own values by attacking roark , finally grasps the nature of the power he thought he held . he shuts down the banner and commissions a final building from roark , a skyscraper that will serve as a monument to human achievement . eighteen months later , the wynand building is under construction . dominique , now roark 's wife , enters the site to meet him atop its steel framework . major characters . howard roark . rand 's stated goal in writing fiction was to portray her vision of an ideal man . the character of howard roark , the protagonist of the fountainhead , was the first instance where she believed she had achieved this . roark embodies rand 's egoistic moral ideals , especially the virtues of independence smith , tara . '' unborrowed vision : independence and egoism in the fountainhead '' . in and integrity . schein , dina . '' roark 's integrity '' . in the character of roark was at least partly inspired by american architect frank lloyd wright . rand described the inspiration as limited to specific ideas he had about architecture and '' the pattern of his career '' . she denied that wright had anything to do with the philosophy expressed by roark or the events of the plot . berliner , michael s . '' howard roark and frank lloyd wright '' . in rand 's denials have not stopped commentators from claiming stronger connections between wright and roark . berliner , michael s . '' howard roark and frank lloyd wright '' . in wright equivocated about whether he thought roark was based on him , sometimes implying that he did , at other times denying it . berliner , michael s . '' howard roark and frank lloyd wright '' . in wright biographer ada louise huxtable described significant differences between wright 's philosophy and rand 's , and quoted him declaring , '' i deny the paternity and refuse to marry the mother . '' architecture critic martin filler said that roark resembles the swiss-french modernist architect le corbusier more closely than wright . . peter keating . in contrast to the individualistic roark , peter keating is a conformity who bases his choices on what others want . introduced to the reader as roark 's classmate in architecture school , keating does not really want to be an architect . he loves painting , but his mother steers him toward architecture instead . smith , tara . '' unborrowed vision : independence and egoism in the fountainhead '' . in in this as in all his decisions , keating does what others expect rather than follow his personal interests . he becomes a social climber , focused on improving his career and social standing using a combination of personal manipulation and conformity to popular styles . he follows a similar path in his private life : he chooses a loveless marriage to dominique instead of marrying the woman he loveswho lacks dominique 's beauty and social connections . by middle age , keating 's career is in decline and he is unhappy with his path , but it is too late for him to change . rand did not use a specific architect as a model for keating . berliner , michael s . '' howard roark and frank lloyd wright '' . in her inspiration for the character came from a neighbor she knew while working in hollywood in the early 1930s . rand asked this young woman to explain her goals in life . the woman 's response was focused on social comparisons : the neighbor wanted her material possessions and social standing to equal or exceed those of other people . rand created keating as an archetype of this motivation , which she saw as the opposite of self-interest . . dominique francon . dominique francon is the heroine of the fountainhead , described by rand as '' the woman for a man like howard roark '' . rand described dominique as similar to herself '' in a bad mood '' . for most of the novel , the character operates from what rand viewed as wrong ideas . believing that the values she admires can not survive in the real world , she chooses to turn away from them so that the world can not harm her . only at the end of the novel does she accept that she can be happy and survive . boeckmann , tore . '' rand 's literary romanticism '' . in the character has provoked varied reactions from commentators . philosopher chris matthew sciabarra called her '' one of the more bizarre characters in the novel '' . literature scholar mimi reisel gladstein called her '' an interesting case study in perverseness '' . writer tore boeckmann described her as a character with conflicting beliefs and saw her actions as a logical representation of how those conflicts might play out . boeckmann , tore . '' aristotle 's poetics and the fountainhead '' . in . gail wynand . gail wynand is a wealthy newspaper mogul who rose from a destitute childhood in the ghettoes of new york ( hell 's kitchen ) to control much of the city 's print media . while wynand shares many of the character qualities of roark , his success is dependent upon his ability to pander to public opinion . rand presents this as a tragic flaw that eventually leads to his downfall . in her journals rand described wynand as '' the man who could have been '' a heroic individualist , contrasting him to roark , '' the man who can be and is '' . some elements of wynand 's character were inspired by real-life newspaper tycoon william randolph hearst , berliner , michael s . '' howard roark and frank lloyd wright '' . in including hearst 's yellow journalism and mixed success in attempts to gain political influence . wynand ultimately fails in his attempts to wield power , losing his newspaper , his wife , and his friendship with roark . the character has been interpreted as a representation of the master morality described by philosopher friedrich nietzsche ; his tragic nature illustrates rand 's rejection of nietzsche 's philosophy . in rand 's view , a person like wynand , who seeks power over others , is as much a '' second-hander '' as a conformist such as keating . smith , tara . '' unborrowed vision : independence and egoism in the fountainhead '' . in . ellsworth toohey . ellsworth monkton toohey is roark 's antagonist . he is rand 's personification of evilthe most active and self-aware villain in any of her novels . minsaas , kirsti . '' the stylization of mind in ayn rand 's fiction '' . in toohey is a socialist , and represents the spirit of collectivism more generally . he styles himself as representative of the will of the masses , but his actual desire is for power over others . he controls individual victims by destroying their sense of self-worth , and seeks broader power ( over '' the world '' , as he declares to keating in a moment of candor ) by promoting the ideals of ethical altruism and a rigorous egalitarianism that treats all people and achievements as equally valuable . rand used her memory of the british democratic socialist harold laski to help her imagine what toohey would do in a given situation . she attended a new york lecture by laski as part of gathering material for the novel , following which she changed the physical appearance of the character to be similar to that of laski . new york intellectuals lewis mumford and clifton fadiman also helped inspire the character . . history . background and development . when rand first arrived in new york as an immigrant from the soviet union in 1926 , she was greatly impressed by the manhattan skyline 's towering skyscrapers , which she saw as symbols of freedom , and resolved that she would write about them . ralston , richard e . '' publishing the fountainhead '' . in in 1927 , rand was working as a junior screenwriter for movie producer cecil b . demille when he asked her to write a script for what would become the 1928 film skyscraper . the original story by dudley murphy was about two construction workers working on a skyscraper who are rivals for a woman 's love . rand rewrote it , transforming the rivals into architects . one of them , howard kane , was an idealist dedicated to erecting the skyscraper despite enormous obstacles . the film would have ended with kane standing atop the completed skyscraper . demille rejected rand 's script , and the completed film followed murphy 's original idea . rand 's version contained elements she would use in the fountainhead . in 1928 , rand made notes for a proposed , but never written , novel titled the little street . rand 's notes for it contain elements that carried over into her work on the fountainhead . david harriman , who edited the notes for the posthumously published journals of ayn rand ( 1997 ) , described the story 's villain as a preliminary version of the character ellsworth toohey , and this villain 's assassination by the protagonist as prefiguring the attempted assassination of toohey . rand began the fountainhead ( originally titled second-hand lives ) following the completion of her first novel , we the living , in 1934 . that earlier novel was based in part on people and events familiar to rand ; the new novel , on the other hand , focused on the less-familiar world of architecture . she therefore conducted extensive research that included reading many biographies and other books about architecture . she also worked as an unpaid typist in the office of architect ely jacques kahn . rand began her notes for the new novel in december 1935 . rand wanted to write a novel that was less overtly political than we the living , to avoid being viewed as '' a 'one-theme ' author '' . as she developed the story , she began to see more political meaning in the novel 's ideas about individualism . rand also planned to introduce the novel 's four sections with quotes from friedrich nietzsche , whose ideas had influenced her own intellectual development , but she eventually decided that nietzsche 's ideas were too different from hers . she edited the final manuscript to remove the quotes and other allusions to him . milgram , shoshana . '' the fountainhead from notebook to novel '' . in rand 's work on the fountainhead was repeatedly interrupted . in 1937 , she took a break from it to write a novella called anthem . she also completed a stage adaptation of we the living that ran briefly in 1940 . that same year , she became active in politics . she first worked as a volunteer in wendell willkie 's presidential campaign , and then attempted to form a group for conservative intellectuals . as her royalties from earlier projects ran out , she began doing freelance work as a script reader for movie studios . when rand finally found a publisher , the novel was only one-third complete . . publication history . although she was a previously published novelist and had a night of january 16th , rand had difficulty finding a publisher for the fountainhead . macmillan publishing , which had published we the living , rejected the book after rand insisted they provide more publicity for her new novel than they had done for the first one . rand 's agent began submitting the book to other publishers ; in 1938 , knopf signed a contract to publish the book . when rand was only a quarter done with the manuscript by october 1940 , knopf canceled her contract . several other publishers rejected the book . when rand 's agent began to criticize the novel , rand fired the agent and decided to handle submissions herself . twelve publishers ( including macmillan and knopf ) rejected the book . while rand was working as a script reader for paramount pictures , her boss put her in touch with the bobbs-merrill company . a recently hired editor , archibald ogden , liked the book , but two internal reviewers gave conflicting opinions . one said it was a great book that would never sell ; the other said it was trash but would sell well . ogden 's boss , bobbs-merrill president d.l . chambers , decided to reject the book . ogden responded by wiring to the head office , '' if this is not the book for you , then i am not the editor for you . '' his strong stand won rand the contract on december 10 , 1941 . she also got a 1,000 advance so she could work full-time to complete the novel by january 1 , 1943 . ralston , richard e . '' publishing the fountainhead '' . in rand worked long hours through 1942 to complete the final two-thirds of her manuscript , which she delivered on december 31 , 1942 . rand 's working title for the book was second-hand lives , but ogden pointed out that this emphasized the story 's villains . rand offered the mainspring as an alternative , but this title had been recently used for another book . she then used a thesaurus and found 'fountainhead ' as a synonym . the fountainhead was published on may 7 , 1943 , with 7,500 copies in the first printing . initial sales were slow , but they began to rise in late 1943 , driven primarily by word of mouth . the novel began appearing on bestseller lists in 1944 . it reached number six on the new york times bestseller list in august 1945 , over two years after its initial publication . by 1956 , the hardcover edition sold over 700,000 copies . ralston , richard e . '' publishing atlas shruggged '' . in the first paperback edition was published by the new american library in 1952 . a 25th anniversary edition was issued by the new american library in 1971 , including a new introduction by rand . in 1993 , a 50th anniversary edition from bobbs-merrill added an afterword by rand 's heir , leonard peikoff . the novel has been translated into more than 25 languages . the european productions of the play received mostly positive reviews . the festival d'avignon production received positive from the french newspapers la croix , les échos , and le monde , as well as from the english newspaper the guardian , whose reviewer described it as '' electrifying theatre '' . the french magazine télérama gave the avignon production a negative review , calling the source material inferior and complaining about the use of video screens on the set , while another french magazine , la terrasse , complimented the staging and acting of the odéon production . american critics gave mostly negative reviews of the next wave festival production . helen shaw 's review for the village voice said the adaptation was unwatchable because it portrayed rand 's characters and views seriously without undercutting them . the reviewer for the financial times said the play was too long and that hove had approached rand 's '' noxious '' book with too much reverence . in a mixed review for the new york times , critic ben brantley complimented hove for capturing rand 's '' sheer pulp appeal '' , but described the material as '' hokum with a whole lot of ponderous speeches '' . a review for the huffington post complimented van hove 's ability to portray rand 's message , but said the play was an hour too long . . television . the novel was adapted in urdu for the pakistan television network in the 1970s , under the title teesra kinara . the serial starred rahat kazmi , who also wrote the adaptation . kazmi 's wife , sahira kazmi , played dominique . the novel was also parodied in an episode of the animated series mighty mouse : the new adventures and in season 20 of the animated sitcom the simpsons , in the last part of the episode '' four great women and a manicure '' . . other adaptations . in 1944 , omnibook magazine produced an abridged edition of the novel that was sold to members of the united states armed forces . rand was annoyed that bobbs-merrill allowed the edited version to be published without her approval of the text . king features syndicate approached rand the following year about creating a condensed , illustrated version of the novel for syndication in newspapers . rand agreed , provided that she could oversee the editing and approve the proposed illustrations of her characters , which were provided by frank godwin . the 30-part series began on december 24 , 1945 , and ran in over 35 newspapers . rand biographer anne heller complimented the adaptation , calling it '' handsomely illustrated '' . . see also . architecture of the united states romantic realism ely jacques kahn kahn and ayn rand . notes .