Parka

etymology . the word anorak comes from the greenlandic ( kalaallisut ) word annoraaq . it did not appear in english until 1924 ; an early definition is '' a beaded item worn by greenland women or brides in the 1930s '' . in the early 1950s it was made from nylon , but changed to poplin by 1959 , when it was featured in vogue magazine as a fashion item . in 1984 , the observer used the term to refer to the type of people who wore it and subsequently , in the united kingdom , it is sometimes used as a mildly anorak ( slang ) . the word parka is derived from the nenets language . in the aleutian islands the word simply means '' animal skin '' . brewers dictionary of 20th century phrase and fable it first entered the english written record in a 1625 work by samuel purchas . the inuit who speak inuktitut use parkas and have various terms related to them as follows : . amauti . n-3b ( '' scrub snorkel '' or '' snorkel '' ) parka . left the original snorkel parka ( usaf n-3b parka , which is 3/4 length and has a full , attached hood ; the similar n-2b parka is waist-length and has an attached split hood ) was developed in the united states during the early 1950s for military use , mainly for flight crews stationed in extremely cold areas . it was designed for use in areas with temperatures as low as . originally made with a sage green dupont flight silk nylon outer and lining it was padded with a wool blanket type material until the mid-1970s when the padding was changed to polyester wadding making the jacket both lighter and warmer . the outer shell material also was changed to a sage green cotton-nylon blend , with respective percentages 80–20 , 65–35 , and 50–50 being used at various times . it gained the common name of '' snorkel parka '' because the hood can be zipped right up leaving only a small tunnel ( or snorkel ) for the wearer to look out of . this is particularly effective in very cold , windy weather although it has the added liabilities of seriously limiting the field of vision and hearing . earlier vietnam-era hoods had genuine fur ruffs ; later versions used synthetic furs . original manufacturers of this parka for the government included skyline , southern athletic , lancer , greenbrier , workroom for designers , alpha , and avirex . the basic n-3b parka design was copied and sold to the civilian market by many manufacturers with varying degrees of quality and faithfulness to the original government specifications . surplus military parkas are often available for relatively low prices online and in surplus stores ; they compare quite favorably with civilian extreme-cold parkas of all types due to their robust construction , designed for combat conditions , and warmth . the 1970s–1980s civilian version of the parka was made in many colors – navy blue , green , brown , black , maroon , grey , royal blue , sky blue and bright orange . most had an orange diamond quilted nylon lining , although a very small number did have alternative colored linings such as yellow , pale blue , and green . while still manufacturing parkas to the military standard , alpha industries have more recently adopted the orange lining and a slimmer fit when producing their vf59 model parka which is now more popular than the military version . in the late 1980s the snorkel parka came to be associated in the uk with trainspotters , who would supposedly wear them , giving birth to the slang term there anorak . in europe the snorkel parka started to regain popularity in the late 1990s and early 2000s . fishtail parka . image : fishtail parka.jpg thumb right m-51 fishtail parka . this was a favorite among the mod subculture . the fishtail parka was first used by the united states army in 1950 during the korean war . following the end of the second world war the us army recognized the need for a new cold weather combat system , resulting in four main styles of fishtail parka : the ex-48 , m-48 , m-51 and the m-65 . the m stands for model , and the number is the year it was standardized . the ex-48 model was the first prototype or '' experimental '' precursor to all of them . the m-48 then being the first actual production model fishtail parka after the pattern being standardized on december 24 , 1948 . the name fishtail comes from the fish tail extension at the back that could be folded up between the legs , much like a knochensack , and fixed using snap connectors to add wind-proofing . the fishtail was fixed at the front for warmth or folded away at the back to improve freedom of movement when needed . the ex-48 parka is distinctive as it has a left sleeve pocket and is made of thin poplin , only the later production m-48 parkas are made of the heavier sateen canvas type cotton . the ex-48 also has a thin fibre glass based liner that is very light and warm , the m-48 has a thicker wool pile liner with an integral hood liner made of wool . both are distinguishable from any other type of parka by having the sleeve pocket . this was dropped for the m-51 onward . the fur ruff on the hood is also fixed to the shell of an ex-48/m-48 and is of wolf , coyote or often wolverine . the m-48 parka was costly to produce and therefore only in production for around one year . the pockets were wool lined both inside and out . the cuffs had two buttons for securing tightly around a wearer 's wrist . the later more mass-produced m-51 parka had just the one cuff button . the liner had a built in chest pocket which again was unique to the m-48 parka . the next revision was the m-51 , made because the m48 was too expensive to mass-produce . the outer hood of the m-51 fishtail parka is integral to the parka shell , an added hood liner as well as a button in main liner make the m-51 a versatile 3 piece parka . the idea behind this 3 part system was to enable a more customisable parka that allowed for easier cleaning of the shell as the hood fur was on the detachable hood liner , not fixed to the shell as in the m-48 . it also allowed for both liners to be buttoned in or our depending on the temperature and hence warmth required . it was also cheaper than the m-48 to mass-produce the early m-51 was made of heavy sateen cotton , the same material as the m-48 . later revisions of the m-51 were poplin based . the later liners were also revised from the '' heavy when wet '' wool pile to a lighter woolen loop or frieze wool design that dried easier and were far lighter . the frieze liners were constructed of mohair and were designed using a double loop system which repelled cold weather . the m-65 fishtail parka has a detachable hood and was the last revision . it features a removable quilted liner made of light nylon / polyester batting which are modern synthetic materials . the m-65 fishtail parka first came into production in 1968 . these parkas featured synthetic fur on the hoods after an outcry from the fur lobby . as a result , only hoods for these parkas made in 1972 and for one year later have real fur . designed primarily for combat arms forces such as infantry , they are to be worn over other layers of clothing ; alone , the fishtail parka is insufficient to protect against '' dry cold '' conditions ( i.e . below about -10 & nbsp ; °c ) . as such all fishtail parkas are big as they were designed to be worn over battle dress and other layers . in the 1960s uk , the fishtail parka became a symbol of the mod subculture . because of their practicality , cheapness and availability from military surplus shops , the parka was seen as the ideal garment for fending off the elements and protecting smarter clothes underneath from grease and dirt when on the mod 's vehicle of choice , the scooter . its place in popular culture was assured by newspaper pictures of parka-clad mods during the mods and rockers of the 1960s . cagoule . a cagoule is the british english term for a lightweight , weatherproof anorak or parka , usually unlined and sometimes knee-length . the chambers dictionary , 1994 . a cagoule could be rolled up into a very compact package and carried in a bag or pocket . it was invented by noel bibby of peter storm ltd . in the early 1960s . mike parsons and mary rose , invisible on everest—innovation and the gear makers . it may have a full-zippered front opening , or pull over the head like an original anorak and close with snaps or a short zipper , has an integral hood , and elasticated or drawstring cuffs . in some versions , when rolled up , the hood doubles as a bag into which the rest of the coat is pushed . it became very popular in the united kingdom during the 1970s . see also . anorak ( slang ) capote ( garment ) goggle jacket hoodie mackintosh yup'ik clothing the anorak , a play about the montreal massacre written and performed by adam kelly . references . external links . a traditional inuit parka at the sheldon jackson museum , in alaska