Douglas Wilder

early life . wilder was born on january 17 , 1931 , in the segregated church hill neighborhood of richmond . jessie carney smith , notable black american men , book 1 , 1998 , page 1218 he is the son of beulah olive ( richards ) and robert judson wilder . untold glory : african americans in pursuit of freedom , opportunity , and achievement , harlem moon/broadway books . 2007 . p . 372 . he is the grandson of slaves , his paternal grandparents having been enslaved in goochland county . donald p . baker , wilder : hold fast to dreams ; a biography of l . douglas wilder , 1989 , page 3 the seventh of eight brothers and sisters , wilder was named for the african-american writers paul laurence dunbar and frederick douglass . associated press , spokane spokesman-review , '' virginia gov . wilder running for president '' , september 14 , 1991 . wilder 's father sold insurance and his mother worked as a maid . while the family was never completely destitute , wilder recalled his early years during the great depression as a childhood of '' gentle poverty . '' joe taylor , associated press , '' wilder ’ s roots in ‘ gentle poverty ’ '' , ocala star-banner , november 9 , 1989 . wilder worked his way through virginia union university , a historically black university , by waiting tables at hotels and shining shoes , graduating in 1951 with a degree in chemistry . virginia union university , the wilder collection : biographical information , retrieved october 5 , 2013 . drafted into the united states army during the korean war , he volunteered for combat duty . at the battle of pork chop hill , he and two other men found themselves cut off from their unit , but they bluffed nineteen korean people 's army into surrendering , for which wilder was awarded the bronze star medal . he was a sergeant when he was discharged in 1953 . associated press , fredericksburg free lance-star , wilder : former governor now a candidate for richmond mayor , september 26 , 2004 . following the war , wilder worked in the state medical examiner 's office and pursued a master 's degree in chemistry . in 1956 he changed his career plans and entered howard university law school . after graduating in 1959 , he established a law practice in richmond , the virginia capital . cnn.com , '' then & now : douglas wilder '' , june 19 , 2005 . wilder married eunice montgomery in 1958 . the couple had three children before divorcing in 1978 : lynn diana ; lawrence douglas jr . ; and loren deane . b . drummond ayres , jr . , new york times , '' the 1989 elections : the virginia contest ; man in the news ; lawrence douglas wilder ; from confrontation to conciliation '' , the new york times november 8 , 1989 . . political career . douglas wilder had joined the democratic party and began his career in public office by winning a 1969 by-election for the virginia state senate from a richmond-area district . he was the first african-american elected to the virginia senate since reconstruction . a 1970 redistricting gave wilder a predominantly african-american district , and he became a liberal in a predominantly conservative , white-majority legislature . wilder briefly flirted with an independent bid for the united states senate in 1982 . he did so after the initial favorite for the democratic nomination , state delegate owen pickett of virginia beach , paid homage to the byrd organization in announcing his bid . angered that pickett would praise a political machine who obstinately resisted racial integration , wilder threatened to make an independent bid for the seat if pickett won the nomination . pickett not only realized that wilder was serious , but that he would siphon off enough black votes in a three-way race to hand the seat to the republican nominee , congressman paul trible . pickett pulled out of the race , and wilder abandoned plans to run for the senate . in 1985 wilder was narrowly elected as the 35th lieutenant governor of virginia on a democratic ticket headed by attorney general gerald l . baliles , the party 's candidate for governor . wilder was the first african-american to win a statewide election in virginia . aware that he needed to reach the swath of the state 's majority-white electorate , wilder had undertaken a two-month '' back roads '' campaign tour of the state , visiting virginia 's predominantly rural central and western regions and enhancing his name recognition across the state . governor of virginia . wilder was elected governor on november 8 , 1989 , defeating republican marshall coleman by a spread of less than half a percent . the narrow victory margin prompted a recount , which reaffirmed wilder 's election . he was sworn in on january 13 , 1990 by former u.s . supreme court justice lewis f . powell , jr . in recognition of his landmark achievement as the first elected african-american governor , the national association for the advancement of colored people awarded wilder the spingarn medal for 1990 . wilder had a comfortable lead in the last polls before the election . the unexpected closeness of the election may have been due to the republicans ' strong get out the vote efforts . wilder had been candid about his pro-choice position in relation to abortion . some observers believed the close election was caused by the bradley effect , and suggested that white voters were reluctant to tell pollsters that they did not intend to vote for wilder . during his tenure as governor , wilder worked on crime and gun control initiatives . he also worked to fund virginia 's transportation initiatives , effectively lobbying congress to reallocate highway money to the states with the greatest needs . '' then & now : douglas wilder '' , cnn , june 19 , 2005 . retrieved march 4 , 2009 . much residential and office development had taken place in northern virginia without its receiving sufficient federal money for infrastructure improvements to keep up . he also succeeded in passing state bond issues to support improving transportation . in may 1990 wilder ordered state agencies and universities to divest themselves of any investments in south africa because of its policy of apartheid , making virginia the first southern state to take such action . during his term , wilder carried out virginia 's law on capital punishment , although he had stated his personal opposition to the death penalty . there were 14 executions by the electric chair , including the controversial case of roger keith coleman . in january 1994 wilder commuted the sentence of earl washington jr . , an intellectually disabled man , to life in prison based on testing of dna evidence that raised questions about his guilt . virginia law has strict time limits on when such new evidence can be introduced post-conviction . but in 2000 , under a new governor , an str-based dna test led to the exclusion of washington as the perpetrator of the murder for which he had been sentenced . he was fully exonerated by governor jim gilmore for the capital murder and he was released from prison . as virginia limits consecutive gubernatorial terms , he was succeeded in 1994 by george allen . campaigns for president and senate . in the mid-1990s wilder was scrutinized for his attacks on fellow democrat chuck robb and support of republican mark earley . wilder declared himself a candidate for president in 1992 , but withdrew before primary season had ended . he briefly ran for the u.s . senate as an independent in 1994 . mayor of richmond . on may 30 , 2004 , wilder announced his intention to run for mayor of richmond . until recently , the richmond city council chose the mayor from among its 9 members . the move to change this policy succeeded in november 2003 when voters approved a mayor-at-large referendum , with roughly 80 percent voting in favor of the measure . wilder was a leading proponent of the mayor-at-large proposal . on november 2 , 2004 , wilder received 79 % of the vote ( 55,319 votes ) to become the first direct election mayor of richmond in sixty years . upon winning the election , wilder communicated his intentions to take on corruption in the city government . he issued several ultimatums to the sitting city council before he took office . he was sworn in on january 2 , 2005 . he was a member of the mayors against illegal guns coalition , a bi-partisan group with a stated goal of '' making the public safer by getting illegal guns off the streets . '' the coalition was co-chaired by former boston mayor thomas menino and former new york city mayor michael bloomberg . on may 16 , 2008 wilder announced that he would not seek reelection to another four-year term as mayor . post-political career . wilder has continued as an adjunct professor in public policy at virginia commonwealth university within the l . douglas wilder school of government and public affairs . he writes occasional editorials for virginia newspapers . douglas wilder is the founder of the united states national slavery museum , a non-profit organization based in fredericksburg , virginia . the museum has been fundraising and campaigning since 2001 to establish a national museum on slavery in america . in june 2008 wilder requested that the museum be granted tax exempt status , which was denied . from that time , taxes on the land had not been paid and the property was at risk of being sold at auction by the city of fredericksburg . beset by financial problems the museum has been assessed delinquent property taxes for the years 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 amounting to just over 215,000 . the organization filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on september 22 , 2011 . early in 2011 douglas wilder was refusing to respond to or answer any questions from either news reporters or patrons who had donated artifacts . wilder made news in 2012 when he refused to support barack obama , the nation 's first black president , for another term . he noted that he supported obama in 2008 , but said the president 's tenure in the oval office thus far had been a disappointment . wilder did not endorse mitt romney , the republican challenger , and later said that he hoped for an obama victory despite having gone to a romney fundraiser . in 2015 , wilder published an autobiography , son of virginia : a life in america 's political arena . in march 2018 , wilder filed suit against john accordino , who was serving as the dean of his namesake college , for harassing wilder 's assistant . this led to accordino stepping down from his position and susan gooden being named as the interim dean of the college and then wilder dropping the suit 4 months after filing . in march 2019 , sydney black filed a complaint under title ix of the education amendments act of 1972 against wilder for sexual harassment after she claims he made sexual advances to her , which she rebuffed , and then told her later that there was no funding for her position at the virginia commonwealth university . in july 2019 , the university 's independent investigator concluded that wilder did kiss the student without her consent . in response , wilder provided a detailed rebuttal , in which he denied '' non-consensual sexual contact ” between black and him . in addition , he denied retaliating against her by saying her position had been eliminated . wilder also claimed the investigator ignored contradictory evidence , including his claim that black called him eight times after the night during which he supposedly kissed her , something she presumably would not have done if she felt harassed or threatened . the university planned to consider the investigator 's findings and wilder 's rebuttal before deciding what action to take , if any . on october 24 , 2019 , wilder announced that the university 's internal review panel had cleared him of wrongdoing . in 2020 wilder raised concerns that the state archives at the library of virginia had failed to provide access to the records of his gubernatorial administration . library of virginia apologizes for delay with wilder papers , promises fix as 'highest priority ' ( juy 9 , 2020 ) . political stances . since the 1970s wilder has supported the death penalty . he generally ran on '' anti-crime '' platforms . in response to a waning budget balance due to state economic problems , wilder supported some of the most dramatic cuts in the united states in allocations for higher education . honors and awards . in 2004 , virginia commonwealth university named its school of government and public affairs in honor of l . douglas wilder . wilder serves as an adjunct faculty member at the school . the virginia union university library , norfolk state university 's performing arts center , and a hampton university dormitory are also named after governor wilder . wilder also received an honorary doctorate from arizona state university in 2004 . virginia state university named its cooperative extension building the l . douglas wilder building in 1996 , l . douglas wilder middle school was named in honor of former governor wilder . personal papers . the l . douglas wilder collection resides at the l . douglas wilder library and learning resource center at wilder 's alma mater , virginia union university . the l . douglas wilder collection the collection contains press office photographs from wilder 's time as governor , over 600 audio cassette tapes of wilder 's wrva radio talk show as well as other speeches , and over 350 video cassettes of political events , campaign materials , and news appearances . a gallery located in the library also displays many of wilder 's political recognitions and awards . notes . references . further reading . dwayne yancey , when hell froze over ( 1988 , updated 1990 ) don baker , wilder : hold fast to dreams ( 1989 ) margaret edds , claiming the dream ( 1990 ) . external links . l . douglas wilder 's oral history video excerpts at the national visionary leadership project the l . douglas wilder collection at virginia union university - - - - -