Yoshinoya

etymology . the kanji 吉 ( yoshi ) means '' luck '' in japanese , the kanji 野 ( no ) means '' field '' , and the kanji 家 ( ya ) means '' house '' . the founder of the company , eikichi matsuda ( 松田栄吉 ) , was from the former town of yoshino ( 吉野町 ) in osaka prefecture , and a belief predominates that yoshino is the origin of the name . '' 吉野家の歴史に関するご質問 . '' ( japanese ) yoshinoya co . , ltd . retrieved july 6 , 2011 . in japan , the nickname of the restaurant is '' yoshigyū '' ( 吉牛 ) , which is an abbreviation of yoshinoya no gyūdon ( 吉野家の牛丼 , yoshinoya 's gyūdon ) . logo . the logo of yoshinoya resembles a bull horn , and was invented by yoshinoya 's founder eikichi matsuda . the idea of the bull horn was derived from the initial letter of yoshinoya 's english name , '' y '' . the rope surrounding the horn represents a in japanese sumo-wrestling , '' makuuchi '' ( equivalent to '' winner '' ) , representing the quality of the food served in yoshinoya . the surrounding rope is made up of 27 rice grains . the logo as a whole is meant to suggest that yoshinoya sells the '' best beef bowls '' . hong kong yoshinoya official website : . history . yoshinoya first opened in 1899 at the nihonbashi fish market in tokyo . when the market was devastated by the great kantō earthquake , yoshinoya moved to the new tsukiji fish market in tokyo in 1926 . the chain opened its first 24-hour store in 1952 . on december 27 , 1958 , the chain 's business model was changed from self-employed restaurants to a stock company , as an attempt to gain more profit . in 1965 , the chain earned a million dollars in sales , which led to the idea of expanding the chain 's operations in japan . the chain 's first franchised store was opened in shinsaibashi , in 1968 . in 1975 , the first american store of the fast-food chain was opened in colorado.alt in the early 2000s , yoshinoya , along with other chains such as mcdonald 's , triggered a price war in japan by introducing a regular beef bowl dish for 280 yen , or around us 3 . . controversies in the 2000s . in late 2001 , a domestic bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) incident critically damaged beef bowl sales . in late 2003 , japan suspended us beef imports in japan due to a bse incident in washington , cutting off yoshinoya 's main source of plate steak ( fatty beef ) that is the main component of its beef bowl . this forced yoshinoya to terminate beef bowl sales in japan for the first time in its history on february 11 , 2004 . news of the removal of this item from yoshinoya 's menu caused its fans and non-fans alike to queue in massive lines at its restaurants all around japan to taste what might be their last beef bowl for a long time . yoshinoya then switched to serving pork bowl ( butadon ) instead of beef . however , its restaurants in the united states continued to serve the beef bowl using american short plate . from december 2 , 2004 , restaurants in japan started serving '' beef yakiniku bowls '' ( 牛焼肉丼 , gyū-yakiniku-don ) , which use australian beef , a different sauce , and additional vegetables . press release ( retrieved on april 10 , 2010 ) these bowls differed from original '' beef bowls '' , which use american beef . image : gyudonline.jpg thumb people lining up on the day of '' the beef bowl revival festival '' ( 牛丼復活祭 ) in 2006 , near teradachō station , osakain december 2005 , japan agreed to remove the restriction on importing beef from the united states . a letter to customers was then put up in restaurants , promising that the beef bowl would return in a few months . in january 2006 , imports stopped again because inspectors found banned cattle parts in a veal shipment from the united states . in june 2006 , japan lifted the ban on imports again , and on july 31 , 2006 , yoshinoya reposted the letter promising to resume serving the beef bowl in about two months . on september 18 , 2006 , yoshinoya brought back their beef bowl for one day as '' the beef bowl revival festival '' ( 牛丼復活祭 , gyūdon fukkatsusai ) . this '' revival '' , however , meant that its beef bowls would be available only the first five days of the month in october and november . on december 1 , 2006 , they began serving beef bowls daily , albeit at limited hours . these hours were extended once during special campaigns in february and december 2007 . by march 17 , 2008 , yoshinoya announced that they would resume 24-hour sales of the beef bowl , rolling out through their then 1040 stores nationwide through march 20 , 2008 . an announcement of banned cattle products in a californian beef import on april 21 , 2008 , did not halt the company 's plans , as they felt they had enough stock from other sources to avoid a recall . in 2019 , yoshinoya outlets in hong kong were targeted to be boycotted and vandalized by anti-government protesters during 2019–20 hong kong protests . hop hing group , based in hong kong , is the licensed franchise of yoshinoya in the city and mainland china ( beijing and the cities in southeast china ) . its ceo marvin hung was criticized by protesters for attending a rally for hong kong police organized by pro-beijing camps . hong kong protesters trash starbucks and yoshinoya another major reason that caused the boycott of yoshinoya is about an advertisement posted on facebook in july 2019 . the advertisement featured a traditional japanese food , chikuwa ; in cantonese , the word sounds similar to '' dog that tears paper '' . as this advert was published after a police removed messages on a lennon wall in tai po , the advertisement was then regarded as poking fun at the police . the staff from social strategy hong kong who helped created the advertisement was sacked afterwards . hence , the public thought that yoshinoya was politically biased and suppressed freedom of speech . citizens in support of the current social movement then started boycotting yoshinoya . . locations . thumb yoshinoya has a chain of stores in japan , the united states , hong kong , cambodia , china , indonesia , malaysia , philippines , singapore , taiwan , and thailand . japan . in its restaurants in japan , tables are often counters , and in that case , they take orders over those counters . chopsticks are provided . the menu includes standard-serving ( nami , or namimori , 並盛 ) , large-serving ( ōmori , 大盛 ) , or extra-large-serving ( tokumori , 特盛 ) '' 吉野家メニュー： 牛丼・牛皿 . '' ( japanese ) yoshinoya co . , ltd . retrieved july 6 , 2011 . beef bowls , pork bowls ( butadon , 豚丼 ) , '' 吉野家メニュー： 豚丼・豚皿 . '' ( japanese ) yoshinoya co . , ltd . retrieved july 6 , 2011 . raw eggs ( to stir and pour on top , sometimes mixed with soy sauce ) , soft-boiled eggs ( hanjuku tamago , 半熟玉子 ) , miso soup and pickles ( called oshinkō お新香 in its menu ; a kind of asazuke ) . they also serve red ginger ( beni shōga ) , spice , and japanese tea ( ocha , お茶 ) free of charge . some menus including raw eggs and miso soup can be taken out . '' 吉野家メニュー： サイドメニュー . '' ( japanese ) yoshinoya co . , ltd . retrieved july 6 , 2011 . image : yoshinoya kumamoto japan.jpg thumb yoshinoya in kumamoto city alt some customers make special requests at no extra charge such as : extra gravy sauce ( tsuyudaku , つゆだく ) , extra onions ( negidaku , ねぎだく ) , without gravy sauce ( tsuyunuki , つゆ抜き ) , no onions ( neginuki , ねぎ抜き ) , 吉野家の牛丼、頼み方は72種類 ( 2008 ) . retrieve june 19 , 2011 , from egg-yolk only ( kimidake , 黄身だけ ) and less rice ( karui no , 軽いの ; literally '' light one '' ) . on june 14 , 2011 , yoshinoya in japan started serving eel bowls ( unadon , 鰻丼 ) as a standard seasonal menu to be offered until the latter part of july . '' 吉野家 夏の定番メニュー 「鰻丼」期間限定発売のお知らせ . '' ( japanese ) ( pdf ) yoshinoya holdings . june 9 , 2011 . retrieved july 5 , 2011 . . united states . locations , but all the new york city stores closed by january 2012 . in march 2020 , indoor dine-ins were abandoned , with take-away , drive-thru or pick-up service still available . the main menu in the united states includes the beef bowl , chicken bowl , combo bowl , and shrimp bowl , along with soup and desserts , and has variations such as '' beef with vegetables bowls '' , '' teriyaki chicken bowls '' , and barbecue-style plates . skinless chicken is available upon request . tempura bowls are no longer available . the menu of yoshinoya in the u.s . is similar to that in japan . at a basic level , both companies serve several recipes over a bowl of rice , which includes the trademark beef bowl with very thinly sliced beef plus light sauce and onions . hong kong . the hong kong division of yoshinoya was founded in 1991 . currently 57 yoshinoya food stores are split among three main areas : the hong kong branch , the new territories branch , and the kowloon branch . fourteen stores are in the hong kong branch , 21 stores are in the new territories branch , and 22 stores are in the kowloon branch . each yoshinoya food store has five working positions : store manager , supervisor , customer service assistant , crew , and production assistant . unlike the yoshinoya in japan , stores in hong kong do not provide table services . customers order their food at a cashier and collect their food on a tray there , which is the same as in western fast-food stores . philippines . in 1992 , the first philippine franchisee of yoshinoya was established and it operated until 1993 . in 2001 , yoshinoya re-entered the philippine market through a joint-venture between yoshinoya and the century pacific group named yoshinoya century pacific inc . its first store opened in metro point mall , pasay city in december 15 , 2001 . in 2021 , following the end of the partnership between yoshinoya and the century pacific group , yoshinoya formed a new joint-venture with jollibee foods corporation that would serve as the next franchisee of yoshinoya in the philippines . under the new deal , there are plans to open 50 stores in the country in the long-term . . gallery . image : yoshinoyagyudonfair.jpg yoshinoya in teradachō , osaka city , on september 18 , 2006 image : yoshinoya at tsukiji fish market by supermatsubokkuri.jpg the flagship restaurant in tsukiji fish market in tokyo image : historyboard , the headstore of yoshinoya , tsukiji.jpg greetings to customers at the flagship restaurant image : gyudonbanner.jpg free banner given to customers in '' the beef bowl revival festival '' on september 18 , 2006 . see also . list of japanese restaurants . references . external links . yoshinoya co . , ltd . yoshinoy holdings co . , ltd . - executive board members yoshinoya america yoshinoya philippines yoshinoya singapore yoshinoya hong kong '' yoshinoya : the videogame - video review '' at '' bn-games.com why yoshinoya america yucks compared to yoshinoya globally