Adult

biological adulthood . historically and cross-culturally , adulthood has been determined primarily by the start of puberty ( the appearance of secondary sex characteristics such as menstruation and the development of breasts in women , ejaculation , the development of facial hair , and a deeper voice in men , and pubic hair in both sexes ) . in the past , a person usually moved from the status of child directly to the status of adult , often with this shift being marked by some type of coming-of-age test or ceremony . during the industrial revolution , children went to work as soon as they could in order to help provide for their family . there was not a huge emphasis on school or education in general . many children could get a job and were not required to have experience as adults are nowadays . after the social construct of adolescence was created , adulthood split into two forms : biological adulthood and social adulthood . thus , there are now two primary forms of adults : biological adults ( people who have attained reproductive ability , are fertile , or who evidence secondary sex characteristics ) and social adults ( people who are recognized by their culture or law as being adults ) . depending on the context , adult can indicate either definition . another aspect of adulthood that is relatively new is psychological functioning . according to jeffrey arnett , adults can make financial decisions on their own , are financially independent , and are able to make difficult life decisions on their own . although few or no established dictionaries provide a definition for the two word term biological adult , the first definition of adult in multiple dictionaries includes '' the stage of the life cycle of an animal after reproductive capacity has been attained '' . international dictionary of medicine and biology ( 1986 ) churchill 's medical dictionary ( 1989 ) thus , the base definition of the word adult is the period beginning at physical sexual maturity , which occurs sometime after the onset of puberty . although this is the primary definition of the base word '' adult '' , the term is also frequently used to refer to social adults . the two-word term biological adult stresses or clarifies that the original definition , based on physical maturity , is being used . the time of puberty varies from child to child , but usually begins around 10 or 11 years old . girls typically begin the process of puberty at age 10 or 11 , and boys at age 11 or 12 . girls generally complete puberty by 15–17 , and boys by age 16 or 17 . nutrition , genetics and environment also usually play a part in the onset of puberty . girls will go through a growth spurt and gain weight in several areas of their body . this is due to the natural processes of puberty , but genetics also plays a part in how much weight they gain or how much taller they get . . legal adulthood . legally , adulthood typically means that one has reached the age of majority – when parents lose parental rights and responsibilities regarding the person concerned . depending on one 's jurisdiction , the age of majority may or may not be set independently of and should not be confused with the minimum ages applicable to other activities , such as engaging in a contract , marriage , voting , having a job , serving in the military , buying/possessing firearms , driving , traveling abroad , involvement with alcoholic beverages , smoking , sexual activity , gambling , being a model or actor in pornography , running for president , etc . admission of a young person to a place may be restricted because of danger for that person , concern that the place may lead the person to immoral behavior , or because of the risk that the young person causes damage ( for example , at an exhibition of fragile items ) . one can distinguish the legality of acts of a young person , or of enabling a young person to carry out that act , by selling , renting out , showing , permitting entrance , allowing participation , etc . there may be distinction between commercially and socially enabling . sometimes there is the requirement of supervision by a legal guardian , or just by an adult . sometimes there is no requirement , but rather a recommendation . using the example of pornography , one can distinguish between : being allowed inside an adult establishment being allowed to purchase pornography being allowed to possess pornography another person being allowed to sell , rent out , or show the young person pornography , see disseminating pornography to a minor being a pornographic actor : rules for the young person , and for other people , regarding production , possession , etc . ( see child pornography ) with regard to films with violence , etc . : another person being allowed to sell , rent out , or show the young person a film ; a cinema being allowed to let a young person enter the age of majority ranges internationally from ages 15 to 21 , with 18 being the most common age . nigeria , mali , democratic republic of congo and cameroon define adulthood at age 15 , but marriage of girls at an earlier age is common . in most of the world , including most of the united states , india and china , the legal adult age is 18 ( historically 21 ) for most purposes , with some notable exceptions : the legal age of adulthood in british columbia , new brunswick , newfoundland and labrador , northwest territories , nova scotia , nunavut , and the yukon territory in canada is 19 ( though there are some exceptions in which canadians may be considered legal adults in certain situations like sexual consent ) ; the legal age of adulthood in nebraska and alabama in the united states , is 19 . the legal age of adulthood in south korea is 19 . the legal age of adulthood in indonesia is 20 . the legal age of adulthood in mississippi and puerto rico in the u.s . is 21 . social construction of adulthood . in contrast to biological perspectives of aging and adulthood , social scientists conceptualize adulthood as socially constructed . elder , glen h . jr . 1985 . “ perspectives on the life course . ” op . 23-49 in life course dynamics : trajectories and transitions , 1968–1980 , ed . glen h . elder jr . ithaca , ny : cornell university press . settersten , richard a . 1999 . lives in time and place : the problems and promises of developmental science . amityville , ny : baywood publishing company . while aging is an established biological process , the attainment of adulthood is social in its criteria . in contrast to other perspectives that conceptualize aging and the attainment of adulthood as a largely universal development , regardless of context , nation , generation , gender , race , or social class . social scientists regard these aspects as paramount in cultural definitions of adulthood . ryff , carol d . 1985 . “ the subjective experience of life-span transitions . ” in gender and the life course , by alice s . rossi , 97–113 . new york : adine . further evidence of adulthood as a social construction is illustrated by the changing criteria of adulthood over time . historically , adulthood in the u.s . has rested on completing one 's education , moving away from the family of origin , and beginning one 's career . arnett , jeffrey jensen . 1998 . “ learning to stand alone : the contemporary american transition to adulthood in cultural and historical context . ” human development 41:295–315 . levinson , daniel j . 1978 . the seasons of a man ’ s life . new york : knopf . shanahan , michael j . 2000 . “ pathways to adulthood in changing societies : variability and mechanisms in life course perspective . ” annual review of sociology 26:667–692 . other key historical criteria include entering a marriage and becoming a parent . these criteria are social and subjective ; they are organized by gender , race , ethnicity , social class , among other key identity markers . as a result , particular populations feel adult earlier in the life course than do others . arnett , jeffrey jensen . 2001 . “ conceptions of the transition to adulthood among emerging adults in american ethnic groups . ” journal of adult development , 8:133–143 . aronson , pamela . 2008 . “ the markers and meanings of growing up : contemporary young women ’ s transition from adolescence to adulthood . ” gender & society 22:56–82 . barrett , anne . 2003 . “ socioeconomic status and age identity : the role of dimensions of health in the subjective construction of age identity . ” journal of gerontology 58 : 101–110 . barrett , anne . 2005 . “ gendered experiences in midlife : implications for age identity . ” journal of aging studies 19:163–183 . contemporary experiences of and research on young adults today substitute more seemingly subjective criteria for adulthood which resonate more soundly with young adults ' experiences of aging . furstenberg , frank f . jr . , rubén g . rumbaut , and richard a . settersten jr . 2005 . “ on the frontier of adulthood : emerging themes and new directions . ” in on the frontier of adulthood : theory , research , and public policy , by richard a . settersten jr . , frank f . furstenburg jr . , and rubén g . rumbaut , 3–25 . chicago : university of chicago press . the criteria are marked by a growing '' importance of individualistic criteria and the irrelevance of the demographic markers of normative conceptions of adulthood . '' shanahan , michael j . , erik j . porfeli , jeylan t . mortimer , and lance d . erickson . 2005 . “ subjective age identity and the transition to adulthood : when do adolescents become adults ? ” in on the frontier of adulthood : theory , research , and public policy , by richard a . settersten jr . , frank f . furstenburg jr . , and rubén g . rumbaut , 225–255 . chicago : university of chicago . :230 in particular , younger cohorts ' attainment of adulthood centers on three criteria : gaining a sense of responsibility , independent decision-making , and financial independence . arnett , jeffrey jensen . 2004 . emerging adulthood : the winding road from late teens through the twenties . new york , ny : oxford university press . settersten , richard a . 2011 . “ becoming adult : meanings and markers for young americans . ” in coming of age in america : the transition to adulthood in the twenty-first century , by mary c . waters , patrick j . carr , maria j . kefalas , and jennifer holdaway , 169–190 . berkeley : university of california press . jeffrey arnett , a psychologist and professor at clark university in massachusetts , studied the development of adults and argues that there is a new and distinct period of development in between adolescence and adulthood . this stage , which he calls '' emerging adulthood , '' occurs between the ages of 18 and 25 . arnett articulates five distinct features that are unique to this period of development . this stage is an age of identity exploration , instability , self - focus , feeling in between , and an age of possibilities . arnett describes these individuals as able to take some responsibility for their lives , but still not completely feeling like an adult . arnett describes individuals in this stage of development as deciding who they are and what they want out of life . often times they change residences because they are getting higher education and are no longer tied to the routine of living with their parents . arnett says these individuals can essentially go where they want when they want . arnett also says that '' optimism reigns . '' people in this stage of life are confident that they can make a better life for themselves than their parents had and can have deeper , longer lasting relationships . . religion . according to jewish tradition , adulthood is reached at age 13 ( the minimum age of the bar and bat mitzvah ) for jewish boys and girls ; they are expected to demonstrate preparation for adulthood by learning the torah and other jewish practices . the christian bible and jewish scripture contain no age requirement for adulthood or marriage , which includes engaging in sexual activity the 1983 code of canon law states , '' a man before he has completed his sixteenth year of age , and likewise a woman before she has completed her fourteenth year of age , can not enter a valid marriage '' . canon 1083 , §1 according to the disappearance of childhood by neil postman , the christian church of the middle ages considered the age of accountability , when a person could be tried and even executed as an adult , to be age 7 . while certain religions have their guidelines on what it means to be an adult , generally speaking , there are trends that occur regarding religiosity as individuals transition from adolescence to adulthood . the national library of medicine ( ncbi ) highlights some studies that show rates of religiosity declining as people move out of the house and live on their own . often times when people live on their own , they change their life goals and religion tends to be less important as they discover who they are . other studies from the ncbi show that as adults get married and have children they settle down , and as they do , there tends to be an increase in religiosity . everyone 's level of religiosity builds at a different pace , meaning that religion relative to adult development varies across cultures and time . . see also . references .