Wimshurst machine

description . these machines belong to a class of electrostatic generators called influence machines , which separate electric charges through electrostatic induction , or influence , not depending on friction for their operation . earlier machines in this class were developed by wilhelm holtz ( 1865 and 1867 ) , august toepler ( 1865 ) , j . robert voss ( 1880 ) , and others . the older machines are less efficient and exhibit an unpredictable tendency to switch their polarity while the wimshurst machine has neither defect . in a wimshurst machine , the two insulated discs and their metal sectors rotate in opposite directions passing the crossed metal neutralizer bars and their brushes . an imbalance of charges is induced , amplified , and collected by two pairs of metal combs with points placed near the surfaces of each disc . these collectors are mounted on insulating supports and connected to the output terminals . the positive feedback increases the accumulating charges exponentially until the dielectric breakdown voltage of the air is reached and an electric spark jumps across the gap . the machine is theoretically not self-starting , meaning that if none of the sectors on the discs has any electrical charge there is nothing to induce charges on other sectors . in practice , even a small residual charge on any sector is enough to start the process going once the discs start to rotate . the machine will only work satisfactorily in a dry atmosphere . it requires mechanical power to turn the disks against the electric field , and it is this energy that the machine converts into the electric power of the spark . the steady state output of the wimshurst machine is a direct ( non-alternating ) current that is proportional to the area covered by the metal sector , the rotation speed , and a complicated function of the initial charge distribution . the insulation and the size of the machine determine the maximum output voltage that can be reached . the accumulated spark energy can be increased by adding a pair of leyden jars , an early type of capacitor suitable for high voltages , with the jars ’ inner plates independently connected to each of the output terminals and the jars ’ outer plates interconnected . a typical wimshurst machine can produce sparks that are about a third of the disc 's diameter in length and several tens of microamperes . the available voltage gain can be understood by noting that the charge density on oppositely charged sectors , between the neutralizer bars , is nearly uniform across the sectors , and thus at low voltage , while the charge density on same charged sectors , approaching the collector combs , peaks near the sector edges , at a consequently high voltage relative to the opposite collector combs . wimshurst machines were used during the 19th century in physics research . they were also occasionally used to generate high voltage to power the first-generation crookes x-ray tubes during the first two decades of the 20th century , although holtz machines and induction coils were more commonly used . today they are only used in science museums and education to demonstrate the principles of electrostatics . operation . the two contra-rotating insulating discs ( usually made of glass ) have a number of metal sectors stuck onto them . the machine is provided with four small earthed brushes ( two on each side of the machine on conducting shafts at 90° to each other ) , plus a pair of charge-collection combs . the conducting shafts , that hold the brushes on a typical wimshurst machine , would form the shape of an '' x '' , if one could see through the insulating discs , as they are perpendicular to each other . the charge-collection combs are typically mounted along the horizontal and equally contact the outer edges of both front and back discs . the collection combs on each side are usually connected to respective leyden jars . any small charge on either of the two discs suffices to begin the charging process . suppose , therefore , that the back disc has a small , net electrostatic charge . for concreteness , assume this charge is positive ( red ) and that the back disc ( a lower chain ) rotates counter-clockwise ( right to left ) . as the charged sector ( moving red square ) rotates to the position of the brush ( y down arrow tip ) next to front disc ( b upper chain near center ) , it induces a polarization of charge on the conducting shaft ( y-y1 upper horizontal black line ) holding the brush , attracting negative ( green ) charge to the near side ( y upper square becoming green ) , so that positive ( red ) charge accumulates on the far side ( across the disc , 180 degrees away ) ( y1 upper square becoming red ) . the shaft 's polarized charges attach to the nearest sectors on disc b , resulting in negative charge on b y closer to the original positive charge on a , and positive charge on the opposite side of b y1 . after an additional 45° rotation ( z near lower chain middle ) , the positive ( red ) charge on a ( lower chain ) is repelled by a positive ( red ) charge on b ( z upper chain ) approaching . the first collection comb ( z arrow-tipped lines to triangles ) encountered allows both positive ( red ) charges to leave the sectors neutral ( squares becoming black ) , and accumulate in the leyden jar anode ( red triangle ) attracted to the leyden jar cathode ( green triangle ) . the charge completes the cycle across the discs when a spark ( yellow zigzag ) discharges the leyden jar ( red and green triangles ) . as b rotates 90° clockwise ( left to right ) , the charges that have been induced on it line up with the brushes next to disc a x , x1 . the charges on b induce the opposite polarization of the a-brushes ' shaft , and the shaft 's polarization is transferred to its disc . disc b keeps rotating and its charges are accumulated by the nearest charge-collection combs . disc a rotates 90° so that its charges line up with the brush of disc b y , y1 , where an opposite charge-polarization is induced on the b conducting shaft and the nearest sectors of b , similar to the description two paragraphs above . the process repeats , with each charge polarization on a inducing polarization on b , inducing polarization on a , etc . the '' influence '' of neighboring attractive sectors induces exponentially larger charges , until balanced by the conducting shaft 's finite capacitance . all of these induced positive and negative charges are collected by combs to charge the leyden jars , electrical charge-storage devices similar to capacitors . the mechanical energy required to separate the opposing charges on the adjacent sectors provides the energy source for the electrical output . see also . kelvin water dropper pelletron van de graaff generator tesla coil . references . '' history of electrostatic generators '' . hans-peter mathematick technick algorithmick linguistick omnium gatherum . de queiroz , antonio carlos m . , '' the wimshurst electrostatic machine '' weisstein , eric w . , '' wimshurst machine '' . bossert , françois , '' wimshurst machine '' . lycée louis couffignal , strasbourg . ( english version ) charrier jacques '' la machine de wimshurst '' . faculté des sciences de nantes . external links . the wimshurst machine website : photos and video clips of a wimshurst machine mit video demonstration and explanation of a wimshurst machine ( mit techtv physics demo ) how does a wimshurst machine work ? saint mary 's physics demo site