Mink

species . european mink mustela lutreola american mink neovison vison sea mink neovison macrodon ( extinct ) . size . the male weighs about and is about in length . farm-bred males can reach . the female weighs about and reaches a length of about . the sizes above do not include the tail , which can be from . color . a mink 's rich glossy coat in its wild state is brown and looks silky . farm-bred mink can vary from white to almost black , which is reflected in the british wild mink . their pelage is deep , rich brown , with or without white spots on the underparts , and consists of a slick , dense underfur overlaid with dark , glossy , almost stiff guard hairs . breeding and gestation . mink show the curious phenomenon of delayed implantation . although the true gestation period is 39 days , the embryo may stop developing for a variable period , so that as long as 76 days may elapse before the litter arrives . between 45 and 52 days is normal . there is only one litter per year . they typically have between six and 10 kits per litter . litters as large as 16 have been recorded at fur farms . stereotypy . on farms , minks are placed in battery cages , a type of soft , metal wire cage that restricts their ability to move . this often results in a condition referred to as stereotypies , an abnormal behavior . these abnormal , repetitive behaviours are a result of keeping them imprisoned , and is similar to the deterioration of mental health in humans . stereotypies have also been noted to increase during human presence . to attempt to eliminate stereotypies in captive mink , the canadian national farm animal care council has implemented regulations on incorporating environmental enrichments into mink cages . enrichments are pen-related alterations or the addition of novel objects to improve the mink 's physical and psychological health . enrichments may help reduce the onset of stereotypies , but rarely decrease or eliminate them entirely . leaving minks alone plays a large role in the prevention of stereotypies , and the animals ' well-being . . lifespan . the maximum lifespan of a mink is usually around ten years , but rarely exceeds three years in the wild . . diet . mink prey on fish and other aquatic life , small mammals , birds , and eggs ; adults may eat young mink . burns , john ( 2008 ) . '' mink , '' alaska department of fish & game . mink raised on farms primarily eat expired cheese , eggs , fish , meat and poultry slaughterhouse byproducts , dog food , and turkey livers , as well as prepared commercial foods . a farm with 3,000 mink may use as much as two tons of food per day . . predators . great horned owls , bobcats , foxes , coyotes , wolves , and humans are all natural predators of mink . they are trapped for their fur ( though the majority of mink fur on the market comes from fur farms ) . waterside habits . mink like to live near water and are seldom found far from riverbanks , lakes , and marshes . even when roaming , they tend to follow streams and ditches . sometimes they leave the water altogether for a few hundred meters , especially when looking for rabbits , one of their favorite foods . in some places , particularly in scotland and in iceland , they live along the seashore . sometimes they live in towns if suitable water is available . mink may be present at all hours , even when people are nearby . territory . mink are very territorial animals . a male mink will not tolerate another male within his territory but appears to be less aggressive towards females . generally , the territories of both male and female animals are separate , but a female 's territory may sometimes overlap with that of a male . very occasionally , it may be totally within a male 's . the territories , which tend to be long and narrow , stretch along river banks , or around the edges of lakes or marshes . territory sizes vary , but they can be several miles long . female territories are smaller than those of males . each territory has one or two central areas ( core areas ) where the mink spends most of its time . the core area is usually associated with a good food supply , such as a pool rich in fish , or a good rabbit warren . the mink may stay in its core area , which can be quite small , for several days at a time , but it also makes excursions to the ends of its territory . these excursions seem to be associated with the defense of the territory against intruders . the mink likely checks for any signs of a strange mink and leaves droppings ( scat ) redolent of its personal scent to reinforce its territorial rights . human uses . farming . the mink fur has been highly prized for use in clothing , with hunting giving way to farming . their treatment on fur farms has been a focus of animal rights and animal welfare activism . american mink have established populations in europe ( including great britain ) and south america , after being released from mink farms by animal rights activists , or otherwise escaping from captivity . in the uk , under the wildlife & countryside act 1981 , it is illegal to release mink into the wild . in some countries , any live mink caught in traps must be humanely killed . . ireland . there are three mink farms in ireland , in donegal , kerry , and laois . mink farming was introduced into the country by two veterinarians . three thousand mink were released by campaigners into the wild from a farm in the 1960s . it is estimated that there are 33,500 wild mink in ireland . calls for irish minks to be culled amid covid-19 concerns irish independent , 2020-11-10 . the department of agriculture stated in november 2020 saying that the department of health had advised , following the detection of coronavirus among animals on a danish mink farm , that the roughly 120,000 farmed irish mink should be culled . mink farming was already due to be discontinued under the 2020 programme for government but the coronavirus risk had expedited the closure of the industry . ireland ’ s mink population to be culled amid covid-19 fears irish independent , 2020-11-19 . . denmark . health concerns . minks are among the animals that can be infected with coronaviruses . transmission of the sars-cov-2 virus from minks to humans was first documented in the netherlands by way of genetic tracing , which prompted the government to bring forward to the end of 2020 a ban on mink farming scheduled to go into effect in 2024 . the u.s . department of agriculture ( usda ) confirmed that cases of minks infected with covid-19 had been documented in utah in august 2020 . in november 2020 , denmark , the world 's largest producer of mink fur , announced it is to cull its mink population of 15 to 17 million to stop the spread of cluster 5 , a mutated strain of the virus , which has been linked to the animals and resulting in a mutated covid-19 to 12 humans . the decision was later halted due to the legality of the proposed legislation . . references . external links .