Pete Conrad

skylab . conrad 's last mission was as commander of skylab 2 , the first crew to board the skylab space station . the station had been damaged on its uncrewed launch , when its micrometeoroid shield tore away , taking one of two main solar panels with it and jamming the other one so that it could not deploy . conrad and his crew repaired the damage on two spacewalks . conrad managed to pull free the stuck solar panel by sheer brute force , an action of which he was particularly proud . the astronauts also erected a '' parasol '' solar shield to protect the station from intense solar heating , a function which the lost micrometeoroid shield was supposed to perform . without the shield , skylab and its contents would have become unusable . president jimmy carter honored conrad for this in 1978 by awarding him the congressional space medal of honor . during his training for skylab 2 , conrad had to bail out from nasa t-38 n957na on may 10 , 1972 . he was returning to houston from a visit to ilc industries in delaware . on approach to ellington afb he was advised that the weather had deteriorated below minimums so he diverted to hobby . during the night , instrument flight rules ( ifr ) descent , he suffered a generator failure at 800 feet and broke off the approach . he elected to divert to an airfield with better weather . unfortunately he ran out of fuel as he reached bergstrom afb and was forced to eject at 3,700 feet . he landed about 100 yards from the base operations building and his airplane impacted in an open field about two miles away . post-nasa career . conrad retired from nasa and the navy in 1973 , and went to work for american television and communications company . he started as the vice president of operations and chief operating officer . conrad was in charge of the operation of existing systems and the national development of new cable television systems . in 1976 , he accepted a position with mcdonnell douglas as a vice president and consultant . in 1978 , he became vice president of marketing and was responsible for the commercial and military sales of douglas aircraft company . after an engine fell off a mcdonnell douglas dc-10 , causing it to american airlines flight 191 in 1979 , conrad spearheaded mcdonnell douglas 's ultimately unsuccessful efforts to allay the fears of the public and policymakers , and save the plane 's reputation . in 1980 , he was promoted to senior vice president of marketing . from 1982 to 1984 , conrad served as the senior vice president of marketing and product support . he was appointed staff vice president of international business development in 1984 . during the 1990s he consulted for the delta clipper experimental single-stage-to-orbit launch vehicle . he became vice president of project development in 1993 . on february 14 , 1996 , conrad was part of the crew on a record-breaking around-the-world flight in a learjet owned by cable tv pioneer , bill daniels . the flight lasted 49 hours , 26 minutes and 8 seconds . today the jet is on permanent static display at denver international airport 's terminal c . a month before he died , conrad appeared on nightline and said , '' i think the space shuttle is worth one billion dollars a launch . i think that it is worth two billion dollars for what it does . i think the shuttle is worth it for the work it does . '' in the last interview he gave before his death , conrad sat down for pbs 's nova series and discussed where he felt the future direction of space travel should go . he considered returning to the moon '' a waste of taxpayer money '' , but recommended missions to mars and asteroids . in 2006 , nasa posthumously awarded him the ambassador of exploration award for his work for the agency and science . . personal life . while at princeton , conrad met jane dubose , a student at bryn mawr , whose family owned a ranch near uvalde , texas . her father , winn dubose , was the first person to call conrad '' pete '' rather than '' peter '' , the name he had used since birth . upon his graduation from princeton and acceptance of his navy commission , conrad and jane were married on june 16 , 1953 . they had four sons : peter , born in 1954 ; thomas , born in 1957 ; andrew , born in 1959 ; and the youngest , christopher , born in 1960 . given the demands of his career in the navy and nasa , pete and jane spent a great deal of time apart , and pete saw less of his boys growing up than he would have liked . even after he retired from nasa and the navy , he kept himself busy . in 1988 , pete and jane divorced . both pete and jane remarried . in 1989 , conrad 's youngest son , christopher , was stricken with a malignant lymphoma . he died in april 1990 , at the age of 29 . conrad met nancy crane , a denver divorcee , through mutual friends . conrad and crane married in 1990 . conrad was a cub scout . his recreational interests included golf , water skiing and auto racing , such as formula vee . . death . conrad died on july 8 , 1999 , from internal injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident . while traveling with his wife and friends from his huntington beach home to monterey , california , his motorcycle crashed on a turn . conrad later died in a hospital in ojai . he was wearing a helmet at the time and was operating within the speed limit . he was buried with full honors at arlington national cemetery , burial detail : conrad , charles ( section 11 , grave 113-3 ) – anc explorer with many apollo-era astronauts in attendance . the johnson space center in houston , texas , has a grove of trees that have been planted to honor the memory of the astronauts who have died . after conrad 's death , nasa planted a tree in his honor . during the dedication ceremony , his apollo 12 crewmate alan bean , used his speech to lighten the somber occasion by injecting a little levity , pretending to '' channel '' conrad 's instructions from the hereafter . bean said , conrad wanted nasa to light his tree every christmas season with colored lights instead of the white used for everyone else , in keeping with his motto '' when you ca n't be good , be colorful '' . nasa has honored this '' request '' , and every christmas since then , all of the trees in the grove have been lit with white lights , except conrad 's tree , which has been lit with red lights . . awards and honors . two navy distinguished service medals two distinguished flying crosses congressional space medal of honor ( 1978 ) two nasa distinguished service medals two nasa exceptional service medals yuri gagarin gold space medal ( fédération aéronautique internationale ) harmon trophy ( 1974 ) thompson trophy ( 1974 ) he is inducted into several aviation and astronaut halls of fame . he was one of ten gemini astronauts inducted into the international space hall of fame in 1982 . conrad and his fellow gemini astronauts were inducted into the u.s . astronaut hall of fame in 1993 . conrad was presented an honorary master of arts degree from princeton in 1966 ; an honorary doctor of laws degree from lincoln-wesleyan university in 1970 , and an honorary doctor of science degree from kings college , wilkes-barre , pennsylvania in 1971 . the three skylab astronaut crews were awarded the 1973 robert j . collier trophy '' for proving beyond question the value of man in future explorations of space and the production of data of benefit to all the people on earth . '' gerald carr accepted the 1975 dr . robert h . goddard memorial trophy from president ford , awarded to the skylab astronauts . they were awarded aiaa 's 1974 haley astronautics award . conrad was a fellow of the american astronautical society ; new york academy of sciences ; american institute of aeronautics and astronautics , and the society of experimental test pilots . . in popular media . conrad is discussed at length in tom wolfe 's book , the right stuff , about the pilots engaged in u.s . postwar research about rockets . '' and someday , i may even use it on the moon . '' & nbsp ; — conrad , in footage of an american express television commercial . conrad played himself in the 1991 television movie plymouth , about a fictional lunar base ; and in the 1975 made-for-tv movie , stowaway to the moon . in the 1995 film apollo 13 , conrad was played by david andrews . in the 1998 hbo miniseries from the earth to the moon , he was played by peter scolari ( in episode 1 , '' can we do this ? '' ) and by paul mccrane ( in episode 7 , '' that 's all there is '' ) . in the 2018 film first man , conrad was played by ethan embry . in 1998 , holmes osborne played a character named '' buzz conrad '' on the cbs sitcom family matters , season 9 , episode 21 , a fictional combination of buzz aldrin and pete conrad . reference was made to pete conrad in grey 's anatomy , season 14 episode 22 . see also . list of spaceflight records . references . bibliography . . external links . conrad foundation interview with pete conrad for nova series : to the moon wgbh educational foundation , raw footage , 1998 as charles conrad as pete conrad