Rockefeller Center

buildings . the current complex is a combination of two building complexes and a standalone building : the original 14 art deco office buildings from the 1930s , one building across 51st street built in 1947 , and a set of four international-style towers built along the west side of avenue of the americas during the 1960s and 1970s . the center spans in total , with some in office space . . landmarked buildings . the landmarked buildings comprise in midtown , bounded by fifth and sixth avenues between 48th and 51st streets . built as a cohesive unit , the buildings have been owned by tishman speyer since 2000 . the buildings are spread along six blocks , with three blocks facing each avenue . these six blocks are the size of three standard blocks . one of the landmark buildings ' defining features is the indiana limestone facade possessed by all 14 structures , as specified in the original plans . all of the structures were designed by associated architects , with raymond hood as the principal architect , and are listed on the national register of historic places . . radio city . the east side of sixth avenue , officially known as avenue of the americas , contains most of the buildings that were built specifically for the proposed radio complex . these buildings , which comprise '' radio city '' , are 1230 avenue of the americas , 30 rockefeller plaza , radio city music hall and 1270 avenue of the americas . the idea for an integrated media complex somewhere came in 1920 , when owen d . young , the chairman of rca parent general electric , suggested that rca combine its then-disparate offices into one location . the western half of the southernmost block of the complex along sixth avenue , between 48th and 49th streets , contains the former u.s . rubber company building ( now simon & schuster building ) at 1230 avenue of the americas . the last structure in the original complex to be built , it was topped out in november 1939 . the 23-story building contains two 7-story wings on its north and south sides . it was renamed after uniroyal in 1967 , and again after simon & schuster in 1976 . 1230 avenue of the americas was expanded to the east in 1954 after the center theatre adjacent to it was demolished . the 19-story annex , designed by wallace harrison and max abramovitz , had a glass facade on the lowest two stories—reflecting the design of the former american airlines building across sixth avenue—and a limestone facade above the second story . it is aligned with the axis of 10 rockefeller plaza on the eastern side of the block , and its northern and southern elevations contain five setbacks . the exterior also houses an abstract bas-relief created by naum gabo . the center theatre , at 1236 sixth avenue , was the only structure in the original rockefeller center to be demolished . originally the '' roxy theatre '' , it was renamed after william fox sued roxy rothafel over the naming rights to the nearby roxy theatre , which rothafel had originally managed . the 3,700-seat center theatre had a short massing ( general shape ) in place due to height restrictions at the time , which prohibited construction above theater auditoriums . the theater 's stage was enlarged for musicals in 1936 , and four years later , 380 seats were removed in order to make way for an ice rink for skating spectaculars . it showed film , musicals , ice-skating competitions , and television through its 21-year existence . due to its duplication of the larger radio city music hall 's activities , it was deemed uneconomical almost from its opening , and was considered redundant by the 1950s . in 1954 , it was replaced by the expansion of 1230 avenue of the americas . the block immediately to the north , on sixth avenue between 49th and 50th streets , is occupied by 30 rockefeller plaza and its western annex at 1250 sixth avenue . the 70-floor , building anchors the entire complex , and is located on the eastern side of the block . opened in 1933 as the rca building , the building has been renamed multiple times , first to the ge building in 1988 , after general electric bought rca , and then to the comcast building in 2014 after comcast 's purchase of nbcuniversal . 30 rockefeller plaza was built as a single structure occupying the entire block between sixth avenue and rockefeller plaza , and its design was influenced by john todd 's desire for the building to use its air rights to their maximum potential . it has three main segments : the 66-story tower rising from the eastern part of the base with the famous rainbow room restaurant on the 65th floor , and , formerly , the rockefeller family office ; a windowless segment in the middle of the base that houses nbc studios ; and a shorter 16-story tower on the western part of the base at 1250 avenue of the americas . as an icon of the complex , 30 rockefeller plaza 's architecture influenced the design of the rest of the complex , with its limestone facade and gothic-inspired four-leafed spandrels . radio city music hall at 1260 avenue of the americas , occupying the southwestern portion of the block between 50th and 51st streets . the only remaining theater in the complex , it was similar in style to the center theatre , but at a larger scale . construction started in december 1931 , and the hall opened in december 1932 . the music hall seats 6,000 people , and since opening has seen over 300 million visitors . located in a niche adjacent to the neighboring 1270 avenue of the americas , the music hall is housed under the building 's seventh-floor setback . the other building on the block between 50th and 51st streets is 1270 avenue of the americas , a 31-story structure with a setback on the sixth floor . originally the rko building , it was built over the music hall and shares many of the same exterior architectural details . construction of the building started in 1931 , and the building was complete by september 1932 . henry hofmeister designed the building , as well as several other office buildings in the city that were built over theaters . the building 's entrance design , blending in with that of the other buildings in the radio city section , is marked by three sculptural bas-reliefs created by robert garrison for each of the building 's three bays , signifying muses of contemporary thought , morning , and evening . in 1990 , robert kushner created three bronze sculptures of winged spirits for the lobby . the rko building served as headquarters for its namesake company 's movie production in the 1930s , and was renamed for the american metal climax company ( amax ) , its new owners , in the early 1960s . international complex . the international complex is located entirely along fifth avenue , with the tall international building overshadowing four smaller country-themed buildings with retail outlets . three of the buildings—the tall tower and the two southern retail buildings—were planned after the cancellation of the incongruously designed oval retail building in 1931 , while the two retail buildings to the north were added later . the low rectangular structures that replaced the oval building were seen as a more suitable design for the avenue . the current international theme was decided on due to a lack of american tenants willing to rent there ; eventually , the buildings were occupied by british , french , and italian interests , although the italian interests ultimately were the only foreign tenants who rented for the long term . all four retail buildings have identical limestone facades , roof gardens , and ground-floor storefronts , but differ in the artworks with which they were decorated . contemporary advertisements for shopping on fifth avenue touted the complex 's proximity to saks fifth avenue and st . patrick 's cathedral . when viewed from fifth avenue , the buildings provide a foreground for the taller 30 rockefeller plaza building behind them . the channel gardens separate the british empire building and la maison francaise . the southernmost of the four retail buildings is la maison francaise ( literally '' the french house '' ) at 610 fifth avenue , which opened in october 1933 . it is a six-story standalone building with a limestone facade with a sixth-story setback , as well as a partial -story penthouse on the west half of the seventh story and a garden on the east side of the seventh-story roof . immediately across the channel gardens to the north of la maison francaise is its twin , the british empire building at 620 fifth avenue , which opened in april 1933 . it is also a standalone building , with exactly the same massing as la maison francaise , down to the setback , rooftop garden , and half-penthouse . the international building has the address 630 fifth avenue to its east , or 45 rockefeller plaza to its west . the tower stands at 41 stories high , including mechanical floors . one of two skyscrapers that opened in manhattan in 1935 , it was noted for its short 136-day duration of construction , as well as the construction quality , overall design , and materials used . the building , located in the middle of the block between rockefeller plaza and fifth avenue , contains a central plaza on its east , facing the fifth avenue entrance , which contains the famous statue of atlas . the palazzo d'italia and international building north serve as six-story retail wings of the international building . the palazzo d'italia is located at 626 fifth avenue , on the south side of the plaza , while international building north is located at 636 fifth avenue , north of the plaza . other buildings . the 36-story tower at 1 rockefeller plaza , on the east side of the plaza between 48th and 49th streets , is the original time & life building that was opened in april 1937 . time inc . itself did not move into the building for another year after its completion . in 1960 , the building was renamed for general dynamics after time inc . had moved into 1271 avenue of the americas , the new time-life building located three blocks away . the tower was renamed for its street address after general dynamics moved to st . louis in 1971 . 10 rockefeller plaza is located opposite 1 rockefeller , on the west side of the plaza . its planning name was the holland house , but the dutch government did not sign on , so the building became the eastern air lines building instead . 10 rockefeller was built as a 16-story slab , basically a miniature version of 1 rockefeller . 10 rockefeller 's six-story parking garage was the first in rockefeller center . notable modern tenants include the today show studios , and since 2005 , the nintendo new york store . 50 rockefeller plaza , formerly the associated press building , is located on the west side of rockefeller plaza between 50th and 51st streets . it was constructed in the spring of 1938 . the only building in the center built to the outer limits of its lot line , the 15-story building took its shape from associated press 's need for a single , undivided , loft-like newsroom as large as the lot could accommodate—namely , a blocky structure with no setbacks . 600 fifth avenue is located at the corner of fifth avenue and 48th street and was built after the other buildings in the main complex , opening in 1952 . the 28-story tower was once also known as the sinclair oil building and the manufacturers hanover trust company building . its l-shaped footprint surrounds another building at the corner of 49th street and fifth avenue , such that it fronts on 48th street , on fifth avenue , but only midblock on 49th street . carson and lundin designed 600 fifth avenue , along with 666 fifth avenue three blocks north , to complement the rockefeller complex between the two towers . 600 fifth avenue contains a limestone facade , consistent with that of the original complex , as well as a seventh-story setback on its fifth avenue side and rooftop gardens on its setbacks . the building contains a main lobby at 48th street , a service entrance to the same street , and a connection to 1 rockefeller plaza at its west end . unlike other buildings in the complex , 600 fifth avenue 's ground level only contained one public entrance to maximize the ground-floor retail space , which was originally leased by swiss interests and pan am airlines . later buildings . the buildings subsequently added are separately owned by multiple owners . the first subsequent building to be built was 75 rockefeller plaza , at 51st street on the north end of the complex , was built in 1947 . the building contains a low base that is level with the rooftops of the low-rise buildings on 51st and 52nd street , as well as a tall slab rising from the base , aligned in a north-south direction . it was originally built privately , but ownership was transferred to rockefeller center in february 1947 . the 33-story , building was originally called the esso building . it was the headquarters of standard oil company of new jersey ( later exxon ) until the early 1970s . the esso building was later renamed after warner communications , time warner and aol time warner . it is now owned by mohamed al fayed and managed by rxr realty . the other four buildings were built as part of a single project on the west side of sixth avenue between 47th and 51st streets . erected from 1958 through 1974 , they were all built by the same firm , harrison & abramovitz . the 300 million project was part of a drive to get large companies such as celanese corporation , s & p global , exxon , and time inc . to invest in the center . the new project added a combined of space to the existing center when it was completed , and was attractive to potential tenants because of this . the following buildings are part of the newer sixth avenue expansion : 1211 avenue of the americas , the former celanese building , is located between 47th and 48th streets . the tower opened in 1974 . now the news corp building , it is owned by an affiliate of beacon capital partners , and leasing is managed by cushman & wakefield . 1221 avenue of the americas , the former mcgraw-hill building , is located between 48th and 49th streets . the building opened in 1973 and is owned by the rockefeller group . 1251 avenue of the americas , the former exxon building , is located between 49th and 50th streets . this building was built from 1967 to 1971 . exxon 's corporate headquarters moved into the structure in 1972 , with co-ownership with rockefeller center 's managers , and held an ownership stake there until 1986 , when mitsui & company purchased the building . exxon moved its headquarters to texas in 1989 , vacating all of the space in 1251 avenue of the americas . pearson , anne and ralph bivins . '' exxon moving corporate headquarters to dallas '' . houston chronicle . october 27 , 1989 . p . a1 . retrieved on july 29 , 2009 . 1271 avenue of the americas , the former time & life building , is located between 50th and 51st streets . the building was completed in 1958 construction on the time-life 's building 's steelwork started in april 1958 , and is owned by the rockefeller group . . other architectural elements . lower plaza . at the front of 30 rock is the lower plaza , located in the very center of the complex and below ground level . the center plaza was part of the plans for the canceled metropolitan opera house . although the opera house was canceled in 1929 , the plaza was retained in subsequent plans . originally , the plaza would have been located at ground level with a promenade called channel gardens , which led westward from fifth avenue to the plaza . in the march 1931 revision to the complex 's blueprint , the center plaza was enhanced and sunken . the sunken plaza was originally supposed to be oval-shaped , but the plaza was later changed to a rectangular shape . the sunken rectangular plaza , planted with shrubs , provided a sense of privacy and enclosure when it was originally built . the plaza 's main entrance is through the channel gardens , a , planted pedestrian esplanade running westward from fifth avenue between the british empire building and la maison francaise . the steeply sloping promenade was originally furnished with six narrow pools in the center of the space , each surrounded by hedges . the pools are topped with fountain heads designed by rene chambellan , each representing a different attribute : leadership , will , thought , imagination , energy , and alertness . chambellan also designed the fountains ' drain covers with various bronze depictions of sea creatures such as turtles and crabs . during the winter , the channel gardens ' fountains were shut off and decorated with valerie clarebout 's sculptures of angels . the twelve sculptures , each measuring tall , have been placed in the gardens every winter since 1954 . at the western end of the promenade is a plaque commemorating the original elgin gardens , as well as a bronze monumental plaque to john d . rockefeller jr ( see below ) . from there , a flight of the steps descends toward the rink , then splits into two different stairs heading both north and south . the western end of the plaza contains paul manship 's 1934 masterwork , prometheus ( see also . the statue stands in a fountain basin in front of a grey rectangular wall . the rockefeller center christmas tree is placed above the statue from november to january every year ; it is usually put in place and lit the week after thanksgiving , and taken down the week after new year 's day . the first tree was erected in 1934 , and as successive trees received more lavish decorations , the tradition gradually became known worldwide . much of the plaza 's outdoor section is occupied by an ice rink . installed in 1936 , it replaced unprofitable retail space that had been constructed as part of the original center . originally intended as a '' temporary '' measure , the rink became an immediate tourist attraction upon opening , becoming one of the world 's most famous skating rinks in later years . in 1939 , a permanent rink was installed , which necessitated the replacement of the center staircase from channel gardens . . for a reference to the roller skating rink 's opening , see : its popularity inspired the construction of a skating rink in the former center theatre , and for a short time , there were also proposals to convert the lower plaza 's ice rink to a roller skating rink during the springtime . the northern , southern , and eastern sides of the plaza are surrounded by a walkway that is several steps below street level , with staircases at either western end as well as at the plaza 's channel gardens entrance . some 200 flagpoles surround the plaza 's perimeter at ground level , installed at regular intervals along the walkway and rockefeller plaza . the poles were installed in 1942 and were originally intended to be temporary . the flags later became permanent installations , fitting in with the nearby international complex . the poles originally displayed the flags of the united nations ' member countries , although in later years they also carried flags of the u.s . states and territories , or decorative and seasonal motifs . originally , there were 26 flags for each of the members of the united nations , but as more countries became un members , additional rows of poles were added on the north and south sides of the plaza . during national and state holidays , every pole carries the flag of the united states . the flags ' ropes are secured with locks to prevent people from tampering with the flags . in july 1962 , two years after john rockefeller jr . 's death , the center 's management placed a plaque at the plaza , containing a list of ten principles in which he believed . the creed was first expressed in 1941 . rockefeller 's beliefs include '' the supreme worth of the individual and in his right to life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness '' ( the first principle ) and '' truth and justice are fundamental to an enduring social order '' ( the sixth principle ) . the architect i . & nbsp ; m . pei praised rockefeller center 's lower plaza as being '' perhaps the most successful open space in the united states , perhaps in the world '' , due to its success in drawing visitors . the plaza has also inspired similar developments around the world . rockefeller plaza . rockefeller plaza is a pedestrian street running through the complex , parallel to fifth and sixth avenues . this street was also part of the original plans for the metropolitan opera , and benjamin morris originally intended for the road to stretch from 42nd to 59th streets . only the section between 48th and 51st streets was built , and the road was open in its entirety by 1937 . the road was given the name '' rockefeller plaza '' in 1933 , despite the potential confusion with the lower plaza , because it was believed that the '' plaza '' in the road 's name would emphasize its '' spatial unity '' with the lower plaza and channel gardens . the original intention of the street 's construction was to enhance the shopping district of fifth avenue , to its east , but this never happened , and rockefeller plaza now primarily serves as a pedestrian passage that connects all of rockefeller center 's separate components . as with most numbered crosstown streets in manhattan , rockefeller plaza is wide with curbs on either side of an asphalt surface . however , the sidewalks are much wider than on typical streets . in addition , rockefeller plaza is supported by a multi-level steel skeleton underneath , which houses the underground mall , storage rooms , and the complex 's shipping and loading center . as such , it contains a layer of waterproofing . the surface of rockefeller plaza outside radio city music hall , between 50th and 51st street , contains small bronze circles for theatergoers to stand on while waiting to enter the hall . until the 1980s , the plaza contained plaques that affirmed columbia university 's ownership of rockefeller center , but these were removed with the 1985 sale of the complex to the rockefeller group . since rockefeller plaza is technically a purely private property to which the public is welcome , the plaza is closed for part of one day every year . . rooftop gardens . the gardens atop rockefeller center 's roofs were designed by ralph hancock and raymond hood . they came about because both hood and todd believed that rooftop gardens would enhance the complex 's beauty ; in particular , hood compared the presence of rooftop gardens to the plants around a house . originally , the gardens were supposed to be all interconnected via bridges between the roofs of each building . however , after hood 's death in 1935 , the garden plan fell apart , as most of the complex 's final buildings were built without provisions for gardens . the associated press building 's 15th-story roof , as well as the isolated location of the international building and the high cost of these gardens , made this system infeasible . ultimately , gardens were installed on 10 rockefeller plaza ; 30 rockefeller plaza ; the four international-themed retail buildings ; the center theatre ; and radio city music hall . the gardens started running a 45,000-per-year deficit by 1937 due to various expenses as well as a lack of interest among tourists . the largest and most grand of the gardens was the '' garden of the nations '' ( alternatively '' gardens of the nations '' ) , which was installed on the eleventh-floor roof of 30 rockefeller plaza and opened in april 1935 . the construction effort involved of soil ; of rock from as far as england ; 100,000 bricks ; 2,000 trees and shrubs ; 4,000 small plants ; and 20,000 bulbs for flowers . they were originally composed of thirteen nation-specific gardens whose layouts were inspired by the gardens in the respective countries they represented . each of the nation-themed gardens were separated by barriers . there was an '' international garden '' , a rock garden , in the center of the thirteen nation-themed gardens , which featured a meandering stream and 2,000 plant varieties . the garden of the nations also contained a children 's garden , a modern-style garden , and a shrub-and-vegetable patch . upon opening , the garden of the nations attracted many visitors because of its collection of exotic flora , and it became the most popular garden in rockefeller center . in its heyday , the center charged admission fees for the garden of the nations . however , all of the nation-themed gardens were eventually removed , and the rock garden was left to dry up , supplanted by flower beds that were no longer open to the public . the international complex 's gardens fared better . hancock developed the british empire building and la maison francaise 's gardens , while a.m . van den hoek designed the gardens atop the other two buildings . the british and french gardens both contain a lawn and pool surrounded by hedges , while the other two gardens atop the international building 's wings include ivy lawns surrounded by hedges . the italian garden also contained a cobblestone walkway and two plaques from the roman forum , while international building north 's garden has a paved walkway with steps . the roof gardens of the international building 's wings were restored in 1986 for 48,000 each , followed by the gardens on the british and french buildings , which were restored the next year . . underground concourse . a series of shop- and restaurant-filled pedestrian passages stretch underground from 47th to 51st streets between fifth and seventh avenues . the pedestrian tunnel system was part of the updated 1931 plan for the center , and formal proposals for the system were submitted in 1933 . it was supposed to comprise a system that stretched over , all air-conditioned and lined with shops . meanwhile , the pair of four-lane roadways was supposed to be located underneath the pedestrian mall , with delivery ramps leading to a central loading area below ground . later plans also included a people mover . ultimately , the people mover was not built , but the 25-space mall opened in may 1935 . the complex 's owner tishman speyer renovated the concourse in 1999 in an effort to make the underground retail space more noticeable and attract more upscale tenants . the original bronze ornaments and lighting were replaced , air-conditioning was installed , two passageways were demolished , and both ground-level and underground retail spaces were refurbished as part of the renovation . the concourse is the uppermost level of the complex 's four basement levels , as well as the only basement level open to the public . the lower three levels are home to storage rooms and the complex 's shipping center , the latter of which is accessed by a delivery ramp at 50th street . access is via lobby stairways in the six landmark buildings , through restaurants surrounding the concourse-level skating rink , and via elevators to the north and south of the rink . there is also a connection to the new york city subway 's 47th–50th streets–rockefeller center station , serving the . , the largest retailer in the concourse is banana republic . . pre-existing buildings . two small buildings abut the north and south corners of the 30 rockefeller plaza annex . these buildings exist as a result of two tenants who refused to sell their rights to rockefeller during construction . the grocer john f . maxwell would only sell his property at sixth avenue and 50th street if he received 1 million in return . however , rockefeller 's assistant charles o . heydt mistakenly said that maxwell would never sell , and maxwell himself said that he had never been approached by the rockefellers . consequently , rockefeller center did not purchase maxwell 's property until 1970 . maxwell 's demand paled to that of daniel hurley and patrick daly , owners of a speakeasy who , since 1892 , had leased a property at 49th street . they would sell for 250 million , roughly the cost of the entire complex . they initially gained a lease extension until 1942 , but ended up leasing their property until 1975 , and was built around maxwell 's and hurley and daly 's properties . on the southeast corner of the complex , on fifth avenue between 48th and 49th streets , there were also two pre-existing buildings . robert walton goelet owned a lot at 2–6 west 49th street and wished to develop it ; the lot was developed as 608 fifth avenue , which was completed in 1932 . the st . nicholas church , located on 48th street behind goelet 's land , also refused to sell the property despite an offer of up to 7 million for the property . the church was razed in 1949 to make way for 600 fifth avenue . . art . in november 1931 , john todd suggested the creation of a program for placing distinctive artworks within each of the buildings . hartley burr alexander , a noted mythology and symbology professor , was tasked with planning the complex 's arts installations . alexander submitted his plan for the site 's artwork in december 1932 . as part of the proposal , the complex would have a variety of sculptures , statues , murals , friezes , decorative fountains , and mosaics . in an expansion of hood 's setback-garden plan , alexander 's proposal also included rooftop gardens atop all the buildings , which would create a '' babylonian garden '' when viewed from above . at first , alexander suggested '' homo fabor , man the builder '' as the complex 's overarching theme , representing satisfaction with one 's occupation rather than with the wage . however , that theme was not particularly well received by the architects , so alexander proposed another theme , the '' new frontiers '' ; this theme dealt with social and scientific innovations and represented the challenges that humanity faced '' after the conquest of the physical world '' . in theory , this was considered a fitting theme , but alexander had been so specific about the details of the necessary artworks that it limited the creative license for any artists who would be commissioned for such works , so he was fired . it took several tries to agree on the current theme , '' the march of civilization '' , at which point some of the art had already been commissioned , including those which alexander had proposed . the art that currently exists within rockefeller center was inspired by professor alexander 's arts program . sculptor lee lawrie contributed the largest number of individual pieces & nbsp ; – twelve , including the atlas statue facing fifth avenue and the conspicuous friezes of wisdom above the main entrance to 30 rockefeller plaza . edward trumbull coordinated the colors of the works located inside the buildings , and léon-victor solon did the same job for the exterior pieces . isamu noguchi 's gleaming stainless steel bas-relief , news , over the main entrance to 50 rockefeller plaza ( the associated press building ) was , at the time of commissioning , the largest metal bas-relief in the world . the complex 's other sculptors included rene chambellan , leo friedlander , robert garrison , alfred janniot , carl paul jennewein , gaston lachaise , leo lentelli , paul manship , giacomo manzù , hildreth meiere , and attilio piccirilli . other artists included carl milles , margaret bourke-white , and dean cornwell . radio city music hall architect donald deskey commissioned many depression-era artists to design works for the interior of the hall , including stuart davis 's 1932 mural men without women , named after the short story collection by ernest hemingway that had been published the same year . see : one of the center 's more controversial works was man at the crossroads , created by diego rivera , which was originally commissioned for 30 rockefeller plaza 's lobby but was demolished before it could be completed . . statues . . atlas . commissioned in 1936 and executed by lee lawrie and rene chambellan , the atlas statue is located in the international building 's courtyard . it faces eastward toward st . patrick 's cathedral on fifth avenue . the statue depicts atlas the titan , with exaggerated muscles , supporting the celestial vault on his shoulders . prometheus . paul manship 's highly recognizable bronze gilded prometheus statue , commissioned in 1934 , is located at the western end of the sunken plaza . it stands high and weighs . the statue depicts the greek legend of the titan prometheus recumbent , bringing fire to mankind . the statue is flanked by two smaller gilded representations of youth and maiden , which were relocated to palazzo d'italia from 1939 to 1984 because manship thought the representations did not fit visually . the model for prometheus was leonardo ( leon ) nole , and the inscription , a paraphrase from aeschylus , on the granite wall behind , reads : '' prometheus , teacher in every art , brought the fire that hath proved to mortals a means to mighty ends . '' . man at the crossroads . in 1932 , the mexican socialist artist diego rivera ( whose sponsor was the museum of modern art and whose patron at the time was abby aldrich rockefeller , the wife of john d . rockefeller , jr . ) , was commissioned by their son nelson to create a color fresco for the wall in the lobby of the then-rca building . this came after nelson had been unable to secure the commissioning of either matisse or picasso . previously rivera had painted a controversial fresco in detroit titled detroit industry , commissioned by abby and john 's friend , edsel ford , who later became a trustee of the museum of modern art . as expected , his man at the crossroads became controversial , as it contained moscow may day scenes and a clear portrait of lenin , which had not been apparent in initial sketches . after nelson issued a written warning to rivera to replace the offending figure with an anonymous face , rivera refused ( after offering to counterbalance lenin with a portrait of lincoln ) . as per nelson 's orders , rivera was paid for his commission and the mural was papered over . nine months later , after all attempts to save the fresco were explored—including relocating it to abby 's museum of modern art—it was destroyed as a last option . ( rivera would later partially recreate the work as man , controller of the universe , using photographs taken by an assistant , lucienne bloch . ) rivera 's fresco in the center was replaced with a larger mural by the catalan artist josep maria sert , titled american progress , depicting a vast allegorical scene of men constructing modern america . containing figures of abraham lincoln , mahatma gandhi , and ralph waldo emerson , it wraps around the west wall of 30 rockefeller plaza 's grand lobby . critical reception . in its earliest years , rockefeller center received largely negative and pessimistic reviews from architectural critics . the most cynical opinion came from architectural scholar lewis mumford , who so hated the '' weakly conceived , reckless , romantic chaos '' of the march 1931 plans for rockefeller center that he reportedly went into exile in upstate new york . he blamed john rockefeller jr . for the complex 's '' inability to consider a new type of problem in any form except the skyscraper stereotype '' . mumford 's view of the complex was only marginally less negative when he revisited the issue in december 1933 : he said that it could be '' large , exciting , and romantic '' at night , but that '' a mountain or ash heap of the same size would do the trick almost as well , if the lights were cleverly arranged '' . ralph adams cram , who adhered to a more classical architectural style , also had a pessimistic view of the plans unveiled in march 1931 . he called the plan for rockefeller center '' an apotheosis of megalomania , a defiant egotism '' arising from an ostentatious display of wealth , and said that '' the sooner we accomplish the destiny it so perfectly foreshadows , the sooner we shall be able to clear the ground and begin again '' . douglas haskell , who formerly edited architectural forum magazine , wrote that rockefeller center 's ambiance was '' gray , unreal , baleful '' . the urban planner le corbusier had a more optimistic view of the complex , expressing that rockefeller center was '' rational , logically conceived , biologically normal , and harmonious '' . he wrote that although rockefeller center would inevitably be disorganized in its earliest years , it would eventually adhere to a certain '' order '' , and he also praised the complex for being a paragon of '' noble '' and '' efficient '' construction . the writer frederick lewis allen took a more moderate viewpoint , saying that negative critics had '' hoped for too much '' precisely because rockefeller center had been planned during an economically prosperous time , but was constructed during the depression . even though allen thought that the art was mediocre and the opportunities for a less lively complex were wasted , he stated that rockefeller center had an aura of '' festivity '' around it , unlike most other office buildings in america . sigfried giedion wrote in his book space , time and architecture that rockefeller center 's design was akin to a '' civic center '' whose design represented the 1930s version of the future . henry luce , the founder of time inc . , said in 1941 that rockefeller center represented '' the true world of tomorrow '' , as opposed to the 1939 new york world 's fair , whose '' world of tomorrow '' representations '' are today junk piles under the winter snow '' . novelist gertrude stein said in 1935 , '' the view of rockefeller center from fifth avenue is the most beautiful thing i have ever seen . '' by the 1940s , most critics had positive views of rockefeller center . even mumford praised the complex , lamenting in 1947 that the new headquarters of the united nations on first avenue had no '' human scale '' or '' transition from the intimate to the monumental '' , whereas rockefeller center 's buildings '' produce an aesthetic effect out of all proportion to their size '' . haskell wrote in 1966 that rockefeller center 's designers '' seemed to have regarded urban life as an enhanceable romance '' . in 1969 , the art historian vincent scully wrote , '' rockefeller center is one of the few surviving public spaces that look as if they were designed and used by people who knew what stable wealth was and were not ashamed to enjoy it . '' the new york state office of parks , recreation and historic preservation commissioned a report in 1974 entitled '' grand central terminal and rockefeller center : a historic-critical estimate of their significance '' , in which they concluded that rockefeller center , along with central park and grand central terminal , were the only three developments that could slow down manhattan 's '' remorseless process of expansion and decay '' . in 1976 , new york times architectural critic paul goldberger wrote , '' what makes rockefeller center work is that it is at once a formal beaux‐arts‐influenced complex of dignified towers and a lively , utterly contemporary amalgam of shops , plazas and street life . it is as natural a home for a 1970 's street festival as for a 1930 's movie about cafe society : few designs can join such disparate worlds so comfortably . '' . see also . early skyscrapers architecture of new york city list of new york city designated landmarks in manhattan from 59th to 110th streets national register of historic places listings in manhattan above 59th to 110th streets . notes .