Christine Keeler

biography . early years . keeler was born in uxbridge , middlesex . her father , colin keeler ( later known as colin king ) , abandoned the family in 1945 . she was brought up by her mother , julie ellen payne , and stepfather , edward huish , in a house made from two converted railway carriages in the berkshire village of wraysbury . in 1951 , at the age of 9 , keeler was sent to a holiday home in littlehampton because the school health inspector said that she was suffering from malnutrition . she was sexually abused as a teenager both by her stepfather and his friends , for whom she babysat . at the age of 15 , she found work as a model at a dress shop in london 's soho . at age 17 , she gave birth to a son after an affair with an african-american united states air force sergeant . the child was born prematurely on 17 april 1959 , and survived just six days . that summer , keeler left wraysbury , staying briefly in slough with a friend before heading for london . she initially worked as a waitress at a restaurant on baker street , where she met maureen o'connor , who worked at murray 's cabaret club in soho . she introduced keeler to the owner , percy murray , who hired her almost immediately as a topless showgirl . at murray 's she met stephen ward , an english osteopath and artist . his practice and his art brought considerable social success , and he made many important friends . soon the two were living together with the outward appearance of being a couple , but according to her , it was a platonic , non-sexual relationship . in her autobiography , secrets and lies , keeler maintains that ward was working as a double agent , having contact with both senior members of mi5 , and the kgb to whom he was passing uk state secrets . profumo affair . on the weekend of 8–9 july 1961 , ward introduced keeler to john profumo , the secretary of state for war , at a pool party at cliveden , the buckinghamshire mansion owned by the 3rd viscount astor . profumo began a brief affair with keeler . the exact length of the affair between keeler and profumo is disputed , ending either in august 1961 once profumo was warned by the security services of the possible dangers of mixing with the ward circle , or continuing with decreasing fervour until december 1961 . among ward 's other friends , whom profumo briefly met , was the soviet naval attaché and gru officer , yevgeny ivanov . according to keeler , she and ivanov had a short sexual relationship . after her relationship with profumo ended , keeler was sexually involved with several partners , including jazz singer lucky gordon and jazz promoter johnny edgecombe . there was considerable jealousy between the two men ; in one quarrel on 27 october 1962 , edgecombe slashed gordon 's face with a knife . when keeler ended the relationship with edgecombe in december 1962 , edgecombe turned up at ward 's house in wimpole mews on 14 december , where she was temporarily seeking refuge , and fired five shots at the building . his arrest and subsequent trial brought keeler to public attention and provided the impetus from which the scandal known as the '' profumo affair '' developed . after initially denying any impropriety with keeler , profumo eventually confessed and resigned from the government and parliament , causing great embarrassment to his government colleagues who had previously supported him . these events , in the summer of 1963 , brought keeler notoriety ; the economist gave the headline '' the prime minister 's crisis '' alongside a picture of keeler , with no further explanation . morley portrait . at the height of the profumo affair in 1963 , keeler sat for a photographic portrait taken by lewis morley . the photo shoot , at a studio on the first floor of peter cook 's establishment club , with morley was to promote a proposed film , the keeler affair , that was never released in the united kingdom . keeler was reluctant to pose in the nude , but the film producers insisted . morley persuaded keeler to sit astride a plywood chair , so that whilst technically she would be nude , the back of the chair would obscure most of her body . keeler told cartoon historian tim benson in 2007 that she was not nude and was , in fact , wearing knickers during the entire photoshoot . the photo propelled arne jacobsen 's model 3107 chair to prominence , even though the chair used was an imitation of the model 3107 , with a hand-hold aperture crudely cut out of the back to avoid copyright infringement . the chair used is now in the victoria and albert museum . the differences in the designs of the chairs are readily apparent in a side-by-side photograph . . trials . on 18 april 1963 , keeler was attacked at the home of a friend . she accused gordon , who was arrested and charged . at his trial , which began on 5 june , he maintained that his innocence would be established by two witnesses who , the police told the court , could not be found . on 7 june , principally on the evidence of keeler , gordon was found guilty and sentenced to three years ' imprisonment . by this time , ward was facing trial on vice charges , and again keeler was a main prosecution witness . ward 's trial , which ran 22–31 july 1963 , has been characterised as '' an act of political revenge '' for the embarrassment caused to the government . he was accused of living off immoral earnings earned through keeler and mandy rice-davies , on the basis of the small contributions to household expenses or loan repayments the two had made to ward while living with him . ward 's professional earnings as an osteopath were a substantial £5,500 a year ( £ in at the time these small payments were made . after a hostile summing-up from the trial judge , ward was convicted , but before the jury returned their verdict , he took an overdose of barbiturates and died before sentence could be passed . in the closing days of ward 's trial , gordon 's assault conviction was overturned by the court of appeal when his missing witnesses were found and testified that the evidence given by keeler was substantially false . in december 1963 , keeler pleaded guilty to charges of perjury before sir anthony hawke , the recorder of london , and she was sentenced to nine months ' imprisonment , serving four and a half months in prison . later life . after her release from prison in 1964 , keeler had two brief marriages , to james levermore in 1965–66 and to anthony platt in 1971–72 . there was a child from each union , the elder being largely raised by keeler 's mother , julie . keeler mainly lived alone in the last couple of decades of her life . most of the considerable amount of money that she made from newspaper stories was dissipated by lawyers . she said that during the 1970s '' i was not living , i was surviving '' . she published several accounts of her life , in one of which she claimed that she became pregnant as a result of her relationship with profumo and subsequently had an abortion . her portrait , by ward , was acquired by the national portrait gallery in 1984 . in 1988 keeler was featured in bryan ferry 's promotional video for the single '' kiss and tell '' ( originally released on ferry 's seventh solo album , bête noire , in 1987 ) with mandy rice-davies ; this was meant to draw more attention to the song 's theme . in june 1988 she made an extended appearance on channel 4 discussion programme after dark . . death . on 5 december 2017 , keeler 's son seymour platt announced that his mother '' passed away last night at about 11.30 & nbsp ; pm '' at the princess royal university hospital in locksbottom , in bromley , greater london . she had been ill for some months , suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and was aged 75 . her funeral took place on 16 december 2017 at the west london crematorium in kensal green cemetery . . in popular culture . in the 1989 film about the profumo affair , scandal , actress joanne whalley portrays keeler . in andrew lloyd webber 's stage musical stephen ward , which opened at the aldwych theatre in 2013 , keeler was portrayed by charlotte spencer . keeler is portrayed by gala gordon during the second season of the netflix drama series the crown in 2017 . keeler is portrayed by sophie cookson in the trial of christine keeler , a six-part television series screened on bbc one from 2019 to 2020 . funded by the arts council england and arts council of wales , a touring exhibition called dear christine opened in newcastle upon tyne in june 2019 and toured to swansea in october 2019 , finishing at arthouse1 in london in february 2020 . the culmination of a four-year project by artist/curator fionn wilson to reclaim and re-frame keeler , it features work from 20 women artists '' in order to put a female perspective on a narrative that has mostly been led by men '' . garageland , issue 22 , '' difficult women '' , october 2018 , . the exhibition has been described by journalist and writer julie burchill as '' a thing of beauty without cruelty '' . critic and writer ian mckay wrote , '' in several important ways , dear christine , the exhibition , seeks with some noble intent to rescue christine 's image and experience and reprocess it , rescuing it from the newspaper front-page-keeler that is etched into the collective consciousness '' . the exhibition also featured in the morning star , the daily telegraph and the international times . in wales arts review , writer craig austin interviewed artist/curator fionn wilson who says : '' christine keeler has always fascinated me , since i first became aware of her story via the 1989 film scandal . when i started painting , i decided to do a series of paintings of her , and as i researched christine 's life story , it struck me that , even though she is a culturally significant figure in british history , there is very little recent artistic reference to her . i decided that i would try to rectify this and add to the visual narrative around her . and so the project was born . it 's also a very personal project . i have great sympathy for christine keeler . '' the exhibition catalogue ( dear christine , april 2019 , edited by wilson , designed by rebecca fairman , includes writing by amanda coe ( screenwriter and executive producer of the trial of christine keeler ) , keeler 's son seymour platt , art historian kalliopi minioudaki , and artist and art critic bo gorzelak pedersen . christine keeler is mentioned in the song '' piano lessons '' from the 1999 album stupid dream by porcupine tree . publication . by keeler . . by others . . references .