Homotherium

taxonomy and distribution . left the name homotherium ( greek : , 'same ' ) and , 'beast ' ) ) was proposed by emilio fabrini ( 1890 ) , without further explanation , for a new subgenus of machairodus , whose main distinguishing feature was the presence of a large diastema between the two inferior premolars . the lineage of homotherium is estimated ( based on mitochondrial dna sequences ) to have diverged from that of smilodon about 18 million years ago . homotherium probably derived from machairodus and appeared for the first time at the miocene–pliocene border , about 4 to 5 million years ago . alan turner : '' the evolution of the guild of larger terrestrial carnivores during the plio-pleistocene in africa '' . geobios , no 23 , fasc . 3 , p . 349-368 , 1990 . during the pleistocene it occurred in vast parts of eurasia , north america and until the middle pleistocene ( about 1.5 million years ago ) even in africa . a fossil of h . crenatidens was inadvertently dredged from the bed of the north sea , which was a flat , low-lying extent of marshy tundra laced with rivers during the last glacial period . ( bbc news ) paul rincon , '' big cat fossil found in north sea '' , 18 november 2008 accessed 18 november 2008 there has also been a discovery of 1.8-million-year-old fossils in venezuela , indicating that scimitar-toothed cats were able to invade south america along with smilodon during the great american interchange . these remains form the holotype of homotherium venezuelensis . rincón , a . , prevosti , f . , & parra , g . ( 2011 ) . new saber-toothed cat records ( felidae : machairodontinae ) for the pleistocene of venezuela , and the great american biotic interchange journal of vertebrate paleontology , 31 ( 2 ) , 468-478 doi : 10.1080/02724634.2011.550366 how long they lasted in south america is not yet evident . homotherium survived in eurasia until about 28,000 years ago . several eurasian species have been recognized based mainly on differences in the size and shape of the upper canines and body size : h . latidens , h . nestianus , h . sainzelli , h . crenatidens , h . nihowanensis , and h . ultimum . however , given the range of sizes found in extant large cats , it is likely that they represent a single species , homotherium latidens . two species described from early pleistocene africa , h . ethiopicum and h . hadarensis—also hardly differ from the eurasian forms . on the african continent the genus disappeared about 1.5 million years ago . in north america a very similar species , h . serum , occurred from the late pliocene until the late pleistocene . however , both morphological and genetic data suggest that all late pleistocene homotherium individuals worldwide should probably be regarded as members of h . latidens . remains have been found at various sites between alaska and texas . in the southern parts of its range the american homotherium co-existed with smilodon ; in the northern parts it was the only species of saber-toothed cat . the american homotherium was originally described by the name dinobastis . despite homotheriums vast range and the large quantity of fossil remains from eurasia , africa and north america , complete skeletons of this cat are relatively rare . one of the most famous sites of homotherium remains is friesenhahn cave in texas , where 30 homotherium skeletons were found , along with hundreds of juvenile mammoths and several dire wolf . the genus dinobastis was originally named by cope ( 1893 ) . its type is dinobastis serus . it was synonymized subjectively with smilodon by matthew ( 1910 ) and later with homotherium by churcher ( 1966 ) , schultz et al . ( 1970 ) , waldrop ( 1974 ) , kurtén and anderson ( 1980 ) , churcher ( 1984 ) and and carpenter ( 1988 ) . w . d . matthew . 1910 . bulletin of the american museum of natural history 28 c . b . schultz et al . 1970 . bulletin of the nebraska state museum 9 w . w . dalquest and r . m . carpenter . 1988 . occasional papers , museum , texas tech university 124 . description . left homotherium reached at the shoulder and weighed an estimated and was therefore about the size of a male african lion . sorkin , b . 2008 : a biomechanical constraint on body mass in terrestrial mammalian predators . lethaia , vol . 41 , pp . 333–347 meade , g.e . 1961 : the saber-toothed cat dinobastis serus . bulletin of the texas memorial museum 2 ( ii ) , 23–60 . compared to more familiar machairodonts , like smilodon or megantereon , homotherium had comparatively shorter upper canines , but these flat , serrated teeth were still longer than those of any living cat . homotheirums incisors and lower canines formed a powerful puncturing and gripping device ; among living cats , only the tiger ( panthera tigris ) has such large incisors , which aid in lifting and carrying prey . the molars of homotherium were rather weak and not adapted for bone crushing . the skull was longer than in smilodon and had a well-developed crest , where muscles were attached to power the mandible . this jaw had down-turned forward flanges to protect the scimitars . its large canine teeth were crenulated and designed for slashing rather than purely stabbing . however , a 2018 study by figueirido and colleagues found that homotherium possessed a bite adapted to clamp and hold while inflicting damage with its canines that was more similar to a lion 's due to the larger amounts of trabecular bone present in the skulls of the genus . this is unlike the canine shear-bite of smilodon , which it has been compared to , and this difference in killing bites provides evidence for distinct ecological adaptations . homotherium had the general appearance of a cat , but had a number of atypical features for a felid . homotherium had unusual limb proportions , with longer , more robust forelimbs that gave it a hyena-like appearance . the hind quarters were rather squat with feet that may have been partially plantigrade , causing the back to slope towards the short tail . features of the hind limbs indicate that this cat was moderately capable of leaping . the pelvic region , including the sacral vertebrae , was bear-like , as was the short tail composed of 13 vertebrae—about half the number of long-tailed cats ' . thumb the unusually large , square nasal opening , similar to that of the cheetah ( acinonyx jubatus ) , presumably allowed faster oxygen intake , which would have aided in rapid or extended running and in cooling the brain . again similarly to the cheetah , the visual cortex in homotheriums brain was large and complex , implying that the scimitar cat relied heavily on vision during the hunt . based on homotheriums preference for open habitat such as plains and comparisons with modern cats , it is considered likely by ethology william allen et al that homotherium would have been plainly colored like lions to better camouflage itself . . diet and habitats . left the decline of homotherium could be a result of the disappearance of large herbivorous mammals like mammoths in america at the end of the pleistocene . in north america fossil remains of homotherium are less abundant than those of its contemporary smilodon . for the most part it probably inhabited higher latitudes and altitudes and therefore was likely to be well adapted to the colder conditions of the mammoth steppe environment . the reduced claws , relatively slender limbs , and sloping back all appear to be adaptations for endurance running in open habitats . m . anton et al . : co-existence of scimitar-toothed cats , lions and hominins in the european pleistocene . implications of the post-cranial anatomy of homotherium latidens ( owen ) for comparative palaeoecology . quaternary science reviews 24 ( 2004 ) . genomic analysis supports the hypothesis that homotherium was social and well-adapted to life as a pursuit predator . genes revealing high genetic diversity indicate the genus was far more common than previously assumed due to the preservation bias of the fossil record . the study also revealed that this genus of machairodont was most likely diurnal , and would have mainly hunted in daylight . african homotherium species seem to have hunted early pleistocene species of deinotherium , likely preferring to target the more vulnerable adolescents or calves in a herd . due to their saber-teeth , an attack on such thick-skinned prey would have likely been significantly easier and less time-consuming compared to a similar hunt on modern elephants by lions . at the well known friesenhahn cave site in texas , the remains of almost 400 juvenile mammoths were discovered along with numerous homotherium skeletons of all ages , from elderly specimens to cubs . based on this fossil site , homotherium was likely a social predator that would have been specialized in hunting young mammoths and that subsequently dragged the kills into secluded caves to eat in relative peace . homotherium also seemed to have retained the excellent nocturnal vision typical of most cats , and hunting at night in the arctic regions where many homotherium have been found would have been a prime hunting method . the sloped back and powerful lumbar section of homotheriums vertebrae suggest a bear-like build , and thus that these animals could have been capable of pulling formidable loads ; further , broken upper canines - a common injury in fossils of other machairodonts such as machairodus and smilodon that would have resulted from struggling with their prey - is not seen in homotherium , perhaps because their social groups would completely restrain prey items before any of the cats attempted to kill the target with their saber teeth . moreover , the bones of the young mammoths found in friesenhahn cave show distinctive marks matching the incisors of homotherium , indicating that they could efficiently process most of the meat on a carcass and that the mammoths had been deposited in the caves by the cats themselves and not by scavengers . examination of the bones also indicates that the carcasses of these juvenile mammoths were dismembered after being killed by the cats before being dragged away , suggesting that homotherium would disarticulate their kill to transport it to a safe area such as a hidden lair or den and prevent competitors such as dire wolf and american lions from usurping the carcass .