Ninove

history . the oldest version of the name '' ninove '' , neonifus dates from the 9th century . later versions of the city name were ninive and nineve . the current version of the city name dates from the 14th century . the origin of the city name is not clear . there are two theories about the origin . one states that name is from roman origin , the other states that it is of franks origin . the meaning of the name , however , is known . ninove means '' nieuw weiland '' or in english , '' new pasture '' . during roman rule , ninove was a small settlement located in the current '' nederwijk '' . with the arrival of the franks in the 4th century ad , the settlement grew to a small agricultural town . the area on which ninove is located was from 843 on part of the holy roman empire . in the 11th century this area was conquered by the count of flanders , boudewijn v and the whole area between the rivers scheldt and dender became part of the flanders . from the 11th century on , the medieval castra was fortified into a castle stronghold . because it lay on the trade route between flanders and brabant , the town prospered and grew into a city . in 1137 , norbertine monks from park abbey founded the saint cornelius abbey ( abbey of our lady and ss . cornelius and cyprian ) , adjacent to the city ( see below ) . in 1295 the town and lands were bought by the count of flanders guy of dampierre . his grandson henry awarded the town a city charter in 1339 . the 15th to 17th centuries were a bad time for the city as the region was plagued with war and religious and political strife . the abbey was plundered by the french in 1578 during the reformation . in 1658 , ninove was occupied by the french army . after the treaty of the pyrenees , the french returned the area back to spain but the area was to change hands many times during the wars of louis xiv and louis xv of france . during the 17th century , ninove was crippled under the indemnities laid on it by the warring parties and the town faced a big economic crisis as its cloth industry went into decline . the big abbey was closed by the french in 1796 , after flanders was annexed to france . the town served as a cavalry headquarters during the waterloo campaign of 1815 . during the 19th century , ninove became industrialized and by the time of the first world war , the city became the centre of the flemish match industry . this industry however declined in importance until the last match factory closed during the late 1970s . from 1973 to 2011 , the town of meerbeke was the finish of the cycling race tour of flanders . the population of ninove has steadily grown and the city has become an attractive centre for commercial , recreational and economical activities in the area , and plays host to a popular annual volkswagen show every march , specifically for air-cooled vehicles , i.e . beetles , camper-vans , type 3 's , 4 's etc . the opening of a shopping mall in the centre of the city , as well as new sport and cultural infrastructure , and the construction of many residential apartment buildings have made ninove a growing competitor for nearby aalst and an ideal living-place for many commuters who work in nearby brussels . premonstratensian abbey . the premonstratensian abbot of park abbey founded the abbey of saints cornelius and cyprian in 1137 . abbey of the park ; catholic encyclopedia ( 1913 ) the monks settled on uncultivated lands which had been offered to them by the lord of ninove which were near the town , on the banks of the river dender . the community continued to grow and its financial position soon allowed it to occupy the adjacent parishes . the lay brothers undertook the farm work . because of its large landholdings , the abbey soon became one of the biggest grain producers in flanders . the 16th and 17th centuries were difficult times because of the political troubles and the effects of the french wars of religion on the southern netherlands . the 18th century brought a period of calm and prosperity . all the abbey buildings were reconstructed to the plans of a ghent architect advised by laurent-benoît dewez . the abbey was suppressed in 1796 during the french revolution . the abbey community was able to buy it back but this process lasted until 1822 . many of the buildings were demolished during the first half of the 19th century . the abbey church became the parish church of the assumption of mary in 1813 . city politics . since 1 november 2015 , the mayor of ninove has been tania de jonge ( open vld ) . the city council currently has 33 members , and is composed as follows : open vld - 9 seats forza ninove ( vlaams belang ) - 15 seats samen ( sp.a-groen - cd & v ) - 7 seats n-va - 2 seats . 2001-2007 . cd & v and n-va had allied themselves for the 2000 election , and formed a coalition with the vld . due to the increase of population , the threshold of 35,000 inhabitants had been passed and ninove saw an increase from 31 to 33 council members for the communal elections , which were held on sunday 8 october 2006 . the municipal elections on 8 october 2006 let the vld retain its 12 seats , the cd & v win a seat , giving them a total of 8 , the vlaams belang double its seats , giving them a total of 8 , the socialist party pro ninove lose a seat , making a total of 4 , and the green party hold their single seat . the coalition between vld and cd & v was renewed , but without the n-va . 2007-2012 . during the 2 january 2007 elections of the ocmw council , one member of the vld fraction voted for a candidate of vlaams belang , making the vld lose 1 seat . after an investigation led by the local chapter of the vld , it was announced that the person they suspected to be the culprit was schepen mariette de smet . de smet announced she would leave the vld , but would remain in the council of the mayor and aldermen as an independent . her colleagues in the council stripped her of all her duties , but after a few months she regained a few of them . on 9 january 2008 de smet , fellow vld schepen corijn and another vld member of the city council announced they were joining ldd , leaving the vld-cd & v with a brittle one seat majority on the city council . the ldd alderman however elected to stay in the majority , making for a brittle coalition . on 5 may 2009 a vlaams belang councilmember defected to the ldd . in 2009 mayor luc durant announced he would resign due to health reasons . he was replaced in september by michel casteur . in 2010 another vb councilmember left the party to become an independent . in january 2011 mariette de smet announced she would join the vlaams belang lead chartel list '' forza ninove '' and left ldd . she was then again stripped of her duties by her fellow aldermen . on 27 july 2011 de smet was murdered in a murder-suicide by a friend of her husband . she was replaced as alderman by a member of the vld . in 2012 the local ldd disbanded with its members either joining forza ninove or n-va . 2013-2018 . the municipal elections on 14 october 2012 saw the ruling vld-cd & v-ldd coalition head for electoral defeat as the vld ( 9 ) lost three and the cd & v ( 4 ) lost four seats . vlaams belang , under the cartel name '' forza ninove '' , won a seat , giving them a total of 9 . the socialist party sp.a and the green party formed a chartel and won six seats . n-va won 5 seats . after the negotiations between open vld , sp.a-groen and n-va collapsed , the coalition between open vld and cd & v was renewed but expanded with sp.a-groen . n-va , claiming election irregularities by cd & v and '' forza ninove '' , launched and won an administrative appeal . this ruling vacated the election results and ordered new elections to be held . open vld , cd & v and sp.a-groen appealed this ruling to the council of state which in february 2013 subsequently overthrew the previous ruling and restored the election results . the new city council and aldermen were finally inaugurated on 25 february 2013 . on 1 november 2015 mayor casteur stood down and was replaced by tania de jonge . 2019-current . the municipal elections on 14 october 2018 saw forza ninove win a landslide victory with 40 % of the vote , winning 15 seats ( +6 ) . open vld retained its 9 seats , samen ( a cartel of socialists , greens and christian-democrats ) won 7 seats . n-va won 2 seats ( -3 ) . forza was unable to form a majority coalition , and ultimately open vld and samen combined with one councillor from n-va to form a majority . list of former mayors . . nicknames . throughout the ages the inhabitants of ninove were given various nicknames as a title of honour or mockery . wortelmannen or wortels . the inhabitants were given the title of '' wortelmannen '' or '' wortels '' ( dutch for carrot people or carrot ) because of an event during the middle ages . during a row with the neighbouring city of aalst , the people of aalst decided to besiege ninove . the inhabitants of ninove were completely surprised by this attack and were found unprepared . in all the confusion the key to close the city gate could not be found . in order to bolt the gate , a carrot was used . a passing donkey saw the carrot-bolt and ate it , leaving the city gate unbolted and the militiamen from aalst free entry of the city . . de oudste , de stoutste en de wijste der steden . ninove was described by antonius sanderus as the oldest , the boldest and the wisest of cities . sanderus wrote in his flandria illustrata : ninove was called the oldest because of the similarity of its name with the ancient assyrian city nineveh , the boldest because it waited on the enemy with open gates and the wisest because the city had no jester or town fool , if one was needed a fool from a neighbouring town was lent . famous inhabitants . , chairman abvv etienne cosyns , liberal politician johannes despauterius , flemish humanist johan evenepoel , belgian composer romain gijssels , professional road bicycle racer frans hemerijckx , belgian physician , known for his work amongst lepers in the belgian congo and in india willy roggeman , writer and jazz musician wesley sonck , a former football player of the belgium national football team kevin van der perren , ice skater , 9th at the winter olympics louis waltniel , liberal politician and industrialist geert de vos ( born 1981 ) , is a belgian dart player who plays for the british darts organisation . references . external links . official website of the ocmw ninove official demographic statistics of ninove - 2006 official demographic statistics of ninove - 2007 - only available in dutch abbey of the park - article about the norbertine monastery official site carnival ninove only available in dutch