Epitaph Records

history . early years ( 1980s ) . brett gurewitz formed epitaph records as a vehicle for releases by his band bad religion . larkin , colin ( 1999 ) '' epitaph records '' in the virgin encyclopedia of heavy rock , virgin books , , p . 150 the name had been taken from the king crimson song epitaph from which the lyrics '' confusion shall be my epitaph . '' had struck a chord with brett and greg when they were young . its first release for the label was bad religion 's 1981 self-titled ep , followed by their debut how could hell be any worse ? , which was also the label 's first full-length release . also released during this period was peace thru vandalism , an ep by the vandals , who were the first band besides bad religion to sign to epitaph . two more bad religion releases followed – into the unknown and the ep back to the known – before their temporary split . after gurewitz had cleaned up his drug issues , both epitaph and bad religion were revived in 1987 . in the following year , epitaph released its first record as a proper label , which was l7 's l7 ( album ) , and it was distributed by chameleon . also in 1988 , bad religion released suffer , which was both released and distributed by epitaph . not only is suffer often cited as one of the band 's best by fans , but it is credited with '' saving '' the southern california punk rock scene by fans and bad religion 's contemporaries alike . in 1989 , gurewitz signed nofx to epitaph . they released their debut for the label , s & m airlines , that same year , featuring the video for its title track and the cover of fleetwood mac 's '' go your own way '' , which featured guest vocals by gurewitz and greg graffin , also a member of bad religion . this was followed by bad religion 's next two albums – no control and against the grain – which sold 60,000 and 100,000 copies respectively . breakthrough success ( 1990s ) . by 1993 , more punk acts had signed to epitaph , including pennywise , down by law , coffin break , the offspring , rancid , rkl , snfu , total chaos and claw hammer . epitaph 's expansion saw the label relocate to new offices in silver lake . although bad religion was the founding band of epitaph , releasing their early records through the label , they switched over to atlantic in 1993 , with recipe for hate being their first record outside of the label . brett gurewitz is thought to have left bad religion as a result of internal disputes , but actually left the band in 1994 so he could run epitaph full-time . that year bad religion and epitaph received widespread fame , both within and outside the punk community , when bad religion ( even though they had left epitaph by this time ) , nofx , rancid and the offspring all released hit records . this was a big year for punk in the mainstream ; rancid appeared on saturday night live the following year , playing '' ruby soho '' and '' roots radicals '' . the offspring eventually left for columbia records in a contract dispute , but their album smash became the best selling independent album of all time , with more than 11 million units sold worldwide to date . . change in style ( 2000s ) . in 2001 , brett gurewitz returned to bad religion , and the band returned to epitaph records , piccoli , sean ( 2002 ) '' punk 's been good to bad religion '' , south florida sun-sentinel , march 1 , 2002 , p . 36 releasing seven more albums , the latest being age of unreason ( 2019 ) . in mid-2005 epitaph was added to the official list of riaa members along with several other high-profile independent labels . the reason for the listing is not clear , but one source points to an agreement for internet p2p distribution . another source claims label management joined riaa in order to get certified sales awards ( i.e . , official '' gold '' or '' platinum '' record status ) for releases . this sparked some controversy as some feel they should no longer be labeled independent if they are a member of the riaa . however , the only source that has actually been used for these claims of membership is the official riaa membership list , which has been disputed . as of this writing , not only is epitaph listed as an official member , but lookout ! records is once again listed , after being falsely listed before . in addition , fat wreck chords has released statements denying their own involvement in the riaa , condemning the organization . during this time , the label started to stray from its traditional punk rock output by signing a number of post-hardcore bands such as the blackout , escape the fate , from first to last , hell is for heroes , i am ghost , matchbook romance , our last night , scatter the ashes , story of the year , thursday , vanna , and you me at six . recent years ( 2010s ) . epitaph signed weezer in 2010 , the label releasing hurley later that year . luerssen , john d . ( 2010 ) '' weezer sign to epitaph , announce 'hurley ' album '' , spinner , august 5 , 2010 , retrieved may 8 , 2011 the label signed social distortion in the same year . goodman , dean ( 2010 ) '' rock band weezer honors 'lost ' star on new album '' , reuters , august 11 , 2010 , retrieved may 8 , 2011 epitaph signed australian punk band dangerous ! in 2011 and released album teenage rampage . epitaph had also signed the canadian punk rock band propagandhi . the label has also been more active in signing bands from the emo revival including the menzingers , joyce manor , pianos become the teeth , defeater , the world is a beautiful place & i am no longer afraid to die , and touché amoré . sales certifications . epitaph has issued two albums that have been certified as platinum or multi-platinum , for sales of over 1 million units , by the recording industry association of america : smash by the offspring , which has been certified six-times platinum , and . and out come the wolves by rancid , which has been certified platinum . six albums released by the label , or its subsidiaries hellcat and anti- , have been certified gold for sales of 500,000 copies : ignition by the offspring , punk in drublic by nofx , let 's go by rancid , orphans : brawlers , bawlers & bastards by tom waits , the drug in me is you by falling in reverse , the warrior 's code by dropkick murphys and sempiternal by bring me the horizon . . artists . current artists . alkaline trio the all-american rejects architects ( world ex . australia & new zealand ) bad religion bad suns cold hart color film converge cover your tracks ( inactive since 2016 ) defeater descendents desaparecidos every time i die fake names falling in reverse the frights the garden green day ( distribution only for first two albums ) guccihighwaters the ghost inside hot water music hunny indii g . jamie t joyce manor justin pierre la dispute the lawrence arms lil lotus mannequin pussy the menzingers millencolin nascar aloe neverkept now and on earth ( formerly skip the foreplay ) off with their heads parkway drive ( world ex . australia & new zealand ) pennywise pianos become the teeth plague vendor propagandhi quicksand raised fist refused remo drive retox roll the tanks saosin save face saywecanfly the sidekicks sleepwave smrtdeath social distortion teenage wrist thick thrice this wild life too close to touch touché amoré the world is a beautiful place & i am no longer afraid to die . former artists . 1208 98 mute 59 times the pain agnostic front all alesana atmosphere avion roe beatsteaks beautiful bodies ( disbanded ) big talk the blood brothers ( re-releasing old material ) bombshell rocks bob log iii the bouncing souls ( active with rise records ) bring me the horizon ( active with sony music ) burning heads busdriver ( now on epitaph 's sub-label anti- ) the blackout the business circle jerks claw hammer coffin break the color of violence the cramps culture abuse dag nasty danger doom dangerous ! daredevils a day to remember ( distribution only , active with fueled by ramen ) dead fucking last death by stereo the deviates the distillers division of laura lee down by law the draft ( disbanded ) dwarves error escape the fate ( active with eleven seven label group ) eyedea & abilities farewell frank turner ( active with polydor/xtra mile ) frenzal rhomb from first to last gallows ( re-releasing old material in north america ) gas huffer the ghost of a thousand green day ( re-releasing old material in europe ; active with reprise records ) guttermouth h2o ( active with bridge nine records ) heavens ( disbanded ) the higher hell is for heroes the hives heideroosjes humpers i against i i am ghost i killed the prom queen ikara colt the ( international ) noise conspiracy ( disbanded ) i set my friends on fire the joykiller wayne kramer l7 leathermouth letlive madball matchbook romance the matches motion city soundtrack new found glory ( active with hopeless records ) new bomb turks nick cave and the bad seeds no fun at all ( burning heart records ) nofx ( active with fat wreck chords ) obey the brave the offspring osker our last night pete philly and perquisite the pietasters poison idea pulley rancid ( now on epitaph 's sub-label hellcat records ) randy red aunts rich kids on lsd ruth ruth sage francis ( now on epitaph 's sub-label anti- ) satanic surfers scatter the ashes settle set your goals sleeping with sirens ( active with sumerian records ) story of the year sing it loud some girls the sound of animals fighting the special goodness snfu straightfaced survive this ! ( disbanded ) ten foot pole terrorgruppe thelonious monster thursday total chaos tricky turbonegro union 13 u.s . bombs undeclinable ambuscade the vandals ( active with kung fu records ) vanna ( disbanded ) veara voodoo glow skulls ( active with california street music records ) the weakerthans ( on hiatus ) weezer ( active with atlantic records ) youth group ( now on epitaph 's sub-label anti- ) you me at six ( active with bmg rights management ) zeke . compilations . punk-o-rama series unsound series how we rock spirit of the streets epitaph / union skate/surf dvd series football schmootball ( 1st ) dc video ( 3rd ) circle one ( 5th ) out of print compilations bored generation skate/surf enhanced cd-rom ( 1996 ) more songs about anger , fear , sex & death ( 1992 ) new noise ( 2010 ) new noise 2 ( 2011 )