Satellite dish

principle of operation . thumb the parabolic shape of a dish reflects the signal to the dish ’ s focal point . mounted on brackets at the dish 's focal point is a device called a feedhorn . this feedhorn is essentially the front-end of a waveguide that gathers the signals at or near the focal point and 'conducts ' them to a low-noise block converter or lnb . the lnb converts the signals from electromagnetic or radio waves to electrical signals and shifts the signals from the downlinked c-band and/or ku-band to the l band range . direct broadcast satellite dishes use an lnbf , which integrates the feedhorn with the lnb . a new form of omnidirectional satellite antenna , which does not use a directed parabolic dish and can be used on a mobile platform such as a vehicle was announced by the university of waterloo in 2004 . the theoretical gain ( antenna gain ) of a dish increases as the frequency increases . the actual gain depends on many factors including surface finish , accuracy of shape , feedhorn matching . a typical value for a consumer type 60 & nbsp ; cm satellite dish at 11.75 & nbsp ; ghz is 37.50 & nbsp ; db . with lower frequencies , c-band for example , dish designers have a wider choice of materials . the large size of dish required for lower frequencies led to the dishes being constructed from metal mesh on a metal framework . at higher frequencies , mesh type designs are rarer though some designs have used a solid dish with perforations . a common misconception is that the lnbf ( low-noise block/feedhorn ) , the device at the front of the dish , receives the signal directly from the atmosphere . for instance , one bbc news downlink shows a '' red signal '' being received by the lnbf directly instead of being beamed to the dish , which because of its parabolic shape will collect the signal into a smaller area and deliver it to the lnbf . modern dishes intended for home television use are generally 43 & nbsp ; cm ( 18 & nbsp ; in ) to 80 & nbsp ; cm ( 31 & nbsp ; in ) in diameter , and are fixed in one position , for ku-band reception from one orbital position . prior to the existence of direct broadcast satellite services , home users would generally have a motorised c-band dish of up to 3 m in diameter for reception of channels from different satellites . overly small dishes can still cause problems , however , including rain fade and interference from adjacent satellites . europe . in europe , the frequencies used by dbs services are 10.7–12.75 & nbsp ; ghz on two polarisations h ( horizontal ) and v ( vertical ) . this range is divided into a '' low band '' with 10.7–11.7 & nbsp ; ghz , and a '' high band '' with 11.7–12.75 & nbsp ; ghz . this results in two frequency bands , each with a bandwidth of about 1 & nbsp ; ghz , each with two possible polarizations . in the lnb they become down converted to 950–2150 & nbsp ; mhz , which is the frequency range allocated for the satellite service on the coaxial cable between lnbf and receiver . lower frequencies are allocated to cable and terrestrial tv , fm radio , etc . only one of these frequency bands fits on the coaxial cable , so each of these bands needs a separate cable from the lnbf to a switching matrix or the receiver needs to select one of the 4 possibilities at a time . systems design . in a single receiver residential installation there is a single coaxial cable running from the receiver set-top box in the building to the lnb on the dish . the dc electric power for the lnb is provided through the same coaxial cable conductors that carry the signal to the receiver . in addition , control signals are also transmitted from the receiver to the lnb through the cable . the receiver uses different power supply voltages ( 13 / 18 v ) to select vertical / horizontal antenna polarization , and an on/off pilot tone ( 22 & nbsp ; khz ) to instruct the lnb to select one of the two frequency bands . in larger installations each band and polarization is given its own cable , so there are 4 cables from the lnb to a 'multiswitch ' switching matrix , which allows the connection of multiple receivers to the multiswitch in a star topology using the same signalling method as in a single receiver installation . satellite finder . thumb a satellite finder ( or sat finder ) is a satellite field strength meter used to accurately point satellite dishes at communications satellites in geostationary orbit . professional satellite finder meters allow better dish alignment and provide received signal parameter values as well . types . motor-driven dish . a dish that is mounted on a pole and driven by a stepper motor or a servo can be controlled and rotated to face any satellite position in the sky . there are three competing standards : diseqc , usals , and 36 v positioners . many receivers support all of these standards . motor-driven dishes come in a variety of sizes , but a dish of at least is required to receive signals from distant satellites which are intended to serve other areas . with diseqc and usals , the satellite dish will automatically aim itself at one of sixteen satellites programmed in previously when pressing one of the channel buttons on the remote . motor-driven satellite dishes using usals can detect other satellites in a constellation after one has been found and aimed at . most receivers sold at present are compatible with usals and diseqc 1.0 and 1.2 . multi-satellite . right every standard-size dish enables simultaneous reception from multiple different satellite positions without re-positioning the dish , just by adding additional lnb or using special duo lnb , triple , or four feed monoblock lnb . however , some designs much more effectively optimize simultaneous reception from multiple different satellite positions without re-positioning the dish . the vertical axis operates as an off-axis concave parabolic concave hyperbolic cassegrain reflector , while the horizontal axis operates as a concave convex cassegrain . the spot from the main dish wanders across the secondary , which corrects astigmatism by its varying curvature . the elliptic aperture of the primary is designed to fit the deformed illumination by the horns . due to double spill-over , this makes more sense for a large dish . switching between satellites is possible by using diseqc switches added to a satellite installation , or built-in duo lnbs or monoblock lnbs . most receivers sold presently are compatible with at least diseqc 1.0 , which can switch automatically between 4 satellites ( all of contemporary monoblock lnbs ) as the user changes channels using the remote control . diseqc 1.1 allows for switching automatically between 16 satellite positions or more ( through cascading switches ) . motor-driven dishes assure better optimal focusing for the given dish size ; lnb is always in central alignment with the broadcasting satellite , but diseqc switches are faster than diseqc motors as no physical movement is required . vsat . a common type of dish is the very small aperture terminal ( vsat ) . this provides two way satellite internet communications for both individuals and private networks for organizations . at present , most vsats operate in ; c band is restricted to less populated regions of the world . in 2005 , dish manufacturers began moving towards new satellites operating at higher frequencies , offering greater performance at lower cost . these antennas vary from in most applications though c-band vsats may be as large as . others . individual dishes serving one dwelling : direct to home ( dth ) . collective dishes , shared by several dwellings : satellite master antenna television ( smatv ) or communal antenna broadcast distribution ( cabd ) . automatic tracking satellite dish satellitedish1.jpg general electric satellite dish for directv satellite television . sky minidish.jpg sky '' minidish '' . dishing out the truth.jpg satellite dishes installed on an apartment complex . back of satellite dish.jpg the back side of an old c-band satellite dish showing the pole , mount , motor , and structure of the dish . wwe truck.jpg a wwe hd satellite truck in a parking lot . 06-06-2014 fonte de agua em dato rua , fohorem 6.jpg satellite dish at a hut in east timor . homemade dishes . any metal surface which concentrates a significant fraction of the reflected microwaves at a focus can be used as a dish antenna , at a lower gain . this has led to trash can lids , woks , and other items being used as '' dishes '' . only modern low noise lnbs and the higher transmission power of dth satellites allows a usable signal to be received from such inefficient diy antennas . history . parabolic antennas referred to as '' dish '' antennas had been in use long before satellite television . the term satellite dish was coined in 1978 during the beginning of the satellite television industry , and came to refer to dish antennas that send and/or receive signals from communications satellites . taylor howard of san andreas , california , adapted an ex-military dish in 1976 and became the first person to receive satellite television signals using it . the first satellite television dishes were built to receive signals on the c-band analog , and were very large . the front cover of the 1979 neiman-marcus christmas catalog featured the first home satellite tv stations on sale . the dishes were nearly in diameter . the satellite dishes of the early 1980s were in diameter and made of fiberglass with an embedded layer of wire mesh or aluminium foil , or solid aluminium or steel . satellite dishes made of wire mesh first came out in the early 1980s , and were at first in diameter . as the front-end technology improved and the noise figure of the lnbs fell , the size shrank to a few years later , and continued to get smaller reducing to feet by the late 1980s and by the early 1990s . larger dishes continued to be used , however . in december 1988 , luxembourg 's astra 1a satellite began transmitting analog television signals on the ku band for the european market . this allowed small dishes ( 90 & nbsp ; cm ) to be used reliably for the first time . in the early 1990s , four large american cable companies founded primestar , a direct broadcasting company using medium power satellites . the relatively strong k u band transmissions allowed the use of dishes as small as 90 & nbsp ; cm for the first time . on 4 march 1996 , echostar introduced digital sky highway ( dish network ) . this was the first widely used direct-broadcast satellite television system and allowed dishes as small as 20 & nbsp ; inches to be used . this great decrease of dish size also allowed satellite dishes to be installed on vehicles . dishes this size are still in use today . television stations , however , still prefer to transmit their signals on the c-band analog with large dishes due to the fact that c-band signals are less prone to rain fade than k u band signals .