Hedda Gabler

characters . hedda tesman ( née gabler ) — the main character , newly married and bored with both her marriage and life , seeking to influence a human fate for the first time . she is the daughter of general gable . she wants luxury , but has no funds . george ( jørgen ) tesman — hedda 's husband , an academic who is as interested in research and travel as he is enamored with his wife , although blind to hedda 's manipulative ways . despite george 's presumed rivalry with eilert over hedda , he remains a congenial and compassionate host and even plans to return eilert 's manuscript after eilert loses it in a drunken stupor . juliana ( juliane ) tesman — george 's loving aunt who has raised him since early childhood . she is also called aunt julle in the play , and aunt ju-ju by george . desperately wants hedda and her nephew to have a child . in an earlier draft , ibsen named her mariane rising , clearly after his aunt ( father 's younger half-sister ) and godmother mariane paus who grew up ( with ibsen 's father ) on the stately farm rising near skien ; while she was later renamed juliane tesman , her character was modeled after mariane paus . oskar mosfjeld , henrik ibsen og skien : en biografisk og litteratur-psykologisk studie ( p . 236 ) , oslo , gyldendal norsk forlag , 1949 thea elvsted — a younger schoolmate of hedda and a former acquaintance of george . nervous and shy , thea is in an unhappy marriage . judge brack — an unscrupulous family friend . it is implied that the judge has a lascivious personality , which he directs towards hedda . eilert lövborg ( ejlert løvborg ) — george 's former colleague , who now competes with george to achieve publication and a teaching position . eilert was once in love with hedda . destroyed his reputation in society by spending his money on depravity . bertha ( berte ) — a servant of the tesman 's . wants to please hedda at all times . plot . hedda , the daughter of a general , has just returned to her villa in kristiania ( now oslo ) from her honeymoon . her husband is george tesman , a young , aspiring , and reliable academic who continued his research during their honeymoon . it becomes clear in the course of the play that she never loved him , but married him because she thinks her years of youthful abandon are over . the reappearance of george 's academic rival , eilert løvborg , throws their lives into disarray . eilert , a writer , is also a recovered alcoholic who has wasted his talent until now . eilert shows signs of rehabilitation and has just published a bestseller in the same field as george . when hedda and eilert talk privately together , it becomes apparent that they are former lovers . the critical success of his recently published work makes eilert a threat to george , as eilert is now a competitor for the university professorship george had been counting on . george and hedda are financially overstretched , and george tells hedda that he will not be able to finance the regular entertaining or luxurious housekeeping that she had been expecting . upon meeting eilert , however , the couple discovers that he has no intention of competing for the professorship , but rather has spent the last few years working on what he considers to be his masterpiece , the '' sequel '' to his recently published work . apparently jealous of thea 's influence over eilert , hedda hopes to come between them . despite his drinking problem , she encourages eilert to accompany george and his associate , judge brack , to a party . george returns home from the party and reveals that he found the complete manuscript ( the only copy ) of eilert 's great work , which the latter lost while drunk . george is then called away to his aunt 's house , leaving the manuscript in hedda 's possession . when eilert next sees hedda and thea , he tells them that he has deliberately destroyed the manuscript . thea is mortified , and it is revealed that it was the joint work of eilert and herself . hedda says nothing to contradict eilert or to reassure thea . after thea has left , hedda encourages eilert to commit suicide , giving him a pistol that had belonged to her father . she then burns the manuscript and tells george she has destroyed it to secure their future . when the news comes that eilert did indeed kill himself , george and thea are determined to try to reconstruct his book from eilert 's notes , which thea has kept . hedda is shocked to discover from judge brack that eilert 's death , in a brothel , was messy and probably accidental ; this '' ridiculous and vile '' death contrasts with the '' beautiful and free '' one that hedda had imagined for him . worse , brack knows the origins of the pistol . he tells hedda that if he reveals what he knows , a scandal will likely arise around her . hedda realizes that this places brack in a position of power over her . leaving the others , she goes into her smaller room and shoots herself in the head . the others in the room assume that hedda is simply firing shots , and they follow the sound to investigate . the play ends with george , brack , and thea discovering her body . critical interpretation . joseph wood krutch makes a connection between hedda gabler and freud , whose first work on psychoanalysis was published almost a decade later . in krutch 's analysis , gabler is one of the first fully developed neurotic female protagonists of literature . by that , krutch means that hedda is neither logical nor insane in the old sense of being random and unaccountable . her aims and her motives have a secret personal logic of their own . she gets what she wants , but what she wants is not anything that normal people would acknowledge ( at least , not publicly ) to be desirable . one of the significant things that such a character implies is the premise that there is a secret , sometimes unconscious , a world of aims and methods — one might almost say a secret system of values — that is often much more important than the rational one . it is regarded as a deep and emotional play , most notably due to ibsen 's portrayal of a sort of anti-character . ibsen was interested in the then-embryonic science of mental illness and had a poor understanding of it by present-day standards . his ghosts is another example of this . examples of the troubled 19th-century female might include oppressed , but '' normal '' , willful characters ; women in abusive or loveless relationships ; and those with some type of organic brain disease . ibsen is content to leave such explanations unsettled . bernard paris interprets gabler 's actions as stemming from her '' need for freedom which is as compensatory as her craving for power . her desire to shape a man 's destiny . '' paris , bernard . imagined human beings : a psychological approach to character and conflict in literature , new york university press : new york city , 1997 , p . 59 . . productions . the play was performed in munich at the cuvilliés theatre on 31 january 1891 , with clara heese as hedda , though ibsen was said to be displeased with the declamatory style of her performance . ibsen 's work had an international following so that translations and productions in various countries appeared very soon after the publication in copenhagen and the premiere in munich . in february 1891 there were two productions : berlin and copenhagen . marker , frederick j . marker , lise-lone . ibsen ’ s lively art : a performance study of the major plays . cambridge university press ( 1989 ) . meyer , michael leverson , editor and introduction . ibsen , henrik . the wild duck and hedda gabler . w . w . norton & company ( 1997 ) . page 139 . the first british performance was at the vaudeville theatre , london , on 20 april 1891 , starring elizabeth robins , who directed it with marion lea , who played thea . robins also played hedda in the first us production , which opened on 30 march 1898 at the fifth avenue theatre , new york city . a 1902 production starring minnie maddern fiske was a major sensation on broadway , and following its initial limited run was revived with the same actress the next year . in february 1899 it was produced as part of the moscow art theatre 's first season with maria f . andreeva as hedda . worrall , nick . the moscow art theatre . routledge ( 2003 ) page 82 . many prominent actresses have played the role of hedda : vera komissarzhevskaya , eleonora duse , alla nazimova , asta nielsen , johanne louise schmidt , mrs . patrick campbell , eva le gallienne , elizabeth robins , anne meacham , ingrid bergman , peggy ashcroft , fenella fielding , jill bennett , janet suzman , diana rigg , isabelle huppert , claire bloom , june brown , kate burton , geraldine james , kate mulgrew , kelly mcgillis , fiona shaw , maggie smith , jane fonda , annette bening , amanda donohoe , judy davis , emmanuelle seigner , mary-louise parker , harriet walter , rosamund pike and cate blanchett . in 1970 the royal national theatre in london staged a production of the play directed by ingmar bergman , starring maggie smith , who gained much critical acclaim and won a best actress evening standard theatre award for her performance . also in the early 1970s , irene worth played hedda at stratford , ontario , prompting new york times critic walter kerr to write , '' miss worth is just possibly the best actress in the world . '' glenda jackson returned to the rsc to play hedda gabler . a later film version directed by nunn was released as hedda ( 1975 ) for which jackson was nominated for an oscar . in 2005 , a production by richard eyre , starring eve best , at the almeida theatre in london was well-received and later transferred for an 11½ week run at the duke of york 's on st martin 's lane . the play was staged at chicago 's steppenwolf theater starring actress martha plimpton . british playwright john osborne prepared an adaptation in 1972 , and in 1991 the canadian playwright judith thompson presented her version at the shaw festival . thompson adapted the play a second time in 2005 at buddies in bad times theatre in toronto , setting the first half of the play in the nineteenth century , and the second half during the present day . early in 2006 , the play gained critical success at the west yorkshire playhouse in leeds and the liverpool playhouse , directed by matthew lloyd with gillian kearney in the lead role . a revival opened in january 2009 on broadway , starring mary-louise parker as the title character and michael cerveris as jørgen tesman , at the american airlines theatre , to mixed critical reviews . performance of a production of the play , as translated and directed by vahid rahbani , was stopped in tehran , iran in 2011 . article , farsnews.com vahid rahbani was summoned to court for inquiry after an iranian news agency blasted the classic drama in a review and described it as '' vulgar '' and '' hedonistic '' with symbols of '' sexual slavery cult . '' '' hedonistic hedda gabler banned at tehran theatre '' , yahoo news article , tabnak.ir a modernized new zealand adaptation by the wild duck starring clare kerrison in the title role , and opening at bats theatre in wellington in april 2009 , was referred to as '' extraordinarily accessible without compromising ibsen 's genius at all . '' bats theatre hedda gabler review , theatreview.org.nz a serbs production premiered in february 2011 at the national theatre in belgrade . a 2012 brian friel adaptation of the play staged at london 's old vic theatre received mixed reviews , especially for sheridan smith in the lead role . the play was staged in 2015 at madrid 's maría guerrero . the production , which received mixed reviews , was directed by eduardo vasco and presented a text that was adapted by the spanish playwright yolanda pallín with cayetana guillén cuervo playing the lead role . tony award-winning director ivo van hove made his national theatre debut in london with a period-less production of ibsen 's masterpiece . this new version by patrick marber featured ruth wilson in the title role and rafe spall as brack . a ballet interpretation is set to premiere at the norwegian national opera and ballet in autumn 2017 under the direction of marit moum aune . in january 2019 , richmond shakespeare society will stage the third production of hedda gabler in the society 's history . hedda will be portrayed by amanda adams and judge brack by nigel cole . the play has been staged since may 2019 in the national theatre , warsaw . hedda is portrayed by . the play is having a worldwide tour with the theatricalia company up until the summer of 2020 . directed and translated by trevor nunn , and stars pam st clement as bertha , patrick stewart as eilert lovborg , peter eyre as george tesman , glenda jackson as hedda tesman , timothy as judge brack , constance chapman as juliana tesman , and jennie linden as mrs . elvsted . mass media adaptations . the play has been adapted for the screen several times , from the silent film era onwards , in several languages . the bbc screened a television production of the play in 1962 , with ingrid bergman , michael redgrave , ralph richardson , and trevor howard , while the corporation 's play of the month in 1972 featured janet suzman and ian mckellen in the two main leads . a version shown on britain 's commercial itv network in 1980 featured diana rigg in the title role . glenda jackson was nominated for an academy award as leading actress for her role in the british film adaptation hedda ( 1975 ) directed by trevor nunn . a version was produced for australian television in 1961 . an american film version released in 2004 relocated the story to a community of young academics in washington state . an adaptation ( by brian friel ) of the 2012 old vic production was the first broadcast in the united kingdom on bbc radio 4 on 9 march 2013 . in 2014 , matthew john also adapted hedda gabler starring rita ramnani , david r . butler , and samantha e . hunt . german director andreas kleinert adapted the story to early 21st century germany in his 2016 film hedda , starring susanne wolff and godehard giese . awards and nominations . ; awards 1992 laurence olivier award for best revival 2006 laurence olivier award for best revival ; nominations 2005 lucille lortel award for outstanding revival . alternative productions , tribute and parody . in the netflix animated show , '' bojack horseman , '' an episode features the main character putting on a stage production while in prison with inmates playing the roles . an operatic adaptation of the play has been produced by shanghai 's hangzhou xiaobaihua yue opera house . an adaptation with a lesbian relationship was staged in philadelphia in 2009 by the mauckingbird theatre company . zinman , toby . '' a lesbian interpretation of hedda gabler '' , philadelphia inquirer a production at princeton university 's lewis center for the arts featured a male actor , sean peter drohan , in the title role . philip kan gotanda 'loosely ' adapted hedda gabler into his 2002 play , the wind cries mary . a prostitute in the feature film tristram shandy : a cock and bull story is named hedda gobbler . the 2009 album until the earth begins to part by scottish folk indie-rock band broken records features a song , '' if eilert løvborg wrote a song , it would sound like this '' . john cale , welsh musician and founder of american rock band the velvet underground , recorded a song '' hedda gabler '' in 1976 , included originally on the 1977 ep animal justice ( now a bonus track on the cd of the album sabotage ) . he performed the song live in 1998 , with siouxsie sioux , and also in london ( 5 march 2010 ) with a band and a 19 piece orchestra in his paris 1919 tour . the song was covered by the british neofolk band sol invictus for the 1995 compilation im blutfeuer ( cthulhu records ) and later included as a bonus track on the 2011 reissue of the sol invictus album in the rain . the norwegian hard-rock band black debbath recorded the song '' motörhedda gabler '' on their ibsen-inspired album naar vi døde rocker ( '' when we dead rock '' ) . as the title suggests , the song is also influenced by british heavy metal band motörhead . the original play heddatron by elizabeth meriwether ( b . 1981 ) melds hedda gabler with a modern family 's search for love despite the invasion of technology into everyday life . in the 2013 novel bridget jones : mad about the boy by helen fielding , bridget tries and fails to write a modernized version of hedda gabler , which she mistakenly calls '' hedda gabbler '' and believes to have been written by anton chekhov . bridget intends to call her version '' the leaves in his hair '' and set it in queen 's park , london . bridget claims to have studied the original play as an undergraduate at bangor university . see also . chekhov 's gun hedda gabler filmography . references . further reading . ibsen , henrik . hedda gabler trans . kenneth mcleish , nick hern books , london , 1995 . novelguide : hedda gabler . external links . photos of the irish classical theatre company 's 2009 production of hedda gabler