Swithun

recorded life . st swithun was bishop of winchester from his consecration on 30 october 852 until his death on 2 july 863 . keynes , '' archbishops and bishops '' , p . 549 however , he is scarcely mentioned in any document of his own time . his death is entered in the canterbury manuscript of the anglo-saxon chronicle ( ms f ) under the year 861 . anglo-saxon chronicle ( ms f ) . he is recorded as a witness to nine charters , the earliest of which ( s 308 ) is dated 854 . lapidge , cult of st swithun , p . 4 more than a hundred years later , when dunstan and æthelwold of winchester were inaugurating their church reform , swithun was adopted as patron of the restored church at winchester , formerly dedicated to st . peter and st . paul . his body was transferred from its almost forgotten grave to æthelwold 's new basilica on 15 july 971 ; according to contemporary writers , numerous miracles preceded and followed the move . traditional life . the revival of swithun 's fame gave rise to a mass of legendary literature . the so-called vita s . swithuni of lantfred and wulfstan , written about 1000 , hardly contains any biographical fact ; all that has in later years passed for authentic detail of swithun 's life is extracted from a late eleventh-century hagiography ascribed to goscelin of st bertin 's , a monk who came over to england with hermann , bishop of salisbury from 1058 to 1078 . according to this writer saint swithun was born in the reign of egbert of wessex , and was ordained priest by helmstan , bishop of winchester ( 838-c . 852 ) . his fame reached the king 's ears , and he appointed him tutor of his son , æthelwulf ( alias adulphus ) , and considered him one of his chief friends . however , michael lapidge describes the work as '' pure fiction '' and shows that the attribution to goscelin is false . lapidge , cult of st swithun , p . 69 under æthelwulf , swithun was appointed bishop of winchester , to which see he was consecrated by archbishop ceolnoth . in his new office he was known for his piety and his zeal in building new churches or restoring old ones . at his request æthelwulf gave the tenth of his royal lands to the church . swithun made his diocesan journeys on foot ; when he gave a banquet he invited the poor and not the rich . william of malmesbury adds that , if bishop eahlstan of sherborne was æthelwulf 's minister for temporal matters , swithun was the minister for spiritual matters . swithun 's best known miracle was his restoration on a bridge of a basket of eggs that workmen had maliciously broken . of stories connected with swithun the two most famous are those of the winchester egg-woman and queen emma 's ordeal . the former is to be found in the hagiography attributed to goscelin , the latter in thomas rudborne 's historia major ( 15th century ) , a work which is also responsible for the not improbable legend that swithun accompanied alfred on his visit to rome in 856 . he died on 2 july 862 . on his deathbed swithun begged that he should be buried outside the north wall of his cathedral where passers-by should pass over his grave and raindrops from the eaves drop upon it . webster , douglas raymund . '' st . swithin . '' the catholic encyclopedia . vol . 14 . new york : robert appleton company , 1912 . 20 may 2013 . veneration . swithun 's feast day in england is on 15 july and in norway ( and formerly in medieval wales ) on 2 july . he was moved from his grave to an indoor shrine in the old minster at winchester in 971 . his body was probably later split between a number of smaller shrines . his head was certainly detached and , in the middle ages , taken to canterbury cathedral . peterborough abbey had an arm . butler , alban . the lives of the saints , vol . vii , 1866 his main shrine was transferred into the new norman cathedral at winchester in 1093 . he was installed on a 'feretory platform ' above and behind the high altar . the retrochoir was built in the early 13th century to accommodate the huge numbers of pilgrims wishing to visit his shrine and enter the 'holy hole ' beneath him . his empty tomb in the ruins of the old minster was also popular with visitors . the shrine was only moved into the retrochoir itself in 1476 . it was demolition in 1538 during the english reformation . a modern representation of it now stands on the site . the shrine of swithun at winchester was supposedly a site of numerous miracles in the middle ages . æthelwold of winchester ordered that all monks were to stop whatever they were doing and head to the church to praise god every time that a miracle happened . a story exists that the monks at some point got so fed up with this , because they sometimes had to wake up and go to the church three or four times each night , that they decided to stop going . st swithun then appeared in a dream to someone ( possibly two people ) and warned them that if they stopped going to the church , then miracles would cease . this person ( or persons ) then warned the monks about the dream they had , and the monks then caved in and decided to go to the church each time a miracle happened again . studies in the early history of shaftesbury abbey , dorset county council , 1999 . patronage . swithun is regarded as one of the saints to whom one should pray in the event of drought . mcleod , jaime . '' today is st . swithin 's day '' , farmers ' almanac , 15 july 2011 . legacy . there are in excess of forty churches dedicated to st swithun , which can be found throughout the south of england , especially in hampshire – see list st swithun 's church ( disambiguation ) . an example is st swithun 's , headbourne worthy , to the north of winchester . this church is surrounded on three sides by a brook that flows from a spring in the village ; the lych gate on the south side is also a bridge over the brook , which is unusual . other churches dedicated to st swithun can be found at walcot , st . swithin 's , walcot , bath lincoln , worcester , st . swithun 's , worcester cheswardine , shropshire and western norway , where stavanger cathedral is dedicated to him . he is also commemorated at st swithin 's lane in the city of london ( site of the former church of st swithin , london stone ) , st swithun 's school for girls in winchester and st swithun 's quadrangle in magdalen college , oxford . in stavanger , norway , several schools and institutions are named “ st svithun ” after him . it can be assumed that the fictitious st swithin 's hospital in the british comedy series doctor in the house , is also named after this saint . proverb . the name of swithun is best known today for a british weather lore proverb , which says that if it rains on st . swithun 's day , 15 july , it will rain for 40 days . : st swithun 's day if thou dost rain : for forty days it will remain : st swithun 's day if thou be fair : for forty days 'twill rain nae mare a buckinghamshire variation has : if on st swithun 's day it really pours : you 're better off to stay indoors . swithun was initially buried out of doors , rather than in his cathedral , apparently at his own request . william of malmesbury recorded that the bishop left instructions that his body should be buried outside the church , ubi et pedibus praetereuntium et stillicidiis ex alto rorantibus esset obnoxius where it might be subject to the feet of passers-by and to the raindrops pouring from on high , which has been taken as indicating that the legend was already well known in the 12th century . in 971 it was decided to move his body to a new indoor shrine , and one theory traces the origin of the legend to a heavy shower by which , on the day of the move , the saint marked his displeasure towards those who were removing his remains . this story , however , can not be traced further back than the 17th or 18th century . also , it is at variance with the 10th century writers , who all agreed that the move took place in accordance with the saint 's desire expressed in a vision . james raine suggested that the legend was derived from the tremendous downpour of rain that occurred , according to the durham chroniclers , on st . swithun 's day , 1315 . john earle suggests that the legend comes from a pagan or possibly prehistoric day of augury . in france , medardus ( 8 june ) , urban of langres , and gervasius and protasius ( 19 june ) are credited with an influence on the weather almost identical with that attributed to st swithun in england . in flanders , there is st godelieve ( 6 july ) and in germany the seven sleepers ' day ( 27 june ) . there is a scientific basis to the weather pattern behind the legend of st swithun 's day . around the middle of july , the jet stream settles into a pattern which , in the majority of years , holds reasonably steady until the end of august . when the jet stream lies north of the british isles then continental high pressure is able to move in ; when it lies across or south of the british isles , arctic air and atlantic weather systems predominate . the times , follow st swithin : book a british break the most false that the prediction has been , according to the guinness book of records , were 1924 when 13.5 hours of sunshine in london were followed by 30 of the next 40 days being wet , and 1913 when a 15-hour rainstorm was followed by 30 dry days of 40 . . see also . saint swithun in popular culture . references . notes . . bibliography . andrew godsell '' saint swithin and the rain '' in '' legends of british history '' ( 2008 ) . . further reading . aelfric , and geoffrey ivor needham . lives of three english saints . n.y . : appleton-century-crofts , 1966 . series : methuen 's old english library . 119 pages . oclc : 422028061 . blakely , ruth margaret . st . swithun of winchester : an investigation into the literature relating to his life , legends and cult . thesis ( fla ) -- library association 1981 , n.d . oclc : 557018780 . bussby , frederick . saint swithun : patron saint of winchester . winchester : friends of winchester cathedral , 1971 . oclc : 7477761 . davidson , george , and john faed . legend of st . swithin : a rhyme for rainy weather . london : hamilton , adams , 1861 . oclc : 16140471 . deshman , robert , '' saint swithun in early medieval art , '' in idem , eye and mind : collected essays in anglo-saxon and early medieval art edited by adam cohen ( kalamazoo , michigan : medieval institute publications , western michigan university , 2010 ) ( publications of the richard rawlinson center ) . fridegodus , a . campbell , eddius stephanus , wulfstan , and lamfridus . frithegodi monachi breviloquium vitae beati wilfredi , et wulfstani cantoris narratio metrica de sancto swithuno . turici : in aedibus thesauri mundi , 1950 . 183 pages . notes : fridegodus ' work is a versification of the vita sancti wilfredi i , usually attributed to eddi . wulfstan 's work is a versification of lamfridus ' miracula sancti swithuni . oclc : 62612752 . swithun , and john earle . facsimile of some leaves in saxon handwriting on st . swithun , copied by photozincography , with literal translation and notes . 1861 . 20 pages . oclc : 863315099 . wolstanus wintonensis , michael huber , and lamfridus . s . swithinus , miracula metrica , i . text ; beitrag zur altenglischen geschichte und literatur . landshut : j . thomann'sche buch-u . kunstdruckerei , 1905 . 105 pages . notes : programm—humanistisches gymnasium metten . a versification of lantfred 's work . oclc : 669193 . yorke , barbara . '' swithun st swithun ( d . 863 ) . '' oxford dictionary of national biography . oxford university press , 2004 . external links . guardian netnotes on st . swithin 's day bbc '' landward '' feature on st . swithin 's day