She Stoops to Conquer

plot . act i . act i begins at the hardcastles ’ home in the countryside . mrs . hardcastle complains to her husband that they never leave their rural home to see the new things happening in the city . hardcastle says he loves everything old , including his old wife . mrs . hardcastle says she was a young woman when she had her first husband ’ s son , tony , and he is not yet twenty-one . hardcastle complains about tony ’ s immaturity and love of pranks . tony enters on his way to a pub , and his mother follows him offstage , begging him to stay and spend time with them . hardcastle ’ s daughter kate enters . he remarks on her fashionable clothing , which she dislikes . kate reminds him of their deal : she wears what she likes in the morning and dresses in the old-fashioned style he prefers at night . hardcastle reveals big news : his friend sir charles ’ s son , marlow , is coming to visit , and hardcastle hopes kate and marlow will marry . hardcastle says marlow has a reputation for being handsome , intelligent and very modest . kate likes all but the last part of this description and resolves to try to make a good impression on marlow . hardcastle exits , leaving kate to think over her visitor . she is joined by her cousin constance , whom she tells about marlow ’ s impending visit . constance tells her that she knows marlow : he is the best friend of her suitor , hastings . the odd thing about marlow is that he is terribly shy around upper-class women , and therefore often seduces lower-class women instead . mrs . hardcastle wants constance to marry her cousin , tony , so that constance ’ s inherited jewels stay in the family . constance tells kate that she pretends to be willing to marry tony so that mrs . hardcastle won ’ t suspect she loves hastings . luckily for constance , tony doesn ’ t want to marry constance any more than she wants to marry him . act ii . the scene changes to a bar , where tony is drinking with a group of lower-class men . the bar ’ s owner says that two fashionable-looking men have arrived who say they are looking for mr . hardcastle ’ s house . tony realizes that this must be marlow and decides to trick marlow into believing hardcastle ’ s house is an inn . act ii begins with hardcastle trying to teach his servants how to behave in front of his guests . soon after , marlow and hastings arrive at what they believe to be an inn . hardcastle enters and tries to engage his guests in conversation , but the two young men ignore what he says , believing him to be a lowly innkeeper . hardcastle is shocked by their rude , presumptuous treatment of him . marlow insists on being shown his room , so hardcastle accompanies him . when hastings is left alone , constance enters . upon hearing that hastings believes he is in an inn , she guesses it is a trick of tony ’ s . hastings says that they should keep marlow ’ s mistake from him , because he will be embarrassed and leave immediately if he learns the truth . hastings urges constance to elope with him , but she is reluctant to lose her fortune : the jewels , which she will only inherit if she marries with her aunt ’ s permission . she promises to run away with him once she has the jewels . marlow returns , complaining that hardcastle will not leave him alone . hastings tells marlow that by coincidence , constance and her cousin kate are both at this inn . marlow freezes in anxiety . kate enters and tries to engage marlow in conversation , but once hastings and constance leave kate and marlow alone , marlow is too nervous to complete his sentences or even look at kate ’ s face . he ends the conversation abruptly and rushes off . before exiting the stage , kate reflects to herself that , if he weren ’ t so shy , she would be interested in him . tony and constance enter , followed by hastings and mrs . hardcastle . constance makes a show of flirting with tony for mrs . hardcastle , while he tries to repel her advances . hastings chats with mrs . hardcastle , points out constance and tony , saying that they are betrothed . tony objects to this loudly . hastings tells mrs . hardcastle that he will try to talk some sense into tony , and constance and mrs . hardcastle exit . hastings reveals to tony that he loves constance and wants to elope with her . tony is thrilled and promises to help the couple any way he can . act iii . act iii begins with hardcastle and kate comparing their very different impressions of marlow . he expresses shock at marlow ’ s boldness , while she finds him incredibly shy . kate convinces her father that they should give marlow another chance to see what his true character is . tony presents hastings with a box containing constance ’ s jewels , which he stole from his mother ’ s drawers . constance and mrs . hardcastle enter , and hastings exits . constance tries to convince her aunt to let her try on her jewels , but mrs . hardcastle will not relent . tony suggests that mrs . hardcastle tell constance the jewels are missing , which she does , upsetting constance deeply . tony reassures constance privately , telling her that he gave her jewels to hastings , who is preparing for their elopement . meanwhile , mrs . hardcastle has discovered the jewels are missing . tony teases his distressed mother , and the two of them exit . kate enters accompanied by her maid pimple and wearing the old-fashioned dress her father prefers . she has learned about tony ’ s prank and laughs at marlow ’ s belief that he is in an inn . pimple says that marlow mistook kate for the inn ’ s barmaid . kate says she will take advantage of the mistake , which will enable him to talk to her without such shyness . pimple exits , and marlow enters . kate , pretending to be a maid , speaks to marlow in the accent of a lower-class woman . marlow finds her beautiful and immediately begins to flirt with her . he tries to kiss her , but hardcastle walks into the room and sees them . marlow flees the room , and hardcastle tells kate he is determined to throw marlow out of his house . kate persuades her father to give her time to prove to him that marlow is not what he seems . act iv . act iv begins with constance and hastings planning their elopement . constance tells hastings that she has heard sir charles will soon be arriving , and hastings tells constance that he has entrusted her box of jewels to marlow to keep them safe . they both exit . marlow enters , congratulating himself on thinking to give the box of jewels to the landlady ( i.e . , mrs . hardcastle ) to keep it safe . hastings enters , and marlow tells him he stashed the jewels securely with the landlady . hastings conceals his disappointment that mrs . hardcastle has the jewels back and leaves . hardcastle enters and begins to argue with marlow , whose servants have gotten drunk . storming away , hardcastle says he would never have predicted such rudeness from sir charles ’ s son . marlow is confused by this remark , but at that moment , kate enters . marlow , beginning to understand something is amiss , asks kate where they are , and she tells him that they are at mr . hardcastle ’ s house . marlow is horrified at his error . kate does not yet reveal her true identity , pretending instead to be a poor relation of the family . marlow announces his departure , and kate weeps at the news . he is touched to see how much she cares about him . tony and constance discuss her plan to elope with hastings , even without the jewels . mrs . hardcastle enters and the two cousins pretend to flirt so she won ’ t suspect the planned elopement . a letter comes from hastings addressed to tony , but because tony can not read , his mother reads it to him . the letter reveals the plan for the elopement . mrs . hardcastle is furious and tells constance she is sending her far away to aunt pedigree ’ s house . hastings enters and yells at tony for giving away the secret . marlow enters and yells at both tony and hastings for deceiving him about where he is . constance is utterly distraught and begs hastings to stay faithful to her even if they have to wait several years to marry . after constance leaves , tony tells hastings to meet him in the garden in two hours , promising to make it all up to him . act v . in act v , hardcastle and the newly arrived sir charles laugh over marlow ’ s having mistaken the home for an inn . hardcastle says that he saw marlow take kate ’ s hand and he thinks they will marry . marlow enters and formally apologizes to hardcastle . hardcastle says it doesn ’ t matter , since marlow and kate will soon marry , but marlow denies having feelings for kate . when hardcastle refuses to believe him , marlow storms out . kate enters and assures the two fathers that marlow likes her . she tells the two fathers to hide behind a screen in half an hour to see proof of marlow ’ s feelings . out in the garden , tony arrives and tells hastings that he has driven his mother and constance in a circle instead of taking them to aunt pedigree ’ s house . mrs . hardcastle is terrified , thinking they are lost in dangerous territory . hastings rushes off to find constance . elsewhere in the garden , hastings tries to convince constance to elope with him . she says she is too exhausted from the stress of the night to run off . instead she wants to explain their situation to hardcastle and hope that he can influence his wife to allow their marriage . inside the house , hardcastle and sir charles hide behind a screen and watch marlow and kate talk . kate no longer pretends to be a barmaid , but speaks in her normal voice . marlow says he wishes he could stay with her , but he does not want to disappoint his family by marrying someone of lower birth . kate tells him she has the same background as the woman he came to see . marlow kneels before her , and the two fathers burst out from behind the screen , asking why he lied to them about his feelings for kate . marlow learns kate ’ s true identity and is embarrassed again at having been so deceived . mrs . hardcastle and tony enter ( mrs . hardcastle having realized where she is ) . mrs . hardcastle says that constance and hastings have run off together , but she is consoled by the fact that she will get to keep constance ’ s jewels . at that moment , however , hastings and constance enter . sir charles recognizes hastings and tells hardcastle that he is a good man . hardcastle asks tony if he is really sure that he doesn ’ t want to marry his cousin . tony says he is sure , but that it doesn ’ t matter , since he can not formally refuse to marry constance until he is twenty-one . hardcastle then reveals that mrs . hardcastle has been hiding the fact that tony is in fact already twenty-one . at this , tony says he will not marry constance , freeing her to marry hastings and keep her fortune . everyone except mrs . hardcastle is thrilled that the two young couples – hastings and constance , and marlow and kate – will marry . she stoops to conquer , new mermaids edition . productions . the original production premiered in london at covent garden theatre on 15 march 1773 with mary bulkley as constantia hardcastle , oxford dictionary of national biography : bulkley née wilford ; other married name barresford , mary , by john levitt and was immediately successful . the cambridge history of english and american literature in 18 volumes ( 1907–21 ) , volume x . the age of johnson , ix . oliver goldsmith , § 23 she stoops to conquer . retrieved 21 may 2009 . in the nineteenth century , actor and comedian lionel brough debuted as tony lumpkin in 1869 and continued to play the character in 1777 performances , banerji , nilanjana . '' brough , lionel ( 1836–1909 ) '' . oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 , accessed 25 december 2019 . whilst an 1881 production of the play was socialite and actress lillie langtry 's first big success . the new international encyclopedia , p.544 the play was chosen by the angles theatre company to relaunch the georgian angles theatre in 1978 , about 130 years after it closed . an incident in a nearby house in leverington may have been the basis of the play . goldsmith is supposed to have visited his friends the lumpkins at their home parkfield , leverington . lumpkin moved to wisbech later and this play was very popular in the local theatre . { { handbills in the wisbech & fenland museum collection of over 200 items ) perhaps one of the most famous modern incarnations of she stoops to conquer was peter hall 's version , staged in 1993 and starring miriam margolyes as mrs . hardcastle . the most famous tv production is the 1971 version featuring ralph richardson , tom courtenay , juliet mills , and brian cox , with trevor peacock as tony lumpkin . courtenay , mills and peacock also performed in this play at the garrick theatre , london , in 1969 . the 1971 version was shot on location near ross-on-wye , herefordshire , and is part of the bbc archive . this play was one of 13 bbc productions that formed the series called classic theatre , the humanities in drama . the series was funded in the u.s . by the n.e.h . and used as a study aid on video tape by thousands of u.s . students . in 2008 the play was again produced in wisbech . the story goes that oliver goldsmith wrote the play while staying with the lumpkin family at park house in leverington , near wisbech and that he lampooned his friend , nicholas lumpkin , by turning him into his famous creation , tony lumpkin . the real lumpkin moved to wisbech after his money ran out . . type of comedy . when the play was first produced , it was discussed as an example of the revival of laughing comedy over the sentimental comedy seen as dominant on the english stage since the success of the conscious lovers , written by richard steele in 1722 . an essay published in a london magazine in 1773 , entitled '' an essay on the theatre ; or , a comparison between laughing and sentimental comedy '' , argued that sentimental comedy , a false form of comedy , had taken over the boards from the older and more truly comic laughing comedy . some theatre historians believe the essay was written by goldsmith as a puff piece for she stoops to conquer as an exemplar of the '' laughing comedy '' . goldsmith 's name was linked with that of richard brinsley sheridan , author of the rivals and the school for scandal , as standard-bearers for the resurgent laughing comedy . the play might also be seen as a comedy of manners in which the comedy arises from the gap between the standards of behaviour the characters regard as proper in polite society , and the more informal behaviours they are prepared to indulge or deploy in settings they deem less constrained by such standards . kate 's stooping and marlow 's nervousness are also examples of comedy ( drama ) , as are constance neville 's and george hastings ' love and plan to elope . title . the title refers to kate 's ruse of pretending to be a barmaid to reach her goal . it originates in the poetry of dryden , which goldsmith may have seen misquoted by lord chesterfield . in chesterfield 's version , the lines in question read : '' the prostrate lover , when he lowest lies , but stoops to conquer , and but kneels to rise . '' . characters . charles marlow – the central male character , who has set out to court the young attractive kate hardcastle . a well-educated man , '' bred a scholar '' , marlow is brash and rude to mr . hardcastle , owner of '' liberty hall '' ( a reference to another site in london ) , whom marlow believes to be an innkeeper . marlow is sophisticated and has travelled the world . around working-class women marlow is a lecherous rogue , but around those of an upper-class card he is a nervous , bumbling fool . george hastings – friend of charles marlow and the admirer of miss constance neville . hastings is an educated man who cares deeply about constance , with the intention of fleeing to france with her . tony lumpkin – son of mrs hardcastle and stepson to mr hardcastle , tony is a mischievous , uneducated playboy . mr . hardcastle – the father of kate hardcastle but he is mistaken by marlow and hastings as an innkeeper . mrs . hardcastle – wife to mr . hardcastle and mother to tony , mrs . hardcastle is a corrupt and eccentric character . she is an over-protective mother to tony , whom she loves , but fails to tell him he 's of age so that he is eligible to receive £1,500 a year . miss kate hardcastle – daughter to mr . hardcastle , and the play 's stooping-to-conquer heroine . miss constance neville – niece of mrs . hardcastle , she is the woman whom hastings intends to court . sir charles marlow – a minor character and father of charles marlow ; he follows his son , a few hours behind . reception . goldsmith 's friend and contemporary , samuel johnson greatly admired the play . james boswell quoted him as saying , '' i know of no comedy for many years that has so much exhilarated an audience that it has answered so much the great end of comedy – making an audience merry '' . . adaptations . there have been a number of film and television adaptations of the play over the years : she stoops to conquer , a 1910 silent movie starring anna rosemond she stoops to conquer , a 1914 silent movie directed by george loane tucker and starring henry ainley and jane gail she stoops to conquer , a 1923 silent movie directed by edwin greenwood she stoops to conquer , a 1939 adaptation for television starring morris harvey , renee de vaux and james hayter she stoops to conquer , a 1971 bbc television production starring tom courtenay , juliet mills , ralph richardson , thora hird , trevor peacock and brian cox ночь ошибок ( a night of mistakes ) , soviet television play directed by mikhail kozakov in 1974 the kissing dance , a musical by howard goodall and charles hart : 1998 , for the national youth music theatre of britain she stoops to conquer , a 2003 video presentation recorded live on stage in bath , somerset , england she stoops to conquer , a 2008 television adaptation directed by tony britten and starring tim bell , simon butteriss , judi daykin and mark dexter the play was adapted as an opera by george macfarren . . references . external links . she stoops to conquer : cummings study guides