30 St Mary Axe

site . the building stands on the former site of the baltic exchange ( 24-28 st mary axe ) , which was the headquarters of a global marketplace for shipping freight contracts and also soft commodity , and the chamber of shipping ( 30-32 st mary axe ) . on 10 april 1992 , the provisional ira detonated a bomb close to the exchange , causing extensive damage to the historic building and neighbouring structures . the united kingdom government 's statutory adviser on the historic environment , english heritage , and the city of london 's governing body , the city of london corporation , were keen that any redevelopment must restore the baltic exchange 's old façade onto st mary axe . the exchange hall was a celebrated fixture of the shipping market . english heritage then discovered that the damage was far more severe than initially thought , and they stopped insisting on full restoration , albeit over the objections of architectural conservationists . the baltic exchange and the chamber of shipping sold the land to trafalgar house in 1995 . most of the remaining structures on the baltic exchange site were then carefully dismantled , and the interior of exchange hall and the façade were preserved , hoping for a reconstruction of the building in the future . the salvaged material was eventually sold for £800,000 and moved to tallinn , estonia , where it awaits reconstruction as the centrepiece of the city 's commercial sector . in 1996 , trafalgar house submitted plans for the london millennium tower , a building with more than of office space , apartments , shops , restaurants and gardens . this plan was dropped after objections that it was totally out-of-scale in the city of london , and anticipated disruption to flight paths for both london city and london heathrow airports ; the revised plan for a lower tower was accepted . the tower 's topmost panoramic dome , known as the '' lens '' , recalls the iconic glass dome that covered part of the ground floor of the baltic exchange and much of which is now displayed at the national maritime museum . the gherkin nickname was applied to the current building at least as long ago as 1999 , referring to that plan 's highly unorthodox layout and appearance . . planning process . on 23 august 2000 , deputy prime minister john prescott granted planning permission to construct a building much larger than the old exchange on the site . the site was special because it needed development , it was not on any of the '' sight lines '' ( planning guidance requires that new buildings do not obstruct or detract from the view of st paul 's cathedral dome when viewed from a number of locations around london ) , and it had housed the baltic exchange . the plan for the site was to reconstruct the baltic exchange . gmw architects proposed a new rectangular building surrounding a restored exchange : it would have the type of large floor plan that banks liked . eventually , the planners realised that the exchange was not recoverable , forcing them to relax their building constraints ; they hinted that an '' architecturally significant '' building might obtain a favourable reception from city authorities . this gave the architect a free hand in the design ; it eliminated the restrictive demands for a large , capital-efficient , money-making building , whose design was per the client 's desire . the new building 's low-level plan satisfied the planning authority 's desire to maintain london 's traditional streetscape , with its narrow streets . the mass of the tower was not too imposing . like barclays ' former city headquarters in lombard street , the idea was that the passer-by in neighbouring streets would be nearly oblivious to the tower 's existence until directly underneath it . design and construction . the building was constructed by skanska , completed in december 2003 and opened on 28 april 2004 . the primary occupant of the building is swiss re , a global reinsurance company , which had the building commissioned as the head office for its uk operation . the tower is thus sometimes known as the swiss re building , although this name has never been official and has more recently fallen out of favour , since the company 's main headquarters is in zurich and the gherkin name has become more popular . the building uses energy-saving methods which allow it to use only half the power that a similar tower would typically consume . gaps in each floor create six shafts that serve as a natural ventilation system for the entire building , even though required firebreaks on every sixth floor interrupt the '' chimney '' . the shafts create a giant double glazing effect ; air is sandwiched between two layers of glazing and insulates the office space inside . architects promote double glazing in residential houses , which avoids the inefficient convection of heat across the relatively narrow gap between the panes , but the tower exploits this effect . the shafts pull warm air out of the building during the summer and warm the building in the winter using passive solar heating . the shafts also allow sunlight to pass through the building , making the work environment more pleasing , and keeping the lighting costs down . the primary methods for controlling wind-excited sways are to increase the stiffness , or increase damping with tuned mass damper . to a design by arup , its fully thin-shell structure makes the building rigid enough without any extra reinforcements . despite its overall curved glass shape , there is only one piece of curved glass on the building , the lens-shaped cap at the apex . on the building 's top level ( the 40th floor ) , there is a bar for tenants and their guests , with a panorama view of london . a restaurant operates on the 39th floor , and private dining rooms on the 38th . most buildings have extensive lift equipment on the roof of the building , but this was not possible for the gherkin , since a bar had been planned for the 40th floor . the architects dealt with this by having the main lift only reach the 34th floor , and also a push-from-below lift to the 39th floor . there is a marble stairwell and a disabled persons ' lift , which leads the visitor up to the bar in the dome . the building is visible over long distances : from the north , for instance , it can be seen from the m11 motorway , some away , while to the west it can be seen from the statue of george iii in windsor great park . after completion . in april 2005 , a glass panel , two thirds up the tower , fell to the plaza beneath . the plaza was sealed off , but the building remained open . a temporary covered walkway , extending across the plaza to the building 's reception , was erected to protect visitors . engineers examined the other 744 glass panels on the building . the cost of repair was covered by main contractor skanska and curtain-wall supplier schmidlin ( now called schmidlin-tsk ag ) . the open-floor ventilation system did not operate as designed due to tenants adding glass partitions to increase security . since its completion , the building has won a number of awards for architecture . in october 2004 , the architect was awarded the 2004 stirling prize . for the first time in the prize 's history , the judges were unanimous . in december 2005 , a survey of the world 's largest firms of architects published in 2006 bd world architecture 200 voted the tower as the most admired new building in the world . however , ken shuttleworth , who worked for foster + partners on the design of the building , said in 2011 that he believed the style was now out-moded : '' i was looking at the glass all around and thought , 'why on earth did we do that ? ' now we would do things differently '' . the building appeared in recent films such as harry potter and the half blood prince , a good year , basic instinct 2 , and match point and , rechristened the spirit of london , became the spaceship centrepiece of keith mansfield 's 2008 novel johnny mackintosh and the spirit of london . in september 2006 , the building was put up for sale with a price tag of £600 million . potential buyers included british land , land securities , prudential , ing , and the abu dhabi royal family . on 21 february 2007 , ivg immobilien ag and uk investment firm evans randall completed their joint purchase of the building for £630 million , making it britain 's most expensive office building . swiss re booked a gain of more than £300 million from the sale . the new owners are seeking compensation from four of their former managers on the deal , in which about £620 million was paid for a building with a build cost of about £200 million , giving the previous owners a clear £300 million profit . since february 2010 , sky news has broadcast its flagship business programme , jeff randall live , from a studio in the building . in addition the top two floors of the tower are now available on a private hire basis for events . deloitte announced in april 2014 that the building was again being put up for sale , with an expected price of £550 million . the current owners could not afford to make loan repayments , citing differences in the value of the multi-currency loan and the british pound , high interest rates and general financing structure . in november 2014 , the gherkin was purchased for £700 million by the safra group , controlled by the brazilian billionaire joseph safra . . tenants . as of january 2016 , current occupants of the building include the following : standard life iwg ion trading kirkland & ellis hunton & williams falcon group swiss re lab49 algotechs webscaparate uk additionally , retailers and restaurants operate from the site , such as the sterling and bridge 's newsagent .