List of years in television

1920s . 1922 : no events for this year . 1923 : no events for this year . 1924 : no events for this year . 1925 : no events for this year . 1926 : john logie baird demonstrates the world 's first television system . 1927 : the bbc begins broadcasting as the british broadcasting corporation under the royal charter . 1928 : john logie baird 's television development company demonstrates their model a , b , and c 'televisors ' to the general public . 1929 : john logie baird begins broadcasting 30-minute-long programmes for his mechanically scanned televisions . 1930s . 1930 : baird installs a television at 10 downing street , london , the british prime minister 's residence . on july 14 , prime minister ramsay macdonald and his family use it to watch the first ever television drama , the man with the flower in his mouth . 1931 : allen b . dumont perfects long-lasting reliable cathode ray tubes later used for television reception . tv reaches the soviet union and france . 1932 : the bbc starts a regular public television broadcasting service in the uk . 1933 : the first television revue , looking in , is broadcast on the bbc . the musical revue featured the paramount astoria dancing girls . broadcast live by the bbc using john logie baird 's 30-line mechanical television system , part of this performance was recorded onto a 7 '' aluminum disc using a primitive home recording process called silvatone . this footage , which runs to just under four minutes , is the oldest surviving recording of broadcast television . 1934 : philo farnsworth demonstrates a non-mechanical television system . the agreement for joint experimental transmissions by the bbc and john logie baird 's company comes to an end . first 30 line mechanical television test transmissions commence in april in brisbane australia conducted by thomas elliott and dr val mcdowall . 1935 : first regular scheduled tv broadcasts in germany by the tv station paul nipkow . the final transmissions of john logie baird 's 30-line television system are broadcast by the bbc . first tv broadcasts in france on february 13 on paris ptt vision . 1936 : the 1936 summer olympics becomes the first olympic games to be broadcast on television . 1937 : the bbc one broadcasts the world 's first televised shakespeare play , a thirty-minute version of twelfth night , and the first football match , arsenal f.c . vs . arsenal reserves . 1938 : dumont laboratories manufactures and sells the first all-electronic television sets to the public . baird gives the first public demonstration of color projection television . the bbc broadcasts the world 's first ever television science fiction ( r.u.r . ) , and television crime series ( telecrime ) ; in one of the lengthiest experimental television broadcasts , the bbc broadcasts a 90-minute version of edmond rostand 's cyrano de bergerac , starring leslie banks , constance cummings , and james mason . 1939 : the bbc suspends its television service owing to the outbreak of the second world war . the 1939 new york world 's fair was broadcast . japan is the first asian country to air television . 1940s . 1940 : the american federal communications commission , ( fcc ) , holds public hearings about television . 1941 : first television advertisements aired . the first official , paid television advertisement was broadcast in the united states on july 1 , 1941 over new york station wnbt ( now wnbc ) before a baseball game between the brooklyn dodgers and philadelphia phillies . the announcement was for bulova watches . 1942 : fcc terminates all american television broadcasting because of the war ; dumont petitions fcc to resume broadcasting and receives approval . 1943 : hänsel und gretel is the first complete opera to be broadcast on television , but only in new york ; first ( experimental ) telecast of charles dickens 's a christmas carol . many more telecasts of the story will follow in later years , but until film begins to be used on television , no two of the television versions of the story will have the same casts . an advertisement campaign about forest fires introduces smokey bear 1944 : american broadcasting company , ( abc ) , is formed . 1945 : national broadcasting company ( nbc ) begins the first regularly scheduled television network service in the united states . 1946 : rca demonstrates all-electronic color television system ; the dumont television network begins broadcasting . 1947 : first broadcast of howdy doody , kraft television theatre , a diamond is forever ( de beers ) and meet the press ; the world series is broadcast live for the first time ; the 1947 tournament of roses parade becomes the first televised parade . 1948 : first broadcast of the ed sullivan show and texaco star theater ; the macy 's thanksgiving day parade moves from radio to television 1949 : first broadcast of the lone ranger , crusader rabbit and mama ; 1st emmy awards . 1950s . 1950 : first broadcast of come dancing , broadway open house , your show of shows and what 's my line ? ; cuba is the first caribbean country to receive tv ; brazil is the first south american country to receive tv ; nielsen media research begins to provide television ratings data ; jack benny and burns & allen move from radio to tv ; bob hope appears in his first tv special . 1951 : the first broadcast of live united states transcontinental television takes place in san francisco , california from the japanese peace treaty conference . first broadcast of i love lucy , see it now , dragnet , the hallmark hall of fame , search for tomorrow , sua vida me pertence , love of life and the roy rogers show 1952 : first broadcast of today ( nbc ) , this is your life , tony the tiger ( kellogg 's frosted flakes ) , adventures of superman , omnibus , and flower pot men ; hockey night in canada and guiding light move from radio to tv . 1953 : first broadcast of panorama ; the coronation of elizabeth ii is the first ceremony of its kind to be broadcast on television . 1954 : first broadcast of the tonight show , father knows best , marlboro man , disneyland , green giant and lassie ; ntsc video standard for color television is introduced , and national educational television ( net ) is launched . 1955 : first broadcast of the honeymooners , the mickey mouse club , alfred hitchcock presents , sunday night at the london palladium , the benny hill show , the sooty show , the adventures of robin hood , gunsmoke and captain kangaroo ; itv launches in the uk ; millions of viewers watch the grand opening of disneyland in california . 1956 : first broadcast of the edge of night , as the world turns , the price is right , the tipps family ( pg tips ) , playhouse 90 , the eurovision song contest and hancock 's half hour 1957 : first broadcast of perry mason , have gun — will travel , leave it to beaver , senda prohibida , and carosello 1958 : first broadcast of blue peter , quatermass and the pit , the donna reed show , moonlight mask and the huckleberry hound show ; the quiz show scandals wipe out the 64,000 question and twenty-one . 1959 : first broadcast of the twilight zone , telejornal , rocky and bullwinkle and friends , think small ( volkswagan ) , trix rabbit , snap , crackle and pop ( rice krispies ) , the untouchables , rawhide , first ever barbie commercial and bonanza ( which runs for fourteen years ) . 1960s . 1960 : first broadcast of the andy griffith show , the flintstones , coronation street and tales of the riverbank ; american presidential candidates john f . kennedy and richard m . nixon debate live on television . 1961 : first broadcast of the avengers , the defenders , the dick van dyke show , morecambe and wise , the milky bar kid and car 54 , where are you ? 1962 : first broadcast of the beverly hillbillies , steptoe and son , the jetsons , university challenge , elgar , that was the week that was , slinky , the late late show ( ireland ) and sábado gigante ; first satellite television relayed by telstar . 1963 : first broadcast of doctor who , general hospital , the fugitive , astro boy , we try harder ( avis ) and the outer limits ; martin luther king jr . addresses his famous i have a dream speech to the world ; the world watches in horror over the assassination of john f . kennedy . 1964 : first broadcast of gilligan 's island , the munsters , bewitched , the man from u.n.c.l.e , lucky charms ( lucky charms ) , the addams family , top of the pops , rudolph the red-nosed reindeer , match of the day , jeopardy ! , jonny quest and up series ; broadcast of u.s . president lyndon johnson signing the civil rights act of 1964 ; the beatles appear on the ed sullivan show . 1965 : first broadcast of i dream of jeannie , days of our lives , get smart , thunderbirds , the dean martin show , hogan 's heroes , lost in space , till death us do part , peanuts , des chiffres et des lettres , tomorrow 's world , pilsbury doughboy , the magic roundabout and the war game ; nigeria is the first african country to receive tv . 1966 : first broadcast of star trek , batman ( the live-action tv series ) , the monkees , dark shadows , happiness is a cigar called hamlet , ultra series , how the grinch stole christmas ! , that girl , cathy come home and mission : impossible ; england win the world cup final , seen by tens of millions . 1967 : first broadcast of the carol burnett show , the prisoner , the flying nun , news at ten , captain birdseye , speed racer , spider-man , the phil donahue show and ambassador magma ; pal and secam colour standards introduced in europe , with bbc2 making their first colour broadcasts . 1968 : first broadcast of 60 minutes , one life to live , dad 's army , julia , columbo , elvis , mister rogers ' neighborhood , the keebler elves , the banana splits , hawaii five-o , the milk tray milk tray man , rowan & martin 's laugh-in and adam-12 1969 : first broadcast of sesame street , scooby-doo , where are you ! , monty python 's flying circus , on the buses , the brady bunch and nu , pogodi ! ; apollo 11 moon landing broadcast live worldwide ; completion of fernsehturm berlin . 1970s . 1970 : first broadcast of the mary tyler moore show , the partridge family , the odd couple , mcdonaldland , monday night football , the adventures of rupert bear and all my children ; pbs is launched . 1971 : first broadcast of all in the family , kamen rider , the old grey whistle test , chespirito , the two ronnies , upstairs , downstairs , la linea , the generation game and parkinson 1972 : first broadcast of m a s h , emmerdale , mastermind , kamiondžije , el chavo , rainbow , fat albert and the cosby kids , el chapulín colorado , the bob newhart show , little mikey ( quaker 's life cereal ) , great performances and maude ; hbo is launched . 1973 : first broadcast of boy on the bike ( hovis ) , the ascent of man , moonbase 3 , the wombles , super friends , the young and the restless , an american family , quicky the nesquik bunny , the duracell bunny , ein herz und eine seele , schoolhouse rock ! , seventeen moments of spring , tetley tea folk , last of the summer wine and the world at war 1974 : first broadcast of chico and the man , derrick , happy days , little house on the prairie , kool-aid man , police woman , space battleship yamato , heidi , girl of the alps , land of the lost , porridge , smash martians , rhoda , good times , the rockford files , and tiswas ; 1st daytime emmy awards ; richard m . nixon announces his resignation on live television . 1975 : first broadcast of starsky & hutch , baretta , barney miller , fawlty towers , good morning america , one day at a time , saturday night live , space : 1999 , the jeffersons , the naked civil servant , welcome back , kotter , wheel of fortune and wonder woman ; sony introduces the betamax home video tape recorder . 1976 : first broadcast of the muppet show , i , claudius , grlom u jagode , honey monster ( sugar puffs ) , loriot , sctv , austin city limits , andrex , charlie 's angels , family feud , the gong show , laverne and shirley and nuts in may ; videocassette recorders go on sale ; completion of cn tower . 1977 : first broadcast of abigail 's party , chips , eight is enough , ¿qué pasa , usa ? , roots , soap , it 'll be alright on the night , lou grant , the cadbury 's caramel bunny , hungarian folktales , three 's company , top gear and live from the met 1978 : first broadcast of an ordinary miracle , abarembo shogun , battlestar galactica , dallas , diff'rent strokes , wkrp in cincinnati , once upon a time . , the incredible hulk , the dating game , ski sunday , fantasy island , grange hill , matador , mork & mindy , pennies from heaven , taxi , future boy conan and deeply regretted by . 1979 : first broadcast of doraemon , benson , blue remembered hills , buck rogers in the 25th century , hart to hart , knots landing , life on earth , anne of green gables , antiques roadshow , los ricos también lloran , real people , worzel gummidge , the dukes of hazzard , the facts of life , buzzbee the honey nut cheerios bee , you ca n't do that on television , the meeting place can not be changed , the very same munchhausen and tinker , tailor , soldier , spy ; espn and nickelodeon are launched . 1980s . 1980 : first broadcast of berlin alexanderplatz , magnum pi , nightline , bbc children in need , vruć vetar , strumpet city and yes minister ; cnn ( cnn ) is launched . 1981 : first broadcast of the smurfs , hill street blues , urusei yatsura , the people 's court , absolut bottle ( absolut vodka ) , wetten , dass . ? , dynasty , greatest american hero , postman pat , danger mouse , grey poupon marketing , elvira 's movie macabre , falcon crest , only fools and horses and brideshead revisited ; mtv launched ; hundreds of millions watch prince charles wedding of charles , prince of wales and lady diana spencer ; a writers ' strike disrupts u.s . television for three months . 1982 : first broadcast of cheers , knight rider , family ties , countdown , remington steele , brookside , the mysterious cities of gold , chiquilladas , macross , the snowman , boys from the blackstuff , newhart and st . elsewhere ; channel 4 ( uk ) and the weather channel launched . 1983 : first broadcast of the a-team , the day after , v ( original miniseries ) , 1984 ( apple computers ) , he-man and the masters of the universe , inspector gadget , fraggle rock , oshin , auf wiedersehen , pet , reading rainbow , press your luck , g.i . joe : a real american hero , alvin and the chipmunks , eddie murphy delirious , the joy of painting , an englishman abroad , j . r . hartley ( yellow pages ) , blackadder and terrahawks ; disney channel launched . 1984 : first broadcast of thomas the tank engine and friends , fist of the north star , airwolf , blue thunder , murder , she wrote , miami vice , who 's the boss ? , top lista nadrealista , the cosby show , the transformers , voltron , night court , tales from the darkside , where 's the beef ? ( wendy 's ) , muppet babies , la piovra , santa barbara , spitting image , heimat and the jewel in the crown ; a & e and canal+ launched . 1985 : first broadcast of macgyver , growing pains , the raccoons , thundercats , neighbours , mr . belvedere , moonlighting , larry king live , edge of darkness , the max headroom show , eastenders , disney 's adventures of the gummi bears and the golden girls ; the discovery channel is established ; the first wrestlemania event is broadcast ; millions watch the live aid concert from wembley stadium . 1986 : first broadcast of the oprah winfrey show , perfect strangers , double dare , designing women , chester cheetah ( cheetos ) , alf , malgudi days , ginga : nagareboshi gin , saint seiya , the scottish widow ( scottish widows ) , london 's burning , takeshi 's castle , dragon ball , the noid ( domino 's pizza ) , mormarevi brothers , alternatywy 4 , first my pet monster commercial , pee-wee 's playhouse , the california raisins , siskel & ebert at the movies , the singing detective and pingu ; the fox broadcasting company , ( fox ) , is launched , television is introduced in mayotte and niue . 1987 : first broadcast of full house , married . with children , teenage mutant ninja turtles , headbangers ball , thirtysomething , chucklevision , kimagure orange road , ducktales ( 1987 ) , ramayan , fireman sam , inspector morse , the bold and the beautiful , star trek : the next generation , this is your brain on drugs , the tracey ullman show and 21 jump street ( tv series ) 1988 : first broadcast of roseanne , mystery science theater 3000 , red dwarf , in the heat of the night , just do it ( nike ) , murphy brown , yo ! mtv raps , count duckula , garfield and friends , america 's most wanted , the wonder years and mahabharat ; tnt , ( turner network television ) , is launched ; first lcd televisions go on sale ; a writers ' strike disrupts u.s . television for five months . 1989 : first broadcast of the simpsons , seinfeld , family matters , baywatch , chip ' n dale rescue rangers , saved by the bell , american gladiators , wallace and gromit , dragon ball z , hey dude , face ( british airways ) , america 's funniest home videos , quantum leap , cops , agatha christie 's poirot , shining time station , coach and inside edition ; cnbc and eurosport launched . 1990s . 1990 : first broadcast of tiny toon adventures , talespin , beverly hills , 90210 , in living color , the fresh prince of bel-air , wings , law & order , are you afraid of the dark ? , twin peaks , bobby 's world , mr . bean , and northern exposure 1991 : first broadcast of home improvement , dinosaurs , darkwing duck , step by step , nummer 28 , papa and nicole ( renault ) , the julekalender , æon flux , the first three nicktoons ( doug , rugrats , and the ren & stimpy show ) and the jerry springer show 1992 : first broadcast of the larry sanders show , mad about you , batman : the animated series , barney & friends , martin , the real world , cha cha cha , yuyu hakusho , bananas in pyjamas , pretty soldier sailor moon , melrose place , x-men , and absolutely fabulous ; cartoon network is launched . 1993 : first broadcast of late show with david letterman , animaniacs , the x-files , beavis and butt-head , mighty morphin power rangers , got milk ? , wwe raw , walker , texas ranger , boy meets world , dr . quinn , medicine woman , veggietales , bill nye the science guy , cracker , seaquest dsv , the nanny , ricki lake and frasier 1994 : first broadcast of friends , party of five , the kingdom , chicago hope , babylon 5 , the national lottery draws , dining room table ( ikea ) , inside the actors studio , space ghost coast to coast , spider-man , the tick , er , all that , and gullah gullah island ; turner classic movies is launched ; 1994 united states broadcast tv realignment until 1996 . 1995 : first broadcast of neon genesis evangelion , father ted , nilecity 105,6 , the wayans bros . , spokescandies ( m & m 's ) , xena : warrior princess , triple nine , the late late show , wcw monday nitro , road rules , the drew carey show , budweiser frogs , mad tv , holidays are coming ( coca-cola ) , jag , el y ella , sevcec , and o . j . simpson murder case televised ; the programme rox makes a move to the internet , by becoming the first ever web series ; the history channel is launched . 1996 : first broadcast of the crocodile hunter , 3rd rock from the sun , blue 's clues , hey arnold ! , rurouni kenshin , spin city , kenan and kel , the daily show , judge judy , churchill nodding dog , arthur , detective conan , dexter 's laboratory , our friends in the north , and everybody loves raymond ; fox news is launched ; the first high-definition television broadcasts ; the first dvds and dvd players go on sale . 1997 : first broadcast of south park , pokémon , stargate sg-1 , buffy the vampire slayer , rachel leigh cook 's brain on drugs , king of the hill , todd macfarlane 's spawn , teletubbies , recess , alles kan beter , the taco bell chihuahua , priceless ( mastercard ) , daria and i 'm alan partridge ; first plasma televisions on sale ; millions watch the funeral of diana spencer . 1998 : first broadcast of who wants to be a millionaire ? , oggy and the cockroaches , dawson 's creek , will & grace , charmed , cowboy bebop , cardcaptor sakura , the powerpuff girls , that '70s show , bob the builder , sex and the city , gap inc . ( gap inc . ) , wcw thunder , the royle family , and the king of queens ; kingston communications launches the first major video-on-demand service . 1999 : first broadcast of family guy , spongebob squarepants , the sopranos , futurama , the west wing , whassup ? ( budweiser ) , digimon adventure , one piece , ed , edd n eddy , courage the cowardly dog , wwe smackdown , the amanda show , happy tree friends , big brother ( netherlands ) , the geico gecko , walking with . , yo soy betty , la fea , surfer ( guinness ) , freaks and geeks , trick , and angel ; first digital video recorders go on sale . 2000s . 2000 : first broadcast of csi : crime scene investigation , curb your enthusiasm , malcolm in the middle , mtv cribs , survivor , jackass , bear fight ( john west foods ) , da ali g show , halifax singing staff , 106 & park , just for laughs : gags , dora the explorer , aqua teen hunger force , homestar runner and gilmore girls 2001 : first broadcast of 24 , scrubs , the office ( uk ) , band of brothers , sangdo , merchants of joseon , the secret life of us , fear factor , the fairly oddparents , invader zim , samurai jack , yu-gi-oh ! , lizzie mcguire , how it 's made , smallville and six feet under ; the world witnesses the september 11 terrorist attacks in new york city and washington . regular programming is suspended in order to bring up to date coverage of events relating to the attacks . 2002 : first broadcast of naruto , american idol , the shield , city of men , mr . bean , extreme makeover , i 'm a celebrity . get me out of here ! , the adventures of jimmy neutron : boy genius , madventures , firefly , ant and dec 's saturday night takeaway , 100 greatest britons , winter sonata , the basil brush show , full metal panic ! , ghost in the shell : stand alone complex , george lopez , the wire and kim possible 2003 : first broadcast of two and a half men , one tree hill , fullmetal alchemist , the o.c . , that 's so raven , teen titans , cog ( honda ) , chappelle 's show , reno 911 ! , mythbusters , peugeot 206 , my life as a teenage robot , red vs . blue , dae jang geum , ncis , jimmy kimmel live , all in , silhouette style ( ipod ) , little britain , peep show , arrested development , los serrano , the ellen degeneres show and the venture bros . 2004 : first broadcast of bleach , desperate housewives , rick mercer report , lazytown , house , the geico cavemen , battlestar galactica , monster , samurai champloo , ghost hunters , hassan and habibah , peppa pig , drake & josh , drawn together , citroën c4 , super girl , veronica mars , winx club , foster 's home for imaginary friends , entourage , hell 's kitchen ( uk ) , the dove campaign for real beauty , the apprentice , the biggest loser , lost and the x factor ; euro1080 launches the first high-definition television broadcast . 2005 : first broadcast of avatar : the last airbender , it 's always sunny in philadelphia , grey 's anatomy , spiral , noghtechin , dancing with the stars , ben 10 , my name is earl , the closer , the suite life of zack & cody , noitulove ( guinness ) , so you think you can dance , bones , hell 's kitchen ( us ) , the colbert report , how it should have ended , robot chicken , american dad ! , erin esurance , everybody hates chris , the office ( u.s . ) , how i met your mother , criminal minds , deal or no deal , carlton draught : big ad , supernatural , prison break , pleasant goat and big big wolf , my lovely sam soon and sto para pente 2006 : first broadcast of high school musical , türkisch für anfänger , planet earth , jumong , heroes , psych , dancing on ice , the most interesting man in the world ( dos equis ) , dexter , friday night lights , ugly betty , hannah montana , top chef , the it crowd , charlie brooker 's screenwipe , code geass and 30 rock ; the netherlands is the first country to move to digital television ; france 24 launched ; hd dvd and blu-ray disc launched ; the wb and upn shut down and merge to become the cw . 2007 : first broadcast of the big bang theory , britain 's got talent , gorilla ( cadbury 's dairy milk ) , phineas and ferb , total drama , gossip girl , icarly , heartland , shaun the sheep , the john lewis christmas advert , burn notice , the golden path , pushing daisies , monkey and al ( pg tips ) , nostalgia critic , wizards of waverly place , golden bride , the killing , chuck , mad men and damages ; a writers ' strike shuts down u.s . scripted programming in november . 2008 : first broadcast of breaking bad , the mentalist , sons of anarchy , star wars : the clone wars , wipeout , true blood , simon 's cat , fringe , underbelly , the inbetweeners , radio arvyla and 19 kids and counting ; first 3d tv broadcasts ; the historical miniseries john adams premieres on hbo and wins a record-breaking thirteen emmys . 2009 : first broadcast of modern family , pawn stars , cake boss , tosh.0 , jersey shore , castle , horrible histories , compare the meerkat , the vampire diaries , the good wife , cougar town , archer , late night with jimmy fallon , the middle , glee , parks and recreation , community and misfits . 2010s . 2010 : first broadcast of adventure time , downton abbey , glass home , borgen , sherlock , the man your man could smell like ( old spice ) , solsidan , pretty little liars , my little pony : friendship is magic , boardwalk empire , parenthood , louie , conan , the great british bake off , mike & molly , treme , luther , regular show , storage wars , young justice , good luck charlie , the walking dead and the voice ( holland ) , 2010 tonight show conflict 2011 : first broadcast of game of thrones , black mirror , bob 's burgers , leyla ile mecnun , once upon a time , american horror story , the killing , austin & ally , suits , teen wolf , impractical jokers , the amazing world of gumball , last man standing , shameless , grimm , 2 broke girls , new girl and homeland ; millions watch prince william marry kate middleton , ibm 's watson competes against former champions brad rutter and ken jennings on jeopardy ! , barack obama announces death of osama bin laden on live television 2012 : first broadcast of duck dynasty , satyamev jayate , girls , red bull stratos , scandal , nashville , državni posao , call the midwife , mystery diners , oliver stone 's untold history of the united states , house of lies , veep , the arrowverse , catfish : the tv show , honest trailers , the mindy project , omar , key & peele , the legend of korra , jojo 's bizarre adventure , daniel tiger 's neighborhood , gravity falls and kitchen ; 2012 london olympics becomes the most-watched event of the year . 2013 : first broadcast of rick and morty , steven universe , the americans , peaky blinders , epic split ( volvo trucks ) , marvel 's agents of s.h.i.e.l.d , the following , house of cards ( which debut on netflix instead of cable ) , bates motel , broadchurch , hannibal , vikings , teen titans go ! , paw patrol , orange is the new black , chicken ( mercedes benz ) , liv and maddie , the goldbergs and brooklyn nine-nine 2014 : first broadcast of true detective , black-ish , last week tonight with john oliver , fargo , bojack horseman , gotham , scorpion , gomorrah , the 100 , outlander , lucha underground , transparent , broad city , over the garden wall , silicon valley , the leftovers , jane the virgin , chrisley knows best and girl meets world 2015 : first broadcast of better call saul , star vs . the forces of evil , empire , narcos , daredevil , crazy ex-girlfriend , trivago girl , lucifer , life in pieces , unbreakable kimmy schmidt , love island , mr . robot , we bare bears , schitt 's creek , critical role , master of none , deutschland 83 , lip sync battle , f is for family and superstore ; super bowl xlix breaks the record for most-watched program in the history of american television ; mayweather–pacquiao boxing match is history 's biggest pay-per-view fight ; ten are killed during a helicopter crash during filming of reality series dropped . 2016 : first broadcast of stranger things , my hero academia , the night of , the loud house , fleabag , war & peace , mann mayal , atlanta , this is us , the good place , full frontal with samantha bee , american housewife , american crime story , insecure , westworld , tales of arcadia , victoria and the crown 2017 : first broadcast of american gods , riverdale , big little lies , ducktales ( 2017 ) , hanazuki : full of treasures , the marvelous mrs . maisel , the end of the f ing world , big mouth , the handmaid 's tale , glow , counterpart , legion and a series of unfortunate events ; at the 89th academy awards , the film moonlight is announced the correct winner for best picture , after actors faye dunaway and warren beatty announce la la land , another acclaimed film , the winner by mistake on national television . 2018 : first broadcast of hilda , the circle , tom clancy 's jack ryan , barry , killing eve , bodyguard , pose , succession , she-ra and the princesses of power , disenchantment , a.p . bio , kidding , lodge 49 , patriot act with hasan minhaj , carpool karaoke , cloak & dagger , bluey , final space , forever , homecoming , grown-ish , splitting up together and the kids are alright ; millions watch prince harry marry meghan markle . 2019 : first broadcast of chernobyl , the mandalorian , harley quinn , watchmen , his dark materials , the masked singer , the boys , all elite wrestling : dynamite , russian doll , the dark crystal : age of resistance , the umbrella academy , euphoria , ramy , what we do in the shadows , undone , black monday , hanna , sex education , when they see us , good omens , the morning show , mixed-ish and schooled . 2020s . 2020 : first broadcast of tiger king , central park , solar opposites , zoey 's extraordinary playlist , avenue 5 , i may destroy you , stargirl , dispatches from elsewhere , the great , dash & lily , ted lasso , close enough and utopia falls ; the 2019-20 covid-19 epidemic shuts down production on many television programs . abs-cbn franchise renewal , abs-cbn radio stations and tv stations shutdown , philippines may 5 , 2020 . 2021 : first broadcast of hazbin hotel , the marvel cinematic universe : phase four television series