ITV Granada

granada sky broadcasting . right in 1996 granada joined bskyb to form a joint venture , itv digital channels ( gsb ) providing content and new channels to the satellite platform . granada launched a range of television channels broadcasting the granada archive on the sky satellite television platform and other digital platforms such as itv digital which closed in 2002 due to administration , ntl and telewest ( which merged to form virgin media ) . gsb operated as a joint venture until 2004 when itv was formed . consequently , itv purchased bskyb 's 10 % stake in the venture and launched itv3 which replaced granada plus . gsb was renamed the itv digital channels ltd to reflect itv plc control . ondigital . from 1997 until 2002 granada and carlton invested , and lost , over £1 billion with a joint venture into ondigital , a pay tv , digital terrestrial broadcaster . ondigital was rebranded itv digital in summer 2001 , but opposed by smg plc , utv , and channel television , who felt it would damage the itv brand . ondigital was expected to create a new revenue stream and be floated as a separate company but by march 1999 the service only had 110,000 subscribers , well below the 2 million granada aimed for . granada and carlton persevered by rebranding the service itv digital but this too was not successful . competition from sky digital launched in 1998 was too great and itv digital ceased broadcasting on 1 may 2002 . this led to sweeping cuts in the organisation , including cutting budgets for flagship drama serials and productions and loss of jobs at the manchester headquarters . . additional channels . . granada plus . granada plus was a general entertainment channel , a 50–50 joint venture between granada television and sky ( united kingdom ) , aimed at older audiences using archive material . the channel , launched on 1 october 1996 as granada plus , was later known as g plus and finally plus . it broadcast until 1 november 2004 , when itv bought bskyb 's stake in gsb , and closed the channel , replacing it with itv3 , and taking plus ' low epg position on sky digital . men & motors . men & motors was a male orientated channel which launched on the same day as granada plus , sharing transponder space with plus and broadcasting for three hours a day in the late evening . in 2004 it became a full-time channel , broadcasting motors programming during the day and adult programming in the late evening although the adult programming was dropped when the channel went free-to-air in 2005 . it lasted longest of all the channels , and ran until 2010 , when it was closed to make way for itv hd . most of its programmes were transferred to itv4 . granada breeze . originally granada good life , granada breeze was another gsb venture which also launched on 1 october 1996 . it was a lifestyle channel aimed at women viewers and showed programmes on , cookery , health and us daytime television such as judge joe brown . it provided programmes split into themed sections called granada talk television , granada food and wine , granada health and beauty , granada television high street and granada home and garden . most shows were presented from a large conservatory studio outside the coronation street studio which was later used for daytime itv play programming . granada breeze was scaled down in july 2001 before ceasing operation in march 2002 due to poor viewing figures . . others . another channel , wellbeing , a joint venture with boots , modelled on granada breeze was broadcast from the leeds studios , although granada made some programmes , closed in 2003 . granada talk tv focused on chat shows and closed after less than a year on air . reception . awards and accolades . granada television had a reputation for strong production values . in 1999 , granada television made eight of itv 's top-rated programmes and 30 % of the uk 's top-rated programmes came from its studios and in 2005 supplied 63 % of itv original production . it was the only ita broadcaster created in 1954 that survived into the 21st century , and flourished it emerged the dominant player in the itv network by 2000 . in the 19 bafta awards for the best drama series awarded since 1992 , granada television has won five in total , cracker twice in 1994 and 1995 , cold feet in 2002 and the street in 2007 and 2008 – more than any other production company . coronation street became the longest running serial soap in 2010 when it celebrated its 50th anniversary and the ongoing seven up documentary series was voted the the 50 greatest documentaries by film makers . criticisms of perceived manchester-centric bias . in three franchise rounds ( 1967 , 1980 , and 1991 ) three groups ( palatine television , merseyvision , and mersey television , wherein the latter two were unconnected ) each made audacious bids to rid granada ( and in 1967 , abc ) of its franchise , but were unsuccessful , given that granada was well respected ( second only to the bbc ) . the opponents claimed to the regulatory bodies that existed at the time ( the ita in 1967 , the iba in 1981 , and the itc in 1991 ) in these successive franchise rounds that granada was too manchester-centred at the expense of the liverpool area and need to cater for the whole of north west england . they were supported by the fact that granada television was frequently referred to as '' granada manchester '' ( not '' granada north west '' ) , as most productions were made in manchester and in 2005 granada and the manchester city council held a celebration recognising granada 's 50th anniversary cementing this perception further . in 1993 , brian sedgemore mp , complained that promises granada made during the 1991 franchise round to open offices in chester , lancaster and blackburn were not fulfilled , but david liddiment at granada did not believe this assertion to be true . granada had increased investment in liverpool moving its regional news service to the albert dock complex in 1986 , before moving back to quay street sometime in the early 2000s . the itv network based its daytime show this morning at liverpool 's albert dock for many years before it moved to the london studios in 1996 , as it was difficult to get celebrity guests to travel from london to liverpool . . criticisms and controversies over world in action and tonight . granada 's bold , hard-hitting television and documentaries resulted in a number of legal cases . david plowright told junior researcher , paul greengrass , that granada 's role was to make trouble . world in action was hard-hitting but resulted in expensive , libel trials when wrong accusations were made in the 1990s . in 1998 granada paid £2 million in two cases , to three metropolitan police officers who were wrongly accused of covering up a murder and marks and spencer for alleging m & s knew one of its suppliers was using child labour . world in action was axed in 1998 and replaced by the tonight programme in 1999 but it too was criticised , but this time , for dumbing down as the tonight programme is markedly less hard-hitting . nevertheless , tonight had occasionally stirred controversy like its predecessor . an example is the 2003 documentary living with michael jackson ( a tonight special ) . its airing resulted in the threat of legal action by michael jackson . the documentary gained a large audience , 15 million in the united kingdom , and newspapers depicted jackson in a negative light following the documentary . jackson did not , ultimately , bring any case to court .