Brampton

infrastructure . health and medicine . . courts . grenville & william davis courthouse , ontario court of justice , is located in brampton at 7755 hurontario street ( hurontario street at county court ) . transportation . public transit . local transit is provided by brampton transit , with connections to other systems such as miway , york region transit , go transit , and toronto transit commission . brampton transit also operates a bus rapid transit system , '' züm '' ( pronounced zoom ) , along hurontario street , steeles avenue , queen street/highway 7 , bovaird drive–airport road , and queen street west–mississauga road , which form the backbone to its bus network . there is go bus service to york university and subway stations at yorkdale mall and york mills in toronto . there are three go train stations in brampton along the kitchener line : bramalea , brampton and mount pleasant . rail . both canadian national railways and the orangeville-brampton railway short line ( formerly part of the canadian pacific railway line ) run through the city . cn 's intermodal yards are located east of airport road between steeles and queen street east . the cn track from toronto 's union station , is the kitchener line providing commuter rail and bus services to and from toronto with rail station stops at bramalea , downtown brampton , and mount pleasant . via rail connects through brampton as part of the quebec city-windsor corridor . air . canada 's busiest airport , toronto pearson international airport ( cyyz ) , is located near brampton , in mississauga . greater toronto airports authority draft plan for pickering airport , greater toronto airports authority ( 2003 ) . retrieved on 2006-12-08 . for general aviation , the city is served by the privately owned brampton airport ( cnc3 ) , located to the north of the city in neighbouring caledon . road . brampton is served by several major transportation routes : highway 401 from toronto is a short distance south in mississauga , and can be reached by highway 410 , which runs north–south through the middle of the city . highway 407 runs along the southern portion of the city , just north of the boundary with mississauga . steeles avenue , which runs north of the 407 , is another thoroughfare from toronto . main street , a part of the historic road , hurontario street , and formerly highway 10 , is the city 's main north–south artery . the former highway 7 , ( now regional road 107 ) is another east–west corridor , incorporates the eastern part of queen street ( which is the city 's main east–west street ) and the western part of bovaird drive . representation in other media . deepa mehta 's 2008 film heaven on earth is set in brampton . . notable people . four people from brampton have received the order of canada : robert william bradford , former director of the national aviation museum ; michael f . clarke , director at evergreen , the yonge street mission for street youth in toronto ; howard pawley , professor and former premier of manitoba ; and william g . davis , former premier of ontario . sports . basketball : michael meeks ( internationally ) , caris levert , tyler ennis ( nba ) , tristan thompson ( nba ) , anthony bennett ( nba ) cricket : saad bin zafar , cecil pervez , curling : scott bailey , peter corner , graeme mccarrel , wayne middaugh , allison pottinger field hockey : bernadette bowyer figure skating : vern taylor , mark janoschak football : michael bailey ( cfl ) , fernand kashama ( cfl ) , chris kowalczuk ( cfl ) , rob maver ( cfl ) , jerome messam ( cfl , nfl ) , jason nugent ( cfl ) , junior turner ( cfl ) , steven turner ( cfl ) , jabar westerman ( cfl ) , jamaal westerman ( nfl ) , james yurichuk ( cfl ) nakas onyeka ( cfl ) golf : david hearn ; steve duplantis ( caddy ) hockey : andrew cassels , mike danton , mike dwyer , todd elik , chris felix , sheldon keefe , tom laidlaw , kris newbury , rick nash , tyler seguin , jamie storr , mike weaver , mike wilson , sean monahan , tyler graovac , cassie campbell , mikyla grant-mentis horse-racing : sid c . attard , patrick husbands , robert p . tiller , emma-jayne wilson lacrosse : jim veltman ( nll ) sailing : kevin stittle soccer : gabe gala ( mls ) , atiba hutchinson ( super lig ) , peter roe ( asl , misl ) , murphy wiredu , doneil henry , david hoilett , paul stalteri , roger thompson , cyle larin speed skating : tyson heung tennis : jill hetherington , milos raonic track and field : charles allen , mark boswell wrestling : ohenewa akuffo . politics . three canadian premiers got their start in brampton ; premiers tobias norris and howard pawley oc of manitoba , and '' brampton billy '' , ontario premier william grenville davis cc . other notable politicians include john coyne , and conservative opposition leader gordon graydon . alberta politician and businessman sir james a . lougheed was born in brampton , and served 30 years in senate ; regina mayor david lynch scott was born here . president of the treasury board tony clement spent time as a brampton mpp . john mcdermid held various cabinet positions under brian mulroney , bal gosal minister of state-sport , and former mayor linda jeffrey held cabinet positions at the provincial level . ruby dhalla represented the riding of brampton—springdale in the canadian house of commons from 2004 to 2011 as a member of the liberal party . dhalla and british columbia conservative mp nina grewal were the first sikh women to serve in the canadian house of commons . parm gill was elected as the member of parliament from the conservative party of canada for the riding of brampton-springdale in 2011 , who was also appointed as the parliamentary secretary to the minister of veteran affairs in 2013 . jagmeet singh began his political career in brampton running in two elections in 2011 , defeated in the federal election in may but elected member of provincial parliament for bramalea—gore—malton in october . in 2015 he became deputy leader of the ontario new democratic party . in 2017 he became leader of the federal ndp , the first member of a visible minority to become permanent leader of a major federal party in canada . arts . authors born in or living in brampton include rohinton mistry , jesse thistle , and edo van belkom . visual arts notables from brampton include etcher caroline helena armington , ronald bloore , member of the order of canada ; organiser and member of the '' regina five '' , ( 1960 ) watercolourist jack reid , and william ronald , who was raised in town . norman mills price . animators david feiss and jay stephens grew up here . music acts from brampton include punk band the flatliners , r & b singer keshia chanté , country singer johnny reid , '' metal queen '' lee aaron and pop singer alyssa reid . country singer and '' world champion yodeler '' donn reynolds lived here from 1969 to 1997 . barry stock , guitarist from three days grace was raised in brampton , and currently resides in caledon . singer alessia cara , hip-hop artist roy woods and hip-hop artist tory lanez were also born in brampton . hip-hop record producer wondagurl was also born in brampton . film , television and comedy . two notable comedians hail from brampton : scott thompson and russell peters . comedic actor michael cera was born and raised in brampton . shawn ashmore , aaron ashmore ( smallville ) are brampton-raised . actor tyler labine starred in mad love . other brampton-born or affiliated actors include paulo costanzo , jordan gavaris , gemini award winner kris lemche , lara jean chorostecki , sabrina grdevich , nicole lyn , dulé hill , actor and producer david j . phillips , reality tv star and art dealer billy jamieson , performer george r . robertson , and performer sidhu moose wala . others include voice actor brenna o'brien , and on-air media personalities cassie campbell , chris connor , chris cuthbert and scott mcgillivray . sister cities . brampton has two sister cities as well as active economic , historic , and cultural relationships with others . sister cities : miami beach , florida plano , texas friendship relationships : ribeira grande , azores , portugal xuzhou brampton , eden marikina gapyeong county fangshan district . see also . brampton board of trade brampton municipal election , 2006 city of brampton arts person of the year list of airports in the greater toronto area list of historic places in brampton . references . . notes . . external links . city of brampton official website