Aerospace

overview . in most industrial countries , the aerospace industry is a cooperation of the public and private sectors . for example , several states have a civilian space program funded by the government , such as nasa in the united states , european space agency in europe , the canadian space agency in canada , indian space research organisation in india , jaxa in japan , roscosmos in russia , china national space administration in china , suparco in pakistan , iranian space agency in iran , and korea aerospace research institute in south korea . along with these public space programs , many companies produce technical tools and components such as spacecraft and satellites . some known companies involved in space programs include boeing , cobham , airbus , spacex , lockheed martin , united technologies , mda and northrop grumman . these companies are also involved in other areas of aerospace , such as the construction of aircraft . history . modern aerospace began with engineer george cayley in 1799 . cayley proposed an aircraft with a '' fixed wing and a horizontal and vertical tail , '' defining characteristics of the modern airplane . the 19th century saw the creation of the aeronautical society of great britain ( 1866 ) , the american rocketry society , and the institute of aeronautical sciences , all of which made aeronautics a more serious scientific discipline . airmen like otto lilienthal , who introduced cambered airfoils in 1891 , used gliders to analyze aerodynamic forces . the wright brothers were interested in lilienthal 's work and read several of his publications . they also found inspiration in octave chanute , an airman and the author of progress in flying machines ( 1894 ) . it was the preliminary work of cayley , lilienthal , chanute , and other early aerospace engineers that brought about the first powered sustained flight at kitty hawk , north carolina on december 17 , 1903 , by the wright brothers . war and science fiction inspired scientists and engineers like konstantin tsiolkovsky and wernher von braun to achieve flight beyond the atmosphere . world war ii inspired wernher von braun to create the v1 and v2 rockets . the launch of sputnik 1 in october 1957 started the space age , and on july 20 , 1969 apollo 11 achieved the first manned moon landing . in april 1981 , the space shuttle columbia launched , the start of regular manned access to orbital space . a sustained human presence in orbital space started with '' mir '' in 1986 and is continued by the '' international space station '' . space commercialization and space tourism are more recent features of aerospace . manufacturing . aerospace manufacturing is a high-technology industry that produces '' aircraft , guided missiles , space vehicles , aircraft engines , propulsion units , and related parts '' . most of the industry is geared toward governmental work . for each original equipment manufacturer ( oem ) , the us government has assigned a commercial and government entity code . these codes help to identify each manufacturer , repair facilities , and other critical aftermarket vendors in the aerospace industry . in the united states , the department of defense and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) are the two largest consumers of aerospace technology and products . others include the very large airline industry . the aerospace industry employed 472,000 wage and salary workers in 2006 . most of those jobs were in washington state and in california , with missouri , new york and texas also being important . the leading aerospace manufacturers in the u.s . are boeing , united technologies corporation , spacex , northrop grumman and lockheed martin . these manufacturers are facing an increasing labor shortage as skilled u.s . workers age and retire . apprenticeship programs such as the aerospace joint apprenticeship council ( ajac ) work in collaboration with washington state aerospace employers and community colleges to train new manufacturing employees to keep the industry supplied . important locations of the civilian aerospace industry worldwide include washington state ( boeing ) , california ( boeing , lockheed martin , etc . ) ; montreal , canada ( bombardier , pratt & whitney canada ) ; toulouse , france ( airbus/eads ) ; hamburg , germany ( airbus/eads ) ; and são josé dos campos , brazil ( embraer ) , querétaro , mexico ( bombardier aerospace , general electric aviation ) and mexicali , mexico ( united technologies corporation , gulfstream aerospace ) . in the european union , aerospace companies such as eads , bae systems , thales , dassault , saab ab and leonardo s.p.a . ( formerly finmeccnica ) account for a large share of the global aerospace industry and research effort , with the european space agency as one of the largest consumers of aerospace technology and products . in india , bangalore is a major center of the aerospace industry , where hindustan aeronautics limited , the national aerospace laboratories and the indian space research organisation are headquartered . the indian space research organisation ( isro ) launched india 's first moon orbiter , chandrayaan-1 , in october 2008 . in russia , large aerospace companies like oboronprom and the united aircraft building corporation ( encompassing mikoyan , sukhoi , ilyushin , tupolev , yakovlev , and irkut which includes beriev ) are among the major global players in this industry . the historic soviet union was also the home of a major aerospace industry . the united kingdom formerly attempted to maintain its own large aerospace industry , making its own airliners and warplanes , but it has largely turned its lot over to cooperative efforts with continental companies , and it has turned into a large import customer , too , from countries such as the united states . however , the uk has a very active aerospace sector , including the second largest defence contractor in the world , bae systems , supplying fully assembled aircraft , aircraft components , sub-assemblies and sub-systems to other manufacturers , both in europe and all over the world . canada has formerly manufactured some of its own designs for jet warplanes , etc . ( e.g . the cf-100 fighter ) , but for some decades , it has relied on imports from the united states and europe to fill these needs . however canada still manufactures some military aircraft although they are generally not combat capable . another notable example was the late 1950s development of the avro canada cf-105 arrow , a supersonic fighter-interceptor whose 1959 cancellation was considered highly controversial . france has continued to make its own warplanes for its air force and navy , and sweden continues to make its own warplanes for the swedish air force & mdash ; especially in support of its position as a neutral country . ( see saab ab . ) other european countries either team up in making fighters ( such as the panavia tornado and the eurofighter typhoon ) , or else to import them from the united states . pakistan has a developing aerospace engineering industry . the national engineering and scientific commission , khan research laboratories and pakistan aeronautical complex are among the premier organizations involved in research and development in this sector . pakistan has the capability of designing and manufacturing guided rockets , missiles and space vehicles . the city of kamra is home to the pakistan aeronautical complex which contains several factories . this facility is responsible for manufacturing the mfi-17 , mfi-395 , k-8 and jf-17 thunder aircraft . pakistan also has the capability to design and manufacture both armed and unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles . in the people 's republic of china , beijing , xi'an , chengdu , shanghai , shenyang and nanchang are major research and manufacture centers of the aerospace industry . china has developed an extensive capability to design , test and produce military aircraft , missiles and space vehicles . despite the cancellation in 1983 of the experimental shanghai y-10 , china is still developing its civil aerospace industry . the aircraft parts industry was born out of the sale of second-hand or used aircraft parts from the aerospace manufacture sector . within the united states there is a specific process that parts brokers or resellers must follow . this includes leveraging a certified repair station to overhaul and '' tag '' a part . this certification guarantees that a part was repaired or overhauled to meet oem specifications . once a part is overhauled its value is determined from the supply and demand of the aerospace market . when an airline has an aircraft on ground , the part that the airline requires to get the plane back into service becomes invaluable . this can drive the market for specific parts . there are several online marketplaces that assist with the commodity selling of aircraft parts . in the aerospace and defense industry , much consolidation has occurred at the end of the 20th century , going into the 21st century . between 1988 and 2011 , more than 6,068 mergers & acquisitions with a total known value of 678 billion usd have been announced worldwide . the largest transactions have been : the acquisition of rockwell collins by united technologies corporation for 30.0 bil . usd in 2018 the acquisition of goodrich corporation by united technologies corporation for 16.2 bil . usd in 2011 the merger of allied signal with honeywell in a stock swap valued 15.6 bil . usd in 1999 the merger of boeing with mcdonnell valued at 13.4 bil . usd in 1996 the acquisition of marconi electronic systems , a subsidiary of gec , by british aerospace for 12.9 bil . usd in 1999 ( now called : bae systems ) the acquisition of hughes aircraft by raytheon for 9.5 bil . usd in 1997 . technology . multiple technologies and innovations are used in aerospace , many of them pioneered around world war ii : patented by short brothers , to improve low-speed performance , a de havilland dh4 was modified by handley page to a monoplane with high-lift devices : full-span leading-edge slats and trailing-edge flaps ; in 1924 , fowler flaps that extend backward and downward were invented in the us , and used on the lockheed model 10 electra while in 1943 forward-hinged leading-edge krueger flaps were invented in germany and later used on the boeing 707 . the 1927 large propeller research tunnel at naca langley confirmed that the landing gear was a major source of drag , in 1930 the boeing monomail featured a retractable gear . the flush rivet displaced the domed rivet in the 1930s and pneumatic rivet guns work in combination with a heavy reaction bucking bar ; not depending on plastic deformation , specialist rivets were developed to improve fatigue life as shear joints like the hi-lok , threaded pins tightened until a collar breaks off with enough torque . first flown in 1935 , the queen bee was a radio-controlled target drone derived from the tiger moth for flak training ; the ryan firebee was a jet-powered target drone developed into long-range reconnaissance uavs : the ryan model 147 fire fly and lightning bug ; the israeli iai scout and tadiran mastiff launched a line of battlefield uavs including the iai searcher ; developed from the general atomics gnat long-endurance uav for the cia , the mq-1 predator led to the armed mq-9 reaper . at the end of world war i , piston engine power could be boosted by compressing intake air with a compressor , also compensating for decreasing air density with altitude , improved with 1930s turbochargers for the boeing b-17 the 1937 hindenburg disaster ended the era of passenger airships but the us navy used airships for anti-submarine warfare and airborne early warning into the 1960s , while small airships continue to be used for aerial advertising , sightseeing flights , surveillance and research , and the airlander 10 or the lockheed martin lmh-1 continue to be developed . as us airlines were interested in high-altitude flying in the mid-1930s , the lockheed xc-35 with a pressurized cabin was tested in 1937 and the boeing 307 stratoliner was developed as the first pressurized airliner . in 1933 , plexiglas , a transparent acrylic plastic , was introduced in germany and shortly before world war ii , was first used for aircraft windshields as it is lighter than glass , and the bubble canopy improved fighter pilots visibility . in january 1930 , royal air force pilot and engineer frank whittle filed a patent for a gas turbine aircraft engine with an inlet , compressor , combustor , turbine and nozzle , while an independent turbojet was developed by researcher hans von ohain in germany ; both engines ran within weeks in early 1937 and the heinkel hes 3-propelled heinkel he 178 experimental aircraft made its first flight on aug 27 , 1939 while the whittle w.1-powered gloster e.28/39 prototype flew on may 15 , 1941 . in 1935 , britain demonstrated aircraft radio detection and ranging and in 1940 the raf introduced the first vhf airborne radars on bristol blenheims , then higher-resolution microwave-frequency radar with a cavity magnetron on bristol beaufighters in 1941 , and in 1959 the radar-homing hughes aim-4 falcon became the first us guided missile on the convair f-106 . in the early 1940s , british hurricane and spitfire pilots wore g-suits to prevent g-loc due to blood pooling in the lower body in high g situations ; mayo clinic researchers developed air-filled bladders to replace water-filled bladders and in 1943 the us military began using pressure suits from the david clark company . the modern ejection seat was developed during world war ii , a seat on rails ejected by rockets before deploying a parachute , in 1942 , numerical control machining was conceived by machinist john t . parsons to cut complex structures from solid blocks of alloy , rather than assembling them , improving quality , reducing weight , and saving time and cost to produce bulkheads or wing skins . in world war ii , the german v-2 combined gyroscopes , an accelerometer and a primitive computer for real-time inertial navigation allowing dead reckoning without reference to landmarks or guide stars , leading to packaged imus for spacecraft and aircraft . the uk miles m.52 supersonic aircraft was to have an afterburner , augmenting a turbojet thrust by burning additional fuel in the nozzle , but was cancelled in 1946 . in 1935 , german aerodynamicist adolf busemann proposed using swept wings to reduce high-speed drag and the messerschmitt p.1101 fighter prototype was 80 % complete by the end of world war ii ; the later us north american f-86 and boeing b-47 flew in 1947 , as the soviet mig-15 , and the british de havilland comet in 1949 . in 1951 , the avro jetliner featured an ice protection system from goodyear through electro-thermal resistances in the wing and tail leading edges ; jet aircraft use hot engine bleed air and lighter aircraft use pneumatic deicing boots or weep anti-icing fluid on propellers , wing and tail leading edges . in 1954 , bell labs developed the first transistorized airborne digital computer , tradic for the us boeing b-52 and in the 1960s raytheon built the mit-developed apollo guidance computer ; the mil-std-1553 avionics digital bus was defined in 1973 then first used in the general dynamics f-16 , while the civil arinc 429 was first used in the boeing 757/b767 and airbus a310 in the early 1980s . after world war ii , the initial promoter of photovoltaic power for spacecraft , hans k . ziegler , was brought to the us under operation paperclip along wernher von braun and vanguard 1 was its first application in 1958 , later enhanced in space-deployable structures like the international space station solar arrays of . to board an airliner , jet bridges in the 1950s , to improve thrust and fuel efficiency , the jet engine airflow was divided into a core stream and a bypass stream with a lower velocity for better propulsive efficiency : the first was the rolls-royce conway with a 0.3 bpr on the boeing 707 in 1960 , followed by the pratt & whitney jt3d with a 1.5 bpr and , derived from the j79 , the general electric cj805 powered the convair 990 with a 28 % lower cruise fuel burn ; bypass ratio improved to the 9.3 bpr rolls-royce trent xwb , the 10:1 bpr ge9x and the pratt & whitney gtf with high-pressure ratio cores . functional safety . functional safety relates to a part of the general safety of a system or a piece of equipment . it implies that the system or equipment can be operated properly and without causing any danger , risk , damage or injury . functional safety is crucial in the aerospace industry , which allows no compromises or negligence . in this respect , supervisory bodies , such as the european aviation safety agency ( easa ) , european aviation safety agency regulate the aerospace market with strict certification standards . this is meant to reach and ensure the highest possible level of safety . the standards as 9100 in america , en 9100 on the european market or jisq 9100 in asia particularly address the aerospace and aviation industry . these are standards applying to the functional safety of aerospace vehicles . some companies are therefore specialized in the certification , inspection verification and testing of the vehicles and spare parts to ensure and attest compliance with the appropriate regulations . spinoffs . spinoffs refer to any technology that is a direct result of coding or products created by nasa and redesigned for an alternate purpose . these technological advancements are one of the primary results of the aerospace industry , with 5.2 billion worth of revenue generated by spinoff technology , including computers and cellular devices . these spinoffs have applications in a variety of different fields including medicine , transportation , energy , consumer goods , public safety and more . nasa publishes an annual report called '' spinoffs '' , regarding many of the specific products and benefits to the aforementioned areas in an effort to highlight some of the ways funding is put to use . for example , in the most recent edition of this publication , '' spinoffs 2015 '' , endoscopes are featured as one of the medical derivations of aerospace achievement . this device enables more precise and subsequently cost-effective neurosurgery by reducing complications through a minimally invasive procedure that abbreviates hospitalization . . see also . aerodynamics aeronautics aerospace engineering aircraft astronautics newspace space agencies ( list of ) space exploration spacecraft wiktionary : aviation , aerospace , and aeronautical terms . references . external links .