Burbot

etymology . the name burbot comes from the latin word barba , meaning beard , referring to its single chin whisker , or barbel . its generic and specific names , lota lota , comes from the old french lotte fish , which is also named '' barbot '' in old french . description . with an appearance like a cross between a catfish and an eel , the burbot has a serpent-like body , but is easily distinguished by a single barbel on the chin . the body is elongated and laterally compressed , with a flattened head and single , tube-like projection for each nostril . the mouth is wide , with both upper and lower jaws having many small teeth . burbot have two soft dorsal fins , with the first being low and short , and the second being much longer . the anal fin is low and almost as long as the dorsal fin . the caudal fin is rounded , the pectoral fins are fan-shaped , and pelvic fins are narrow with an elongated second fin ray . having such small fins relative to body size indicates a benthic lifestyle with low swimming endurance , unable to withstand strong currents . geographic distribution . burbot have circumpolar distribution above 40°n . populations are continuous from france across europe and asia to the bering strait . in north america , burbot range from the seward peninsula in alaska to new brunswick along the atlantic coast . burbot are most common in streams and lakes of north america and europe . they are fairly common in lake erie , but are also found in the other great lakes . record burbot comes from lake michigan waters ( december 10 , 2020 ) chicago sun times recent genetic analysis suggests the geographic pattern of burbot may indicate multiple species or subspecies , making this single taxon somewhat misleading . . united kingdom . in the united kingdom , the burbot is possibly extirpated . the last recorded capture was a specimen weighing , on 14 september 1969 , taken at night by john dean , at the river great ouse , near aldreth , cambridgeshire . the burbot may still survive in the uk . the counties of cambridgeshire , norfolk and yorkshire ( particularly the river derwent or yorkshire ouse ) seem to be the strongest candidates for areas in which the species might yet survive . plans to reintroduce this freshwater member of the cod family back into british waters are under investigation . . ecology . habitat . burbot live in large , cold rivers , lakes , and reservoirs , primarily preferring freshwater habitats , but able to thrive in brackish environments for spawning . during the summer , they are typically found in the colder water below the thermocline . in lake superior , burbot can live at depths below . as benthic fish , they tolerate an array of substrate types , including mud , sand , rubble , boulder , silt , and gravel , for feeding . adults construct extensive burrows in the substrate for shelter during the day . burbot are active crepuscular hunters . burbot populations are adfluvial during the winter , and they migrate to near-shore reefs and shoals to spawn , preferring spawning grounds of sand or gravel . . life history . burbot reach sexual maturity at between four and seven years of age . spawning season typically occurs between december and march , often under ice at extremely low temperatures ranging between 1 and 4°c . though a relatively short season lasting from two to three weeks , burbot spawn multiple times , but not every year . as broadcast spawners , burbot do not have an explicit nesting site , but rather release eggs and sperm into the water column to drift and settle . when spawning , many male burbot gather around one or two females , forming a spawning ball . writhing in the open water , males and females simultaneously release sperm and eggs . depending on water temperatures , the incubation period of the eggs lasts from 30 to 128 days . fertilized eggs then drift until they settle into cracks and voids in the substrate . depending on body size , female burbot fecundity ranges from 63,000 to 3,478,000 eggs for each clutch . rate of growth , longevity , and age of sexual maturity of burbot are strongly correlated with water temperature ; large , older individuals produce more eggs than small , younger individuals . eggs are round with a large oil globule , about in diameter and have an optimal incubation range between 1 and 7 °c ( 34 and 45 °f ) . newly hatched burbot larvae are pelagic , passively drifting in the open water . habitats about 12 °c ( 54 °f ) are known to be intolerable for larval burbot . by night , juveniles are active , taking shelter during the day under rocks and other debris . growing rapidly in their first year , burbot reach between in total length by late fall . during their second year of life , burbot on average grow another . burbot transition from pelagic habitats to benthic environments as they reach adulthood , around five years old . average length of burbot by maturity is about , with slight sexual dimorphism . maximum lengths range between , and weights range from . diet and predators . at the larval stage , month-old burbot begin exogenous feeding , consuming food through the mouth and digesting in the intestines . burbot at the larval stage and into the juvenile stage feed on invertebrates based on size . under , burbot eat copepods and cladocerans , and above , zooplankton and amphipods . as adults , they are primarily piscivores , preying on lamprey , whitefish , grayling , young northern pike , suckers , stickleback , trout , and perch . at times , burbot also eat insects and other macroinvertebrates , and have been known to eat frogs , snakes , and birds . having such a wide diet is also correlated to their tendency to bite lures , making them very easy to catch . burbot are preyed upon by northern pike , muskellunge , and some lamprey species . commercial significance . a book written in 1590 in england notes that burbot were so common that they were used to feed hogs . the burbot is edible . in finland , its roe and liver are highly regarded as delicacies , as is the fish itself . an annual spearfishing tournament is held near roblin , manitoba . one of the highlights of the tournament is the fish fry , where the day 's catch is served deep-fried . when cooked , burbot meat tastes very similar to american lobster , leading to the burbot 's nickname of '' poor man 's lobster '' . in the 1920s , minnesota druggist theodore h . rowell and his father , joseph rowell , a commercial fisherman on lake of the woods , were using the burbot as feed for the foxes on joe 's blue fox farm . they discovered the burbot contained something that improved the quality of the foxes ' furs ; this was confirmed by the fur buyers , who commented that these furs were superior to other furs they were seeing . the burbot is a tenacious predator , which sometimes attacks other fish of almost the same size , and as such , can be a nuisance fish in waters where it is not native . recent discoveries of burbot in the green river at flaming gorge reservoir in utah have concerned wildlife biologists , who fear the burbot could decimate the sport-fish population in what is recognized as one of the world 's top brown trout fisheries , because it often feeds on the eggs of other fish in the lake , such as sockeye salmon . the utah division of fish and game has instituted a '' no release '' '' catch and kill '' regulation for the burbot in utah waterways . however , the regulations have been found to be largely unenforceable . the town of walker , minnesota , holds an international eelpout festival every winter on leech lake . '' annual international eelpout festival . '' annual international eelpout festival . 26 april 2008 . 29 may 2008 the festival received national attention on 4 march 2011 , when a correspondent from the tonight show with jay leno did a segment on the event . conservation status . burbot populations are difficult to study , due to their deep habitats and reproduction under ice . although burbot global distribution is widespread and abundant , many populations have been threatened or extirpated . as the burbot lacks popularity in commercial fishing , many regions do not even consider management plans . pollution and habitat change , such as river damming , appear to be the primary causes for riverine burbot population declines , while pollution and the adverse effects of invasive species have the greatest influence on lacustrine populations . management of burbot is on low priority , being nonexistent in some regions . . references . external links . experts to discuss reintroduction of burbot to uk , matt clarke , practical fishkeeping magazine record burbot comes from lake michigan waters ( december 10 , 2020 ) chicago sun times