Mount Kilimanjaro

fauna and flora . animals . large animals are rare on kilimanjaro and are more frequent in the forests and lower parts of the mountain . elephants and cape buffaloes are among the animals that can be potentially hazardous to trekkers . bushbucks , chameleons , dik-diks , duikers , mongooses , sunbirds , and warthogs have also been reported . zebras , leopards and hyenas have been observed sporadically on the shira plateau . specific species associated with the mountain include the kilimanjaro shrew and the chameleon kinyongia tavetana . . vegetation . natural forests cover about on kilimanjaro . in the foothill area maize , beans , sunflowers and , on the western side , wheat are cultivated . remnants of the former savanna vegetation with acacia , combretum , terminalia and grewia also occur . between and , coffee also appears as part of the '' chagga home gardens '' agroforestry . native vegetation at this altitude range ( strombosia , newtonia , and entandrophragma ) is limited to inaccessible valleys and gorges and is completely different from vegetation at higher altitudes . on the southern slope montane forests first contain ocotea usambarensis as well as ferns and epiphytes , farther up in cloud forests podocarpus latifolius , hagenia abyssinica and erica excelsa grow as well as fog-dependent mosses . on the drier northern slopes olive , croton-calodendrum , cassipourea , and juniperus form forests in order of increasing altitude . between and lie erica bush and heathlands , followed by helichrysum until . neophytes have been observed , including poa annua . records from the maundi crater at indicate that the vegetation of kilimanjaro has varied over time . forest vegetation retreated during the last glacial maximum and the ericaceous vegetation belt lowered by between 42,000 and 30,000 years ago because of the drier and colder conditions . the tussock grassland is an area on the slopes of mount kilimanjaro that contains many unique species of vegetation such as the water holding cabbage . climate . the climate of kilimanjaro is influenced by the height of the mountain , which allows the simultaneous influence of the equatorial trade winds and the high altitude anti-trades ; and by the isolated position of the mountain . kilimanjaro has mountain breeze and valley breeze , a regimen stronger on the southern than the northern side of the mountain . the flatter southern flanks are more extended and affect the atmosphere more strongly . kilimanjaro has two distinct rainy seasons , one from march to may and another around november . the northern slopes receive much less rainfall than the southern ones . the lower southern slope receives annually , rising to at altitude and peaking '' partly over '' in the forest belt at . in the alpine zone , annual precipitation decreases to . the average temperature in the summit area is approximately . nighttime surface temperatures on the northern ice field ( nif ) fall on average to with an average daytime high of . during nights of extreme radiative cooling , the nif can cool to as low as . snowfall can occur at any time of year but is mostly associated with northern tanzania 's two rainy seasons . precipitation in the summit area occurs principally as snow and graupel of per year and ablates within days or years . . climatic zones . bushland / lower slope : , 800 m – 1,800 m ( 2,600 & nbsp ; ft – 5,900 & nbsp ; ft ) ; rainforest : 1,800 m – 2,800 m ( 5,900 & nbsp ; ft – 9,200 & nbsp ; ft ) ; heather / moorland : 2,800 m – 4,000 m ( 9,200 & nbsp ; ft – 13,100 & nbsp ; ft ) ; alpine desert : 4,000 m – 5,000 m ( 13,100 & nbsp ; ft– 16,400 & nbsp ; ft ) ; arctic : 5,000 m – 5,895 m ( 16,400 & nbsp ; ft – 19,300 & nbsp ; ft ) . . tourism industry . kilimanjaro national park generated us 51 million in revenue in 2013 , the second-most of any tanzanian national park . the tanzania national parks authority reported that the park recorded 57,456 tourists during the 2011–12 budget year , of whom 16,425 hiked the mountain ; the park 's general management plan specifies an annual capacity of 28,470 . the mountain hikers generated irregular and seasonal jobs for about 11,000 guides , porters , and cooks in 2007 . concerns have been raised about their poor working conditions and inadequate wages of these workers . due to its popularity as destination , the tanzanian and kenyan governments have invested in road infrastructure to improve accessibility to kilimanjaro national park . in tanzania , kilimanjaro international airport also serves as an important transportation hub . there are seven official trekking routes by which to ascend and descend kilimanjaro : lemosho , lemosho western-breach , machame , marangu , mweka , rongai , shira , and umbwe . the machame route can be completed in six or seven days , lemosho in six to eight , and the northern circuit routes in seven or more days . the lemosho route can also be continued via the western-breach , summitting via the western side of the mountain . the western-breach is more secluded and avoids the 6-hour midnight ascent to the summit ( like other routes ) . the rongai is the easiest of the camping routes . the marangu is also relatively easy , if frequently busy ; accommodation is in shared huts . the lemosho western-breach route commences on the western side of kilimanjaro at lemosho and continues to the summit via the western-breach route . . climbing records . the oldest person to climb mount kilimanjaro is anne lorimor , who reached uhuru peak 3.14 p.m . local time on 18 july 2019 aged 89 years and 37 days . the oldest man to summit the mountain is the american robert wheeler , who was 85 years and 201 days when he summited on 2 october 2014 . maxwell j . ojerholm of massachusetts , usa reached uhuru peak , the true summit , unassisted at the age of ten years old on july 4 , 2009 taking the difficult machame route . colin m . barker of missouri , usa , later completed the same route at the age of ten years old on december 22 , 2020 . theodore margaroli from london age 10 reached the summit unassisted by the western breach , the hardest but most scenic route in 2019 . { { records title youngest person to climb mount kilimanjaro via the western breach route url despite an age-limit of 10 years for a climbing permit , keats boyd from los angeles reached the summit on 21 january 2008 at the age of 7 . this record was equaled by montannah kenney from texas in march 2018 . the fastest ascent and the fastest roundtrip have been recorded by the swiss-ecuadorian mountain guide karl egloff . on 13 august 2014 , after guiding a party to the summit the previous days , he ran from umbwe gate to the top in 4 hours and 56 minutes and returned to the mweka gate at in a total time of 6 hours , 42 minutes and 24 seconds . route : kilimanjaro at fastestknowntime.com matt hart , where in the world did karl egloff come from ? , outside 5 , mar 2015 previous records , using the same route , were held by spanish mountain runner kílian jornet ( ascent in 5:23:50 , roundtrip 7:14 on 29 september 2010 ) and by tanzanian guide simon mtuy ( an unsupported roundtrip in 9:21 on 22 february 2006 ) . swiss sets new kilimanjaro fastest ascent and descent record at climbkilimanjaroguide.com the female roundtrip record is held by fernanda maciel from brazil in a time of 10 hours and 6 minutes . her ascent time of 7:08 was broken on 23 february 2018 by the danish ultramarathon runner kristina schou madsen with a time of 6:52:54 from mweka gate . sean mccoy , woman sets speed record up kilimanjaro at gearjunkie.com several climbs by disabled people have drawn attention . wheelchair user bernard goosen from south africa scaled kilimanjaro in six days in 2007 . in 2012 , kyle maynard who has no forearms or lower legs , crawled unassisted to the summit of mount kilimanjaro . in 2020 , a team featuring two double above-knee amputees , hari budha magar and justin oliver davis , summited kilimanjaro . it took them six days to cover the distance to the summit . in 2021 pakistani climber asad ali memon the first pakistani and asian to climb kilimanjaro in 24 hours on february 14 , 2021 . . safety . though the climb is not technically as challenging as the himalayas or andes , the high elevation , low temperature , and occasional high winds can make kilimanjaro a difficult trek . acclimatization is required , and even experienced and physically fit trekkers may suffer some degree of altitude sickness . a study of people attempting to reach the summit of kilimanjaro in july and august 2005 found that 61.3 percent succeeded and 77 percent experienced acute mountain sickness ( ams ) . a retrospective study of 917 persons who attempted to reach the summit via the lemosho or machame routes found that 70.4 percent experienced ams , defined in this study to be headache , nausea , diarrhea , vomiting , or loss of appetite . kilimanjaro 's summit is well above the altitude at which life-threatening high altitude pulmonary edema ( hape ) or high altitude cerebral edema ( hace ) , the most severe forms of ams , can occur . these health risks are increased substantially by excessively fast climbing schedules motivated by high daily national park fees , busy holiday travel schedules , and the lack of permanent shelter on most routes . the six-day machame route , which involves one night of '' sleeping low '' , may delay the onset of ams but does not ultimately prevent its occurrence . falls on steep portions of the mountain and rock slides have killed trekkers . for this reason , the route via the arrow glacier was closed for several years , reopening in december 2007 . the improper disposal of human waste on the mountain environment has created a health hazard , necessitating the boiling of all water . according to the kilimanjaro christian medical centre in moshi , 25 people died from january 1996 to october 2003 while climbing the mountain . seventeen were female and eight were male , ranging in age from 29 to 74 . fourteen died from advanced high altitude illness , including one with hace , five with hape , and six with both hace and hape . the remaining eleven deaths resulted from '' trauma ( 3 ) , myocardial infarction ( 4 ) , pneumonia ( 2 ) , cardio-pulmonary failure of other underlying cause ( 1 ) , and acute appendicitis ( 1 ) . the overall mortality rate was an 13.6 per 100,000 climbers . '' file : kili warning signs px1000.jpg caution signs at the machamé trailhead . file : uhurupeak.jpg sign at uhuru peak , indicating to trekkers that they have reached the top . file : hans meyer memorial.jpg memorial recognizing the german hans meyer as the first european to '' conquer '' kilimanjaro file : uhuru peak mt . kilimanjaro 1.jpg kilimanjaro 's summit , uhuru peak . in popular culture . the snows of kilimanjaro is a 1936 short story by hemingway that references kilimanjaro . the story was adapted into a film in 1952 . under kilimanjaro is a non-fiction novel ( fictionalized memoir ) by ernest hemingway about his travels in the region . sia lives on kilimanjaro is a 1958 children 's book by astrid lindgren . kilimanjaro is mentioned in the 1982 song '' africa '' by toto . the lyrics state that the mountain '' rises like olympus above the serengeti '' , which is actually located far to the northwest of kilimanjaro . in the 1994 disney film the lion king , kilimanjaro can be seen in the background during the opening musical sequence , '' circle of life '' , as the film was set in tanzania . mount kilimanjaro that features in madagascar sequel , madagascar : escape 2 africa . in the halo video game series , a medal named '' killmanjaro '' is awarded to a player who gets seven multiplayer kills in a row within four seconds of each kill . the mountain itself also features in halo 3 . the mountain was shown in bbc 's africa . the 2010 tamil science fiction film enthiran featured a song kilimanjaro a 1969 monty python 's flying circus sketch features john cleese as an explorer , constantly prone to seeing double , organizing an expedition to climb '' both peaks of mt . kilimanjaro . '' he points out that a previous expedition , led by his brother , had intended to build a bridge between the two peaks . -- > . special events . according to the tanzania national parks authority , the first wedding performed on the mountain below the summit took place on 21 september 2014 , when an american couple exchanged vows at shira 2 camp . in 2011 , a couple had exchanged their vows at the summit . on 26 september 2014 , a new world record for the highest-ever cricket match was set when a group of international cricketers played on a flat crater on the mountain at an elevation of .