Jugurtha

etymology . the numidian name jugurtha matches the ancient naming traditions of berber peoples and is likely analyzable as the libyco-berber word ⵢⵤⵔⵝⵏ yugurtən “ he exceeded them ” , connected to the stem agər/ugər “ to exceed ” in modern berber languages . “ jugurtha ” encyclopedie berbére libyco-berber alphabet of tunisia . background . numidia was a region of north africa roughly within the boundaries of what is now western tunisia and eastern algeria . indigenous inhabitants of numidia remained semi-nomadic , often identified as berbers , until masinissa , chief of the massaesyli tribe based near cirta , who supported rome during the second punic war ( 206 bc ) against the nearby punics of carthage , used the support of rome to establish a kingdom . to do so masinissa defeated the rival chief syphax with the help of famed roman general scipio africanus in 203 bc . numidian horsemanship and cavalry tactics , as asserted by polybius , contributed greatly to the development of cavalry tactics in the roman army which helped them to victory in the second punic war . his alliance with rome began to fray in the mid-second century bc among roman fears of masinissa 's ambitions and of carthage 's resurgence on the part of cato the elder . masinissa died before any actual breach in the treaty in early 148 bc , but the suspicion of numidia lasted in rome to affect jugurtha . masinissa was succeeded by his son micipsa . jugurtha , micipsa 's adopted son ( mastanabal 's illegitimate son and thusly masinissa 's illegitimate grandson ) , was so popular among the numidians that micipsa sent him away to hispania to assist a campaign of scipio aemilianus in a poetic parallel to masinissa 's alliance with scipio africanus as an attempt to mitigate his influence . unfortunately for micipsa , this only served jugurtha , who used his time in spain to make several influential roman contacts . under scipio aemilianus at the siege of numantia ( 134 & ndash ; 133 bc ) , serving alongside gaius marius , jugurtha learned of romans ' weakness for bribes and that powerful friends in rome can go a long way . he famously described rome as '' urbem venalem et mature perituram , si emptorem invenerit '' ( '' a city for sale and doomed to quick destruction , if it should find a buyer , '' sallust , jug . 35.10 ) . rise to power . when micipsa died in 118 bc , he was succeeded jointly by jugurtha and his two sons ( jugurtha 's adoptive-brothers ) hiempsal and adherbal . hiempsal and jugurtha quarrelled immediately after the death of micipsa . jugurtha had hiempsal killed , which led to open war with adherbal . after jugurtha defeated him in open battle , adherbal fled to rome for help . the roman officials settled the fight by dividing numidia into two parts , probably in 116 , but this settlement was tainted by accusations that the roman officials accepted bribes to favor jugurtha . among the officials found guilty was lucius opimius ( who , as consul in 121 bc , had presided over events which led to the death of gaius gracchus ) . plutarch . lives of tiberius and gaius gracchus , c . 39 . in : waterfield , robin . plutarch , roman lives , pp . 114 , 458 ( note to p . 114 ) jugurtha was assigned the western half ; later roman propaganda claimed that this half was also richer , but in truth it was both less populated and less developed . . war with rome . image : sulla coin2.jpg thumb denarius coin , reverse : sulla seated left on a raised seat ; before him kneels bocchus , offering an olive-branch ; behind , jugurtha kneeling left , 56 bc . by 112 bc jugurtha resumed his war with adherbal , penning the latter up in his capital of cirta . adherbal was encouraged to hold out by a corps of italian residents , in expectation of military aid arriving from rome . however , roman troops were engaged in the cimbrian war and the senate merely sent two successive embassies to remonstrate with jugurtha who delayed until he had captured cirta . his troops then massacred many residents including the italians . this brought jugurtha into direct conflict with rome , which sent troops under the consul lucius calpurnius bestia . although the romans made significant inroads into numidia , their heavy infantry was unable to inflict any significant casualties on jugurtha 's army which included large numbers of light cavalry . m . cary & h.h . scullard , a history of rome , 3rd ed ( 1975 ) , pp . 214–6 , immediately following the sack of cirta , bestia accepted an offer of negotiations from jugurtha , a highly favourable peace treaty which raised suspicions of bribery once more . the local roman commander was summoned to rome to face corruption charges brought by his political rival gaius memmius , who also induced the tribal assembly to vote safe conduct to jugurtha to come to rome to give evidence against the officials suspected of succumbing to bribery . however once jugurtha had reached rome , another tribune used his veto to prevent evidence being given . jugurtha also severely damaged his reputation and weakened his position by using his time in rome to set gangs onto a cousin , named massiva , a potential rival for the numidian throne . the public opinion of roman citizens and elites , among the most powerful political forces in republican rome , turned against him and jugurtha was once again at war with the republic . war again broke out between numidia and the roman republic , and several legions were dispatched to north africa under the command of the consul , quintus caecilius metellus numidicus . the war dragged out into a long and seemingly endless campaign , as the romans tried to inflict a decisive defeat on jugurtha . a series of incompetent generals of rome began this renewed war ; in 110 bc jugurtha forced capitulation of an entire army being led by aulus pstumius albinus and drove the romans out of numidia entirely . metellus won several battles against jugurtha in 109 bc but failed to spur jugurtha to surrender . frustrated at the stagnation and likely facing political pressure from rome , metellus 's lieutenant , gaius marius , returned to rome to seek election as consul in 107 bc . after winning the election , marius returned to numidia to take control of the war which jugurtha was prolonging through successful guerrilla warfare . jugurtha was allied with his western neighbor mauretania by marriage , bocchus i both his ally and father-in-law , an age-old diplomatic move . at the outset of the major war ( 112–105 bc ) , bocchus stood out of the way of the issue , eventually joining jugurtha in the fighting against marius in 107 bc . this was short-lived support , though , as in 105 bc marius sent his quaestor , sulla , to mauretania in order to weaken jugurtha . bocchus agreed to betray jugurtha and hand him over to sulla in exchange for extension of his lands into western numidia to the mulucha river . this brought the war to a close ; jugurtha was brought to rome in chains and was paraded through the streets as gaius marius ' roman triumph after which his royal robes were removed and his earrings were ripped off . he lost an ear lobe in the process . he was then thrown into the tullianum , where he died of starvation in 104 bc . the poison king : the life and legend of mithradates by adrienne mayor , page 112 he was survived by his son , oxyntas . literary references . jugurtha features in one of arthur rimbaud 's earliest surviving poems . rimbaud was a french poet living in the mid- to late nineteenth century , his father a captain in the french army . the poem is a latin ode to the numidian king , contextualized to rimbaud 's modern context by having the ghost of jugurtha , a la hamlet , appear to a baby abdelkader al-jazairi ( who is unnamed in the poem ) a hero of the algerian struggle for independence against france . the poem opens : . see also . battle of the muthul bomilcar ( 2nd century bc ) jugurtha tableland jugurthine war sallust , de bello iugurthino tacfarinas . references . external links . livius.org : jugurtha penelope.uchicago.edu : the war with jugurtha