List of political parties in the Netherlands

general overview . the people 's party for freedom and democracy ( vvd ) is a conservative-liberal party . as a centre-right movement , it attaches great importance to private enterprise , economic liberalism and the freedom of the individual in political , social , and economic affairs . the party is generally supportive of european economic integration , but is less supportive of political integration . the party 's leader is mark rutte . vvd is a member of the liberal international and the alliance of liberals and democrats for europe party . the labour party ( pvda ) , a social democracy party , and centre-left in orientation . its program is based on more social , political , and economic equality for all citizens . former pvda-prime minister joop den uyl has called it an '' equal distribution of knowledge , income and power . '' in recent years the pvda has espoused a centrist third way programme . the pvda is generally supportive of european integration . although called the labour party , it has no formal links to the trade unions . in practice , however , strong links exist , with pvda politicians often beginning their careers in the fnv trade union . the party is led by lilianne ploumen . the pvda was a member of the socialist international until it delisted in 2014 . nowadays the party is a member of the progressive alliance and the party of european socialists . the party for freedom ( pvv ) is a right-wing populism and national-liberal party . it was founded by geert wilders , who split from the vvd in 2004 . the pvv seeks to lower taxation . it is eurosceptical and seeks to limit immigration , especially from islamic and non-western countries . the party is part of the identity and democracy group . the christian democratic appeal is a christian democratic party on the centre to centre-right . it supports free enterprise and holds to the principle that government activity should supplement but not supplant communal action by citizens . on the political spectrum , the cda sees its philosophy as standing between the '' individualism '' of the vvd and the '' statism '' of the labour party . the cda favours european economic , cultural , and political integration . the cda is a member of the centrist democrat international and the european people 's party . the socialist party ( sp ) is a left-wing populism party . in the 1970s and 1980s , it was a maoism party supported by the people 's republic of china ( prc ) . but in 1991 the sp dropped its communist course , and chose a more independent and less radical democratic socialism course , having long since denounced maoism and the prc . the party itself has called it a move '' from socialism to a social-ism . '' the party opposes what it sees as the european superstate . the sp operated as an independent party within the european united left-nordic green left group until the 2019 european elections , when it lost all seats in the european parliament . lilian marijnissen is the leader of the sp . greenleft combines green politics with left-wing ideals . the party was founded in 1990 as a merger of the radical , pacifist , communist , and evangelical left parties . the current leader jesse klaver opposes what he calls '' economism '' , where important values seem to be secondary to economic growth . greenleft is a member of the global greens and the european green party . the christian union ( cu ) is a social conservativism christian democratic party , which mostly concentrates on ethical issues , such as a resistance against abortion , euthanasia , and gay marriage . in other areas ( e.g . immigration and the environment ) , the party often is closer to the left-wing parties . it is sceptical about european integration . the cu was operating within the european conservatives and reformists group until after the 2019 european elections when it joined the european people 's party group . the party is a founding member of the european christian political movement . democrats 66 ( d66 ) has had widely fluctuating electoral fortunes since the party 's founding in 1966 . the party was founded as a movement that advocated direct democracy and electoral reform . today 's it is a centrist social liberal party , professing a pro-european platform , progressive views on , for example , euthanasia , organ donation , ecological sustainability and ethnic and religious tolerance . sigrid kaag leads the party . d66 is a member of the liberal international and the alliance of liberals and democrats for europe party . party for the animals ( pvdd ) is an animal rights party , which can be labeled as a one issue-party , though it claims not to be . the focus of the party is on animal welfare , protecting the environment and conservation . the party also has distinctive points of view about education , privacy , health care and the economy . its founder is marianne thieme . its current leader is esther ouwehand . the party is currently part of the european united left–nordic green left group . the reformed political party ( sgp ) is a party of the christian right , with stronger ethical points of view than the christianunion . although a small party on a national level , it is an important political power in some orthodox reformed municipalities . the party sees governments ( local , regional , national and international ) as unconditional servants of god . the party bases all of its views directly on the bible . the party opposes european integration and operates within the european conservatives and reformists group and is a member of the european christian political movement . kees van der staaij leads the sgp . 50plus ( 50+ ) is a populist pensioners ' party . the party takes a centrist position in the political spectrum which combines social democracy , social liberal and social conservative positions . it was led by henk krol who left the party in may 2020 due to internal quarrel . he then started the party for the future . the party was part of the european people 's party group until the party 's only mep joined the christian democratic appeal . denk , a small political party mainly focusing on and promoting multiculturalism and social integration . the party also supports environmentalism and international justice . tunahan kuzu founded the party after splitting from the pvda in 2014 . the current leader is farid azarkan . forum for democracy , a right-wing , populist , national conservative party . in favour of lower taxes , military investment and expansion , electoral reform , offering a referendum on european union membership , reinstating border controls and ending what it perceives as mass immigration . the party was founded and led by thierry baudet until he resigned in november 2020 . the party is a member of the european conservatives and reformists party and part of the erc-group . the independent senate group ( osf ) is a parliamentary party in the dutch senate with one senator , representing several provincial parties and advocating a regionalist agenda . the party 's current senator gerben gerbrandy is a member of the civic nationalistic frisian national party . national political parties . parties represented in the states general . roomsch-katholieke staatspartij ( rksp ) ( roman catholic political party ; predecessor of kvp ) seniors 2000 ( seniors 2000 ) solide multiculturele partij ( smp ) sociaal-democratische arbeiders partij ( sdap ) ( social democratic workers party ; merged into labour party ( netherlands ) ) sociaal-democratische bond ( social democratic league ; merged into the sdap ) sociaal liberale partij ( slp ) ( social liberal party ) socialistische party ( socialist party active before world war ii , not the current socialist party ) solidair '93 ( solidarity '93 ; appears not to have contested elections after 1998 ) unie 55+ ( general senior union/union 55+ ) verbond tot democratisering der weermacht ( alliance for the democratization of the army ) verbond van communisten in nederland ( vcn ) ( league of communists in the netherlands ; split from the communist party of the netherlands ( cpn ) in 1983 and merged with the remains of the cpn in 1992 to form the new communist party of the netherlands ( ncpn ) ) verbond voor nationaal herstel ( alliance for national reconstruction ) voornederland ( vnl ) ( for netherlands ) vrijzinnig democratische bond ( vdb ) ( freethinking democratic league ; merged into labour party ( netherlands ) ) free anti revolutionary party ( free anti revolutionary party ; merged into christian historical party ) . see also . politics of the netherlands list of political parties by country liberalism in the netherlands socialism in the netherlands christian democracy in the netherlands republicanism in the netherlands . references . external links . documentation centre for dutch political parties ( dnpp ) at university of groningen