Daikon

cultivation . the chinese and indian varieties tolerate higher temperatures than the japanese one . these varieties also grow well at lower elevations in east africa . if moisture is abundant , it can grow quickly ; otherwise , the flesh becomes overly tough and pungent . the variety long white icicle is available as seed in britain , and will grow very successfully in southern england , producing roots resembling a parsnip by midsummer in good garden soil in an average year . the roots can be stored for some weeks without the leaves if lifted and kept in a cool , dry place . if left in the ground , the texture tends to become woody , but the storage life of untreated whole roots is not long . certain varieties of daikon can be grown as a winter cover crop and green manure . these varieties are often named '' tillage radish '' because the plant grows a huge , penetrating root which effectively performs deep cultivation . the roots bring nutrients lower in the soil profile up into the higher reaches , and are good nutrient scavengers , so they are good partners with legumes instead of grasses ; if harsh winters occur , the root will decompose while in the soil , releasing early nitrogen stores in the spring . culinary use . in japan , many types of pickles are made with daikon roots , including takuan and bettarazuke . daikon roots can be served raw , in salads , or as sashimis which is prepared by meticulous . example photograph of the technique : is frequently used as a garnish , often mixed into various dippings such as ponzu , a soy sauce and citrus juice condiment . the pink spicy is daikon grated with chili pepper . simmered dishes are also popular such as oden . daikon that has been shredded and dried ( a common method of preserving food in japan ) is called . daikon radish sprouts are used raw for salad or garnishing sashimi . daikon leaves are frequently eaten as a green vegetable . they are thorny when raw , so softening methods such as pickling and stir frying are common . the daikon leaf is one of the festival of seven herbs , where it is called suzushiro . in chinese cuisine turnip cake and chai tow kway are made with daikon . the variety called mooli has a high water content , and some cookbooks recommend salting ( or sweetening , depending on the region and context ) and draining it before it is cooked . sometimes , mooli is used as a medium for elaborately carved garnishes . more commonly , daikon is referred as bailuobo ( 白蘿蔔 ) in mandarin or lobak in cantonese . bailuobo is used in a variety of dishes for its unique and mild flavour after being boiled and cooked . for soups , bailuobo can be seen in bailuobo-paigu soup ( 白蘿蔔排骨湯 ) , bailuobo-fanqie soup ( 白蘿蔔番茄湯 ) , bailuobo-doufu soup ( 白蘿蔔豆腐湯 ) etc . delicacies such as '' shredded bailuobo '' ( 白蘿蔔絲 ) and '' cut bailuobo '' ( 白蘿蔔塊 ) are popular domestic dishes too . similar to japanese cuisine , there are many types of pickles ( in mandarin chinese : 咸菜 xiáncài / 榨菜 zhàcài ) made with bailuobo , for example '' sour-sweet cut bailuobo '' ( 酸甜白蘿蔔塊 ) , '' spicy bailuobo '' ( 麻辣白蘿蔔 ) , bailuobo zhacai ( 白蘿蔔榨菜 ) , etc . in north india , daikon is a popular ingredient used to make sabji , stuffed paranthas , pakodas , salads , pickles , and as garnish . the plant 's leaves are used to make dal and kadhi , among other dishes . in south india , daikon is the principal ingredient in a variety of sambar , in which roundels of the radish are boiled with onions , tamarind pulp , lentils , and a special spice powder . when cooked , it can release a very strong odor . this soup , called mullangi sambar , ; literally , '' radish sambar '' ) is very popular and mixed with cooked rice to make a good meal . in vietnamese cuisine , sweet and sour pickled daikon and carrots or đồ chua ) are a common condiment in bánh mì sandwiches . in the philippines , the sour stew sinigang may include daikon . in pakistani cuisine , the young leaves of the daikon plant are boiled and flash-fried with a mixture of heated oil , garlic , ginger , red chili , and a variety of spices . the radish is eaten as a fresh salad , often seasoned with either salt and pepper , or chaat masala . in punjab province , daikon is used to stuff pan-fried breads known as paratha . daikon 's seed pods , called moongray in local languages , are also eaten as a stir-fried dish across the country . in bangladesh , fresh daikon is often finely grated and mixed with fresh chili , coriander , flaked steamed fish , lime juice , and salt . this light , refreshing preparation served alongside meals is known as mulo bhorta . fermenting radish normally releases a strong and noxious smell like bad flatulence or rotting cabbage . file : chai tow kway.jpg chai tow kway , stir-fried cubes of radish cake file : mizuna & daikon.jpg japanese mizuna and daikon salad file : pickled daikon.jpg mohn la jin , burmese pickled radish file : buri daikon.jpg buri daikon , japan file : daikon oden and beer by shrkflickr in kyoto.jpg daikon oden in kyoto , japan file : daikon chips ( 4258631306 ) . jpg daikon chips . nutritional information . daikon is very low in food energy . a 100-gram serving contains only 76 kilojoules or 18 calories ( 5 & nbsp ; cal/oz ) , but provides 27 % of the rda for vitamin & nbsp ; c . daikon also contains the active enzyme myrosinase . agricultural use . tillage radish leaves behind a cavity in the soil when the large tap root decays , making it easier for the following year 's crops , such as potatoes , to bore deeper into the soil . potatoes grown in a rotation with tillage radish do not experience growth restrictions associated with having a shallow hardpan soil , as the tillage radish can break the hardpan , making transfer of water and other important nutrients much easier for the root system . nutrient retention is another important feature of tillage radish . the large tap root is used to retain macro- and micro-nutrients , that would otherwise have the potential to be lost to leaching during the time when the field would otherwise be left empty . the nutrients from the root become readily available for the following year 's crop upon the decay of the radish , which can boost yields and reduce fertilizer costs . robert coffin , a potato industry consultant on prince edward island , suggests that growing tillage radish could help boost potato yields , because of the effect that the large tap root that grows in depth has on mitigating soil compaction . this makes it much easier for potatoes to grow to their full potential , and not be held back because of compaction issues in the soil . . other use . daikon is used in preparing metal surfaces for chemical patination , for example under the rokushō process .