Bashkirs

ethnonym . the etymology and indeed meaning of the endonym bashqort has been for a long time under discussion . the name of the people of bashkort has been known since the 10th century , most researchers etymologize the name as '' main/leader/head '' ( bash ) + '' wolf '' ( qort , old archaic word for the animal ) , thus '' wolf-leader '' ( from the totemic hero ancestor ) . by the folk interpretation in fact , the name seems to come from the legend regarding the migration of the first seven bashkir tribes from the syr-darya valley to the volga-ural region , the legend chants that the bashkirs , who dwelled in the arid syr-darya , were committed to the goddess of fertility of tengrism , ( referred as umay ) , umay , in order to reward them for their loyality , decided to donate them a prosperous , green , fertile land , protected by the legendary ural mountains ( in alignement with the famous bashkir epic poem '' ural-batyr '' ) , a wolf was sent to guide these tribes to their promised land , therefore the tribes followed the wolf , thus '' bash-qort '' ( '' head/lead ( ing ) '' + '' wolf '' ) . the 18th-century ethnographers v . n . tatishchev , p . i . richkov , and johann gottlieb georgi , seem to agree with this interpretation . other theories have been formulated in the years , but none of them seems to have some kind of folk foundation unlike the most prominent theory : in 1847 , the historian v . s . yumatov suggested the original meaning to be : '' beekeeper , beemaster '' ( '' qort '' has shifted meaning in the modern bashkir language , and it now means '' bee '' ) . historian and ethnologist a . e . alektorov ( 1885 ) suggested that bashqort meant '' distinct nation '' . anthropologist r . m . yusupov considered bashqort may have originally been an iranian compound word meaning : '' wolf-children '' or '' descendants of heroes '' , i.e . bacha '' descendant , child '' and gurd '' hero '' or gurg '' wolf '' . historian and archaeologist mikhail artamonov suggested that the word is a corruption of the name of the bušxk ' ( or bwsxk ) , a scythian tribe speaking iranian-that lived in the area now known as bashkortostan . peter b . golden , haggai ben-shammai & andrás róna-tas , the world of the khazars : new perspectives , leiden/boston , brill , 2007 , pp . 422 . the turkologist n . a . baskakov believed the term : '' bashqort '' to have consisted of two parts : '' badz ( a ) '' – brother-in-law '' and '' ( o ) gur '' meaning : '' brothers-in-law of the ugor magyars '' . according to the orientalist douglas morton dunlop , the ethnonym bashqort was derived from beshgur ( or bashgur ) which means '' five tribes in modern bashkir language . ethnologist n . v . bikbulatov suggested that the term originated from the name of a legendary khazar warlord named bashgird , who ruled an area centred on the yayıq river . ethnologist r . g . kuzeev derived the ethnonym from a compound of '' bash '' — '' main , head '' and '' qort '' — '' clan , tribe '' . historian and linguist andrás róna-tas argued the ethnonym '' bashkir '' to be a bulgar turkic reflex of the hungarian endonym magyar ( or the old hungarian majer ) . history . origins . the formation of the bashkir people was played by turkic tribes of south siberian central asian origin , who , before migrating to the southern urals , wandered for a considerable time in the syr darya steppes modern day central-southern kazakhstan , coming into contact with the pechenegs and kimak-kipchak tribes . therefore it is possible to note that the bashkir people originates from the same tribes which compose the modern kazakhs , kyrgyzes and nogais , but there has been a considerable cultural and a small ethnic exchange with oghuz tribes . the migration to the valley of the southern urals happened between the end of the 9th century and the beginning of the 10th century , in parallel to the great kipchak migration to the north . middle ages . the first report about bashkirs might have been found in the chinese chronicle book of sui : around 40 turkic tiele tribes were named ( 636 ad ) in '' a narration about the tiele people '' ; bashkirs might have included within that narration : if the tribal name 比干 ( mandarin bǐgān x -kɑn ) were read as 比千 ( bĭqiān x t͡sʰen ) , according to chinese scholar rui chuanming in the 7th century , bashkirs are also mentioned in '' ashkharatsuyts '' . however these citations may refer to the precursors of the kipchak bashkir tribes who wandered in the aral-syr darya region before the migration . the book of sui might be speaking about the precursors of these tribes when the turkic peoples were still wandering in south siberia from the 9th century , during the migration of the bashkirs to the volga-ural , the first arab and persian written reports about bashkirs commence . these include reports by sallam al-tardzhuman ( 9th century ) . 10th-century authors on the bashkir were : ahmad ibn fadlan , al-masudi , and abu zayd al-balkhi . in the 12th century , said al-andalusi and muhammad al-idrisi mentioned the bashkirs . the 13th-century authors ibn sa'id al-maghribi , yaqut al-hamawi and qazvini and the 14th-century authors al-dimashqi and abu ' l-fida wrote about bashkirs . the traveller sallam an at-tardzhuman visited bashkir lands and wrote in circa 840 the first written arab source on the bashkirs and a rough description of its borders . in the 10th century , persian abu zayd al-balkhi ( 10th century ) described bashkirs as a people divided into two groups : one inhabiting the southern urals , the other living on the danube plain near the boundaries of byzantium . ( these sources may have confused bashkirs with hungarians , since the area of modern bashkortostan is often referred as '' magna hungaria '' , the zone where the magyar tribes dwelled before their migration to europe ; it is believed that bashkirs may have come into contact with these magyar tribes , since some of the northern tribes of the modern bashkirs do have genetic correspondence with hungarians ) . ibn rustah , a contemporary of abu zayd al-balkhi , observed that bashkirs were an independent people occupying territories on both sides of the ural mountains ridge between volga , kama , and tobol rivers and upstream of the ural river . ahmad ibn fadlan , ambassador of the baghdad caliph al-muqtadir to the governor of volga bulgaria , wrote the first ethnographic description of the bashkir in 922 . the bashkirs , according to ibn fadlan , were a warlike and powerful people , which he and his companions ( a total of five thousand people , including military protection ) '' bewared . with the greatest threat '' . they were described as engaged in cattle breeding . according to ibn fadlan , the bashkirs worshipped twelve gods : winter , summer , rain , wind , trees , people , horses , water , night , day , death , heaven and earth , and the most prominent , the sky god . apparently , islam had already begun to spread among the bashkirs , as one of the ambassadors was a muslim bashkir . according to the testimony of ibn fadlan , the bashkirs were turks , living on the southern slopes of the urals , and occupying a vast territory up to the river volga . they were bordered by oghuz turks on the south , pechenegs to the south-east and bulgars on the west . the first european sources to mention the bashkirs were the works of joannes de plano carpini and william of rubruck of the 13th century . by 1236 , genghis khan had incorporated the lands of bashkortostan were incorporated into his empire . during the 13th and 14th centuries , all of bashkortostan was a component of the golden horde . the brother of batu khan , sheibani , received the bashkir lands east of the ural mountains . after the disintegration of the mongol empire , the bashkirs were divided among the nogai horde , the khanate of kazan and the khanate of sibir , founded in the 15th century . early modern period . in the middle of the 16th century , bashkirs were gradually conquered by the tsardom of russia . primary documents pertaining to the bashkirs during this period have been lost , although some are mentioned in the shezhere ( family trees ) of the bashkir . during the russian imperial period , russians and tatars began to migrate to bashkortostan which led to eventual demographic changes in the region . the recruitment of bashkirs into the russian army and having to pay steep taxes pressured many bashkirs to adopt a more settled lifestyle and to slowly abandon their ancient nomadic pastoralist past . in the late 16th and early 19th centuries , bashkirs occupied the territory from the river sylva in the north ; to the river heads of tobol in the east ; the mid-stream of the river yaik in the south ; in the middle and southern urals , the cis-urals including volga territory and trans-uralsto ; and the eastern bank of the volga river on the south-west . bashkir rebellions of the 17th–18th centuries . the bashkirs participated in the 1662–64 , 1681–84 and 1704–11 rebellions . in 1676 , the bashkirs rebelled under a leader named seyid sadir or 'seit sadurov ' , and the russian army had great difficulties in ending the rebellion . the bashkirs rose again in 1707 , under aldar and kûsyom , due to perceived ill-treatment by imperial russian officials . at the founding of orenburg in 1735 , the fourth insurrection occurred in 1735 and lasted six years . russians had discussed from the times of peter the great a desire to expand russian sovereignty south-east toward persia and india . ivan kirillov formed a plan to build the fort to be called orenburg at orsk at the confluence of the or river and the ural river , south-east of the urals where the bashkir , kalmyk and kazakh lands met . work on fort orenburg commenced at orsk in 1735 . however , by 1743 'orenburg ' was moved a further 250 & nbsp ; km west to its current location . the next planned construction was to be a fort on the aral sea . the consequence of the aral sea fort would involve crossing bashkir and the little jüz lands , some of whom had recently offered a nominal submission to the russian crown . kirillov 's plan was approved on may 1 , 1734 and he was placed in command . although kirillov was warned that this may provoke a bashkir rebellion , the warnings were ignored . kirillov left ufa with 2,500 men in 1735 . warfare commenced on the first of july , 1735 . the war consisted of many small raids and complex troop movements , so it can not be easily summarized . for example : in the spring of 1736 , kirillov burned 200 villages , killed 700 in battle and executed 158 . an expedition of 773 men left orenburg in november and lost 500 from cold and hunger . at seiantusa the bashkir planned to massacre sleeping russians , however , the ambush failed . in retaliation , one thousand villagers , including women and children , were put to the sword and another 500 driven into a storehouse and burned to death . raiding parties then went out and burned about 50 villages and killed another 2,000 . eight thousand bashkirs attacked a russian camp and killed 158 , losing 40 killed and three bashkir prisoners were promptly hanged by the russians . rebellious bashkirs raided loyal bashkirs . leaders who submitted were sometimes fined one horse per household and on other occasions , hanged . kirillov died of disease during the war and there were several changes of commander . the bashkir war occurred during the reign of empress anna of russia and the russo-turkish war ( 1735–1739 ) . although the history of the 1735 bashkir war can not be easily summarized , its results were : the russian imperial goal of expansion into central asia was delayed to deal with bashkir resistance . bashkiria was pacified in 1735–1740 . orenburg was established . the southern side of bashkiria was partitioned by the orenburg line of forts . the forts ran from samara on the volga east as far as the samara river headwaters . it then crossed to the middle of the ural river and following the river course east and then north on the eastern side of the urals . it then went east along the uy river to ust-uisk on the tobol river where it connected to the ill-defined 'siberian line ' along the forest-steppe boundary . in 1740 a report was made of bashkir losses which listed : killed : 16,893 ; sent to baltic regiments and fleet : 3,236 ; women & children distributed ( presumably as serfs ) : 8,382 with a grand total of 28,511 . fines were reported as : horses : 12,283 ; cattle and sheep : 6,076 ; money : 9,828 rubles ; villages destroyed : 696 . the compilation was from army reports and excluded losses from irregular warfare , hunger , disease and cold . at the time , the bashkir population was estimated at 100,000 . next major rebellion occurred in 1755–56 . in its suppression , 36,000 russian regular troops were involved . the number of rebels was about 50,000 . the rebellion was brutally crushed . later , in 1774 , the bashkirs , under the leadership of salawat yulayev , supported pugachev 's rebellion . in 1786 , the bashkirs achieved tax-free status ; and in 1798 russia formed an irregular bashkir army from among them . residual land ownership disputes continued . napoleonic wars . during the napoleonic wars , many bashkirs served as mercenaries in the russian army to defend from the france invaders during french invasion of russia . subsequently , the bashkir battalions were the most notable fighters during the napoleonic wars on the north german and dutch plateau . the dutch and the germans called the bashkirs '' northern amurs '' , probably because the population was not aware of who the bashkirs actually were or where they came from , therefore the usage of '' amurs '' in the name may be associated to a reference of something or someone coming from far away ; these battalions were considered as the liberators from the french , however modern russian military sources do not give credit to the bashkirs for these accomplishments . these regiments also served in battle of paris and the subsequent occupation of france by the coalition forces . . the establishment of the first republic of bashkortostan . after the russian revolution , the all-bashkir qoroltays ( convention ) concluded that it was necessary to form an independent bashkir republic within russia . as a result , on 15 november 1917 , the bashkir regional ( central ) shuro ( council ) , ruled by the notorious zeki velidi togan proclaimed the establishment of the first independent bashkir republic in areas of predominantly bashkir population : orenburg , perm , samara , ufa provinces and the autonomous entity bashkurdistan on november 15 , 1917 . this effectively makes bashkortostan the first ever democracy turkic republic in history and the first ever nation to rise against the russian empire after the revolution . the newborn independent bashkortostan had to quickly form its own armed forces in order to protect itself from both the red and white army , zeki velidi togan managed to get the formal support of the basmachi movement , however , the position of the republic between the white and red armies played in disadvantage of the bashkir armed forces , successively , the republic fell violently to the control of the red army , resulting into a massacre of ethnic bashkirs committed by the predominantly russian red army battalions . zeki velidi togan had to escape to turkey , where he died in 1970s . the red takeover in march 1919 , the republic of bashkortostan was converted into the bashkir soviet republic or bashkir assr , government , subsequently subordinated to the power of the russian sfsr . the orenburg bashkir qoroltays were not considered sufficiently politically orthodox by the soviet government , therefore the orenburg area was separated from the bashkir assr , a separate council was put in charge of the area ( the orenburg soviet ) . however , even after the separation , the bolsheviks and stalin , who was in charge of nationalities in the new communist regime , considered even the red bashkirs as too separatist , therefore they attempted to set up a great idel-ural soviet , merging bashkirs with idel tatars and chuvashes . this was vehemently rejected by the bashkir councils who continued to demand autonomy and responded to this deception in a negative manner , the conditions presented by the bolsheviks were considered unacceptable , and a subsequent bashkir rebellion started . as response , the bolsheviks plundered the food ( hunger genocide like holodomor , etc . ) and burned the almost completely defenseless bashkir population in the middle of winter . the bolsheviks did expect the bashkirs to revolt , therefore all the red bashkir soldiers were sent to fight far away from their homeland as precautionary measure so they could not help their civilian population against the red terror and had to give up their dream of freedom and independence . '' one nation after another was more or less eliminated . approximately 800.000 bashkirs ( 57 % of the ethnic population ) were liquidated in the years 1917-1922 . '' -kaarel haav , rein ruutsoo , '' the estonian people and stalinism '' , tallinn , 1990 , p . 36 . . world war ii . during world war ii , bashkir soldiers served in the red army to defend the soviet union and fought against the germans during the operation barbarossa . some bashkir soldiers also fought for the german wehrmacht in the ostlegionen idel-ural legion . this unit composed approximately 12,500 individuals , but included tatars , chuvashes , udmurts , and mordvins as well as bashkirs . hitler 's soviet muslim legions volga tatar legion idel-ural signs idel-ural legionaries brought together about 40,000 volunteers mainly ex-prisoners of war . second declaration of independence on october 11 , 1990 , declaration of state sovereignty by the supreme council of the republic was proclaimed . on march 31 , 1992 bashkortostan signed a federal agreement on the delimitation of powers and areas of jurisdiction and the nature of contractual relations between the authorities of the russian federation and the authorities of the sovereign republics in its composition including the republic of bashkortostan . genetics . the modern bashkirs have an average of approximately 60 % '' west-eurasian/european '' and 40 % '' siberian/east-asian '' genetic material . genetic studies have revealed y chromosome the dominant frequency for bashkir males is the haplogroup r1b ( r-m269 and r-m73 ) which is , on average , 47.6 % . the y-dna haplogroup r-m269 ( r1b1a2 ) is the most common european haplogroup , greatly increasing in frequency on a west to east its prevalence in wales at 92.3 % to poland estimated at 22.7 % . the second most dominant is the haplogroup r1a at an average frequency of 26,5 % , and third the haplogroup n1c at 17 % . despite the bashkirs being considered a turkic peoples , dna haplogroups r1a and r1b are majority shared with indo-europeans . haplogroups j2 , c , o , e1b , g2a , l , n1b , i , t.were found at lower incidences . лобов а . с . структура генофонда субпопуляций башкир . диссертация кандидата биологических наук . — уфа , 2009.- 131 с . most mitochondrial dna of the bashkirs ( 60–65 % ) consist of the haplogroups g , d , с , z and f ; which are lineages characteristic of east-eurasian populations . on the other hand , mtdna haplogroups characteristic of european and near eastern populations were found in significant amounts ( 35–40 % ) . с . а . лимборская , э . к . хуснутдинова , е . в . балановская . этногеномика и геногеография народов восточной европы . институт молекулярной генетики ран . уфимский научный центр . медико-генетический научный центр рамн . м . наука . 2002 . с.179–180 антропология башкир/бермишева м . а . , иванов в . а . , киньябаева г . а . и др . спб . , алетейя , 2011 , 496 с . , с.339 . geneticist suslova commented in 2015 that : the bashkirs are characterized by east-asian admixture , which dates from the 13th century , according to an analysis of the identical-by-descent segments . a group of bashkirs from the burzyansky and abzelilovsky districts of the republic of bashkortostan in the idel-ural region who belong to the r1a subclade r-sur51 are the closest kin of the hungarian árpád dynasty , from which got separated 2000 years ago . on a genetic level , the closest population to bashkirs are the nogais , who also have a dominant haplogroup r1b , we then have the crimean tatars , kyrgyzes , karakalpaks and kazakhs . language . bashkir language is a turkic language of the kypchak group . it has three main dialects : southern , eastern and north-western located in the territory of historical bashkortostan . the russian census ( 2010 ) recorded 1,152,404 bashkir speakers in the russian federation . bashkir language is native to 1 133 339 bashkirs ( 71,7 % of the total number of bashkirs , reporting mother tongue ) . the tatar language was reported as native tongue to 230,846 bashkirs ( 14,6 % ) and russian language , as the native tongue to 216 066 bashkir ( 13,7 % ) . most bashkirs are bilingual in bashkir and russian . the first appearance of a '' bashkir '' language is dated back to the 9th century , in the form of stone inscription using a runic alphabet , most likely , this alphabet derives from the yenisey variant of the old turkic script . this archaic version of a bashkir language would be more or less a dialect of the proto-kipchak language , however , since then , the bashkir language has been through a series of vowel and consonant shifts , which are a result of a common literary history shared with the idel tatar language since the formation of the cumania , when the volga bulgaria started to receive kipchaks influence and became the tatars , most likely between the 10th and 11th centuries . today 's spoken turkic languages that could sound more like the proto-kipchak languages spoken by bashkirs back in time , could easily be the nogai and karachay-balkar languages . from an ark of time of roughly 900 years , the bashkir language and idel tatar language , previously being completely different languages , '' melted '' into a series of dialects of a common volga turki language , the idel tatars and bashkirs tough are and always were two peoples of completely different origins , cultures and identities , but because of a shared common literary history in an ark of 900 years , the two languages ended up in a common language , spoken in different dialects with features depending on the people which spoke them . for example , the dialects spoken by bashkirs , tend to have an accent which mostly resembles other kipchak languages , like kyrgyz , kazakh , nogai , karakalpak , and many other languages of the kipchak sub-group , while the dialects spoken by idel tatars , have accents more resembling the original volga bulgaria spoken before the cumans . at the beginning of the 20th century , most notably during the russian revolution , when bashkortostan and tatarstan became two different republics which rose up against the russian empire in an attempt to achieve independence , the bashkir and idel tatar language were defined as two separate literary languages , each of them based on the most distinct dialects of the volga kipchak language spoken by the bashkir and idel tatar people . after the arrival of islam between the bashkir people in 1200s , the arabic script was adopted to write the language , it was continued to use until 1928 , when stalinist policies imposed the use an experimental latin alphabet developed by russian linguists , this alphabet does not resemble the modern common turkic latin alphabet , but is a weird bad-looking experiment which was effectively more of a mix between latin , cyrillic and other symbols . this experiment failed and the government imposed a bashkir alphabet in 1939 . to this day , the 1939 cyrillic alphabet is the official alphabet used to write bashkir , however several universities started to implement latin . the bashkir language was considered endangered but recent bashkir nationalism has made many develop an interest in it . the combination of encouragement by local authorities and renewed bashkir language interest among bashkirs have greatly assisted the language to stay relevant . . demographics . the ethnic bashkir population is estimated at roughly 2 million people ( 2009 sil ethnologue ) . the 2010 russian census recorded 1,584,554 ethnic bashkirs in russia , of which 1,172,287 bashkirs live in bashkortostan ( 29.5 % of the total population of the republic ) . culture . the bashkirs traditionally practiced agriculture , cattle-rearing and bee-keeping . the half-nomadic bashkirs wandered either the mountains or the steppes , herding cattle . wild-hive beekeeping can be named as a separate component of the most ancient culture which is practiced in the same burzyansky district near to the kapova cave . traditional bashkir dish beşbarmaq is prepared from boiled meat and halma ( a type of noodle ) , sprinkled with herbs flavored with onions and some qorot ( young dry cheese ) . this is another notable feature of the bashkir cuisine : dishes are often served with dairy products — it is a rare party that is without qorot or qaymaq ( sour cream ) . most of the dishes in bashkir cuisine are nutritious and easy to prepare . epic poems and mythology . the bashkirs have created a rich folklore associated with their early period of history . in their works of their oral folk art , the views of ancient bashkirs on nature , their worldly wisdom , psychology , moral ideals , social aspirations and creative imagination are artistically reflected into the modern bashkir folklore . the genre composition of the bashkir folk art is very diverse : epic poetry , legend and traditions , riddles , songs ( ritual , epic or only lyrical ) etc . the bashkir poems , like the epic creations of other peoples , find origin in the ancient turkic mythology , in fact the bashkir epic tale culture can be considered a more developed and expanded version of old turkic epic culture . majority of the poems of bashkir mythology have been written down and published as books at the beginning of the 20th century , these poems compose a great part of the literature of the bashkir people and are important examples of further-developed turkic culture . some of these poems became important on a continental level , for example the poem of the '' ural-batyr '' , which tells the tale of the legendary hero ural , is the origin of the name of the ural mountains , the natural border between europe and asia . other poems constitute a great part of the bashkir national identity , other tales apart from the ural batyr are '' akbuzat '' , '' qara yurga '' , '' aqhaq qola '' , '' kongur buga '' , '' uzaq tuzaq '' , and many others . the ural-batyr and its impact . the poem ural-batyr , has been developed with the inclusion of the pantheon of the old turkic politheistic religion '' tengrism '' . it takes basis on the pre-islamic bashkir conception of the world . in the ural batyr and pre-islamic bashkir folktale religion ( which still constitute the basis of the modern bashkir folk and literature ) the world is three-tiered . it includes an heavenly , earthly and undergroundly ( underwater ) trinity : on the sky , the heavenly king samrau resides , his wives are the sun and the moon , he has two daughters , umay and aykhylu , who are incarnated either in the form of birds or beautiful girls . in the ural batyr , umay is incarnated into a swan in fact , she later assumes the aspect of a beautiful girl as the story proceeds . people live on the earth , the best of whom pledge honor and respect to the existence of nature . the third world is the underground world , where the devas , or also singular , deva or div , live , incarnated as a snake , the incarnation of the dark forces , who live underground . as mentioned above , through the actions told in the ural batyr , the bashkirs express their ideas on good and evil . this is how the legendary hero ural , possessing titanic power , overcoming incredible difficulties , destroys the deva , and obtains '' living water '' ( the idea of water in nature , in the pre-islamic bashkir panteon of the turkic mythology , is known as a spirit of life , thus the water is what gives life ) . ural thus obtaining '' living water '' in order to defeat death in the name of the eternal existence of man and nature . ural did not drink the '' living water '' , but instead of drinking it to live eternally , he decided to sparkle it around himself , died and donated eternity to the world , the withered earth turned green , ural died and from his body , the ural mountains originated . the name of the ural mountain range comes from this poem . religion . in the pre-islamic period the bashkirs were followers of animism , shamanism and tengrianism . shireen hunter , jeffrey l . thomas , alexander melikishvili , '' islam in russia : the politics of identity and security '' , m.e . sharpe inc . к вопросу о тенгрианстве башкир // compatriot , popular science magazine bashkirs began converting to islam in the 10th century . shirin akiner , '' islamic peoples of the soviet un '' , second edition , 1986 arab traveler ibn fadlan in 921 met some of the bashkirs , who were already muslims . allen j . frank , '' islamic historiography and '' bulghar '' identity among the tatars and bashkirs '' , brill , 1998 the final assertion of islam among the bashkirs occurred in the 1320s and 1330s during the golden horde period . the mausoleum of hussein-bek , the burial place of the first imam of historical bashkortostan , is preserved in bashkortostan . the mausoleum is a 14th-century building . catherine the great established the orenburg mohammedan spiritual assembly in 1788 in ufa , which was the first muslim administrative center in russia . religious revival among the bashkirs began in the early 1990s . jeffrey e . cole , '' ethnic groups of europe : an encyclopedia '' , greenwood publishing group according to talgat tadzhuddin there were more than 1,000 mosques in bashkortostan in 2010 . интерфакс . говорить о притеснении ислама в россии кощунственно , считает талгат таджуддин // interfax , 17 december 2010 the bashkirs are predominantly sunni muslims of the hanafi madhhab . . notable bashkirs . salawat yulayev , bashkir national hero zeki velidi togan , historian , turkologist and leader of the bashkir national movement of the early 20th century shaikhzada babich , bashkir poet , writer and playwright . member of the bashkir national liberation movement , one of the members of the bashkir government ( 1917–1919 ) shagit hudayberdin , communist revolutionary tagir kusimov , soviet military leader mustai karim , bashkir soviet poet , writer and playwright . he was named people 's poet of the bashkir autonomous soviet socialist republic ( 1963 ) , hero of socialist labour ( 1979 ) , and winner of the lenin prize ( 1984 ) and the ussr state prize ( 1972 ) zagir ismagilov , composer and educator murtaza rakhimov , first president of bashkortostan lyasan utiasheva , ( bashkir mother ) tv show host , socialite and former rhythmic gymnast alina ibragimova , violinist morgenshtern , rapper and internet personality . see also . turkic peoples