Love in a Cold Climate

plot summary . lady leopoldina '' polly '' hampton is the only child of the supremely aristocratic and very rich earl of montdore and his wife , sonia . lady montdore is a product of the minor ranks of the aristocracy and her marriage to an earl is regarded as a social coup on her part . she is depicted by fanny , as an avaricious , greedy snob , but not without charm . her thrusting personality , allied to her husband 's impeccable social standing , riches and political influence makes her a formidable woman . lady montdore , unbeknown to lord montdore , takes advantage of her husband 's reputation to forward her own career as a hostess and manipulator of her social circle . their daughter is polly , whom fanny loses contact with when lord montdore is sent as viceroy of india . fanny receives an invitation to visit the montdores upon their return from india . she has great affection for polly , but polly reveals little of herself . polly has '' come out '' in india and as a beautiful and socially important debutante , is expected to have a very successful season in london . however , polly consistently demonstrates a total lack of interest in the london season and all of the men she meets . she is hoping that '' in a cold climate '' , society will be less interested in love affairs . lady montdore is exasperated by her daughter 's apparent indifference to love and marriage . '' important '' potential suitors acknowledge that polly is very beautiful , but find her cold and aloof . polly reveals to no one that she has been in love with her uncle , '' boy '' dougdale ( the husband of her paternal aunt ) , since she was 14 . boy is snobbish and sexually rapacious ; his many affairs are common knowledge to both his wife and society at large . fanny and her radlett cousins have long suspected that the sexually ambiguous boy has paedophile tendencies and he is a joke amongst fanny 's cousins for his inappropriate touches and '' lecherous '' behaviour towards young girls . polly marries boy shortly after her aunt 's death , causing a scandal in her social circle and distressing her parents deeply . unbeknownst to polly , boy has been lady montdore 's lover for many years . she is excluded from her father 's will upon her marriage and she and boy ostracised from society . they move to sicily for several years . polly 's place in the family is filled by the heir to lord montdore 's entailed fortune and title , cedric hampton . born in nova scotia to a minor member of the montdore family , cedric has used his exceptional good looks and personal charm to establish a place within the homosexual milieu of the european aristocracy . he has lived a life of luxury as the lover of rich and aristocratic men . cedric accepts an invitation to visit the montdores . his natural love of beauty , innate good taste and careful use of flattery enable cedric to win the affections of lord and lady montdore and many others . cedric focuses his attentions upon lady montdore who uses cedric 's popularity and charm to reestablish herself as a leading society hostess , to cedric 's advantage . fanny and cedric soon become close friends . polly and boy return from sicily , out of love and their marriage turned sour . while pregnant , polly is regularly visited by the duke of paddington ( a fictional title ) , who lavishes her with attention . polly reconciles with her mother after bearing a child who dies shortly after its birth . cedric and boy meet and fall in love . '' cedric arranged the whole thing perfectly '' , according to fanny . while polly recovers from the difficult birth , cedric whisks boy and lady montdore to france , leaving polly free to be carried off by the duke . while this outcome shocks the conservative social circles in which they mix , fanny takes a broader minded view , pleased to see people she loves each finding happiness in their own way . characters . leopoldina '' polly '' hampton , the daughter of lord and lady montdore , is renowned for her beauty but not much else . sonia ( née perrotte ) , lady montdore , polly 's abrasive , narcissistic and inconsiderate mother lord montdore , polly 's kindly and rather dull father and the previous viceroy of india frances '' fanny '' wincham ( née logan ) , the narrator , is a distant cousin of polly and a frequent visitor of the family . linda radlett , fanny 's cousin and best friend , daughter of lord and lady alconleigh . her relationships form a central part of story in the pursuit of love . louisa radlett , eldest daughter of lord and lady alconleigh , marries lord fortwilliam . cedric hampton , the heir to hampton and a close friend of fanny 's , is flagrantly homosexual and extremely charming . he causes a great deal of gossip and scandal , yet most people are won over by his charm once they meet him . once he arrives at hampton , he spends most of his time making over his aunt . harvey '' boy '' dougdale , husband of lord montdore 's sister patricia and later the husband of polly hampton . boy is bisexual and known for his extremely active sex life . lady patricia dougdale ( née hampton ) , whom polly is said to resemble , is the wife of boy dougdale . patricia pined for boy for several years before he finally married her , but within six months of the wedding patricia became aware of her husband 's extramarital affairs . she was long afflicted with ill health and her death is a major plot point in the story . davey warbeck , fanny 's uncle and close friend of the montdores and the alconleighs jassy radlett , fanny 's cousin , is a regular visitor who never fails to cheer up fanny . victoria radlett , jassy 's younger sister , and likewise one of fanny 's most welcome visitors matthew radlett , lord alconleigh , father of jassy and victoria and uncle to fanny , is notable for his intense loathing of cedric hampton . sadie alconleigh , fanny 's aunt and mother of jassy and victoria , is a close friend of the montdores . alfred wincham , an oxford don and fanny 's husband . although fanny often claims that she and her husband are perfectly suited for one another , alfred is often dismissive of his wife 's behaviour and interests . norma cozens , fanny 's neighbour , is one of her closest friends despite their many differences in temperament . veronica chaddesley-corbett , the most popular and prominent socialite of her day and an important visitor at hampton fabrice de sauveterre , a wealthy french duke and a guest at hampton . sauveterre is a major character in the pursuit of love . sequel . do n't tell alfred ( 1960 ) is a sequel to the novel giving further insight into the married life of fanny and alfred . television adaptations . love in a cold climate has been adapted twice as a mini-series : in 1980 by simon raven for thames television ( set 1924-1940 ) starring lucy gutteridge , rosalyn landor , michael aldridge , judi dench , vivian pickles and jean-pierre cassel in 2001 by deborah moggach for the bbc starring rosamund pike , elisabeth dermot-walsh , celia imrie and alan bates both versions were broadcast in the united states by pbs as part of masterpiece theatre . external links . the official nancy mitford website