John Addington Symonds

biography . early life . symonds was born at bristol , england , in 1840 . his father , the physician john addington symonds , sr . ( 1807–1871 ) , was the author of criminal responsibility ( 1869 ) , the principles of beauty ( 1857 ) and sleep and dreams . the younger symonds , considered delicate , did not take part in games at harrow school after the age of 14 , and he showed no particular promise as a scholar . symonds moved to clifton hill house at the age of ten , an event which he believed had a large and beneficial impact towards his health and spiritual development . symonds 's delicate condition continued , and as a child he suffered from nightmares in which corpses in and under his bed prompted sleepwalking ; on one such occasion he was almost drowned when , sleepwalking in the attic of clifton hill house , he reached a cistern of rainwater . according to symonds , an angel with '' blue eyes and wavy , blonde hair '' woke him and brought him to safety ; this figure frequented symonds 's dreams and was potentially his first homosexual awakening . in january 1858 , symonds received a letter from his friend alfred pretor ( 1840–1908 ) , telling of pretor 's affair with their headmaster , charles john vaughan . symonds was shocked and disgusted , feelings complicated by his growing awareness of his own homosexuality . he did not mention the incident for more than a year until in 1859 , when a student at oxford university , he told the story to john conington , the latin professor . conington approved of romantic relationships between men and boys . earlier , he had given symonds a copy of ionica , a collection of homoerotic verse by william johnson cory , the influential eton college master and advocate of pederastic pedagogy . conington encouraged symonds to tell his father about his friend 's affair , and the senior symonds forced vaughan to resign from harrow . pretor was angered by the younger man 's part , and never spoke to symonds again . kaplan , morris b . ( 2012 ) sodom on the thames : sex , love , and scandal in wilde times . cornell university press . p . 112 in the autumn of 1858 , symonds went to balliol college , oxford , as a commoner but was elected to an exhibition in the following year . in spring of that same year , he fell in love with william fear dyer ( 1843–1905 ) , a bristol choirboy three years younger . they engaged in a chaste love affair that lasted a year , until broken up by symonds . the friendship continued for several years afterwards , until at least 1864 . dyer became organist and choirmaster of st nicholas ' church , bristol . at oxford university , symonds became engaged in his studies and began to demonstrate his academic ability . in 1860 , he took a first in mods and won the newdigate prize with a poem on '' the escorial '' ; in 1862 he obtained a first in literae humaniores , and in 1863 won the chancellor 's english essay . in 1862 , symonds was elected to an open fellowship at the conservative magdalen . he made friends with a c . g . h . shorting , whom he took as a private pupil . when symonds refused to help shorting gain admission to magdalen , the younger man wrote to school officials alleging '' that i symonds had supported him in his pursuit of the chorister walter thomas goolden ( 1848–1901 ) , that i shared his habits and was bent on the same path . '' phyllis grosskurth ( ed . ) . ( 1986 ) the memoirs of john addington symonds , chicago : university of chicago press . p . 131 although symonds was officially cleared of any wrongdoing , he suffered a breakdown from the stress and shortly thereafter left the university for switzerland . personal life . there he met janet catherine north ( sister of botanical artist marianne north , 1830–1890 ) . they married at hastings on 10 november 1864 . they settled in london and had four daughters : janet ( born 1865 ) , charlotte ( born 1867 ) , margaret ( madge ) ( born 1869 ) and katharine ( born 1875 ; she was later honoured for her writing as dame katharine furse ) . edward lear wrote '' the owl and the pussycat '' for the three-year-old janet . while in clifton in 1868 , symonds met and fell in love with norman moor ( january 10 , 1851 – march 6 , 1895 ) , a youth about to go up to oxford , who became his pupil . symonds and moor had a four-year affair but did not have sex , although according to symonds 's diary of 28 january 1870 , '' i stripped him naked and fed sight , touch and mouth on these things . '' schultz , bart ( 2004 ) henry sidgwick : eye of the universe – an intellectual biography . cambridge university press . pp . 408–409 the relationship occupied a good part of his time , including one occasion he left his family and travelled to italy and switzerland with moor . the unconsummated affair , also inspired his most productive period of composing poetry , published in 1880 as new and old : a volume of verse . buckton , oliver s . ( 1998 ) secret selves : confession and same-sex desire in victorian autobiography . university of north carolina press . p . 95 . career . symonds intended to study law , but his health again broke down and forced him to travel . returning to clifton , he lectured there , both at the college and ladies ' schools . from his lectures , he prepared the essays in his introduction to the study of dante ( 1872 ) and studies of the greek poets ( 1873–1876 ) . meanwhile , he was occupied with his major work , renaissance in italy , which appeared in seven volumes at intervals between 1875 and 1886 . since his prize essay on the renaissance at oxford , symonds had wanted to study it further and emphasise the reawakening of art and literature in europe . his work was interrupted by serious illness . in 1877 his life was in danger . his recovery at davos platz led him to believe this was the only place where he was likely to enjoy life . he practically made his home at davos , and wrote about it in our life in the swiss highlands ( 1891 ) . symonds became a citizen of the town ; he took part in its municipal business , made friends with the peasants , and shared their interests . there he wrote most of his books : biographies of percy bysshe shelley ( 1878 ) , philip sidney ( 1886 ) , ben jonson ( 1886 ) and michelangelo ( 1893 ) , several volumes of poetry and essays , and a translation of the autobiography of benvenuto cellini ( 1887 ) . there , too , he completed his study of the renaissance , the work for which he is chiefly remembered . he was feverishly active throughout his life . considering his poor health , his productivity was remarkable . two works , a volume of essays , in the key of blue , and a monograph on walt whitman , were published in the year of his death . his activity was unbroken to the last . he had a passion for italy , and for many years resided during the autumn in the house of his friend , horatio f . brown , on the zattere , in venice . in 1891 he made an effort to visit karl heinrich ulrichs in l'aquila . he died in rome and was buried close to the grave of percy bysshe shelley . legacy . symonds left his papers and his autobiography in the hands of brown , who wrote an expurgated biography in 1895 , which edmund gosse further stripped of homoerotic content before publication . in 1926 , upon coming into the possession of symonds 's papers , gosse burned everything except the memoirs , to the dismay of symonds 's granddaughter . symonds was morbidly introspective , but with a capacity for action . in talks and talkers , the contemporary writer robert louis stevenson described symonds ( known as '' opalstein '' in stevenson 's essay ) as '' the best of talkers , singing the praises of the earth and the arts , flowers and jewels , wine and music , in a moonlight , serenading manner , as to the light guitar . '' beneath his good fellowship , he was a melancholic . this side of his nature is revealed in his gnomic poetry , and particularly in the sonnets of his animi figura ( 1882 ) . he portrayed his own character with great subtlety . his poetry is perhaps rather that of the student than of the inspired singer , but it has moments of deep thought and emotion . it is , indeed , in passages and extracts that symonds appears at his best . rich in description , full of '' purple patches '' , his work lacks the harmony and unity essential to the conduct of philosophical argument . his translations are among the finest in the language ; here his subject was found for him , and he was able to lavish on it the wealth of colour and quick sympathy which were his characteristics . bisexuality and homosexual writings . image : symonds-a problem in greek ethics.gif thumb front cover of the 1983 reprint edition , edited by john lauritsen in 1873 , symonds wrote a problem in greek ethics , a work of what would later be called '' gay history '' . he was inspired by the poetry of walt whitman , with whom he corresponded . katz , love stories , pp . 243–244 . katz notes that '' whitman 's knowledge of and response to ancient greek love is the subject for a major study '' ( p . 381 , note 6 ) . the work , '' perhaps the most exhaustive eulogy of greek love , '' remained unpublished for a decade , and then was printed at first only in a limited edition for private distribution . katz , love stories , p . 244 . a problem in greek ethics was later published without attribution in havelock ellis 's sexual inversion ( 1897 ) ; see eric o . clarke , virtuous vice : homoeroticism and the public sphere ( duke university press , 2000 ) , p . 144 . although the oxford english dictionary credits the medical writer c . g . chaddock for introducing '' homosexual '' into the english language in 1892 , symonds had already used the word in a problem in greek ethics . dejean , pointing to the phrase '' homosexual relations '' in aware of the taboo nature of his subject matter , symonds referred obliquely to pederasty as '' that unmentionable custom '' in a letter to a prospective reader of the book , katz , love stories , p . 262 . but defined '' greek love '' in the essay itself as '' a passionate and enthusiastic attachment subsisting between man and youth , recognised by society and protected by opinion , which , though it was not free from sensuality , did not degenerate into mere licentiousness . '' as quoted by pulham , art and transitional object , p . 59 , and anne hermann , queering the moderns : poses/portraits/performances ( st . martin 's press , 2000 ) , p . 148 . symonds studied classics under benjamin jowett at balliol college , oxford , and later worked with jowett on an english translation of plato 's symposium . aldrich , robert ( 1993 ) the seduction of the mediterranean : writing , art , and homosexual fantasy . routledge . 0415093120 . p . 78 . jowett was critical of symonds 's opinions on sexuality , dowling , linda ( 1994 ) hellenism and homosexuality . cornell university press . p . 74 , notes that jowett , in his lectures and introductions , discussed love between men and women when plato himself had been talking about the greek love for boys . but when symonds was falsely accused of corrupting choirboys , jowett supported him , despite his own equivocal views of the relation of hellenism to contemporary legal and social issues that affected homosexuals . dowling , linda ( 1994 ) hellenism and homosexuality . cornell university press . pp . 88 , 91 . symonds also translated classical poetry on homoerotic themes , and wrote poems drawing on ancient greek imagery and language such as eudiades , which has been called '' the most famous of his homoerotic poems '' . while the taboos of victorian england prevented symonds from speaking openly about homosexuality , his works published for a general audience contained strong implications and some of the first direct references to male-male sexual love in english literature . for example , in '' the meeting of david and jonathan '' , from 1878 , jonathan takes david '' in his arms of strength / and in that kiss / soul into soul was knit and bliss to bliss '' . the same year , his translations of michelangelo 's sonnets to the painter 's beloved tommaso cavalieri restore the male pronouns which had been made female by previous editors . in november 2016 , symonds 's homoerotic poem , 'the song of the swimmer ' , written in 1867 , was published for the first time in the times literary supplement . by the end of his life , symonds 's bisexuality had become an open secret in certain literary and cultural circles . his private memoirs , written ( but never completed ) over a four-year period from 1889 to 1893 , form the earliest known self-conscious lgbt autobiography . symonds 's daughter , madge vaughan , was probably writer virginia woolf 's first same-sex crush , though there is no evidence that the feeling was mutual . woolf was the cousin of her husband william wyamar vaughan . another daughter , charlotte symonds , married the classicist walter leaf . henry james used some details of symonds 's life , especially the relationship between him and his wife , as the starting-point for the short story '' the author of beltraffio '' ( 1884 ) . over a century after symonds 's death , in 2007 , his first work on homosexuality , soldier love and related matter was finally published by andrew dakyns ( grandson of symonds ' associate , henry graham dakyns ) , in eastbourne , e . sussex , england . soldier love , or soldatenliebe since it was limited to a german edition . symonds ' english text is lost . this translation and edition by dakyns is the only version ever to appear in the author 's own language . soldier love and related matter translated and edited by andrew dakyns . . works . the renaissance . an essay ( 1863 ) miscellanies by john addington symonds , m.d . , : selected and edited with an introductory memoir , by his son ( 1871 ) introduction to the study of dante ( 1872 ) studies of the greek poets , 2 vol . ( 1873 , 1876 ) renaissance in italy , 7 vol . ( 1875–86 ) shelley ( 1878 ) sketches in italy and greece ( london , smith and elder 1879 ) sketches and studies in italy ( london , smith and elder 1879 ) animi figura ( 1882 ) sketches in italy ( selections prepared by symonds , arranged , so as to , in his own words in a prefatory note , '' adapt itself to the use of travellers rather than of students '' ; leipzig , bernhard tauchnitz 1883 ) a problem in greek ethics ( 1883 ) '' shakspere 's predecessors in the english drama '' ( 1884 ) new italian sketches ( bernard tauchnitz : leipzig , 1884 ) wine , women , and song . medieval latin students ' songs ( 1884 ) english translations/paraphrases . autobiography of benvenuto cellini ( 1887 ) an english translation . a problem in modern ethics ( 1891 ) our life in the swiss highlands ( 1892 ) ( with his daughter margaret symonds as coauthor ) in the key of blue ( 1893 ) the life of michelangelo buonarroti ( 1893 ) walt whitman . a study ( 1893 ) . see also . uranian poetry . notes . references . . further reading . phyllis grosskurth , john addington symonds : a biography ( 1964 ) phyllis grosskurth ( ed . ) , the memoirs of john addington symonds hutchinson ( 1984 ) whitney davis queer beauty , chapter 4 : '' double mind : hegel , symonds , and homoerotic spirit in renaissance art '' . columbia university press , 2010 . david amigoni and amber k . regis ( ed . ) ' ( re ) reading john addington symonds . ' special issue of english studies , 94:2 ( 2013 ) . amber k . regis ( ed . ) , the memoirs of john addington symonds : a critical edition ( 2016 ) . external links . john addington symonds papers , university of bristol library special collections symonds 's translation of the life of benvenuto cellini , vol . 1 , posner library , carnegie mellon university vol . 2 , carnegie mellon university john addington symonds , waste : a lecture delivered at the bristol institution for the advancement of science , literature . , 1863 john addington symonds , the principles of beauty , 1857 john addington symonds , the renaissance , an essay , 1863 '' renaissance '' , encyclopædia britannica , 9th edition , 1875–89 , 1902encyclopedia.com . retrieved 21 april 2017 . biography , glbtq encyclopaedia 1998 symonds international symposium 2010 symonds international symposium michael matthew kaylor , secreted desires : the major uranians : hopkins , pater and wilde ( 2006 ) robert peters ' mss , indiana university david beres , review of the letters of john addington symonds , ed . herbert m . schueller and robert l . peters , psychoanalytic quarterly 40 ( 1971 ) rictor norton , '' the life and writings of john addington symonds ( 1840—1893 ) ''