Sunnydale

environment . sunnydale itself . sunnydale 's size and surroundings are implausible but justified given its origins — to sustain a human population for supernatural evils to prey upon . the town 's founder spared no expense to attract a populace , and sunnydale thus contains many elements of a large city — which the show 's writers utilized fully for comic effect and narrative convenience . during the first three seasons , sunnydale is shown to have 38,500 inhabitants , the '' welcome to sunnydale '' sign says 38,500 in two early episodes : '' school hard '' ( 2.03 ) and '' lovers walk '' ( 3.08 ) . very few high schools , in '' some assembly required '' ( 2.02 ) , the three dead cheerleaders attended fondren high , which is '' across town '' from sunnydale high . in '' reptile boy '' ( 2.05 ) , kent preparatory school is mentioned . in '' dead man 's party '' ( 3.02 ) joyce mentions a local all-girls school named miss porter 's . yet in most episodes '' the high school '' refers specifically to sunnydale high . forty-three churches , giles is surprised at this figure in '' what 's my line , part two '' ( 2.10 ) . a small private college , crestwood college is featured in '' reptile boy '' ( 2.05 ) but never mentioned again . a zoo , there are three visits to the zoo in '' the pack '' ( 1.06 ) , including a class trip and one trip by buffy on foot . a museum , the museum director who receives the box containing the demon acathla in '' becoming , part one '' ( 2.21 ) refers to giles as being '' right here in sunnydale '' . and one modest main street . even so , it has twelve gothic cemetery . according to giles in '' revelations '' ( 3.07 ) . these cemeteries are so heavily used that services are sometimes held at night . '' once more , with feeling '' ( 6.07 ) . sunnydale is divided into five neighborhoods . the first is the entertainment district which contains the bronze , sunnydale 's nightclub , which attracts some well-known artists despite a clientele consisting mainly of high-school kids . the second is the alleys directly behind bronze which contain the town 's excess supply of pallets and cardboard . the high school makes the third neighborhood . the fourth neighborhood is filled in its entirety by the large graveyard , and lastly the suburban residential sprawl is the final neighborhood . the abundance of very nice homes is made possible by low property values caused by frequent murder . '' villains '' ( 6.20 ) in later seasons it is revealed that sunnydale contains a campus of the university of california system , as well as a profitable magic supply shop . the town is also seen to include a large park containing a creek and a lake , and one of its cemeteries is shown to be adjacent to a lake . '' help '' ( 7.04 ) . sunnydale has a number of parks : weatherly park , glebe park , radcliff park and nelson park are just some of the examples . sunnydale has a train station , buffy finds dead bodies in the train in '' crush '' ( 5.14 ) . a bus station , the bus station is shown in '' inca mummy girl '' ( 2.04 ) , '' what 's my line , part one '' ( 2.09 ) , and '' showtime '' ( 7.11 ) , and mentioned in '' innocence '' ( 2.14 ) . a small airport , kendra arrives by plane in '' what 's my line , part one '' ( 2.09 ) , and the airport itself is shown in '' choices '' ( 3.19 ) and '' who are you '' ( 4.16 ) as well as '' bargaining i '' ( 6.01 ) . the airport shown in this episode is actually burbank airport with '' sunnydale '' photoshopped over the word '' burbank '' . in '' tabula rasa '' ( 6.08 ) , giles 's ticket shows an itinerary from sunnydale airport to los angeles international airport and then to london heathrow airport , which is the same route announced on the public address system as giles awaits his flight in '' bargaining , part i '' ( 6.01 ) . and a small military base . in '' innocence '' ( 2.14 ) , xander and cordelia break into the base to steal a rocket launcher as part of his plan to destroy the judge . there is also a seaport with a harbor deep enough to allow the docking of coastal freighters . in episode 3/14 , '' bad girls , '' faith disposes of the body of the deputy mayor by weighting it down and sinking it in the harbor . in episode 3/19 , '' choices , '' a box containing the mystic spiders mayor wilkins has to consume as part of the ascension process comes in by water and the docks are shown . directly beneath sunnydale high school is a hellmouth , a subterranean , mystical portal that attracts evil forces . this functions as a major plot device in buffy the vampire slayer , as it explains why vampires and other demons are so prevalent in sunnydale . sunnydale possesses many common horror-movie characteristics , such as an abundance of dark alleyways , abandoned mansions and factories , and an adult population that is either clueless or perpetually in denial , in stark contrast to the demon-fighting , supernaturally aware teens . by the show 's seventh season , set in 2002–03 , the city 's population had fallen to 32,900 . the '' welcome to sunnydale '' sign says 32,900 in '' conversations with dead people '' ( 7.07 ) . in the spring , the town is almost completely evacuated . sunnydale 's surroundings . sunnydale has a somewhat isolated location . when sunnydale is stricken by a town-wide epidemic — such as the silence spell in '' hush '' ( 4.10 ) — no other towns seem to be nearby . the town is situated near several acres of woods and forest , including miller 's woods . the woods in '' homecoming '' ( 3.05 ) are named '' miller 's woods '' . in '' bargaining , part two '' ( 6.02 ) and '' villains '' ( 6.20 ) the woods are large enough to get lost in . breaker 's woods is a 45-minute drive from town . giles visited there during '' lovers walk '' ( 3.08 ) . sunnydale is located on or near the pacific ocean . an ocean port with several docked ships is nearby . the port is seen in '' surprise '' ( 2.13 ) and '' consequences '' ( 3.15 ) . in '' consequences '' , giles refers to buffy and faith 's return from the docks as '' coming back to town '' , indicating that the docks are not part of sunnydale itself . kingman 's bluff stands on a tall cliff overlooking the sea . kingman 's bluff is the location of willow 's terrible spell ( '' grave '' , 6.22 ) . there is a beach not too far away . it is not specified how close this beach is to sunnydale . it is seen in '' go fish '' ( 2.20 ) and '' buffy vs . dracula '' ( 5.01 ) . close to or in sunnydale is an old quarry house built beside a deep lake , located a few feet from a cliff edge . although the quarry house never appears in any episodes , it does make an appearance in the comic book series '' the blood of carthage '' , which explains the house 's pre-columbian origins . the house and its grounds also appear in the chaos bleeds video game . in addition , there is a hydroelectric dam in the vicinity of sunnydale . in '' as you were '' ( 6.15 ) , buffy , riley and riley 's wife , sam , fight a suvolte demon on a dam they only drove a short distance to reach . within a day 's drive of sunnydale is a desert . giles drives buffy to the desert in '' intervention '' ( 5.18 ) , and drives with the potentials to the desert in '' the killer in me '' ( 7.13 ) . it is stated several times that sunnydale is approximately two hours ' drive north of los angeles , in '' sanctuary '' ( angel 1.19 ) , cops refer to sunnydale as being '' up north '' although it is also mentioned that buffy 's dad comes '' down '' from l.a . to visit , in '' nightmares '' ( 1.10 ) , buffy states '' he 's still in l.a . he , like , comes down for weekends sometimes . '' implying that sunnydale is south of l.a . in the final episode of buffy the vampire slayer ( '' chosen '' ) , and also in the first issue of the buffy : season eight comic book , sunnydale is depicted being surrounded by desert terrain . at the end of '' chosen '' ( 7.22 ) the town has sunk into a large pit , and the pit is completely surrounded by desert . it is shown this way in the comic book buffy the vampire slayer season eight 1 , '' the long way home '' , pages 14-15 . the episode '' pangs '' reveals that sunnydale is in the former homeland of the chumash people , which is the area northwest of los angeles , centered on santa barbara county . the episode references a lost spanish mission , which might be a reference to a historical mission originally located near point conception which was destroyed by an earthquake and relocated inland . the episode '' shadow '' ( 5.08 ) contains a telephone directory ad for the magic box , which uses an 805 area code . this would indicate that sunnydale is located in santa barbara county , or possibly ventura county or san luis obispo county ( all are along the coast north of los angeles but south of monterey ) . maps of sunnydale . maps of sunnydale have appeared at various times during the show : a large map of '' sunnydale county '' hangs on the wall of principal snyder 's office and also on the wall of mayor wilkins ' office . it was in the principal 's office in '' dead man 's party '' ( 3.02 ) , and in the mayor 's office in various third-season episodes . the best view of the map is in '' choices '' ( 3.19 ) . compare this with the map of santa barbara county at this is actually a map of santa barbara county , california with the words '' sunnydale county '' superimposed on it . according to this map , sunnydale is located at a bend on the california coast . to the south and west of sunnydale is the pacific ocean . joss whedon stated in november 1998 that '' sunnydale is in fact near santa barbara . '' joss whedon post on the bronze posting board , november 22 , 1998 , archived here . giles uses a street map of santa barbara as a map of sunnydale when he is plotting sightings of the initiative commandos in the series ' fourth season . '' doomed '' ( 4.11 ) a street map of central sunnydale is used by the scooby gang twice in the seventh season . once early in the season , and again in '' touched '' ( 7.20 ) . in the seventh season , andrew draws a map of sunnydale to track the first 's activities . shown in '' get it done '' ( 7.15 ) . the general shape of the coastline matches the map used in season three . according to andrew 's map , there are woods between sunnydale and the ocean to the west and to the south , and directly southeast of the town , at the location where the coast bends , there is a dark forest . there are also woods to the east of sunnydale , as well as railroad tracks . filming locations . various southern california locations are used as stand-ins for sunnydale : the exterior shots , and some interior shots , of buffy 's home are of an actual home located in torrance . the exterior shots of sunnydale high school ( seasons 1–3 ) are of torrance high school in torrance , california . the exterior shots of the mansion ( seasons 2–3 ) are of frank lloyd wright 's ennis house in los feliz near griffith park . most of the university of california , sunnydale scenes ( season 4 ) were filmed at the university of california , los angeles , and in a closed sound stage designed to match the ucla architecture . some of the later scenes were filmed at a private business park . the exterior shots of sunnydale city hall is the iowa courthouse building , an office building in torrance . the exterior shots of new sunnydale high school ( season 7 ) were filmed at california state university , northridge in northridge , california . history . prior to buffy 's arrival . long before humans settled the area , a hellmouth existed at the site of the future town of sunnydale . in ancient times , a magic scythe was used at the site of the hellmouth '' to kill the last pure demon that walked upon the earth . '' after this , the scythe was hidden , and its last guardian remained , waiting in a pagan temple that would somehow remain unnoticed for centuries . '' end of days '' ( 7.21 ) . centuries later , navajo and chumash peoples lived in this area . one or more groups of monks or friars also settled in this area . navajo ( diné ) people are mentioned in '' the glittering world '' in tales of the slayers . chumash are mentioned in '' pangs '' ( 4.08 ) . one group of monks were mentioned by the ancient guardian in '' end of days '' ( 7.21 ) ; a possibly different group in '' pangs '' ( 4.08 ) . as in general california history , these friars can safely be assumed to have been spanish franciscans , who arrived in california in the late 18th century . spike and andrew journey to a different mission in '' empty places '' ( 7.19 ) . in 1812 , there was an earthquake in the sunnydale region that caused a cave-in during which an entire mission was lost ; the very existence of the mission was soon forgotten . ( the mission la purisima concepción , originally sited near point conception and relocated to lompoc would fit this description . ) '' pangs '' ( 4.08 ) . richard wilkins arrived in california in the late 19th century , looking for gold . he founded sunnydale ( after considering the alternate names '' happydale '' and '' sunny acres '' ) in a demon infested valley after a navajo slayer died there '' the glittering world '' , in tales of the slayers in 1899 . he made a pact with the demons to found a town atop the hellmouth for them '' to feed on '' , in return for the promise of immortality by becoming a pure demon himself . wilkins became mayor of sunnydale . '' enemies '' ( 3.17 ) . in the 1930s , there was at least one more major earthquake in sunnydale . this caused a cave-in that swallowed up the master and his lair , as well as the satanist temple on kingman 's bluff . episode 6/22 , '' grave . '' giles explains to anya how willow proposes to destroy the world and specifically refers to the temple as satanist . there is a satanist symbol on the top of the temple 's steeple . ( the date of this earthquake is given as either 1932 or 1937 , although it is possible these were two distinct quakes . ) in '' the harvest '' ( 1.02 ) , willow refers to an earthquake in 1937 which '' swallowed half the town '' , including the master 's lair . in '' grave '' ( 6.22 ) , anya says that the temple on kingman 's bluff was '' swallowed up in the big earthquake of '32 '' . it is possible they are referring to two different earthquakes , but it is also possible that one of them is simply misstating the date . sometime in the 1980s or 1990s , richard wilkins was again elected mayor , now under the name of '' richard wilkins iii '' , and served more than one term . '' enemies '' ( 3.17 ) . a sign saying '' reelect mayor wilkins '' is visible ; since no election is currently being held , this indicates a past re-election bid . by the 1990s , sunnydale appeared to have become a typical town on the california coast , with a popular mayor , a police force that principal snyder describes as '' deeply stupid , '' episode 2/22 , '' becoming , part 2 . '' and a local newspaper ( the sunnydale press it can be seen in '' never kill a boy on the first date '' , '' reptile boy '' , '' becoming , part one '' , '' bad girls '' , '' consequences '' , '' graduation day , part one '' , '' hush '' , and '' once more , with feeling '' . ) . however , mayor wilkins had instructed the police to cover up any supernatural or mysterious violence occurring in the city , and had instructed principal snyder to cover up supernatural violence occurring at sunnydale high . in '' lovers walk '' ( 3.08 ) , wilkins refers to having covered up spike and drusilla 's rampages during season two . snyder and the police chief discuss these coverups in '' i only have eyes for you '' ( 2.19 ) . wilkins and snyder discuss it in '' graduation day , part 1 '' ( 3.21 ) . . mystic artifacts . at some point in sunnydale 's history , the following mystic artifacts were hidden throughout the town 's cemeteries and perhaps elsewhere : the du lac cross ( found in '' what 's my line , part one '' ) some , but not all , of the scattered remnants of the judge ( found and reassembled in '' surprise '' ) ; other pieces were found elsewhere and shipped to sunnydale the glove of myhneghon ( found in '' revelations '' ) the amulet of balthazar ( found in '' bad girls '' ) the gem of amarra ( found in '' the harsh light of day '' ) . during the series . the series begins when buffy summers , the current vampire slayer , moves to 1630 revello drive , and begins attending sunnydale high school . there she meets new friends , including willow rosenberg , xander harris , and her new watcher , rupert giles . this '' scooby gang '' , eventually including popular cheerleader cordelia chase and willow 's boyfriend oz , often hangs out at the bronze , the espresso pump ( a local coffee house with a retro gas station motif ) and the sun cinema . buffy 's mother , joyce , works in an art gallery in sunnydale . ( it is not clear whether or not she owns the gallery . ) during their time in high school , buffy and her friends fight a number of vampires , most notably the master , angel a vampire with a soul , who fell in love with buffy ; spike , drusilla , and angelus ( when angel had lost his soul ) . another slayer , faith , arrives in their senior year of high school ( season 3 ) and lives at the downtowner motel the sign reads '' downtowner motel/apt . '' in '' the zeppo '' ( 3.12 ) and others . until she joins forces with mayor wilkins . in the third season episode '' the wish '' , cordelia angrily wishes that buffy summers had never arrived in sunnydale , and her wish is granted by vengeance demon anyanka . cordelia finds herself in an alternate universe where the master has risen to the surface and completely taken over the town , with the surviving human population living in terror of the vampires . the school is sparsely populated ; curfews are strict ; humans wear crosses and drab colors to avoid attracting vampires ; and almost all of the people she knew are either dead or have been turned into vampires . at the end of the third season ( june 1999 ) , sunnydale high school is destroyed in a great conflict that kills mayor wilkins and principal snyder . after this point , there is no mention in the television show of the political leaders of the city . the police occasionally appear , but the police chief does not . there is no further discussion of the police covering up supernatural evidence , although one newspaper headline suggests this may have continued . in '' once more , with feeling '' ( 6.07 ) , the headline of the sunnydale press states , '' mayhem caused . monsters certainly not involved , officials say . '' as the fourth season begins ( fall 1999 ) , buffy and willow begin attending the university of california , sunnydale . there they discover that the united states government was operating a '' black '' ( secret ) military unit , the initiative , and has a laboratory and demon confinement complex in a cavern beneath the uc sunnydale campus . the initiative is closed down at the end of the season ( spring 2000 ) after a climactic battle with the cyborg adam . by this time , tara maclay and anya have been added to the scooby gang . later this same year , giles purchases a magic shop named the magic box . '' the real me '' ( 5.02 ) , which has been seen multiple times previously — for example , in '' lovers walk '' ( 3.08 ) , at which time it is called uncle bob 's magic cabinet . sometime between the fourth and fifth seasons ( during the summer of 2000 ) , the mysterious '' key '' is transformed into buffy 's younger '' sister '' , dawn summers and the evil goddess glory arrives in the town , leading to an increase in the number of mentally ill patients due to her ability to suck the sanity from their brains to maintain her own . the next year brings the deaths of joyce summers and buffy herself ( although buffy is returned from the grave by a magic spell cast by willow ) . after this point , buffy and dawn become co-owners of the family house . joyce 's will would have either left the house to buffy or to buffy and dawn . in '' empty places '' ( 7.19 ) , dawn tells buffy '' this is my house , too . '' before season 5 's end , a scene in the city would be shown at least once in the second season of buffys spinoff , angel . in the episode '' disharmony '' , cordelia chase calls willow from los angeles when her high school friend harmony kendall turns up . we see willow 's side of this call in a rare sunnydale scene for this series . angel himself returns to sunnydale at least four times in buffy seasons 4 , 5 and 7 . at the end of the sixth season ( spring 2002 ) , the magic box is demolished in a battle between willow and buffy . at the beginning of the seventh season ( fall 2002 ) , sunnydale high school is rebuilt on the same location as before — directly over the hellmouth . by this time , knowledge of supernatural phenomena seems to be slowly growing in the town . sunnydale 's population is also revealed to have dropped to 32,900 . the '' welcome to sunnydale '' sign lists a population 38,500 in several early episodes , including '' school hard '' ( 2.03 ) and '' lovers walk '' ( 3.08 ) . in '' conversations with dead people '' , meanwhile , it gives a population of 32,900 ( 7.07 ) . the sign is visible for a moment at the end of '' chosen '' ( 7.22 ) but the population figure is not legible . in the second half of the seventh season ( early 2003 ) , supernatural manifestations at sunnydale high reach unprecedented levels . within less than a month , virtually the entire population of the town flees in a mass evacuation . the evacuation is seen at the beginning of '' empty places '' ( 7.19 ) , although the bronze is still crowded . by the next episode , '' touched '' ( 7.20 ) , the town is virtually empty . soon thereafter , the cataclysmic showdown between the scooby gang , the potential slayers buffy has gathered together , and the first evil results in the complete obliteration of the town . sunnydale collapses into a giant pit , closing the entrance to the hellmouth . '' chosen '' ( 7.22 ) . during the weeks between the series finale of buffy and the season 5 premiere of angel , lindsey mcdonald makes an off-screen trip to the crater and digs up the amulet worn by spike in the final battle . he sends it to angel at wolfram & hart where it releases an incorporeal spike . the destruction of the city is mentioned several times during angel 's final season , mainly tying into spike 's brief ghostly status . it is seen one more time when a military general oversees the crater in season 8 . the destruction of the town has also led the u.s . government to brand the scooby gang and their slayers an international terrorism group . in the final arc of season 8 , the scooby gang return to the ruins of sunnydale to secure the seed of wonder , an artifact that is the source of all magic on earth , and serves as a battleground between themselves and a massive legion of extra-dimensional demons . references .