Luke Rhinehart

early life . george powers cockcroft was born on november 15 , 1932 in albany , new york to donald and elizabeth cockcroft , both college graduates , his mother from wellesley college . he was raised in albany , where his father was an electrical engineer , and his ancestry included vermont political notables . as tanya gold noted for an interview piece in the guardian , '' the creator of the dice man was born to new england grandees '' ; a great-grandfather and a grandfather were vermont 's governor and chief justice of its supreme court , resepctively , in their time . see gold , the guardian , 4 march 2017 , op . cit . he attended the albany academy , graduating in 1950 , and received a ba from cornell university in 1954 and an ma from columbia university in 1956 . in 1964 he received a phd in american literature , also from columbia . after obtaining his phd , he went into teaching . during his years as a university professor he taught , among other things , courses in zen and western literature . career . in 1969 , while cockcroft was teaching a study abroad program on the island of mallorca , an englishman starting a new publishing house happened to stop at a cafe in the same village , deià , and was given a partial manuscript of the dice man to read by cockcroft . cockcroft was subsequently offered an advance payment for publication . shortly afterwards , cockcroft was encouraged by his course director to take an early sabbatical from his teaching duties . he remained in mallorca to complete the novel , after which the publisher sold the american rights to the novel for a large sum , and within a year the film rights , allowing cockcroft to retire from teaching and become a full time novelist . personal life and family . cockroft married his wife , ann , who would later become a writer of two romance novels and a volume of poetry , on june 30 , 1956 ; together they have three children . his brother , james cockcroft , is the author of more than 20 books , mostly on latin american history and society . the author and his family spent a number of years traveling , sailing , and returning to mallorca , living in deià in the late 1960s and early 70s , retrieved 20/12/2020 . including time spent on a large catamaran which became the inspiration for the boat in his novel long voyage back . in the mid 1970s they returned to the united states and spent 1975 in a sufi commune , before moving to a large old farmhouse and former religious retreat in the foothills of the berkshires in upstate new york . death . on 1 august 2012 , the '' death '' of rhinehart at the age of 79 was announced by email to 25 friends , beginning with the words “ it is our pleasure to inform you that luke rhinehart is dead ” ; it was later revealed the “ death letter ” was instigated as a playful hoax by cockcroft . reactions ranged from sorrow to gratitude and amusement . cockroft died in november 2020 . . books . fiction . . comic philosophical novels . a number of works authored by him have a similar style to the dice man and alternate between first- and third-person voice with selections from fictional documents . in one case , he even quotes from a future book that he did not actually write until more than two decades later . the voices having different characteristics , the novel ’ s mood changes accordingly . presenting these multiple fragments from multiple viewpoints together resulted in a '' cubist '' narrative structure . of this , rhinehart stated hat they had “ always conceived of myself as being multiple – having , you know , a dozen different selves , if not a thousand different selves , at any given moment . ” rhinehart ’ s first novel the dice man , is a cult classic . it tells the story of a psychiatrist who , dissatisfied with his limited roles and routine life , begins to make life decisions based on the casting of dice . the novel expresses permissive attitudes towards charged subject matter such as rape , murder and sexual experimentation . adventures of wim was an effort to create a new interpretation of the story of wim , a montauk boy born of a virgin mother , declared the savior of the montauk nation , and his life quest for ultimate truth . the book is told through the medium of fictional documents . the search for the dice man ( 1993 ) , set twenty years later , tells the story of rhinehart ’ s son , larry , who has built a highly successful and stable life , having rejected his father ’ s embracing of chance . on a quest to find his father however , larry ’ s life of order and routine becomes enveloped in chaos , the legacy of his father ’ s work . from a draft written at the same time as the dice man , naked before the world ( 2008 ) celebrates the lives of both hippies and the establishment in 1960s mallorca through the story of katya , an innocent catholic art student who arrives on the island to study abroad . katya is thrown into a world of artists , frauds , sex , drugs and the struggle to discover who she wants to be . in jesus invades george : an alternative history ( 2013 ) , which takes place in 2007 , then-sitting president george w . bush is possessed by the spirit of jesus christ . the story playfully reveals and deconstructs the hypocrisy of government and modern politics . in invasion ( 2016 ) , aliens invade earth for the sole purpose of having fun . hyper-intelligent and able to morph into multiple forms , they play games with culture and infrastructure , from computer networks and social media to corporate culture and human relationships . the resulting mayhem reveals the primitive nature of our society , and offers an alternative vision for the human race . a sequel is to be published entitled the hairy balls and the end of civilization . . conventional novels . in matari ( 1975 ) ( republished as white wind , black rider ( 2008 ) ) is historical fiction set in 18th century japan , the beautiful matari is joined by two zen poets as she flees from her husband , a samurai lord who is giving chase with intent to murder her . a lyrical and poetic tale of love , honor and morality . long voyage back ( 1983 ) , a nautical action-adventure novel , follows a group of people sailing aboard a trimaran , and their struggle for survival as they escape the aftermath of nuclear war . nonfiction . the book of est ( 1976 ) is a narrative account of werner erhard 's controversial lgat course personal transformation course known as erhard seminar training or est , which began in 1971 . ( erhard insisted on using lower case letters for the acronym . ) the reader is put in the place of a participant , in order to vicariously '' experience '' the training . erhard authored a foreword to the book . the book of the die ( 2000 ) is “ handbook of dice living ” intended to help free readers from barriers to an unfulfilled life . it follows the philosophy that people must give up their illusion that a self can control life ; they must let go . a collection of proverbs , essays , cartoons , poems , scenes from movies and more form this guide to creating a more playful and unpredictable life . . other works . screenplays . though best known as a novelist , rhinehart has also written nine screenplays : five are based directly on his novels : the dice man , the search for the dice man , whim , naked before the world , and white wind , black rider . two others are direct dice man sequels featuring the original character : the dice lady ( co-written with peter forbes ) , and last roll of the die ( co-written with nick mead ) . two other screenplays , mawson and picton 's chance , are original concepts . audio . the music and spoken word album , the dice man speaks , on dice man records , a new imprint of bizbro creative , features the pseudonymous rhinehart and sputnik weazel and was released in 2018 . access this quoted information by clicking on the three dots-button on the upper right hand corner of the cited webpage . on it , cockcroft/rhinehart performs spoken word passages voiced over acoustic and electronic musical pieces by weazel . antecedents and influence . to date there appears to be a single published scholarly work on the ideas appearing in cockcroft 's the dice man , a conference paper from shanna robinson of the institute for culture and society at the university of western sydney in australia ; in addressing the popular accounts of dickson on its having the '' impact of religious conversion on millions '' and the suggestion , again in popular media ( by dickson and adams ) , that the dicing theme was , at that time , '' enjoying a renaissance '' , robinson writes : although acknowledged that there has been no research at this point establishing the veracity of this , a number of other manifestations of dicing lend some credibility to the idea that it enjoys a certain level of popularity . also , the starting point for david colton 's 2019 phd thesis , ″canned chance , the commodification of aleatory art practice″ is the dice man novel . the novel , and the use of dice and other tools for accessing chance are discussed here . see manchester metropolitan university , more generally , art exploring the application of chance or randomness in its expression is referred to as aleatoricism , and at least one academic , richard hoadley , a faculty member in music and performing arts at anglia ruskin university in the united kingdom , refers to the writings of cockcroft/rhinehart in their teaching on aleatoricism in art . . in popular culture . music . the talk talk song , '' such a shame '' , was inspired by the dice man . the at the gates song , '' world of lies '' , quotes the dice man during it 's spoken word lyrics . television and radio . four seasons of a television travel series called the diceman were made between 1998 and 2000 by the discovery channel . the destinations and activities of the participants were determined by the roll of a die . uk channel 4 's broadcast of diceworld ( 1999 , paul wilmshurst directing ) , a 50-minute television documentary about cockcroft/rhinehart and some of the people influenced by his novels , led to a resurgence of interest in cockcroft/rhinehart 's books , and in various related '' dicing projects '' . a further documentary was produced in 2004 , a collaboration between cockcroft/rhinehart and director nick mead , entitled dice life : the random mind of luke rhinehart . theater . inspired by the dice man and written by paul lucas , the play the dice house premiered in the united kingdom in 2001 , and went on to staging at the arts theatre in london 's west end in 2004 . . magazines and books . controversially , journalist ben marshall spent two years from 1998 to 2000 experimenting with dicing , and reporting his experiences in loaded magazine ; loaded subsequently named cockcroft/rhinehart as novelist of the century . murder mystery author terry mitchell often uses characters who throw dice to make decisions , and in his own personal life , mitchell created the '' dice road trip '' , '' dicing to eat '' , and '' the sacred journey '' , each of which used dice to make decisions about life decisions . comics and related media . the uk comic , 2000 ad , published the gamebook magazine title , dice man , in 1986 ; in total 5 editions were created by pat mills through october of that year , with script and game by mills , covers by glenn fabry , and with art and lettering done by various individuals at 2000 ad . the relationship between this comic title and the similarly titled cockcroft work has been established . advertising . the brewers of rolling rock beer launched an advertising campaign in the united kingdom in 1998 based on the dice man theme , a campaign that included a short-lived dice life website . the relationship between this campaign and cockcroft 's work has been established . art . san francisco artist larnie fox created war toys , '' an exhibit of kinetic sound sculptures '' , for which an activity , '' the dicewalk '' , inspired by cockcroft 's work , was part of its closing ceremony . . bibliography . the dice man ( 1971 ) . matari ( 1975 ) . the book of est ( 1976 ) . long voyage back ( 1983 ) . adventures of wim ( 1986 ) . the search for the dice man ( 1993 ) . the book of the die ( 2000 ) . whim ( 2002 reissue of adventures of wim ) . white wind , black rider ( 2008 ) . reissue of matari . naked before the world : a lovely pornographic love story ( 2008 ) . jesus invades george : an alternative history ( 2013 ) invasion ( 2016 ) . references . further reading . series in the guardian . . other works . . external links . for a long list of further articles based on interviews , see the articles cited in the text . interviews . gq interview , 7 march 2012 . other works .