Flagship

naval use . in common naval use , the term flagship is fundamentally a temporary designation ; the flagship is wherever the admiral 's flag is being flown . however , admirals have always needed additional facilities , including a meeting room large enough to hold all the captains of the fleet and a place for the admiral 's staff to make plans and draw up orders . historically , only larger ships could accommodate such requirements . the term was also used by commercial fleets , when the distinction between a nation 's navy and merchant fleet was not clear . an example was sea venture , flagship of the fleet of the virginia company , which was captained by royal navy vice-admiral christopher newport yet bore the merchant navy admiral of the company 's fleet , sir george somers , during the ill-fated third supply of 1609 . in the age of sailing ships , the flagship was typically a first rate ; the aft of one of the three decks would become the admiral 's quarters and staff offices . this can be seen on , the flagship of admiral nelson at the battle of trafalgar in 1805 , still serving the royal navy as the ceremonial flagship of the first sea lord from portsmouth , england . non-first rates could serve as flagships , however : , a frigate ( a fifth rate ) , served as flagship for parts of the united states navy during the early 19th century . in the 20th century , ships became large enough that the larger types , cruisers and up , could accommodate a commander and staff . some larger ships may have a separate flag bridge for use by the admiral and his staff while the captain commands from the main navigation bridge . because its primary function is to coordinate a fleet , a flagship is not necessarily more heavily armed or armored than other ships . during world war ii admirals often preferred a faster ship over the largest one . modern flagships are designed primarily for command and control rather than for fighting , and are also known as command ships . flagship as metaphor . as with many other naval terms , flagship has crossed over into general usage , where it means the most important or leading member of a group , as in the flagship station of a broadcast network . is used as both a noun and adjective describing the most prominent or highly touted product , brand , location , or service offered by a company . derivations include the '' flagship brand '' or '' flagship product '' of a manufacturing company , '' flagship store '' of a retail chain , or '' flagship service '' of a hospitality or transportation concern . the term '' flagship '' may have specific applications : auto companies may have a flagship in the form of their leading or highest-priced car . electronics industry may have a series of products considered to be their flagship , usually consisting of one or two products that are updated periodically . for example , the samsung galaxy s series consists of several flagship smartphones that are released on a yearly basis . in rail transport , a '' flagship service '' is either the fastest or most luxurious . often it is also a named train or service . colleges and universities in the united states . most states in the united states provide public university education through one or more university systems , with each system having multiple campuses located throughout the state . the phrase flagship institution or flagship university may be applied to an individual school or campus within each state system . the college board , for example , defines flagship universities as the best-known institutions in the state , noting that they were generally the first to be established and are frequently the largest and most selective , as well as the most research-intensive public universities . these schools are often land-grant , sea-grant , or space-grant research universities . according to robert m . berdahl , then-chancellor of the university of california , berkeley , the phrase '' flagship '' came into existence in the 1950s when the morrill act schools were joined by newer institutions built in a wave of post-war expansion of state university systems . berdahl notes further that because flagships are generally the oldest schools within a system , they are often the largest and best financed and are perceived as elite relative to non-flagship state schools . he comments that '' those of us in 'systems ' of higher education are frequently actively discouraged from using the term 'flagship ' to refer to our campuses because it is seen as hurtful to the self-esteem of colleagues at other institutions in our systems . the use of the term is seen by some as elitist and boastful . it is viewed by many , in the context of the politics of higher education , as 'politically incorrect . ' . only in the safe company of alumni is one permitted to use the term . '' nevertheless , the term '' flagship university '' is still used in official contexts by the u.s . department of education , various state university system boards of governors , and state legislatures . additionally , state universities often self-designate themselves as flagships . higher education agencies , research journals , and other organizations also use the term , though their lists of flagship universities can differ greatly . one list of 50 flagship universities ( one per state ) is employed by the higher education coordinating board , the college board , the princeton review and many other state and federal educational and governmental authorities for a variety of purposes including tuition and rate comparisons , research studies and public policy analyses . despite its ubiquity , this list of 50 flagships is not the only state-by-state examination of flagships . in a 2010 article , standard & poor 's created its own list of flagship universities , noting that each state had typically one or two institutions with flagship characteristics . the education sector , an education policy organization , used a different list of 51 flagship universities in an august 2011 study of college debt . several states had multiple universities categorized as flagships due to '' less of a clear distinction between a single flagship and other public universities '' in those states . additionally , several states were not included in the study due to insufficient comparative data . there are many instances in which more than one school in a state has claimed to be , or has been described as , a '' flagship '' . in february 2012 , idaho 's state board of education made a controversial decision to strike the word '' flagship '' from the university of idaho mission statement . the board 's president richard westerberg explained that this revision was made as part of the board 's many changes made to multiple idaho universities ' mission statements in an effort to ensure all statements were consistent and collegial in nature rather than comparative or competitive . idaho . retailing . flagship stores are core stores for brand name retailers , larger than their standard outlets and stocking greater inventory , often found in prominent shopping districts such as fifth avenue in new york , oxford street in london or tokyo 's ginza . . broadcasting . a flagship station is the principal station of a radio or tv network broadcast network . it can be the station that produces the largest amount of material for the network , or the station in the parent company 's home city , or both . the term dates back to the mid twentieth century years of broadcasting when headquarters stations produced programs for their networks . for example , the flagship stations of the abc , nbc and cbs television and radio networks are their owned and operated outlets in new york city . likewise , public television 's wnet served as primary member station for national educational television ( net ) , a forerunner to the us public broadcasting service ( pbs ) . in sports broadcasting , the '' flagship '' is a team 's primary station in their home market , which produces game broadcasts and feeds them to affiliates . for example , wgn was the flagship station of the chicago cubs baseball team , which has an extensive cubs radio network spanning several states . automobiles . the term flagship is also used to describe an automaker 's top ( i.e . largest/most expensive/most prestigious ) vehicle . modern examples include the mercedes-benz s-class , toyota century , hongqi l5 , and land rover 's range rover . airlines . american airlines obtained copyright to the term “ flagship ” on may 3 , 1937 per the catalog of copyright entries . as of december 20 , 2019 as stated in a legal document , this includes '' the marks “ flagship , ” “ flagship lounge ” and “ flagship suite ” ( the “ flagship marks ” ) —to describe premium air travel services for first and business class passengers since the 1930s and 1940s . '' delta airlines also uses/used the word '' flagship '' to describe its top lines , as pointed out by aa and being argued legally in december 2019 and into 2020 . . conservation . within conservation biology , the term flagship species refers to a species or taxon that is a symbol or rallying point to catalyze conservation actions . . see also . list of flagships . references . external links .