1983 in music

specific locations . 1983 in british music 1983 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1983 in country music 1983 in heavy metal music 1983 in hip hop music 1983 in jazz . trends . classical music on cd has become popular among listeners . . events . january–april . january 1 ztt records is founded . the merchant ivory film heat and dust is released . on the soundtrack , composed by zakir hussain , ivory is featured on tanpura with hussain ( who also appeared in the film ) on tabla . january 8 – the uk singles chart is tabulated from this week forward by the gallup organization . in 1984 electronic terminals will be used in selected stores to gather sales information , and the old '' sales diary '' method will be gradually phased out over the next few years . february 2 – '' menudomania '' comes to new york as 3,500 screaming girls crowd kennedy airport to catch a glimpse of puerto rico boy band menudo , who are playing six sold-out shows at the felt forum . february 11 – the rolling stones concert film let 's spend the night together opens in new york . february 13 – marvin gaye performs '' the star-spangled banner '' before the nba all-star game . february 23 – the 25th annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by john denver . toto win both album of the year ( for toto iv ) and record of the year ( for '' rosanna '' ) , while willie nelson 's cover of '' always on my mind '' wins song of the year . men at work win best new artist . february 26 – michael jackson 's thriller album hits 1 on the us charts , the first of thirty-seven ( non-consecutive ) weeks it would spend there on its way to becoming the biggest-selling album of all time . february 28 – u2 releases their 3rd album war which debuts at 1 in the uk and produces the band 's first international hit single . march 2 – compact discs go on sale in the united states . they had first been released in japan the previous october . march 4 – neil young cancels the remainder of his tour after collapsing backstage in louisville , kentucky , after playing for seventy-five minutes . april 5 a generative theory of tonal music by fred lerdahl and ray jackendoff is published . us interior secretary james g . watt causes controversy when he effectively bans the beach boys from a return performance at the fourth of july festivities in washington , announcing that wayne newton would perform instead . watt claims that rock bands attract '' the wrong element '' . that same week president reagan , himself an avowed beach boys fan , presents watt with a plaster foot with a hole in it . april 11 – dave mustaine is fired from metallica just as the band is set to begin recording its début album . he is replaced by kirk hammett . april 14 – david bowie releases let 's dance , his first album since parting ways with rca records and his fifteenth studio album overall . with its deliberate shift to mainstream dance-rock , it would become bowie 's biggest commercial success , at 10.7 million copies sold worldwide . bowie , however , would experience a critical downturn for the next ten years as a result of his perceived obligation to continue appealing to fans of the album . april 18 – ellen taaffe zwilich becomes the first woman to win the pulitzer prize for music . april 23 – french singer corinne hermès , representing luxembourg , wins the 28th annual eurovision song contest , held at rudi-sedlmayer-halle in munich , with the song '' si la vie est cadeau '' . may–august . may 16 singer anna vissi marries composer nikos karvelas . the motown 25 special airs on nbc , celebrating a quarter century of motown records . michael jackson unveils his moonwalk dance move during a performance of '' billie jean '' . may 28–june 4 – the second us festival is held at glen helen park in california . june 3 – american rock drummer jim gordon commits matricide during a schizophrenic episode . june 18–19 – menudo 's second visit to new york . the band plays four shows at madison square garden and all 80,000 tickets sell out within three days of going on sale . june 20 – catalunya ràdio begins broadcasting . july 1 – chilean band los prisioneros debut at the miguel leon prado high school song festival . they personify the rebellion of young chileans leading to protests which eventually oust augusto pinochet . july 6 – as a statement of protest against music piracy in the form of home taping , jean-michel jarre releases only one pressing of his latest album '' music for supermarkets '' , which is sold at an auction to a french real estate dealer for 69,000 francs ( about 8960 us . ) the auction is broadcast live on radio luxembourg which also plays the album in full for the first and only time . july 19 – simon and garfunkel begin their north american summer tour in akron , ohio . july 21 – diana ross performs a filmed concert in central park in heavy rain ; eventually the storm forces her to postpone the rest of the concert till next day . july 25 – metallica release their debut studio album , kill 'em all , since hailed as a groundbreaking release for the burgeoning thrash metal genre . july 29 – friday night videos is broadcast for the first time on nbc . august 5 – david crosby is sentenced by a judge in dallas , texas to five years in prison on drug and weapon possession charges . august 16 johnny ramone suffers a near-fatal head injury during a fight over a girl in front of his east village apartment . singer paul simon marries actress carrie fisher . august 20 – the rolling stones sign a new 28 million contract with cbs records , the largest recording contract in history up to this time . september–december . september – bonnie tyler releases the album faster than the speed of night in united states september 1 – joe strummer and paul simonon of the clash issue a press statement announcing mick jones has been fired from the group . september 4 – phil lynott performs his final show with thin lizzy in nuremberg , germany . september 18 – the members of kiss show their faces without their makeup for the first time on mtv , simultaneous with the release of their album lick it up . september 20 – the first arms charity concert is held at the royal albert hall in london . november 12 – duran duran start their sing blue silver world tour . the tour begins with sold-out shows in australia november 26 – quiet riot 's metal health album tops the us album charts , the first heavy metal album to hit 1 in america . december 2 the uday-ustav festival , a tribute to uday shankar , is staged at the instigation of uday 's younger brother , ravi shankar . michael jackson 's 14-minute music video for thriller is premiered on mtv . phish plays first show . december 25 – marvin gaye gives his father , as a christmas present , an unlicensed smith & wesson . 38 special caliber pistol so that gaye could protect himself from intruders . a few months later , gaye sr would use it to shoot his son dead . december 31 – the twelfth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by culture club , rick james , laura branigan , barry manilow , mary jane girls and david frizzell . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1983 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1983 . bands reformed . the animals the everly brothers . albums released . january–march . . compositions . vyacheslav artyomov – tristia for solo piano , organ , trumpet , vibraphone and strings jean-baptiste barrière – chreode i john cage – thirty pieces for string quartet friedrich cerha – requiem für hollensteiner george crumb – processional for piano jean daetwyler – concerto for alphorn , flute , saxophone and strings no . 2 mario davidovsky – romancero , for soprano , flute ( piccolo , alto flute ) , clarinet ( bass clarinet ) , violin and violoncello lorenzo ferrero ellipse for flute onde for guitar karel goeyvaerts – aquarius i ( voorspel ) —l ’ ère du verseau , for orchestra jacques hétu – clarinet concerto simeon ten holt – lemniscaat , for keyboard ( 1982–1983 ) wojciech kilar – fanfare victoria for mixed choir and orchestra witold lutosławski – symphony no . 3 ( 1972–83 ) krzysztof penderecki – viola concerto john pickard – nocturne in black and gold peter sculthorpe – piano concerto karlheinz stockhausen – luzifers tanz , for wind orchestra iannis xenakis – shaar morton feldman – crippled symmetry . opera . robert ashley – perfect lives ( an opera for television ) leonard bernstein – a quiet place oliver knussen – where the wild things are ( children 's ) olivier messiaen – saint françois d'assise per nørgård – det guddommelige tivoli ( the divine circus ) . jazz . musical theater . la cage aux folles – broadway production opened at the palace theatre and ran for 1781 performances doonesbury – broadway production opened at the biltmore theatre and ran for 104 performances mame ( jerry herman ) – broadway revival merlin – broadway production opened at the mark hellinger theatre and ran for 199 performances oliver ! ( lionel bart ) – london revival on your toes – broadway revival my one and only – broadway production opened at the st . james theatre and ran for 767 performances singin ' in the rain – london production the tap dance kid – broadway production opened at the broadhurst theatre and ran for 699 performances zorba – broadway revival . musical films . carmen eddie and the cruisers flashdance le bal mangammagari manavadu narcissus neti bharatam the pirates of penzance rock & rule staying alive yentl . musical television . salad days . births . january 13 – william hung , american musician january 18 – samantha mumba , irish singer and actress january 19 – hikaru utada , japanese singer and songwriter january 20 – mari yaguchi , japanese singer ( morning musume ) and host january 21 – rapsody , american rapper january 24 – frankie grande , american actor , singer , and dancer january 25 – andrée watters , canadian singer january 30 – ella hooper , australian rock singer-songwriter , musician , radio presenter and tv personality ( killing heidi + the verses ) february 1 – andrew vanwyngarden , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( mgmt ) february 5 – baby k , singaporean-italian singer-songwriter february 8 – jim verraros , american singer february 10 – bless , canadian rapper february 13 – joel little , new zealand record producer , musician and grammy award-winning songwriter ( lorde , taylor swift ) february 17 – kevin rudolf , american record producer and musician february 19 – mika nakashima , japanese singer and actress march 3 – katie white , british singer ( the ting tings ) march 8 – piano squall , american pianist march 9 – mayte perroni , mexican singer and actress march 10 – carrie underwood , american singer/songwriter march 14 – taylor hanson american band member ( hanson ) march 15 – florencia bertotti , argentine actress and singer march 19 – ana rezende ( css ( band ) ) , brazilian march 29 luiza sá ( css ( band ) ) , brazilian jamie woon , british singer , songwriter and record producer , march 30 – hebe tian , member of the taiwanese girl-group s.h.e march 31 – 40 ( record producer ) , canadian record producer , collaborator with drake april 4 – tei , korean ballad singer april 15 – margo price , american singer-songwriter april 16 – marié digby , american singer , songwriter , guitarist , and pianist april 18 – reeve carney , american singer-songwriter and actor april 20 – sebastian ingrosso , swedish dj , actor and record producer . may – october ( singer ) , british musician , producer , singer-songwriter , experimentalist and recording artist may 8 – matt willis , british musician ( busted ) and presenter may 10 – moshe peretz , israeli musician may 11 – holly valance , australian actress , singer and model . may 14 – anahí , mexican singer and actress may 15 – devin bronson , american guitarist , songwriter and producer june 2 – brooke white , american singer june 3 – kelela , american singer and songwriter . june 8 – lee harding , australian singer june 15 – laura imbruglia , australian indie rock singer-songwriter . june 16 – jen majura , german guitarist , bassist and singer . june 17 connie fisher , british actress and singer lee ryan , british singer june 27 – evan taubenfeld , american guitarist , singer , and songwriter ( avril lavigne ) june 30 patrick wolf , english singer-songwriter cheryl , former member of girls aloud , british singer-songwriter and television personality july 1 leeteuk , south korean singer-songwriter and actor . marit larsen , norwegian musician ( m2m ) july 2 – michelle branch , american singer-songwriter and musician ( the wreckers ) july 3 steph jones , american singer-songwriter matt papa , american singer-songwriter july 4 ben jorgensen , american singer , guitarist , member of armor for sleep andrew mrotek , american drummer ( the academy is . ) july 7 – ciara newell , irish singer ( bellefire ) july 9 – lucia micarelli , violinist and actress july 10 – heechul , south korean singer , songwriter july 11 – marie serneholt ( a teens ) july 18 – aaron gillespie , drummer ( underoath ) july 21 – eivør pálsdóttir , faroese singer and composer july 23 – bec hewitt , australian singer , dancer , and actor july 24 – morgan sorne , american singer-songwriter and multi-media artist august 7 – christian chávez , mexican singer and actor august 8 – vanessa amorosi , australian singer/songwriter august 9 – ashley johnson , american actress , voice actress and singer . august 14 – sunidhi chauhan , playback singer august 18 danny ! , american record producer/recording artist mika , british singer emma mckenna , canadian singer-songwriter august 19 tammin sursok , south african-born australian actress and singer . missy higgins , australian singer-songwriter , musician and actress . august 21 - brody jenner , american dj august 25 – james righton , english musician , multi instrumentalist august 28 – alfonso herrera , mexican singer and actor august 30 – jun matsumoto , japanese singer and actor september 12 – frank dukes , canadian record producer and dj september 14 – amy winehouse , english soul , jazz , blues and rnb singer-songwriter ( died 2011 ) september 17 – jennifer peña , american singer and actress september 25 – donald glover , american actor , comedian , writer , director , rapper , and dj september 30 – t-pain , american rapper & singer-songwriter october 7 – flying lotus , american rapper and producer , founded brainfeeder october 10 alyson hau , hong kong radio dj jack savoretti , english acoustic artist ( kylie minogue ) lzzy hale , american singer , songwriter , and musician . ( halestorm ) october 20 – alona tal , israeli singer and actress . october 22 – plan b , english hip hop rapper october 24 – adrienne bailon , american singer and actress october 26 – houston , american r & b singer october 29 amit sebastian paul , swedish singer ( a-teens ) richard brancatisano , australian actor/musician october 30 – diana karazon , jordanian singer november 7 – forrest kline , american singer and songwriter ( hellogoodbye ) november 10 – miranda lambert , american country musician november 14 lil boosie , american rapper chelsea wolfe , american singer-songwriter november 16 fallon bowman , south african–born guitarist ( kittie ) k , south korean singer november 27 – nyla , jamaican singer and songwriter ( brick & lace ) november 28 rostam batmanglij , american musician ( vampire weekend ) tyler glenn , american alternative singer ( neon trees ) december 3 – sherri dupree , american singer-songwriter december 12 – katrina elam , american country singer-songwriter december 15 – brooke fraser , new zealand singer-songwriter , musician december 17 – kosuke saito , japanese dj december 29 – jessica andrews , american country music singer december 31 – sayaka ichii , japanese singer ( morning musume ) unknown dan sultan , australian alternative rock singer-songwriter-guitarist joseph tawadros , egyptian-born australian oud virtuoso . deaths . january 5 – amy evans , operatic soprano and actress , 98 january 7 – edith coates , operatic mezzo-soprano , 74 january 28 – billy fury , singer , 42 ( heart attack ) january 31 – lorraine ellison , soul singer , 51 february 4 – karen carpenter , singer and drummer , 32 ( cardiac arrest due to anorexia nervosa ) february 8 charles kullman , operatic tenor , 80 alfred wallenstein , cellist , 84 february 12 – eubie blake , pianist , 96 february 18 – leopold godowsky , jr . , violinist and chemist , 82 february 22 – sir adrian boult , conductor , 93 february 23 – herbert howells , organist and composer , 90 february 28 – winifred atwell , trinidadian pianist , 69 march 6 – cathy berberian , singer and composer , 57 march 7 igor markevitch , ukrainian composer and conductor , 70 william walton , british composer , 80 april 4 – danny rapp ( danny and the juniors ) , 41 ( suicide by gunshot ) april 5 – cliff carlisle , country and blues singer , 79 april 13 – dolo coker , jazz pianist and composer , 55 april 14 – pete farndon ( the pretenders ) , english bassist , 30 ( drug overdose ) april 17 – felix pappalardi , american producer and bassist , 43 ( gunshot ) april 23 – earl hines , american jazz pianist , 79 april 30 muddy waters , blues singer and guitarist , 70 ( heart attack ) george balanchine , russian-american choreographer , 79 may 23 george bruns , film composer , 68 finn mortensen , composer and music critic , 61 may 25 – paul quinichette , saxophonist , 67 june 2 – stan rogers , folk musician , 33 june 25 – alberto ginastera , argentina composer , 67 july 4 – claus adam , cellist , 66 july 5 – harry james , bandleader , 67 july 12 – chris wood , rock musician , 39 july 23 – georges auric , french composer , member of les six , 84 july 27 – jerome moross , composer , conductor and orchestrator , 69 july 30 – howard dietz , lyricist , 86 august 2 – james jamerson , bassist , 47 august 3 – helge bonnén , pianist and composer , 87 august 6 – klaus nomi , singer , 39 ( complications from aids ) august 13 – zdeněk liška , czech film composer , 61 august 14 – omer létourneau , pianist , organist , composer and conductor , 92 august 17 – ira gershwin , american lyricist , 86 august 24 – arkady filippenko , composer , 71 september 5 – john gilpin , dancer , 53 ( heart attack ) september 24 – isobel baillie , operatic soprano , 88 september 25 – paul jacobs , american pianist , 53 ( complications from aids ) october 16 øivin fjeldstad , violinist and conductor , 80 george liberace , violinist and arranger , 72 november 3 – alfredo antonini , conductor , 82 november 7 – germaine tailleferre , composer , only female member of les six , 88 november 15 – john grimaldi , english keyboard player and songwriter ( argent ) , 28 november 19 – tommy evans , bassist of the rock group badfinger , 36 ( suicide ) december 6 – lucienne boyer , french singer , 80 december 11 – simon laks , polish composer and violinist , 82 december 28 – dennis wilson , american singer , songwriter and drummer , 39 ( drowned ) date unknown antonio mairena , andalusian flamenco singer , 73 or 74 pat smythe , scottish-born jazz pianist , 59 or 60 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1983 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1983 . charts . us no . 1 hits . hot 100 no . 1 hits of 1983 see also : 1983 in music ( uk ) record labels established in 1983 . see also . ronald reagan in music . references .