Eddystone Lighthouse

the need for a light . the eddystone rocks are an extensive reef approximately 12 miles ( 19 & nbsp ; km ) ssw off plymouth sound , one of the most important naval harbours of england , and midway between lizard point , cornwall and start point . they are submerged at high spring tides and were so feared by mariners entering the english channel that they often hugged the coast of france to avoid the danger , which thus resulted not only in shipwrecks locally , but on the rocks of the north coast of france and the channel islands . given the difficulty of gaining a foothold on the rocks particularly in the predominant swell it was a long time before anyone attempted to place any warning on them . winstanley 's lighthouse . the first lighthouse on eddystone rocks was an octagonal wooden structure built by henry winstanley . the lighthouse was also the first recorded instance of an offshore lighthouse . construction started in 1696 and the light was lit on 14 november 1698 . during construction , a french privateer took winstanley prisoner and destroyed the work done so far on the foundations , causing louis xiv to order winstanley 's release with the words '' france is at war with england , not with humanity '' . 01 : winstanley ’ s light ( painting 1699 – 1703 ) the lighthouse survived its first winter but was in need of repair , and was subsequently changed to a dodecagonal ( 12 sided ) stone clad exterior on a timber framed construction with an octagonal top section as can be seen in the later drawings or paintings . ( this gives rise to the claims that there have been five lighthouses on eddystone rock . ) the octagonal top section ( or 'lantern ' ) was high and in diameter , its eight windows each made up of 36 individual glass panes . it was lit by '60 candles at a time , besides a great hanging lamp' . winstanley 's tower lasted until the great storm of 1703 erased almost all trace on 27 november . winstanley was on the lighthouse , completing additions to the structure . no trace was found of him , or of the other five men in the lighthouse . the cost of construction and five years ' maintenance totalled £7,814 7s.6d , during which time dues totalling £4,721 19s.3d had been collected at one penny per ton from passing vessels . rudyard 's lighthouse . following the destruction of the first lighthouse , captain john lovett later colonel john lovett ( c . 1660–1710 ) of soulbury liscombe park and corfe , ( son and heir of former merchant in turkey , christopher lovett , lord mayor of dublin 1676–1677 ) and uncle of noted architect edward lovett pearce 1699–1733 . acquired the lease of the rock , and by act of parliament was allowed to charge passing ships a toll of one penny per ton . he commissioned john rudyard ( or rudyerd ) to design the new lighthouse , built as a conical wooden structure around a core of brick and concrete . the vertical wooden planks which sheathed the structure were installed by two master-shipwrights and caulked like those of a ship ; and the whole structure was anchored to the reef using thirty-six wrought iron bolts forged to fit deep holes which had been machine-cut in the reef . contemporary illustrations with description by rudyerd . a light was first shone from the tower on 28 july 1708 and the work was completed in 1709 . the light was provided by 24 candles . this proved more durable , surviving nearly fifty years . on the night of 2 december 1755 , the top of the lantern caught fire , probably through a spark from one of the candles used to illuminate the light , or else through a fracture in the chimney which passed through the lantern from the stove in the kitchen below . the three keepers threw water upwards from a bucket but were driven onto the rock and were rescued by boat as the tower burnt down . keeper henry hall , who was 94 at the time , died several days later from ingesting molten lead from the lantern roof . a report on this case was submitted to the royal society by physician edward spry , and the piece of lead is now in the collections of the national museums of scotland . lighthouse , eddystone , second / sample / lead www.nms.ac.uk , accessed 12 december 2019 . smeaton 's lighthouse . the third lighthouse marked a major step forward in the design of such structures . recommended by the royal society , civil engineer john smeaton modelled the shape on an oak tree , the foundations and outside structure built of local cornish granite , and lighter portland limestone masonry used on the inside . he pioneered 'hydraulic lime ' , a concrete that cured under water , and developed a technique of securing the blocks using dovetail joints and marble dowels . construction started in 1756 at millbay and the light was first lit on 16 october 1759 . smeaton 's lighthouse was 59 & nbsp ; feet ( 18 & nbsp ; m ) high and had a diameter at the base of 26 & nbsp ; feet ( 8 & nbsp ; m ) and at the top of 17 & nbsp ; feet ( 5 & nbsp ; m ) . it was lit by a chandelier of 24 large tallow candles . in 1807 the 100-year lease on the lighthouse expired , whereupon ownership and management devolved to trinity house . in 1810 they replaced the chandelier and candles with 24 argand lamps and parabolic reflectors . in 1841 major renovations were made , woolmer 's exeter and plymouth gazette , 15 may 1841 under the direction of engineer henry norris of messrs . walker & burges , including complete repointing , replacement water tanks and filling of a large cavity in the rock close to the foundations . in 1845 the lighthouse was equipped with a new second-order fixed catadioptric optic , image manufactured by henry lepaute of paris , with a single multi-wick oil lamp , replacing the old lamps and reflectors . this was the first time that a fully catadioptric large optic ( using prisms rather than mirrors above and below the lens ) had been constructed , and the first such installation in any lighthouse . a new lantern was constructed and fitted to the top of the tower in 1848 , as the original had proved unsatisfactory for housing the new optic . smeaton 's lighthouse remained in use until 1877 when erosion to the rocks under the lighthouse caused it to shake from side to side whenever large waves hit . after decommissioning it was rebuilt on plymouth hoe , in plymouth , as a memorial . william douglass ( engineer ) supervised the dismantling and removal of smeaton 's tower . the re-erected tower on the hoe is now a tourist attraction . the foundations and stub of the tower remain , close to the new and more solid foundations of the current lighthouse – the foundations proved too strong to be dismantled so the victorians left them where they stood . an 1850 replica of smeaton 's lighthouse , hoad monument , stands above the town of ulverston , cumbria as a memorial to naval administrator sir john barrow . douglass 's lighthouse . the current , fourth , lighthouse was designed by james douglass , using robert stevenson 's developments of smeaton 's techniques . by july 1878 the new site , on the south rock was being prepared during the 3½ hours between ebb and flood tide ; the foundation stone was laid on 19 august the following year by hrh the duke of edinburgh , master of trinity house . the supply ship hercules was based at oreston , now a suburb of plymouth ; stone was prepared at the oreston yard and supplied from the works of messrs shearer , smith and co of wadebridge . the tower , which is high , contains a total of 62,133 cubic feet of granite , weighing 4,668 tons . the last stone was laid on 1 june 1881 and the light was first lit on 18 may 1882 . the lighthouse is still in use . the lighthouse was equipped with a large ( first-order ) six-sided biform ( i.e . two-tier ) rotating optic , high in total , manufactured by chance brothers of smethwick ; image each of the six sides of the optic was divided into two fresnel lens panels , which provided the light 's characteristic of two flashes every thirty seconds . wikisource : page : eb1911 - volume 16.djvu/672 in total , the apparatus stood over tall and weighed over seven tons . at the time the eddystone 's extra-tall lenses were the largest in existence ; their superior height was achieved through the use of extra-dense flint glass in the upper and lower portions of each panel . the lighthouse was equipped with a 0.5 h.p . caloric engine to drive the optic 's rotation . illumination was provided by a pair of douglass-designed six-wick concentric argand lamp ; image eighteen cisterns in the lower part of the tower were used to store up to 2,660 tons ( nine months ' worth ) of colza oil to fuel the lamps . on clear nights , only the lamp in the lower tier of lenses was lit ( producing a light of 37,000 candlepower ) ; in poor visibility , however ( judged by whether the plymouth breakwater was visible ) , both lamps were used at full power , to provide a 159,600 candlepower light . in addition to the main light a fixed white light was shone from a room on the eighth storey of the tower ( using a pair of argand lamps and reflectors ) in the direction of the hazardous hand deeps . image the lighthouse was also provided with a pair of large bells , each weighing two tons , which were suspended from either side of the lantern gallery to serve as a fog signal . ten years later they were supplemented ( and then supplanted ) by use of an explosive fog signal device . in 1904 the lamps were replaced with incandescent oil vapour burners . following the invention of the mercury bath system ( allowing a lighthouse optic to revolve in a trough of mercury rather than on rollers ) the eddystone lens pedestal was duly upgraded and the drive mechanism replaced . later , in 1959 the light was electrified and the current smaller ( fourth-order ) 'bi-valve ' optic was installed ; at the same time a 'air horn ' fog signal was installed , with compressors powered from the diesel generators . the old optic was removed and donated to southampton maritime museum ( it was exhibited on the royal pier in the 1970s , but later removed to a council yard where it was destroyed by vandals ) . the lighthouse was automated in 1982 , the first trinity house 'rock ' ( or offshore ) lighthouse to be converted . two years earlier the tower had been changed by construction of a helipad above the lantern , to allow maintenance crews access ; the helipad has a weight limit of 3600 & nbsp ; kg . as part of the automation of the lighthouse a new electric fog signal was installed and a metal halide discharge lamp replaced the incandescent light bulb formerly in use . the light and other systems were monitored remotely , initially by trinity house staff at the nearby penlee point fog signal station . since 1999 the lighthouse has run on solar power . . present day . the tower is high , and light characteristic . the light is visible to , and is supplemented by a foghorn of 3 blasts every 62 & nbsp ; seconds . a subsidiary red sector light shines from a window in the tower to highlight the hand deeps hazard to the west-northwest . the lighthouse is now monitored and controlled from the trinity house operations control centre at harwich in essex . references in media . the lighthouse inspired a sea shanty , frequently recorded , that begins '' my father was the keeper of the eddystone light / and he slept with a mermaid one fine night / from this union there came three / a porpoise and a porgy and the other was me ! '' . another version has the fourth line as '' two of them were fishes and the other was me . '' there are several verses . the lighthouse has been used as a metaphor for stability . thomas d'arcy mcgee commented that canada 's foundations were as '' strong as the foundations of eddystone '' in the globe , 31 october 1864 , 4 . in the goon show episode ten snowballs that shook the world ( 1958 ) , neddie seagoon is sent to eddystone lighthouse to warn the inhabitants that sterling has dropped from f-sharp to e-flat . the lighthouse is celebrated in the opening and closing movements of ron goodwin 's drake 400 suite . the movement 's main theme was directly inspired by the lighthouse 's unique light characteristic . cd insert , '' british light music : ron goodwin . 633 squadron , drake 400 suite , and others . new zealand symphony orchestra , ron goodwin , conductor . '' marco polo cd 8.223518 a novel based on the building of smeaton 's lighthouse , containing many details of the construction , was published in 2005 . the lighthouse is referenced twice in herman melville 's epic novel moby-dick ; at the beginning of chapter 14 , '' nantucket '' : '' how it stands there , away off shore , more lonely than the eddystone lighthouse . '' , and in chapter 133 , '' the chase – first day '' : '' so , in a gale , the but half baffled channel billows only recoil from the base of the eddystone , triumphantly to overleap its summit with their scud . '' the lighthouse is referred to in '' daddy was a ballplayer '' by the canadian band stringband , and follows a similar line to the sea shanty . '' the most famous of all lighthouses , '' the third chapter of the story of lighthouses ( norton 1965 ) by mary ellen chase , is devoted to the eddystone lighthouse . eddystone lighthouse was used for many of the exterior shots in the phantom light , a 1935 film directed by michael powell . '' beacons in the dark : lighthouse iconography in wartime british cinema '' the english pop group edison lighthouse took its name from it . later , 'lighthouse ' was discarded , and they renamed themselves 'edison ' . tribute . on 14 november 2019 , google celebrated the 321st anniversary of the first lighting of eddystone lighthouse with a google doodle . . gallery . file : clouds over the hoe - geograph.org.uk - 474465.jpg clouds over plymouth hoe file : plymouth , smeaton 's tower - geograph.org.uk - 1186133.jpg smeaton 's tower file : plymouth - tinside pool , plymouth sound and smeaton 's tower . - geograph.org.uk - 1180751.jpg tinside pool , plymouth sound file : smeatons tower light - geograph.org.uk - 67009.jpg sunlight through the lantern room file : smeatons lighthouse on plymouth hoe.jpg smeaton 's lighthouse , now partially re-erected on plymouth hoe . file : section of new eddystone lighthouse.jpg cross-section of douglass 's lighthouse in 1884