Barnabe Barnes

early life . the third son of dr richard barnes , bishop of durham , he was baptised in york at the church of st michael le belfry on 6 march 1571 . in 1586 he was entered at brasenose college , oxford but did not take his degree . his father died in 1587 leaving two-thirds of his estate to be divided among his six children , and barnes appears to have been able to live on income from this bequest . john d . cox , & ldquo ; barnes , barnabe ( bap . 1571 , d . 1609 ) , & rdquo ; oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 in 1591 he went to france with the earl of essex , who was then serving against the prince of parma . on his return he published parthenophil and parthenophe , sonnettes , madrigals , elegies and odes ( ent . on stationers ' register 1593 ) , dedicated to his '' dearest friend , '' the poet and nobleman william percy , who contributed a sonnet to the eulogy prefixed to a later work , offices . parthenophil was possibly printed for private circulation , and the copy in the duke of devonshire 's library is believed to be unique . . sonnets . barnabe barnes was well acquainted with the work of contemporary french sonneteers , to whom he is largely indebted , and he borrows his title , apparently , from a naples writer of latin verse , hieronymus angerianus . '' parthenophil and parthenophe '' are the names given to the two protagonists in the sonnets , the first name meaning '' virgin-lover '' and the second '' virgin '' . it is possible to outline a story from this series of love lyrics , but the incidents are slight , and in this case , as in other elizabethan sonnet-cycles , it is difficult to dogmatise as to what is the expression of a real personal experience , and what is intellectual exercise in imitation of petrarch . parthenophil abounds in passages of great freshness and beauty , although its elaborate conceits are sometimes over-ingenious and strained . for example , the passage in which parthenophil wishes to be transformed into the wine his mistress drinks , so that he might pass through her , excited the derision of at least one hostile contemporary critic , thomas nashe . '' therein he was very ill-advised , for so the next time his mistress made water , he was in danger to be cast out of her favour . '' t . nash , works , ed . r . b . mckerrow , 5 vols . , 1958 , 3 the sequence also has a highly unusual ending : the lover parthenophil dreams that he uses black magic to compel his unattainable mistress to appear to him naked , whereupon he rapes her . this is such a reversal of petrarchan convention that it has been interpreted as possibly reflecting contemporary political tensions . john cox suggests that it is linked to the unfolding conflict between the earl of essex and queen elizabeth , in which parthenophe stands for elizabeth : '' since parthenophe means virgin barnes 's dream seems unavoidably political , and the stance of frustrated expectation , occasioned by an unyielding and unapproachable female , seems appropriate to one of essex 's party in the early 1590s . '' . feuds and attempted murder . barnes became involved in the pamphlet feud between gabriel harvey and thomas nashe . barnes took the part of harvey , who wanted to impose the latin rules of quantity on english verse : barnes even experimented in classical metres himself . this partisanship is sufficient to account for the abuse of nashe , who accused him , apparently on no proof at all , of stealing a nobleman 's chain at windsor , and of other things . prior to this literary assault barnes had written a sonnet for harvey 's anti-nashe pamphlet pierces supererogation ( 1593 ) , in which he labelled nashe a confidence trickster , a liar , a viper , a laughing stock and mere '' worthless matter '' who should be flattered that harvey even deigned to insult him . nashe , never slow to pick a fight , took due note : '' but my young master barnaby the bright , and his kindness ( before any desert at all of mine towards him might pluck him on or provoke it ) , i neither have nor will be unmindful of . '' he therefore responded in kind in have with you to saffron-walden ( 1596 ) with various observations on barnes : he was a bad poet , he had dreadful dress sense ( . '' getting him a strange pair of babylonian britches , with a codpiece as big as a bologna sausage . '' ) and had been a coward on the field of battle during the wars in france . nashe claimed , not entirely seriously , that barnes had gone to the general to complain war was dangerous , highly illegal and he wanted to go home at once , and despite six burly captains offering to be his personal bodyguard '' home he would , nothing would stay him , to finish parthenophil and parthenope and write in praise of gabriel harvey . '' t . nash , works , ed . r . b . mckerrow , 5 vols . , 1958 , 3.109 these charges may well be comic fabrications . it is however on record that barnes was prosecuted in star chamber in 1598 for attempting to murder one john browne , first by offering him a poisoned lemon and then by sweetening his wine with sugar laced with mercury sublimate . browne fortunately survived the attack and barnes fled prison before the case concluded . he was not pursued . it seems likely he attempted browne 's assassination at the behest of lord eure , warden of the middle march and of berwick upon tweed , and political stringpulling protected him . . later works . barnes 's second work , a divine centurie of spirituall sonnetts , appeared in 1595 . he also wrote two plays : — the devil 's charter ( 1607 ) , a tragedy dealing with the life of pope alexander vi , which was played before the king ; and the battle of evesham ( or hexham ) , of which the manuscript , traced to the beginning of the 18th century , is lost . in 1606 he dedicated to king james offices enabling privat persons for the special service of all good princes and policies , a prose treatise containing , among other things , descriptions of queen elizabeth and of the earl of essex . barnabe barnes was buried at durham in december 1609 . . footnotes . references . john d . cox , '' barnes , barnabe ( bap . 1571 , d . 1609 ) , '' oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 .