Bobcat

taxonomy . there had been debate over whether to classify this species as lynx rufus or felis rufus as part of a wider issue regarding whether the four species of lynx should be given their own genus , or be placed as a subgenus of felis . the genus lynx is now accepted , and the bobcat is listed as lynx rufus in modern taxonomic sources . the genus lynx shares a clade with the genetic lineages puma , prionailurus and felis dated to ; lynx diverged approximately . the bobcat is believed to have evolved from the eurasian lynx , which crossed into north america by way of the bering land bridge during the pleistocene , with progenitors arriving as early as 2.6 million years ago . the first wave moved into the southern portion of north america , which was soon cut off from the north by glaciers . this population evolved into modern bobcats around 20,000 years ago . a second population arrived from asia and settled in the north , developing into the modern canada lynx . blynx may sometimes occur . . subspecies . 13 bobcat subspecies have been historically recognized based on morphological characteristics : l . r . rufus ( schreber ) – eastern and midwestern united states l . r . gigas ( bangs ) – northern new york to nova scotia and new brunswick l . r . floridanus ( rafinesque ) – southeastern united states and inland to the mississippi valley , up to southwestern missouri and southern illinois l . r . superiorensis ( peterson & downing ) – western great lakes area , including upper michigan , wisconsin , southern ontario , and most of minnesota l . r . baileyi ( merriam ) – southwestern united states and northwestern mexico l . r . californicus ( mearns ) – california west of the sierra nevada l . r . mohavensis ( b.anderson ) – mojave desert of california l . r . escuinapae ( j . a . allen ) – central mexico , with a northern extension along the west coast to southern sonora l . r . fasciatus ( rafinesque ) – oregon , washington west of the cascade range , northwestern california , and southwestern british columbia l . r . oaxacensis ( goodwin ) – oaxaca l . r . pallescens ( merriam ) – northwestern united states and southern british columbia , alberta , and saskatchewan l . r . peninsularis ( thomas ) – baja california l . r . texensis ( mearns ) – western louisiana , texas , south-central oklahoma , and south into tamaulipas , nuevo león , and coahuila this subspecies division has been challenged , given a lack of clear geographic breaks in their ranges and the minor differences between these subspecies . the latest revision of cat taxonomy in 2017 , by the cat classification taskforce of the cat specialist group recognises only two subspecies , based on phylogeographic and genetic studies , although the status of the mexican bobcat ( lynx rufus esquinapae syn . lynx rufus oaxacensis ) remains under review : lynx rufus rufus – east of the great plains , north america lynx rufus fasciatus – west of the great plains , north america . description . the bobcat resembles other species of the midsize genus lynx , but is on average the smallest of the four . its coat is variable , though generally tan to grayish-brown , with black streaks on the body and dark bars on the forelegs and tail . its spotted patterning acts as camouflage . the ears are black-tipped and pointed , with short , black tufts . generally , an off-white color is seen on the lips , chin , and underparts . bobcats in the desert regions of the southwest have the lightest-colored coats , while those in the northern , forested regions are darkest . kittens are born well-furred and already have their spots . a few melanism bobcats have been sighted and captured in florida , usa and new brunswick , canada . they appear black , but may still exhibit a spot pattern . the face appears wide due to ruffs of extended hair beneath the ears . bobcat eyes are yellow with round , black pupils . the nose of the bobcat is pinkish-red , and it has a base color of gray or yellowish- or brownish-red on its face , sides , and back . the pupils are round , black circles and will widen during nocturnal activity to maximize light reception . the cat has sharp hearing and vision , and a good sense of smell . it is an excellent climber , and swims when it needs to , but normally avoids water . however , cases of bobcats swimming long distances across lakes have been recorded . bobcat swims across lake lanier . youtube ( august 3 , 2015 ) the adult bobcat is long from the head to the base of its distinctive stubby tail , averaging ; the tail , which appears '' bobbed '' and gives the species its name , adds an adult stands about at the shoulders . adult males can range in weight from , with an average of ; females at , with an average of . burnie d and wilson de ( eds . ) , animal : the definitive visual guide to the world 's wildlife . dk adult ( 2005 ) , the largest bobcat accurately measured on record weighed , although unverified reports have them reaching . furthermore , a june 20 , 2012 report of a new hampshire roadkill specimen listed the animal 's weight at . schreiber , jason ( june 20 , 2012 ) . 60-pound bobcat turns up as roadkill . union leader the largest-bodied bobcats are from eastern canada and northern new england of the subspecies l . r . gigas , while the smallest are from the southeastern subspecies l . r . floridanus , particularly those in the southern appalachians . the bobcat is muscular , and its hind legs are longer than its front legs , giving it a somewhat irregular gait . at birth , it weighs and is about in length . by its first birthday , it weighs about . the cat is larger in its northern range and in open habitats . nowell , k . and jackson , p . ( 1996 ) . wild cats . status survey and conservation action plan . ( pdf ) . iucn/ssc cat specialist group . iucn , gland , switzerland . a morphological size comparison study in the eastern united states found a divergence in the location of the largest male and female specimens , suggesting differing natural selection for the sexes . . behavior . the bobcat is crepuscular , and is active mostly during twilight . it keeps on the move from three hours before sunset until about midnight , and then again from before dawn until three hours after sunrise . each night , it moves from along its habitual route . this behavior may vary seasonally , as bobcats become more diurnal during fall and winter in response to the activity of their prey , which are more active during the day in colder weather . . social structure and home range . bobcat activities are confined to well-defined territories , which vary in size depending on the sex and the distribution of prey . the home range is marked with feces , urine scent , and by clawing prominent trees in the area . allen , maximilian l . , cody f . wallace , and christopher c . wilmers . '' patterns in bobcat ( lynx rufus ) scent marking and communication behaviors . '' journal of ethology 33.1 ( 2015 ) : 9-14 . in its territory , the bobcat has numerous places of shelter , usually a main den , and several auxiliary shelters on the outer extent of its range , such as hollow logs , brush piles , thickets , or under rock ledges . its den smells strongly of the bobcat . the sizes of bobcats ' home ranges vary significantly ; a world conservation union ( iucn ) summary of research suggests ranges from . one study in kansas found resident males to have ranges of roughly , and females less than half that area . transient bobcats were found to have both larger ( roughly and less well-defined home ranges . kittens had the smallest range at about . dispersal from the birth range is most pronounced with males . reports on seasonal variation in range size have been equivocal . one study found a large variation in male range sizes , from in summer up to in winter . another found that female bobcats , especially those which were reproductively active , expanded their home range in winter , but that males merely shifted their range without expanding it , which was consistent with numerous earlier studies . other research in various american states has shown little or no seasonal variation . like most felines , the bobcat is largely solitary , but ranges often overlap . unusual for cats , males are more tolerant of overlap , while females rarely wander into others ' ranges . given their smaller range sizes , two or more females may reside within a male 's home range . when multiple territories overlap , a dominance hierarchy is often established , resulting in the exclusion of some transients from favored areas . in line with widely differing estimates of home range size , population density figures are divergent , from one to 38 bobcats per in one survey . the average is estimated at one bobcat per . a link has been observed between population density and sex ratio . one study noted a dense , unhunted population in california had a sex ratio of 2.1 males per female . when the density decreased . hunting and diet . the bobcat is able to survive for long periods without food , but eats heavily when prey is abundant . during lean periods , it often preys on larger animals , which it can kill and return to feed on later . the bobcat hunts by stalking its prey and then ambushing with a short chase or pounce . its preference is for mammals weighing about . its main prey varies by region : in the eastern united states , it is the eastern cottontail and new england cottontail , and in the north , it is the snowshoe hare . when these prey species exist together , as in new england , they are the primary food sources of the bobcat . in the far south , the rabbits and hares are sometimes replaced by cotton rats as the primary food source . birds up to the size of an adult trumpeter swan are also taken in ambushes , along with their fledglings and eggs . smith , j . w . ( 1988 ) . status of missouri 's experimental trumpeter swan restoration program . in proc . and papers of the 10th trumpeter swan society conf . , edited by d . compton , 100–103 . maple plain , mn : the trumpeter swan society . the bobcat is an opportunistic predator that , unlike the more specialized canada lynx , readily varies its prey selection . diet diversification positively correlates to a decline in numbers of the bobcat 's principal prey ; the abundance of its main prey species is the main determinant of overall diet . the bobcat hunts animals of different sizes , and adjusts its hunting techniques accordingly . with small animals , such as rodents ( including squirrels , moles , muskrats , mice ) , birds , fish including small sharks , bobcat drags shark out of florida surf and insects , it hunts in areas known to be abundant in prey , and will lie , crouch , or stand , and wait for victims to wander close . it then pounces , grabbing its prey with its sharp , retractable claws . for slightly larger animals , such as geese , ducks , rabbits , and hares , it stalks from cover and waits until prey comes within before rushing in to attack . less commonly , it feeds on larger animals , such as young ungulates , and other carnivores , such as fishers ( primarily female ) , foxes , minks , martens , skunks , raccoons , small dogs , and domesticated cats . donadio , e . , & buskirk , s . w . ( 2006 ) . diet , morphology , and interspecific killing in carnivora . the american naturalist , 167 ( 4 ) , 524-536 . farias , v . , fuller , t . k . , wayne , r . k . , & sauvajot , r . m . ( 2005 ) . survival and cause-specific mortality of gray foxes ( urocyon cinereoargenteus ) in southern california . journal of zoology , 266 ( 3 ) , 249-254 . bobcats are also occasional hunters of livestock and poultry . while larger species , such as cattle , and horses , are not known to be attacked , bobcats do present a threat to smaller ruminants , such as pigs , sheep and goats . according to the national agricultural statistics service , bobcats killed 11,100 sheep in 2004 , comprising 4.9 % of all sheep predator deaths . however , some amount of bobcat predation may be misidentified , as bobcats have been known to scavenge on the remains of livestock kills by other animals . it has been known to kill deer or pronghorn , and sometimes to hunt elk in western north america , especially in winter when smaller prey is scarce , or when deer populations become more abundant . one study in the everglades showed a large majority of kills ( 33 of 39 ) were fawns , according to the yellowstone showed a large amount of kills ( 15 of 20 ) were includes elk calves , but prey up to eight times the bobcat 's weight could be successfully taken . it stalks the deer , often when the deer is lying down , then rushes in and grabs it by the neck before biting the throat , base of the skull , or chest . on the rare occasions a bobcat kills a deer , it eats its fill and then buries the carcass under snow or leaves , often returning to it several times to feed . the bobcat prey base overlaps with that of other midsized predators of a similar ecological niche . research in maine has shown little evidence of competitive relationships between the bobcat and coyote or red fox ; separation distances and territory overlap appeared random among simultaneously monitored animals . however , other studies have found bobcat populations may decrease in areas with high coyote populations , with the more social inclination of the canid giving them a possible competitive advantage . with the canada lynx , however , the interspecific competition affects distribution patterns ; competitive exclusion by the bobcat is likely to have prevented any further southward expansion of the range of its felid relative . . reproduction and life cycle . the average bobcat lifespan is 7 years long and rarely exceeds 10 years . the oldest wild bobcat on record was 16 years old , and the oldest captive bobcat lived to be 32 . bobcats generally begin mating by their second summer , though females may start as early as their first year . sperm production begins each year by september or october , and the male is fertile into the summer . a dominant male travels with a female and mates with her several times , generally from winter until early spring ; this varies by location , but most mating takes place during february and march . the pair may undertake a number of different behaviors , including bumping , chasing , and ambushing . other males may be in attendance , but remain uninvolved . once the male recognizes the female is receptive , he grasps her in the typical felid neck grip and mates with her . the female may later go on to mate with other males , and males generally mate with several females . during courtship , the otherwise silent bobcat may let out loud screams , hisses , or other sounds . research in texas has suggested establishing a home range is necessary for breeding ; studied animals with no set range had no identified offspring . the female has an estrous cycle of 44 days , with the estrus lasting five to ten days . bobcats remain reproductively active throughout their lives . the female raises the young alone . one to six , but usually two to four , kittens are born in april or may , after roughly 60 to 70 days of gestation . sometimes , a second litter is born as late as september . the female generally gives birth in an enclosed space , usually a small cave or hollow log . the young open their eyes by the ninth or tenth day . they start exploring their surroundings at four weeks and are weaned at about two months . within three to five months , they begin to travel with their mother . they hunt by themselves by fall of their first year , and usually disperse shortly thereafter . in michigan , however , they have been observed staying with their mother as late as the next spring . . tracks . bobcat tracks show four toes without claw marks , due to their retractable claws . the tracks can range in size from ; the average is about 1.8 & nbsp ; inches . when walking or trotting , the tracks are spaced roughly apart . the bobcat can make great strides when running , often from . like all cats , the bobcat 'directly registers ' , meaning its hind prints usually fall exactly on top of its fore prints . bobcat tracks can be generally distinguished from feral or house cat tracks by their larger size : about 2.0 in 2 ( 13 & nbsp ; cm² ) versus 1.5 in 2 ( 10 & nbsp ; cm² ) . . ecology . the adult bobcat has relatively few predators other than humans . however seldomly , it may be killed in interspecific conflict by several larger predators or fall prey to them . cougars and gray wolf can kill adult bobcats , a behavior repeatedly observed in yellowstone national park as well as elsewhere . palomares , f . , & caro , t . m . ( 1999 ) . interspecific killing among mammalian carnivores . the american naturalist , 153 ( 5 ) , 492-508 . coyotes have killed adult bobcats and kittens . at least one confirmed observation of a bobcat and an american black bear ( ursus americanus ) fighting over a carcass is confirmed . like other lynx species , bobcats probably avoid encounters with bears , in part because they are likely to lose kills to them or may rarely be attacked by them . krofel , m . , kos , i . , & jerina , k . ( 2012 ) . the noble cats and the big bad scavengers : effects of dominant scavengers on solitary predators . behavioral ecology and sociobiology , 66 ( 9 ) , 1297-1304 . iucn/ssc cat specialist group , kristin nowell , peter jackson . ( 1996 ) . wild cats : status survey and conservation action plan . cambridge , uk : iucn publication services unit . bobcat remains have occasionally been found in the resting sites of male fishers . aubry , keith and rale , catherine ( july 2006 ) ecological characteristics of fishers ( martes pennanti ) in the southern oregon cascade range . usda forest service—pacific northwest research station , olympia forestry sciences laboratory , olympia , wa , u.s . american alligators ( alligator mississippensis ) have been filmed opportunistically preying on adult bobcats in the southeast united states . kittens may be taken by several predators , including owls ( almost entirely great horned owls ) , eagles , foxes , and bears , as well as other adult male bobcats ; when prey populations are not abundant , fewer kittens are likely to reach adulthood . golden eagles ( aquila chrysaetos ) have been reportedly observed preying on bobcats . diseases , accidents , hunters , automobiles , and starvation are the other leading causes of death . juveniles show high mortality shortly after leaving their mothers , while still perfecting their hunting techniques . one study of 15 bobcats showed yearly survival rates for both sexes averaged 0.62 , in line with other research suggesting rates of 0.56 to 0.67 . cannibalism has been reported ; kittens may be taken when prey levels are low , but this is very rare and does not much influence the population . the bobcat may have external parasites , mostly ticks and fleas , and often carries the parasites of its prey , especially those of rabbits and squirrels . internal parasites ( endoparasites ) are especially common in bobcats . one study found an average infection rate of 52 % from toxoplasma gondii , but with great regional variation . one mite in particular , lynxacarus morlani , has to date been found only on the bobcat . parasites ' and diseases ' role in the mortality of the bobcat is still unclear , but they may account for greater mortality than starvation , accidents , and predation . . distribution and habitat . the bobcat is an adaptable species . it prefers woodlands—deciduous , coniferous , or mixed—but does not depend exclusively on the deep forest . it ranges from the humid swamps of florida to desert lands of texas or rugged mountain areas . it makes its home near agricultural areas , if rocky ledges , swamps , or forested tracts are present ; its spotted coat serves as camouflage . the population of the bobcat depends primarily on the population of its prey ; other principal factors in the selection of habitat type include protection from severe weather , availability of resting and den sites , dense cover for hunting and escape , and freedom from disturbance . the bobcat 's range does not seem to be limited by human populations , but by availability of suitable habitat ; only large , intensively cultivated tracts are unsuitable for the species . the animal may appear in back yards in '' urban edge '' environments , where human development intersects with natural habitats . if chased by a dog , it usually climbs up a tree . the historical range of the bobcat was from southern canada , throughout the united states , and as far south as the mexican state of oaxaca , and it still persists across much of this area . in the 20th century , it was thought to have lost territory in the us midwest and parts of the northeast , including southern minnesota , eastern south dakota , and much of missouri , mostly due to habitat changes from modern agricultural practices . while thought to no longer exist in western new york and pennsylvania , multiple confirmed sightings of bobcats ( including dead specimens ) have been recently reported in new york 's southern tier and in central new york , and a bobcat was captured in 2018 on a tourist boat in downtown pittsburgh , pennsylvania . in addition , bobcat sightings have been confirmed in northern indiana , and one was killed near albion , michigan in 2008 . in early march 2010 , a bobcat was sighted ( and later captured by animal control authorities ) in a parking garage in downtown houston . by 2010 , bobcats appear to have recolonized many states , occurring in every state in the continuous 48 except delaware . its population in canada is limited due to both snow depth and the presence of the canadian lynx . the bobcat does not tolerate deep snow , and waits out heavy storms in sheltered areas ; it lacks the large , padded feet of the canadian lynx and can not support its weight on snow as efficiently . the bobcat is not entirely at a disadvantage where its range meets that of the larger felid : displacement of the canadian lynx by the aggressive bobcat has been observed where they interact in nova scotia , while the clearing of coniferous forests for agriculture has led to a northward retreat of the canadian lynx 's range to the advantage of the bobcat . in northern and central mexico , the cat is found in dry scrubland and forests of pine and oak ; its range ends at the tropical southern portion of the country . . conservation . it is listed in appendix ii of the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) , which means it is not considered threatened with extinction , but hunting and trading must be closely monitored . the animal is regulated in all three of its range countries , and is found in a number of protected areas of the united states , its principal territory . estimates from the us fish and wildlife service placed bobcat numbers between 700,000 and 1,500,000 in the us in 1988 , with increased range and population density suggesting even greater numbers in subsequent years ; for these reasons , the u.s . has petitioned cites to remove the cat from appendix ii . populations in canada and mexico remain stable and healthy . it is listed as least concern on the iucn red list , noting it is relatively widespread and abundant , but information from southern mexico is poor . the species is considered endangered in ohio , indiana , and new jersey . it was removed from the threatened list of illinois in 1999 and of iowa in 2003 . in pennsylvania , limited hunting and trapping are once again allowed , after having been banned from 1970 to 1999 . the bobcat also suffered population decline in new jersey at the turn of the 19th century , mainly because of commercial and agricultural developments causing habitat fragmentation ; by 1972 , the bobcat was given full legal protection , and was listed as endangered in the state in 1991 . l . r . escuinipae , the subspecies found in mexico , was for a time considered endangered by the us fish and wildlife service , but was delisted in 2005 . between 2003 and 2011 , a reduction in bobcat sightings in the everglades by 87.5 % has been attributed to predation by the invasive burmese python . the bobcat has long been valued both for fur and sport ; it has been hunted and trapped by humans , but has maintained a high population , even in the southern united states , where it is extensively hunted . in the 1970s and 1980s , an unprecedented rise in price for bobcat fur caused further interest in hunting , but by the early 1990s , prices had dropped significantly . regulated hunting still continues , with half of mortality of some populations being attributed to this cause . as a result , the rate of bobcat deaths is skewed in winter , when hunting season is generally open . urbanization can result in the fragmentation of contiguous natural landscapes into patchy habitat within an urban area . animals that live in these fragmented areas often have reduced movement between the habitat patches , which can lead to reduced gene flow and pathogen transmission between patches . animals such as the bobcat are particularly sensitive to fragmentation because of their large home ranges . a study in coastal southern california has shown bobcat populations are affected by urbanization , creation of roads , and other developments . the populations may not be declining as much as predicted , but instead the connectivity of different populations is affected . this leads to a decrease in natural genetic diversity among bobcat populations . for bobcats , preserving open space in sufficient quantities and quality is necessary for population viability . educating local residents about the animals is critical , as well , for conservation in urban areas . in bobcats using urban habitats in california , the use of rodenticides has been linked to both secondary poisoning by consuming poisoned rats and mice , and to increased rates of severe mite infestation ( known as notoedric mange ) , as an animal with a poison-weakened immune system is less capable of fighting off mange . liver autopsies in california bobcats that have succumbed to notoedric mange have revealed chronic rodenticide exposure . alternative rodent control measures such as vegetation control and use of traps have been suggested to alleviate this issue . . importance in human culture . stories featuring the bobcat , in many variations , are found in some indigenous cultures of north america , with parallels in south america . a story from the nez perce , for instance , depicts lynx and coyote as opposed , antithetical beings . however , another version depicts them with equality and identicality . in a shawnee tale , the bobcat is outwitted by a rabbit , which gives rise to its spots . after trapping the rabbit in a tree , the bobcat is persuaded to build a fire , only to have the embers scattered on its fur , leaving it singed with dark brown spots . the mohave believed dreaming habitually of beings or objects would afford them their characteristics as supernatural powers . dreaming of two deities , cougar and lynx , they thought , would grant them the superior hunting skills of other tribes . european colonizers to the americas also admired the cat , both for its ferocity and its grace , and in the united states , it '' rests prominently in the anthology of & nbsp ; . national folklore . '' grave artifacts from dirt domes excavated in the 1980s along the illinois river revealed a complete skeleton of a young bobcat along with a collar made of bone pendants and shell beads that had been buried by the hopewell culture . the type and place of burial indicate a tamed and cherished pet or possible spiritual significance . the hopewell normally buried their dogs , so the bones were initially identified as remains of a puppy , but dogs were usually buried close to the village and not in the mounds themselves . this is the only wild cat decorated burial on the archaeological record . . see also . bubsy eurasian lynx iberian lynx . references . further reading . . external links . species portrait bobcat ; iucn/ssc cat specialist group bobcats – national geographic youtube video of swimming bobcat - extended video captured of a bobcat swimming across lake lanier georgia