David Gilmour

personal life . gilmour and samson have four children : gilmour 's adopted son charlie ( born 1989 to samson and heathcote williams ) , joe ( born 1995 ) , gabriel ( born 1997 ) and romany ( born 2002 ) . : romany , : charlie , joe and gabriel . charlie 's voice can be heard on the telephone to steve o'rourke at the end of '' high hopes '' from the division bell . gabriel performed piano on the song '' in any tongue '' on the 2015 album rattle that lock , making his recording debut . in 2011 , charlie was jailed for 16 months for violent disorder during a london protest against tuition fees . gilmour lives with his family on a farm near wisborough green , sussex , and also has a home at hove . he also spends time at his recording studio houseboat astoria near hampton court . gilmour is an experienced pilot and aviation enthusiast . under the aegis of his company , intrepid aviation , he amassed a collection of historical aircraft . he later decided to sell the company , which he had started as a hobby , feeling that it was becoming too commercial for him to handle . in a bbc interview , he stated : gilmour does not believe in an afterlife and is an atheism . newsday , published 30 march 2006 : '' i 'm an atheist , and i do n't have any belief in an afterlife . '' '' the theme of the new album & nbsp ; – those pink floyd habits die hard & nbsp ; – is mortality . one song , 'this heaven ' , reflects gilmour 's atheism '' . the sunday telegraph ( london ) , 28 may 2006 , section seven , pg . 8 . he has stated that he is left-wing . he said that his parents were '' proper the guardian readers . some of their friends went on the aldermaston marches . mine never did to my knowledge , but they were both committed to voting for the labour party . '' he described himself as a socialism , '' even if i ca n't quite stick with party politics '' . in august 2014 , gilmour was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to the guardian expressing their hope that scotland would vote to remain part of the united kingdom in the scottish independence referendum . in may 2017 , gilmour endorsed labour party leader jeremy corbyn in the 2017 uk general election . he twitter : '' i 'm voting labour because i believe in social equality . '' gilmour 's net worth is £115 million , according to the sunday times rich list 2018 . . awards and honours . gilmour was appointed a commander of the order of the british empire ( cbe ) in the 2003 birthday honours , '' for services to music '' . the award was presented to him at buckingham palace , on 7 november that year . on 22 may 2008 , he won the 2008 ivor novello awards , recognising his excellence in music writing . later that year , he was recognised for his outstanding contribution to music by the q awards . he dedicated his award to pink floyd keyboardist richard wright , who died in september 2008 . on 11 november 2009 , gilmour received an honorary doctorate from anglia ruskin university . . guitars . in march 1967 gilmour 's parents gave him his first fender guitar , a white telecaster , for his 21st birthday . he would use this guitar , which had a white pickguard and a rosewood fretboard , when he joined pink floyd in 1968 , with one of syd barrett 's teles as a spare . . the black strat . one of gilmour 's most iconic guitars is the black strat , a fender stratocaster that appeared in most pink floyd concerts and every pink floyd album from 1970 to 1983 . the guitar was originally bought by gilmour at manny 's music in new york in 1970 , after the band 's us tour was prematurely cancelled due to the theft of all its equipment in new orleans . the guitar , which originally had a rosewood fretboard and a white pickguard , underwent a number of modifications throughout its life until it adopted its distinctive form with a black pickguard and a maple neck . it was auctioned for charity in 2019 for 3.9 million , making it one of the most expensive guitars ever sold at auction . fender black strat signature stratocaster . in november 2006 , fender custom shop announced two reproductions of gilmour 's black strat for release on 22 september 2008 . phil taylor , gilmour 's guitar tech , supervised this release and has written a book on the history of this guitar . the release date was chosen to coincide with the release of gilmour 's live in gdańsk album . both guitars are based on extensive measurements of the original instrument , each featuring varying degrees of wear . the most expensive is the david gilmour relic stratocaster which features the closest copy of wear on the original guitar . a pristine copy of the guitar is also made , the david gilmour nos stratocaster . . the 0001 strat . the 0001 strat is a fender stratocaster with a white body , maple neck , three-way pick up selector and an unusual gold colour scratch plate and hardware . gilmour bought it from guitar technician phil taylor , who had purchased it from seymour duncan . gilmour used the guitar in the 2004 strat pack show that commemorated the 50th anniversary of the stratocaster at wembley arena along with one of his candy apple red stratocasters ( famous for their appearances with gilmour from 1987 to 2004 ) . it has the serial number 0001 ; however , prototypes had been constructed before this one . the origin of the guitar is unknown , and it is unknown whether it is the real 0001 strat because the neck ( which has the 0001 serial number on it ) could have been taken off the original . the model was used as a spare and for slide guitar in subsequent years . in 2019 , the 0001 strat was sold at auction for 1,815,000 , setting a new world auction record for a stratocaster . gilmour also owns an early 1954 stratocaster , believed to predate fender 's commercial release of the model . . other electric guitars . along with the fender models , gilmour has also used a gibson les paul goldtop model with p-90 pick-ups during recording sessions for the wall and a momentary lapse of reason . it was used for the guitar solo on '' another brick in the wall , part 2 '' . gilmour also plays a gretsch duo-jet , a gretsch white falcon , and a '' white penguin '' . he played a bill lewis 24-fret guitar during the meddle and dark side of the moon recording sessions , and a steinberger gl model which was his main guitar during a momentary lapse of reason recording sessions . acoustics . gilmour has used many acoustic guitars , including a gibson chet atkins classical model , and a gibson j-200 celebrity , acquired from john illsley of dire straits . gilmour used several ovation models including a custom legend 1619-4 , and a custom legend 1613-4 nylon string guitar , both during the wall recording sessions . martin models used include a d-35 , purchased in new york in 1971 , and a d12-28 12-string . steel guitar . gilmour used a pair of jedson steel guitars , as well as a fender 1000 pedal steel , were used frequently in the early 1970s . originally purchased from a pawn shop while gilmour was in seattle in 1970 , the jedson was used during recording of '' one of these days '' from meddle and '' breathe '' and '' the great gig in the sky '' from dark side of the moon . gilmour also owns a fender deluxe lap steel , which he used during the division bell tour in 1994 . gilmour also owns a champ lap steel model . along with the fender steel models gilmour has also used : a gibson eh150 , and two jedson models : one red ( 1977-tuned d-g-d-g-b-e for '' shine on you crazy diamond , parts 6–9 '' , 1987–2006 : tuned e-b-e-g-b-e for '' high hopes '' ) and one blonde . he also uses a zb steel model . gilmour played pedal steel guitar on the album blue pine trees by unicorn . bass guitars . gilmour has played the bass guitar both in the studio and onstage , and has played many bass models including : an ovation magnum , a fender bass vi , fender precision and jazz bass models and a charvel fretless ( all used during the wall recording sessions ) . during the 1991 amnesty international concert gilmour used a music man fretless stingray bass while conducting the house band and again during spinal tap 's performance of '' big bottom '' . . emg dg20 signature pickups . in 2004 emg , inc . released the dg20 signature guitar pickup kit for the fender stratocaster . the set included three active pickups , an exg guitar expander for increased treble and bass frequencies , and a spc presence control to enhance earthiness and mid-range . the system came pre-wired on a custom 11-hole white pearl pickguard with white knobs . the kit was based on the configuration mounted on gilmour 's red stratocaster during the momentary lapse of reason and division bell tours . . discography . ; studio albums david gilmour ( 1978 ) about face ( 1984 ) on an island ( 2006 ) rattle that lock ( 2015 ) . tours . about face tour ( 1984 ) on an island tour ( 2006 ) rattle that lock tour ( 2015–2016 ) . notes . references . sources . . further reading . . external links . official blog bootleg recordings