Jules Ferry

biography . early life and family . ferry was born in saint-dié , in the vosges department , to charles-édouard ferry , a lawyer from a family that had established itself in saint-dié as bellmakers , and adélaïde jamelet . his paternal grandfather , françois-joseph ferry , was mayor of saint-dié through the consulate and the first empire . he studied law , and was called to the bar at paris in 1854 , but soon went into politics , contributing to various newspapers , particularly to le temps . he attacked the second french empire with great violence , directing his opposition especially against baron haussmann , prefect of the seine department . a series of his articles in le temps was later republished as the fantastic tales of haussmann ( 1868 ) . . political rise . elected republican deputy for paris in 1869 , he protested against the declaration of war with germany , and on 6 september 1870 was appointed prefect of the seine by the government of national defense . in this position , he had the difficult task of administering paris during the siege , and after the paris commune was obliged to resign ( 5 june 1871 ) . from 1872 to 1873 he was sent by adolphe thiers as minister to athens , but returned to the chamber as deputy for the vosges , and became one of the leaders of the opportunist republicans . when the first republican ministry was formed under w . h . waddington on 4 february 1879 , he was one of its members , and continued in the ministry until 30 march 1885 , except for two short interruptions ( from 10 november 1881 to 30 january 1882 , and from 29 july 1882 to 21 february 1883 ) , first as minister of education and then as minister of foreign affairs . a leader of the opportunist republicans faction , he was twice premier ( 1880–1881 and 1883–1885 ) . he was an active freemason initiated on 8 july 1875 , in '' la clémante amitiée '' lodge in paris the same day as émile littré . histoire de la franc-maçonnerie française ( pierre chevallier – ed . fayard – 1974 ) dictionnaire universelle de la franc-maçonnerie ( marc de jode , monique cara and jean-marc cara , ed . larousse , 2011 ) encyclopédie de la franc-maçonnerie ( ed . livre de poche , 2000 ) dictionnaire de la franc-maçonnerie ( daniel ligo , presses universitaires de france , 2006 ) jules ferry ( jean-michel gaillard , ed . fayard , 1989 ) he became a member of the '' alsace-lorraine '' lodge founded in paris in 1782 . denslow , william r . and harry s . truman , 10,000 famous freemasons from a to j part one , p . 44 , kessinger publishing , 2004 . school reforms . two important works are associated with his administration : the non-clerical organization of public education , and the major french colonial empire . following the republican program , he proposed to destroy the influence of the clergy in universities and found his own system of republican schooling . he reorganized the committee of public education ( law of 27 february 1880 ) and proposed a regulation for the conferring of university degrees , which , though rejected , aroused violent polemics because the 7th article took away from the unauthorized religious orders the right to teach . he finally succeeded in passing his eponymous laws of 16 june 1881 and 28 march 1882 , which made primary education in france free , non-clerical ( laïque ) and mandatory . in higher education , the number of professors called the '' republic 's black hussars '' because of their republican support , doubled under his ministry . the language policy in france as the language of the republic have been contested in the second half of the 20th century insofar as , while they played an important role in unifying the french nation state and the third republic , they also nearly caused the extinction of several regional languages . 1998 report from bernard poignant , mayor of quimper , to lionel jospin . colonial expansion . after the franco-prussian war in 1870 , ferry formed the idea of acquiring a great colonial empire , principally for the sake of economic exploitation . in 1882 jules ferry , as minister of public instruction , decided to create a mission to explore the regency of tunisia . the expedition was headed by the botanist ernest cosson and included the botanist napoléon doumet-adanson and other naturalists . in 1884 a geological section under georges rolland was added to the tunisian scientific exploration mission . rolland was assisted by philippe thomas from 1885 and by georges le mesle in 1887 . in a speech on the colonial empire before the chamber of deputies on 28 march 1884 , he declared that '' it is a right for the superior races , because they have a duty . they have the duty to civilize the inferior races . '' ferry directed the negotiations which led to the establishment of a french protectorate in tunis ( 1881 ) , prepared the treaty of 17 december 1885 for the occupation of madagascar ; directed the exploration of the congo and of the niger region ; and above all , he organized the conquest of annam and tonkin in what became indochina . the last endeavor led to a war with qing dynasty china , which had a claim of suzerainty over the two provinces . the excitement caused in paris by the sudden retreat from lạng sơn from lạng sơn during this war led to the tonkin affair : his violent denunciation by clemenceau and other radicals , and his downfall on 30 march 1885 . although the sino-french war ( 9 june 1885 ) , in which the qing dynasty ceded suzerainty of annam and tonkin to france , was the work of his ministry , he would never again serve as premier . the desire for a monarchy was strong in france in the early years of the third republic – henri , count of chambord having made a bid early in its history . a committed republican , ferry proceeded to a wide-scale '' purge '' by dismissing many known monarchists from top positions in the magistrate , army , and civil and diplomatic service . in the 1890 's he visited algeria and provided a critical report . he predicted that algeria could not escape a conflict between indigènes and europeans : he was interested in providing education to the indigènes , while the settlers were skeptical about this topic . he was given a poor image of the settlers because they did not want to pay taxes . he also noted that the indigène was contributing to the communes de plein exercice without profiting of it . he considered the settlers were poorly chosen , and that they were too numerous he was in favor of the self-government of algeria but considered the settler were not enough educated to do so he considered that the muslims did not want french citizenship , military service , french mandatory schools , civil french law . he considered that the muslims wanted fewer taxes , taxes more used for their needs , the authority of the cadis , muslim city councilors involvement in mayor election he also considered that thee land laws were a failure . . agreements with germany . the key to understanding ferry 's unique position in third republic history is that until his political critic , georges clemenceau became prime minister twice in the 20th century , ferry had the longest tenure as prime minister under that regime . he also played with political dynamite that eventually destroyed his success . ferry ( like his 20th-century equivalent joseph caillaux ) believed in not confronting wilhelmine germany by threats of a future war of revenge . most french politicians in the middle and right saw it as a sacred duty to one day lead france again against germany to reclaim alsace-lorraine , and avenge the awful defeat of 1870 . but ferry realized that germany was too powerful , and it made more sense to cooperate with otto von bismarck and avoid trouble . a sensible policy – but hardly popular . bismarck was constantly nervous about the situation with france . although he had despised the ineptness of the french under napoleon iii and the government of adolphe thiers and jules favre , he had not planned for all the demands he presented the french in 1870 . he only wished to temporarily cripple france by the billion franc reparation , but suddenly he was confronted by the demands of marshals albrecht von roon and helmut von moltke ( backed by emperor wilhelm i ) to annex the two french provinces as further payment . bismarck , for all his abilities regarding manipulating events , could not afford to anger the prussian military . he got the two provinces , but he realized it would eventually have severe future repercussions . bismarck was able to ignore the french for most of the 1870s and early 1880s , but as he found problems with his three erstwhile allies ( austria , russia , and italy ) , he realized france might one day take advantage of this ( as it did with russia in 1894 ) . when ferry came up with a radically different approach to the situation and offered an olive branch , bismarck reciprocated . a franco-german friendship would alleviate problems of siding with either austria or russia , or austria and italy . bismarck approved of the colonial expansion that france pursued under ferry . he only had some problems with local german imperialists who were critical that germany lacked colonies , so he found a few in the 1880s , making certain he did not confront french interests . but he also suggested franco-german cooperation on the imperial front against the british empire , thus hoping to create a wedge between the two western european great powers . it did , as a result , leading to a major race for influence across africa that nearly culminated in war in the next decade , at fashoda in the sudan in 1898 . but by then both bismarck and ferry were dead , and the rapprochement policy died when ferry lost office . as for fashoda , while it was a confrontation , it led to britain and france eventually discussing their rival colonial goals , and agreeing to support each other 's sphere of influence – the first step to the entente cordiale between the countries in 1904 . later life . ferry remained an influential member of the moderate republican party , and directed the opposition to general boulanger . after the resignation of jules grévy ( 2 december 1887 ) , he was a candidate for the presidency of the republic , but the radicals refused to support him , and he withdrew in favor of sadi carnot . on 10 december 1887 , a man named aubertin attempted to assassinate jules ferry , who later died from complications attributed to this wound on 17 march 1893 . the chamber of deputies gave him a state funeral . ferry 's 1st ministry , 23 september 1880 – 14 november 1881 . jules ferry – president of the council and minister of public instruction and fine arts jules barthélemy-saint-hilaire – minister of foreign affairs jean joseph farre – minister of war ernest constans – minister of the interior and worship pierre magnin – minister of finance jules cazot – minister of justice georges charles cloué – minister of marine and colonies sadi carnot – minister of public works adolphe cochery – minister of posts and telegraphs pierre tirard – minister of agriculture and commerce . ferry 's 2nd ministry , 21 february 1883 – 6 april 1885 . jules ferry – president of the council and minister of public instruction and fine arts paul-armand challemel-lacour – minister of foreign affairs jean thibaudin – minister of war pierre waldeck-rousseau – minister of the interior pierre tirard – minister of finance félix martin-feuillée – minister of justice and worship charles brun – minister of marine and colonies jules méline – minister of agriculture david raynal – minister of public works adolphe cochery – minister of posts and telegraphs anne charles hérisson – minister of commerce changes 9 august 1883 – alexandre louis françois peyron succeeds charles brun as minister of marine and colonies 9 october 1883 – jean-baptiste campenon succeeds thibaudin as minister of war . 20 november 1883 – jules ferry succeeds challemel-lacour as minister of foreign affairs . armand fallières succeeds ferry as minister of public instruction and fine arts . 14 october 1884 – maurice rouvier succeeds hérisson as minister of commerce 3 january 1885 – jules louis lewal succeeds campenon as minister of war . see also . jules ferry laws opportunist republicans vergonha . notes .