Scientism

overview . in the philosophy of science , the term scientism frequently implies a critique of the more extreme expressions of logical positivism and has been used by social scientists such as friedrich hayek , philosophers of science such as karl popper , and philosophers such as mary midgley , the later hilary putnam , and tzvetan todorov tzvetan todorov . the imperfect garden : the legacy of humanism . princeton university press . 2001 . pg . 20 . '' scientism does not eliminate the will but decides that since the results of science are valid for everyone , this will must be something shared , not individual . in practice , the individual must submit to the collectivity , which '' knows '' better than he does . '' to describe ( for example ) the dogmatic endorsement of scientific methodology and the reduction of all knowledge to only that which is measured or confirmatory . more generally , scientism is interpreted as science applied '' in excess '' . this use of the term scientism has two senses : the improper usage of science or scientific claims . this usage applies equally in contexts where science might not apply , such as when the topic is perceived as beyond the scope of scientific method , and in contexts where there is insufficient empirical evidence to justify a scientific conclusion . it includes an excessive deference to the claims of scientists or an uncritical eagerness to accept any result described as scientific . this can be a counterargument to argument from authority . it can also address the attempt to apply '' hard science '' methodology and claims of certainty to the social sciences , which friedrich hayek described in the counter-revolution of science ( 1952 ) as being impossible , because that methodology involves attempting to eliminate the '' human factor '' , while social sciences ( including his own field of economics ) center almost purely on praxeology . '' the belief that the methods of natural science , or the categories and things recognized in natural science , form the only proper elements in any philosophical or other inquiry '' , or that '' science , and only science , describes the world as it is in itself , independent of perspective '' with a concomitant '' elimination of the psychological and spiritual dimensions of experience '' . tom sorell provides this definition : '' scientism is a matter of putting too high a value on natural science in comparison with other branches of learning or culture . '' philosophers such as alexander rosenberg have also adopted '' scientism '' as a name for the view that science is the only reliable source of knowledge . it is also sometimes used to describe universal applicability of the scientific method and approach , and the view that empirical science constitutes the most authoritative worldview or the most valuable part of human learning—sometimes to the complete exclusion of other viewpoints , such as historical , philosophical , economic or cultural worldviews . it has been defined as '' the view that the characteristic inductive methods of the natural sciences are the only source of genuine factual knowledge and , in particular , that they alone can yield true knowledge about man and society '' . allan bullock & stephen trombley ( eds ) , the new fontana dictionary of modern thought , london : harper collins , 1999 , p.775 the term scientism is also used by historians , philosophers , and cultural critics to highlight the possible dangers of lapses towards excessive reductionism in all fields of human knowledge . for social theorists in the tradition of max weber , such as jürgen habermas and max horkheimer , the concept of scientism relates significantly to the philosophy of positivism , but also to the cultural rationalization for modern western civilization . . definitions . reviewing the references to scientism in the works of contemporary scholars , gregory r . peterson detected two main broad themes : it is used to criticize a totalizing view of science as if it were capable of describing all reality and knowledge , or as if it were the only true way to acquire knowledge about reality and the nature of things ; it is used , often pejoratively , to denote a border-crossing violation in which the theories and methods of one ( scientific ) discipline are inappropriately applied to another ( scientific or non-scientific ) discipline and its domain . an example of this second usage is to label as scientism any attempt to claim science as the only or primary source of human values ( a traditional domain of ethics ) or as the source of meaning and purpose ( a traditional domain of religion and related worldviews ) . the term scientism was popularized by f.a . hayek , who defined it as the '' slavish imitation of the method and language of science '' . karl popper defines scientism as '' the aping of what is widely mistaken for the method of science '' . mikael stenmark proposed the expression scientific expansionism as a synonym of scientism . in the encyclopedia of science and religion , he wrote that , while the doctrines that are described as scientism have many possible forms and varying degrees of ambition , they share the idea that the boundaries of science ( that is , typically the natural sciences ) could and should be expanded so that something that has not been previously considered as a subject pertinent to science can now be understood as part of science ( usually with science becoming the sole or the main arbiter regarding this area or dimension ) . according to stenmark , the strongest form of scientism states that science has no boundaries and that all human problems and all aspects of human endeavor , with due time , will be dealt with and solved by science alone . this idea has also been called the myth of progress . e . f . schumacher , in his a guide for the perplexed , criticized scientism as an impoverished world view confined solely to what can be counted , measured and weighed . '' the architects of the modern worldview , notably galileo and descartes , assumed that those things that could be weighed , measured , and counted were more true than those that could not be quantified . if it could n't be counted , in other words , it did n't count . '' intellectual historian t.j . jackson lears argued there has been a recent reemergence of '' nineteenth-century positivist faith that a reified 'science ' has discovered ( or is about to discover ) all the important truths about human life . precise measurement and rigorous calculation , in this view , are the basis for finally settling enduring metaphysical and moral controversies . '' lears specifically identifies harvard psychologist steven pinker 's work as falling in this category . philosophers john n . gray and thomas nagel have leveled similar criticisms against popular works by moral psychologist jonathan haidt , atheist author sam harris , and writer malcolm gladwell . . relevance to debates about science and religion . both religious and non-religious scholars have applied the scientism label to individuals associated with new atheism . theologian john haught argued that philosopher daniel dennett and other new atheists subscribe to a belief system of scientific naturalism , which holds the central dogma that '' only nature , including humans and our creations , is real : that god does not exist ; and that science alone can give us complete and reliable knowledge of reality . '' haught argued that this belief system is self-refuting since it requires its adherents to assent to beliefs that violate its own stated requirements for knowledge . christian philosopher peter williams argued in 2013 that it is only by conflating science with scientism that new atheists feel qualified to '' pontificate on metaphysical issues '' . daniel dennett responded to religious criticism of his 2006 book breaking the spell : religion as a natural phenomenon by saying that accusations of scientism '' are an all-purpose , wild-card smear & nbsp ; . when someone puts forward a scientific theory that religious critics really do n't like , they just try to discredit it as 'scientism ' . but when it comes to facts , and explanations of facts , science is the only game in town '' . non-religious scholars have also linked new atheist thought with scientism and/or with positivism . atheist philosopher thomas nagel argued that neuroscientist sam harris conflated all empirical knowledge with scientific knowledge . marxist literary critic terry eagleton argued that christopher hitchens possessed an '' old-fashioned scientistic notion of what counts as evidence '' that reduces knowledge to what can and can not be proven by scientific procedure . agnostic philosopher anthony kenny has also criticized new atheist philosopher alexander rosenberg 's the atheist 's guide to reality for resurrecting a self-refuting epistemology of logical positivism and reducing all knowledge of the universe to the discipline of physics . michael shermer , founder of the skeptics society , drew a parallel between scientism and traditional religious movements , pointing to the cult of personality that develops around some scientists in the public eye . he defined scientism as a worldview that encompasses natural explanations , eschews supernatural and paranormal speculations , and embraces empiricism and reason . the iranian scholar seyyed hossein nasr ( 1933- ) has stated that in the western world , many will accept the ideology of modern science , not as '' simple ordinary science '' , but as a replacement for religion . gregory r . peterson wrote that '' for many theologians and philosophers , scientism is among the greatest of intellectual sins '' . genetic biologist austin l . hughes wrote in the conservative journal the new atlantis that scientism has much in common with superstition : '' the stubborn insistence that something & nbsp ; . has powers which no evidence supports . '' echoing common criticisms of logical positivism and verificationism , philosopher of religion keith ward has said scientism is philosophically inconsistent or even self-refuting , as the truth of the two statements '' no statements are true unless they can be proven scientifically ( or logically ) '' and '' no statements are true unless they can be shown empirically to be true '' can not themselves be proven scientifically , logically , or empirically . . philosophy of science . anti-scientism . philosopher paul feyerabend , who was an enthusiastic proponent of scientism in his youth , '' feyerabend 's youthful positivist scientism makes quite a contrast with his later conclusions . '' later came to characterize science as '' an essentially anarchic enterprise '' and argued emphatically that science merits no exclusive monopoly over '' dealing in knowledge '' and that scientists have never operated within a distinct and narrowly self-defined tradition . in his essay against method he depicted the process of contemporary scientific education as a mild form of indoctrination , aimed at '' making the history of science duller , simpler , more uniform , more 'objective ' and more easily accessible to treatment by strict and unchanging rules . ''