Saka

usage of name . modern debate about the identity of the '' saka '' is partly from ambiguous usage of the word by ancient , non-saka authorities . according to herodotus , the persians gave the name '' saka '' to all '' scythians '' . herodotus , vii.64 however , pliny the elder ( gaius plinius secundus , ad 23–79 ) claims that the persians gave the name sakai only to the scythian tribes '' nearest to them '' . pliny the elder , natural history , vi . ( 19 ) . 50 the scythians to the far north of assyria were also called the saka suni ( saka or scythian sons ) by the persians . the neo-assyrian empire of the time of esarhaddon record campaigning against a people they called in the akkadian language the ashkuza or ishhuza . another people , the gimirrai , who were known to the ancient greece as the cimmerians , were closely associated with the sakas . in biblical hebrew , the ashkuz ( ashkenaz ) are considered to be a direct offshoot from the gimirri ( gomer ) . '' the sons of gomer were ashkenaz , riphath , a and togarmah . '' see also the entry for ashkenaz in the saka were regarded by the babylonians as synonymous with the gimirrai ; both names are used on the trilingual behistun inscription , carved in 515 & nbsp ; bce on the order of darius the great , george rawlinson , noted in his translation of history of herodotus , book vii , p . 378 these people were reported to be mainly interested in settling in the kingdom of urartu , later part of armenia , and shacusen in utik derived its name from them . ) the behistun inscription initially only gave one entry for saka , they were however further differentiated later into three groups : the sakā paradraya – '' saka beyond the sea '' , a name added after the scythian campaign of darius i north of the danube . the sakā tigraxaudā – '' saka with pointy hats/caps '' the sakā haumavargā – interpreted as '' haoma-drinking saka '' , but there are other suggestions . an additional term is found in two inscriptions elsewhere : the sakā para sugdam – '' saka beyond sugda ( sogdia ) '' , a term was used by darius for the people who formed the limits of his empire at the opposite end to the kingdom of kush ( the ethiopians ) , therefore should be located at the eastern edge of his empire . the sakā paradraya refers to the western scythians ( european scythians ) or sarmatians . both the sakā tigraxaudā and sakā haumavargā are thought to be located in central asia east of the caspian sea . sakā haumavargā is considered to be the same as amyrgians , the saka tribe in closest proximity to bactria and sogdia . it has been suggested that the sakā haumavargā may be the sakā para sugdam , therefore sakā haumavargā is argued by some to be located further east than the sakā tigraxaudā , perhaps at the pamir mountains or xinjiang , although syr darya is considered to be their more likely location given that the name says '' beyond sogdia '' rather than bactria . in the modern era , the archaeologist hugo winckler ( 1863–1913 ) was the first to associate the sakas with the scythians . john manuel cook , in the cambridge history of iran , states : '' the persians gave the single name sakā both to the nomads whom they encountered between the hungry steppe ( mirzacho ' l ) and the caspian , and equally to those north of the danube and black sea against whom darius later campaigned ; and the greeks and assyrians called all those who were known to them by the name skuthai ( iškuzai ) . sakā and skuthai evidently constituted a generic name for the nomads on the northern frontiers . '' persian sources often treat them as a single tribe called the saka ( sakai or sakas ) , but greek and latin texts suggest that the scythians were composed of many sub-groups . journal of the royal asiatic society of great britain & ireland by royal asiatic society of great britain and ireland-page-323 modern scholars now usually use the term saka to refer to iranian peoples who inhabited the northern and eastern eurasian steppe and the tarim basin . . history . origins . the sakas were a group of iranic peoples who spoke a language belonging to the iranian branch of the indo-european languages . french historian rené grousset wrote that they formed a particular branch of the '' sarmatians '' originating from nomadic iranian peoples of the northwestern steppe in eurasia . like the scythians of the pontic steppe , to whom they were related , the saka were racially europoid and ultimately traced their origin to the andronovo culture . '' the physical type of this group , distinctly mongoloid , is also very different from the europoid '' saka '' people of the altai . '' the pazyryk burials of the pazyryk culture in the ukok plateau in the 4th and 3rd centuries bc are thought to be of saka chieftains . '' the rich kurgan burials in pazyryk , siberia probably were those of saka chieftains '' '' analysis of the clothing , which has analogies in the complex of saka clothes , particularly in pazyryk , led wang binghua ( 1987 , 42 ) to the conclusion that they are related to the saka culture . '' '' the dress of iranian-speaking saka and scythians is easily reconstructed on the basis of . numerous archaeological discoveries from the ukraine to the altai , particularly at issyk in kazakhstan . at pazyryk . and ak-alakha '' these burials show striking similarities with the earlier tarim mummies at gumugou . the issyk kurgan of south-eastern kazakhstan , and the ordos culture of the ordos plateau has also been connected with the saka . it has been suggested that the ruling elite of the xiongnu was of saka origin . '' their royal tribes and kings ( shan-yii ) bore iranian names and all the hsiung-nu words noted by the chinese can be explained from an iranian language of saka type . it is therefore clear that the majority of hsiung-nu tribes spoke an eastern iranian language . '' some scholars contend that in the 8th century bc , a saka raid on altai may be '' connected '' with a raid on zhou china . . early history . the saka are attested in historical and archaeological records dating to around the 8th century bc . in the achaemenid-era old persian inscriptions found at persepolis , dated to the reign of darius i ( r . 522-486 bc ) , the saka are said to have lived just beyond the borders of sogdia . likewise an inscription dated to the reign of xerxes i ( r . 486-465 bc ) has them coupled with the dahae people of central asia . two saka tribes named in the behistun inscription , sakā tigraxaudā ( '' saka with pointy hats/caps '' ) and the sakā haumavargā ( '' haoma-drinking saka '' ) , may be located to the east of the caspian sea . some argued that the sakā haumavargā may be the sakā para sugdam , therefore sakā haumavargā would be located further east than the sakā tigraxaudā . some argued for the pamirs or xinjiang as their location , although jaxartes is considered to be their more likely location given that the name says '' beyond sogdiana '' rather than bactria . the contemporary greek historian herodotus noted that the achaemenid empire called all of the '' scythians '' by the name '' saka '' . greek historians wrote of the wars between the saka and the medes , as well as their wars against cyrus the great of the persian achaemenid empire where saka women were said to fight alongside their men . according to herodotus , cyrus the great confronted the massagetae , a people related to the saka , while campaigning to the east of the caspian sea and was killed in the battle in 530 bc . darius i also waged wars against the eastern sakas , who fought him with three armies led by three kings according to polyaenus . in 520–519 bc , darius i defeated the sakā tigraxaudā tribe and captured their king skunkha ( depicted as wearing a pointed hat in behistun ) . the territories of saka were absorbed into the achaemenid empire as part of chorasmia that included much of the amu darya ( oxus ) and the syr darya ( jaxartes ) , and the saka then supplied the achaemenid army with large number of mounted bowmen . they were also mentioned as among those who resisted alexander the great 's incursions into central asia . the saka were known as the sak or sai in ancient chinese records . '' the ethnonym saka appears in ancient iranian and indian sources as the name of the large family of iranian nomads called scythians by the classical western sources and sai by the chinese ( gk . sacae ; opers . sakā ) . '' these records indicate that they originally inhabited the ili and chu river valleys of modern kyrgyzstan and kazakhstan . in the book of han , the area was called the '' land of the sak '' , i.e . the saka . the exact date of the sakas ' arrival in the valleys of the ili and chu in central asia is unclear , perhaps it was just before the reign of darius i . around 30 saka tombs in the form of kurgans ( burial mounds ) have also been found in the tian shan area dated to between 550–250 bc . indications of saka presence have also been found in the tarim basin region , possibly as early as the 7th century bc . at least by the late 2nd century bc , the sakas had founded states in the tarim barin . . migrations . the saka were pushed out of the ili and chu river valleys by the yuezhi . an account of the movement of these people is given in sima qian 's records of the grand historian . the yuehzhi , who originally lived between tängri tagh ( tian shan ) and dunhuang of gansu , china , were assaulted and forced to flee from the hexi corridor of gansu by the forces of the xiongnu ruler modu chanyu , who conquered the area in 177–176 bc . torday , laszlo . ( 1997 ) . mounted archers : the beginnings of central asian history . durham : the durham academic press , pp . 80–81 , . yü , ying-shih . ( 1986 ) . '' han foreign relations , '' in the cambridge history of china : volume i : the ch'in and han empires , 221 bc – a.d . 220 , 377–462 . edited by denis twitchett and michael loewe . cambridge : cambridge university press , pp . 377–388 , 391 , . chang , chun-shu . ( 2007 ) . the rise of the chinese empire : volume ii ; frontier , immigration , & empire in han china , 130 bc – ad 157 . ann arbor : university of michigan press , pp . 5–8 . in turn the yuehzhi were responsible for attacking and pushing the sai ( i.e . saka ) west into sogdiana , where , between 140 and 130 bce , the latter crossed the syr darya into bactria . the saka also moved southwards toward the pamirs and northern india , where they settled in kashmir , and eastward , to settle in some of the oasis-states of tarim basin sites , like yanqi ( 焉耆 , karasahr ) and qiuci ( 龜茲 , kucha ) . yu taishan ( june 2010 ) , '' the earliest tocharians in china '' in victor h . mair ( ed ) , sino-platonic papers , chinese academy of social sciences , university of pennsylvania department of east asian languages and civilizations , pp . 13–14 , 21–22 . the yuehzhi , themselves under attacks from another nomadic tribe , the wusun , in 133–132 bc , moved , again , from the ili and chu valleys , and occupied the country of daxia , ( 大夏 , '' bactria '' ) . yu taishan ( june 2010 ) , '' the earliest tocharians in china '' in victor h . mair ( ed ) , sino-platonic papers , chinese academy of social sciences , university of pennsylvania department of east asian languages and civilizations , p . 13 . bernard , p . ( 1994 ) . '' the greek kingdoms of central asia '' . in harmatta , jános . history of civilizations of central asia , volume ii . the development of sedentary and nomadic civilizations : 700 b.c . to a.d . 250 . paris : unesco . pp . 96–126 . the ancient greco-roman geographer strabo noted that the four tribes that took down the bactrians in the greek and roman account – the asii , pasianoi , tokharoi and sakaraulai – came from land north of the syr darya where the ili and chu valleys are located . identification of these four tribes varies , but sakaraulai may indicate an ancient saka tribe , the tokharoi is possibly the yuezhi , and while the asioi had been proposed to be groups such as the wusun or alans . rené grousset wrote of the migration of the saka : '' the saka , under pressure from the yueh-chih yuezhi , overran sogdiana and then bactria , there taking the place of the greeks . '' then , '' thrust back in the south by the yueh-chih , '' the saka occupied '' the saka country , sakastana , whence the modern persian seistan . '' some of the saka fleeing the yuezhi attacked the parthian empire , where they defeated and killed the kings phraates ii and artabanus . these sakas were eventually settled by mithridates ii in what become known as sakastan . according to harold walter bailey , the territory of drangiana ( now in afghanistan and pakistan ) became known as '' land of the sakas '' , and was called sakastāna in the persian language of contemporary iran , in armenian as sakastan , with similar equivalents in pahlavi , greek , sogdian , syriac , arabic , and the middle persian tongue used in turfan , xinjiang , china . this is attested in a contemporary kharosthi inscription found on the mathura lion capital belonging to the saka kingdom of the indo-scythians ( 200 bc – 400 ad ) in north india , roughly the same time the chinese record that the saka had invaded and settled the country of jibin 罽賓 ( i.e . kashmir , of modern-day india and pakistan ) . ulrich theobald . ( 26 november 2011 ) . '' chinese history – sai 塞 the saka people or soghdians . '' chinaknowledge.de . accessed 2 september 2016 . iaroslav lebedynsky and victor h . mair speculate that some sakas may also have migrated to the area of yunnan in southern china following their expulsion by the yuezhi . excavations of the prehistoric art of the dian kingdom of yunnan have revealed hunting scenes of caucasoid horsemen in central asian clothing . the scenes depicted on these drums sometimes represent these horsemen practising hunting . animal scenes of felines attacking oxen are also at times reminiscent of scythian art both in theme and in composition . migrations of the 2nd and 1st century bc have left traces in sogdia and bactria , but they can not firmly be attributed to the saka , similarly with the sites of sirkap and taxila in ancient india . the rich graves at tillya tepe in afghanistan are seen as part of a population affected by the saka . the shakya clan of india , to which gautama buddha , called śākyamuni '' sage of the shakyas '' , belonged , were also likely sakas , as michael witzel and christopher i . beckwith have demonstrated . indo-scythians . the region in modern afghanistan and iran where the saka moved to became known as '' land of the saka '' or sakastan . this is attested in a contemporary kharosthi inscription found on the mathura lion capital belonging to the saka kingdom of the indo-scythians ( 200 bc – 400 ad ) in northern india , bailey , h.w . ( 1996 ) '' khotanese saka literature '' , in ehsan yarshater ( ed ) , the cambridge history of iran , vol iii : the seleucid , parthian , and sasanian periods , part 2 ( reprint edition ) , cambridge : cambridge university press , pp 1230–1231 . roughly the same time the chinese record that the saka had invaded and settled the country of jibin 罽賓 ( i.e . kashmir , of modern-day india and pakistan ) . in the persian language of contemporary iran the territory of drangiana was called sakastāna , in armenian as sakastan , with similar equivalents in pahlavi , greek , sogdian , syriac , arabic , and the middle persian tongue used in turfan , xinjiang , china . the sakas also captured gandhara and taxila , and migrated to north india . the most famous indo-scythian king was maues . an indo-scythians kingdom was established in mathura ( 200 bc – 400 ad ) . weer rajendra rishi , an indian linguist , identified linguistic affinities between indian and central asian languages , which further lends credence to the possibility of historical sakan influence in north india . according to historian michael mitchiner , the abhira tribe were a saka people cited in the gunda inscription of the western satrap rudrasimha i dated to ad 181 . . kingdoms in the tarim basin . . kingdom of khotan . , king of khotan . khotan , first century . obv : kharosthi legend , '' of the great king of kings , king of khotan , gurgamoya . rev : chinese legend : '' twenty-four grain copper coin '' . british museum the kingdom of khotan was a saka city state in on the southern edge of the tarim basin . as a consequence of the han–xiongnu war spanning from 133 bce to 89 ce , the tarim basin ( now xinjiang , northwest china ) , including khotan and kashgar , fell under han chinese influence , beginning with the reign of emperor wu of han ( r . 141-87 bc ) . loewe , michael . ( 1986 ) . '' the former han dynasty , '' in the cambridge history of china : volume i : the ch'in and han empires , 221 b.c . – a.d . 220 , 103–222 . edited by denis twitchett and michael loewe . cambridge : cambridge university press , pp 197-198 . yü , ying-shih . ( 1986 ) . '' han foreign relations , '' in the cambridge history of china : volume i : the ch'in and han empires , 221 b.c . – a.d . 220 , 377-462 . edited by denis twitchett and michael loewe . cambridge : cambridge university press , pp 410-411 . archaeological evidence and documents from khotan and other sites in the tarim basin provided information on the language spoken by the saka . the official language of khotan was initially gandhari prakrit written in kharosthi , and coins from khotan dated to the 1st century bear dual inscriptions in chinese and gandhari prakrit , indicating links of khotan to both india and china . surviving documents however suggest that an iranian language was used by the people of the kingdom for a long time third-century ad documents in prakrit from nearby shanshan record the title for the king of khotan as hinajha ( i.e . '' generalissimo '' ) , a distinctively iranian-based word equivalent to the sanskrit title senapati , yet nearly identical to the khotanese saka hīnāysa attested in later khotanese documents . this , along with the fact that the king 's recorded regnal periods were given as the khotanese kṣuṇa , '' implies an established connection between the iranian inhabitants and the royal power , '' according to the professor of iranian studies ronald e . emmerick . he contended that khotanese-saka-language royal rescripts of khotan dated to the 10th century '' makes it likely that the ruler of khotan was a speaker of iranian . '' furthermore , he argued that the early form of the name of khotan , hvatana , is connected semantically with the name saka . the region once again came under chinese suzerainty with the campaigns of conquest by emperor taizong of tang ( r . 626-649 ) . xue , zongzheng ( 薛宗正 ) . ( 1992 ) . history of the turks ( 突厥史 ) . beijing : zhongguo shehui kexue chubanshe , p . 596-598 . ; oclc 28622013 from the late eighth to ninth centuries , the region changed hands between the rival tang and tibetan empires . beckwith , christopher . ( 1987 ) . the tibetan empire in central asia . princeton , nj : princeton university press , pp 36 , 146 . wechsler , howard j . ; twitchett , dennis c . ( 1979 ) . denis c . twitchett ; john k . fairbank , eds . the cambridge history of china , volume 3 : sui and t'ang china , 589–906 , part i . cambridge university press . pp . 225–227 . however , by the early 11th century the region fell to the muslim turkic peoples of the kara-khanid khanate , which led to both the turkification of the region as well as its conversion from buddhism to islam . later khotanese-saka-language documents , ranging from medical texts to buddhist literature , have been found in khotan and tumxuk ( northeast of kashgar ) . similar documents in the khotanese-saka language dating mostly to the 10th century have been found in the dunhuang manuscripts . although the ancient chinese had called khotan yutian ( 于闐 ) , another more native iranian name occasionally used was jusadanna ( 瞿薩旦那 ) , derived from indo-iranian gostan and gostana , the names of the town and region around it , respectively . ulrich theobald . ( 16 october 2011 ) . '' city-states along the silk road . '' chinaknowledge.de . accessed 2 september 2016 . . shule kingdom . much like the neighboring people of the kingdom of khotan , people of kashgar , the capital of shule , spoke saka , one of the eastern iranian languages . xavier tremblay , '' the spread of buddhism in serindia : buddhism among iranians , tocharians and turks before the 13th century '' , in the spread of buddhism , eds ann heirman and stephan peter bumbacker , leiden : koninklijke brill , 2007 , p . 77 . according to the book of han , the saka split and formed several states in the region . these saka states may include two states to the northwest of kashgar , and tumxuk to its northeast , and tushkurgan south in the pamirs . kashgar also conquered other states such as yarkand and kucha during the han dynasty , but in its later history , kashgar was controlled by various empires , including tang china , '' the territory of yārkand is for the first time mentioned in the hanshu ( 1st century bce ) , under the name shache ( old chinese , approximately , s³a ( j ) -ka ) , which is probably related to the name of the iranian saka tribes . '' whitfield 2004 , p . 47 . wechsler , howard j . ; twitchett , dennis c . ( 1979 ) . denis c . twitchett ; john k . fairbank , eds . the cambridge history of china , volume 3 : sui and t'ang china , 589–906 , part i . cambridge university press . pp . 225–228 . before it became part of the turkic kara-khanid khanate in the 10th century . in the 11th century , according to mahmud al-kashgari , some non-turkic languages like the kanchaki and sogdian were still used in some areas in the vicinity of kashgar , and kanchaki is thought to belong to the saka language group . it is believed that the tarim basin was linguistically turkified before the 11th century ended . . historiography . persians referred to all northern nomads as sakas . herodotus ( iv.64 ) describes them as scythians , although they figure under a different name : . strabo . in the 1st century bc , the greek-roman geographer strabo gave an extensive description of the peoples of the eastern steppe , whom he located in central asia beyond bactria and sogdiana . strabo went on to list the names of the various tribes he believed to be '' scythian '' , and in so doing almost certainly conflated them with unrelated tribes of eastern central asia . these tribes included the saka . : : ( strabo , geography , 11.8.1 ; transl . 1903 by h . c . hamilton & w . falconer . ) . indian sources . the sakas receive numerous mentions in indian texts , including the puranas , the manusmriti , the ramayana , the mahabharata , and the mahābhāṣya of patanjali . language . modern scholarly consensus is that the eastern iranian language ancestral to the pamir languages in central asia and the medieval saka language of xinjiang , was one of the scythian languages . kuz'mina , elena e . ( 2007 ) . the origin of the indo iranians . edited by j.p . mallory . leiden , boston : brill , pp 381-382 . evidence of the middle iranian '' scytho-khotanese '' language survives in northwest china , where khotanese-saka-language documents , ranging from medical texts to buddhist texts , have been found primarily in khotan and tumxuk ( northeast of kashgar ) . they largely predate the islamization of xinjiang under the turkic-speaking kara-khanid khanate . similar documents , the dunhuang manuscripts , were discovered written in the khotanese saka language and date mostly from the tenth century . attestations of the saka language show that it was an eastern iranian language . the linguistic heartland of saka was the kingdom of khotan , which had two varieties , corresponding to the major settlements at khotan ( now called hotan ) and tumshuq ( now titled tumxuk ) . sarah iles johnston , religions of the ancient world : a guide , harvard university press , 2004 . pg 197 edward a allworth , central asia : a historical overview , duke university press , 1994 . pp 86 . tumshuqese and khotanese varieties of saka contain many borrowings from the middle indo-aryan languages , but also share features with the modern eastern iranian languages wakhi and pashto . the issyk inscription , a short fragment on a silver cup found in the issyk kurgan in kazakhstan is believed to be an early example of saka , constituting one of very few autochthonous epigraphic traces of that language . the inscription is in a variant of kharosthi . harmatta identifies the dialect as khotanese saka , tentatively translating its as : '' the vessel should hold wine of grapes , added cooked food , so much , to the mortal , then added cooked fresh butter on '' . a growing body of both linguistic and physical anthropological evidence suggest the wakhi are descendants of saka . according to the indo-europeanist martin kümmel , wakhi may be classified as a western saka dialect ; the other attested saka dialects , khotanese and tumshuqese , would then be classified as eastern saka . the saka heartland was gradually conquered during the turkic expansion , beginning in the sixth century , and the area was gradually turkified linguistically under the uyghurs . genetics . the earliest studies could only analyze segments of mtdna , thus providing only broad correlations of affinity to modern west eurasian or east eurasian populations . for example , in a 2002 study the mitochondrial dna of saka period male and female skeletal remains from a double inhumation kurgan at the beral site in kazakhstan was analysed . the two individuals were found to be not closely related . the hv1 mitochondrial sequence of the male was similar to the anderson sequence which is most frequent in european populations . the hv1 sequence of the female suggested a greater likelihood of asian origins . more recent studies have been able to type for specific mtdna lineages . for example , a 2004 study examined the hv1 sequence obtained from a male '' scytho-siberian '' at the kyzyl site in the altai republic . it belonged to the n1a maternal lineage , a geographically west eurasian lineage . another study by the same team , again of mtdna from two scytho-siberian skeletons found in the altai republic , showed that they had been typical males '' of mixed euro-mongoloid origin '' . one of the individuals was found to carry the f2a maternal lineage , and the other the d lineage , both of which are characteristic of east eurasian populations . these early studies have been elaborated by an increasing number of studies by russian scholars . conclusions are ( i ) an early , bronze age mixing of both west and east eurasian lineages , with western lineages being found far to the east , but not vice versa ; ( ii ) an apparent reversal by iron age times , with an increasing presence of east eurasian lineages in the western steppe ; ( iii ) the possible role of migrations from the south , the balkano-danubian and iranian regions , toward the steppe . ancient y-dna data was finally provided by keyser et al in 2009 . they studied the haplotypes and haplogroups of 26 ancient human specimens from the krasnoyarsk area in siberia dated from between the middle of the 2nd millennium bc and the 4th century ad ( scythian and sarmatian timeframe ) . nearly all subjects belonged to haplogroup r-m17 . the authors suggest that their data shows that between the bronze and the iron ages the constellation of populations known variously as scythians , andronovians , etc . were blue- ( or green- ) eyed , fair-skinned and light-haired people who might have played a role in the early development of the tarim basin civilisation . moreover , this study found that they were genetically more closely related to modern populations in eastern europe than those of central and southern asia . the ubiquity and dominance of the r1a y-dna lineage contrasted markedly with the diversity seen in the mtdna profiles . a genetic study published in nature in may 2018 examined the remains of twenty-eight sakas buried between ca . 900 bc to ad 1 , compromising eight sakas of southern siberia ( tagar culture ) , eight sakas of the central steppe ( tasmola culture ) , and twelve sakas of the tian shan . the six samples of y-dna extracted from the tian shan saka belonged to the haplogroups r ( four samples ) , r1 and r1a1 . the samples of mtdna extracted from the tien shan saka belonged to c4 , h4d , t2a1 , u5a1d2b , h2a , u5a1a1 , hv6 ( two samples ) , d4j8 ( two samples ) , w1c and g2a1 . the study detected significant genetic differences between the sakas and scythians of the pannonian basin , and between sakas of southern siberia , the central steppe and the tian shan . tian shan sakas were found to be of about 70 % western steppe herder ( wsh ) ancestry , 25 % siberian hunter-gatherer ancestry and 5 % iranian neolithic ancestry . the iranian neolithic ancestry was primarily male-derived , probably from the bactria–margiana archaeological complex . sakas of the tasmola culture were found to be of about 56 % wsh ancestry and 44 % siberian hunter-gather ancestry . the peoples of the tagar culture had about 83.5 % wsh ancestry , 9 % ancient north eurasian ( ane ) ancestry and 7.5 % siberian hunter-gatherer ancestry . the study suggested that the saka were the source of west eurasian ancestry among the xiongnu , and that the huns probably emerged through conquests of sakas by the xiongnu , which is characterized by increased levels of east asian paternal ancestry in central asia . physical appearance . early physical analyses have unanimously concluded that the saka , even those far to the east ( e.g . the pazyryk region ) , possessed predominantly '' europid '' features , although mixed 'euro-mongoloid '' phenotypes also occur , depending on site and period . the 2nd century bc han china envoy zhang qian described the sai ( saka ) as having yellow ( probably meaning hazel or green ) , and blue eyes . in natural history , the 1st century ad roman author pliny the elder characterises the seres , sometimes identified as sala or tocharians , as red-haired and blue-eyed . pliny . naturalis historia . 6 . 88 . archaeology . the spectacular grave-goods from arzhan , and others in tuva , have been dated from about 900 bc onward , and are associated with the saka . burials at pazyryk in the altay mountains have included some spectacularly preserved sakas of the '' pazyryk culture '' – including the ice maiden of the 5th century bc . pazyryk culture . saka burials documented by modern archaeologists include the kurgans at pazyryk in the ulagan ( red ) district of the altai republic , south of novosibirsk in the altai mountains of southern siberia ( near mongolia ) . archaeologists have extrapolated the pazyryk culture from these finds : five large burial mounds and several smaller ones between 1925 and 1949 , one opened in 1947 by russian archaeologist sergei rudenko . the burial mounds concealed chambers of larch-logs covered over with large cairns of boulders and stones . the pazyryk culture flourished between the 7th and 3rd century bc in the area associated with the sacae . ordinary pazyryk graves contain only common utensils , but in one , among other treasures , archaeologists found the famous pazyryk carpet , the oldest surviving wool-pile oriental rug . another striking find , a 3-metre-high four-wheel funerary chariot , survived well-preserved from the 5th to 4th century bc . . tillia tepe treasure . a site found in 1968 in tillia tepe ( literally '' the golden hill '' ) in northern afghanistan ( former bactria ) near shebergan consisted of the graves of five women and one man with extremely rich jewelry , dated to around the 1st century bc , and probably related to that of saka tribes normally living slightly to the north . altogether the graves yielded several thousands of pieces of fine jewelry , usually made from combinations of gold , turquoise and lapis-lazuli . a high degree of cultural syncretism pervades the findings , however . hellenistic cultural and artistic influences appear in many of the forms and human depictions ( from putto to rings with the depiction of athena and her name inscribed in greek ) , attributable to the existence of the seleucid empire and greco-bactrian kingdom in the same area until around 140 bc , and the continued existence of the indo-greek kingdom in the northwestern indian sub-continent until the beginning of our era . this testifies to the richness of cultural influences in the area of bactria at that time . culture . art . the art of the saka was of a similar styles as other iranian peoples of the steppes , which is referred to collectively as scythian art . in 2001 , the discovery of an undisturbed royal scythian burial-barrow illustrated scythian animal-style gold that lacks the direct influence of greek styles . forty-four pounds of gold weighed down the royal couple in this burial , discovered near kyzyl , capital of the siberian republic of tuva . ancient influences from central asia became identifiable in china following contacts of metropolitan china with nomadic western and northwestern border territories from the 8th century bc . the chinese adopted the scythian-style animal art of the steppes ( descriptions of animals locked in combat ) , particularly the rectangular belt-plaques made of gold or bronze , and created their own versions in jade and steatite . mallory and mair , the tarim mummies : ancient china and the mystery of the earliest peoples from the west , 2000 ) following their expulsion by the yuezhi , some saka may also have migrated to the area of yunnan in southern china . saka warriors could also have served as mercenaries for the various kingdoms of ancient china . excavations of the prehistoric art of the dian civilisation of yunnan have revealed hunting scenes of caucasoid horsemen in central asian clothing . '' les saces '' , iaroslav lebedynsky , p.73 saka influences have been identified as far as korea and japan . various korean artifacts , such as the royal crowns of the kingdom of silla , are said to be of '' scythian '' design . crowns similar to the scythian ones discovered in tillia tepe '' appear later , during the 5th and 6th century at the eastern edge of the asia continent , in the tumulus tombs of the kingdom of silla , in south-east korea . '' afganistan , les trésors retrouvés '' , 2006 , p282 , similar crowns , brought through contacts with the continent , can also be found in kofun era japan . . society . fraternal polyandry was a common custom among saka . brothers had one wife in common and the children were considered as belonging to the oldest brother . . clothing . similar to other eastern iranians represented on the reliefs of the apadāna at persepolis , sakas are depicted as wearing long trousers , which cover the uppers of their boots . over their shoulders they trail a type of long mantle , with one diagonal edge in back . one particular tribe of sakas ( the saka tigraxaudā ) wore pointed caps . herodotus in his description of the persian army mentions the sakas as wearing trousers and tall pointed caps . herodotus says sakas had '' high caps tapering to a point and stiffly upright . '' asian saka headgear is clearly visible on the persepolis apadana staircase bas-relief – high pointed hat with flaps over ears and the nape of the neck . the oriental institute of the university of chicago photographic archives . persepolis – apadana , e stairway , tribute procession , the saka tigraxauda delegation . retrieved 2012-6-27 from china to the danube delta , men seemed to have worn a variety of soft headgear – either conical like the one described by herodotus , or rounder , more like a phrygian cap . saka women dressed in much the same fashion as men . a pazyryk burial , discovered in the 1990s , contained the skeletons of a man and a woman , each with weapons , arrowheads , and an axe . herodotus mentioned that sakas had '' high caps and & nbsp ; … wore trousers . '' clothing was sewn from plain-weave wool , hemp cloth , silk fabrics , felt , leather and hides . pazyryk findings give the most number of almost fully preserved garments and clothing worn by the scythian/saka peoples . ancient persian bas-reliefs , inscriptions from apadana and behistun and archaeological findings give visual representations of these garments . based on the pazyryk findings ( can be seen also in the south siberian , uralic and kazakhstan rock drawings ) some caps were topped with zoomorphic wooden sculptures firmly attached to a cap and forming an integral part of the headgear , similar to the surviving nomad helmets from northern china . men and warrior women wore tunics , often embroidered , adorned with felt applique work , or metal ( golden ) plaques . persepolis apadana again serves a good starting point to observe the tunics of the sakas . they appear to be a sewn , long-sleeved garment that extended to the knees and was belted with a belt , while the owner 's weapons were fastened to the belt ( sword or dagger , gorytos , battle-axe , whetstone etc . ) . based on numerous archeological findings , men and warrior women wore long-sleeved tunics that were always belted , often with richly ornamented belts . the kazakhstan saka ( e.g . issyk golden man/maiden ) wore shorter and closer-fitting tunics than the pontic steppe scythians . some pazyryk culture saka wore short belted tunic with a lapel on the right side , with upright collar , 'puffed ' sleeves narrowing at the wrist and bound in narrow cuffs of a color different from the rest of the tunic . men and women wore coats : e.g . pazyryk saka had many varieties , from fur to felt . they could have worn a riding coat that later was known as a median robe or kantus . long sleeved , and open , it seems that on the persepolis apadana skudrian delegation is perhaps shown wearing such coat . the pazyryk felt tapestry shows a rider wearing a billowing cloak .