Angkor Wat

central structure . the temple stands on a terrace raised higher than the city . it is made of three rectangular galleries rising to a central tower , each level higher than the last . mannikka interprets these galleries as being dedicated to the king , brahma , the moon , and vishnu . each gallery has a gopura at each of the points , and the two inner galleries each have towers at their corners , forming a quincunx with the central tower . because the temple faces west , the features are all set back towards the east , leaving more space to be filled in each enclosure and gallery on the west side ; for the same reason the west-facing steps are shallower than those on the other sides . the outer gallery measures by , with pavilions rather than towers at the corners . the gallery is open to the outside of the temple , with columned half-galleries extending and buttressing the structure . connecting the outer gallery to the second enclosure on the west side is a cruciform cloister called preah poan ( meaning '' the thousand buddhas '' gallery ) . buddha images were left in the cloister by pilgrims over the centuries , although most have now been removed . this area has many inscriptions relating the good deeds of pilgrims , most written in khmer but others in burmese and japanese . the four small courtyards marked out by the cloister may originally have been filled with water . glaize p . 63 . north and south of the cloister are libraries . beyond , the second and inner galleries are connected to each other and to two flanking libraries by another cruciform terrace , again a later addition . from the second level upwards , devatas abound on the walls , singly or in groups of up to four . the second-level enclosure is by , and may originally have been flooded to represent the ocean around mount meru . ray , lonely planet guide to cambodia p . 195 . three sets of steps on each side lead up to the corner towers and gopuras of the inner gallery . the very steep stairways represent the difficulty of ascending to the kingdom of the gods . ray p . 199 . this inner gallery , called the bakan , is a square with axial galleries connecting each gopura with the central shrine , and subsidiary shrines located below the corner towers . the roofings of the galleries are decorated with the motif of the body of a snake ending in the heads of lions or garudas . carved lintels and pediments decorate the entrances to the galleries and to the shrines . the tower above the central shrine rises to a height of above the ground ; unlike those of previous temple mountains , the central tower is raised above the surrounding four . briggs p . 199 . the shrine itself , originally occupied by a statue of vishnu and open on each side , was walled in when the temple was converted to theravada buddhism , the new walls featuring standing buddhas . in 1934 , the conservator george trouvé excavated the pit beneath the central shrine : filled with sand and water it had already been robbed of its treasure , but he did find a sacred foundation deposit of gold leaf two metres above ground level . glaize p . 65 . . decoration . integrated with the architecture of the building , and one of the causes for its fame is angkor wat 's extensive decoration , which predominantly takes the form of bas-relief friezes . the inner walls of the outer gallery bear a series of large-scale scenes mainly depicting episodes from the hindu epics the ramayana and the mahabharata . higham has called these , '' the greatest known linear arrangement of stone carving '' . higham , early cultures of mainland southeast asia p . 318 . from the north-west corner anti-clockwise , the western gallery shows the battle of lanka ( from the ramayana , in which rama defeats ravana ) and the kurukshetra war ( from the mahabharata , showing the mutual annihilation of the kaurava and pandava clans ) . on the southern gallery follow the only historical scene , a procession of suryavarman ii , then the 32 hells and 37 heavens of hinduism . glaize p . 68 . on the eastern gallery is one of the most celebrated scenes , the kurma , showing 92 glaize asuras and 88 devas using the serpent vasuki to churn the sea under vishnu 's direction ( mannikka counts only 91 asuras , and explains the asymmetrical numbers as representing the number of days from the winter solstice to the spring equinox , and from the equinox to the summer solstice ) . described in michael buckley , the churning of the ocean of milk it is followed by vishnu defeating asuras ( a 16th-century addition ) . the northern gallery shows krishna 's victory over bana ( where according to glaize , '' the workmanship is at its worst '' ) . glaize p . 69 . angkor wat is decorated with depictions of apsaras and devata ; there are more than 1,796 depictions of devata in the present research inventory . angkor wat devata inventory – february 2010 angkor wat architects employed small apsara images – as decorative motifs on pillars and walls . they incorporated larger devata images ( all full-body portraits measuring approximately – more prominently at every level of the temple from the entry pavilion to the tops of the high towers . in 1927 , sappho marchal published a study cataloging the remarkable diversity of their hair , headdresses , garments , stance , jewellery and decorative flowers , which marchal concluded were based on actual practices of the angkor period . sappho marchal , khmer costumes and ornaments of the devatas of angkor wat . . construction techniques . the stones , as smooth as polished marble , were laid without mortar with very tight joints that are sometimes hard to find . the blocks were held together by mortise and tenon joints in some cases , while in others they used dovetails and gravity . the blocks were presumably put in place by a combination of elephants , coir ropes , pulleys and bamboo scaffolding . henri mouhot noted that most of the blocks had holes in diameter and deep , with more holes on the larger blocks . some scholars have suggested that these were used to join them together with iron rods , but others claim they were used to hold temporary pegs to help manoeuvre them into place . the monument was made out of 5 to 10 million sandstone blocks with a maximum weight of 1.5 tons each . in fact , the entire city of angkor used up far greater amounts of stone than all the egyptian pyramids combined , and occupied an area significantly greater than modern-day paris . moreover , unlike the egyptian pyramids which use limestone quarried barely away all the time , the entire city of angkor was built with sandstone quarried ( or more ) away . this sandstone had to be transported from mount kulen , a quarry approximately to the northeast . the route has been suggested to span along a canal towards tonlé sap lake , another crossing the lake , and finally against the current along siem reap river , making a total journey of . however , etsuo uchida and ichita shimoda of waseda university in tokyo , japan have discovered in 2011 a shorter canal connecting mount kulen and angkor wat using satellite imagery . the two believe that the khmer used this route instead . virtually all of its surfaces , columns , lintels , and even roofs are carved . there are miles of reliefs illustrating scenes from indian literature including unicorns , griffins , winged dragons pulling chariots as well as warriors following an elephant-mounted leader and celestial dancing girls with elaborate hairstyles . the gallery wall alone is decorated with almost 1,000 square metres of bas reliefs . holes on some of the angkor walls indicate that they may have been decorated with bronze sheets . these were highly prized in ancient times and were a prime target for robbers . while excavating khajuraho , alex evans , a stonemason and sculptor , recreated a stone sculpture under , this took about 60 days to carve . '' lost worlds of the kama sutra '' history channel roger hopkins and mark lehner also conducted experiments to quarry limestone which took 12 quarrymen 22 days to quarry about 400 tons of stone . lehner , mark ( 1997 ) . the complete pyramids , london : thames and hudson , pp . & nbsp ; 202–225 . the labour force to quarry , transport , carve and install so much sandstone must have run into the thousands including many highly skilled artisans . the skills required to carve these sculptures were developed hundreds of years earlier , as demonstrated by some artefacts that have been dated to the seventh century , before the khmer came to power . . angkor wat today . restoration and conservation . as with most other ancient temples in cambodia , angkor wat has faced extensive damage and deterioration by a combination of plant overgrowth , fungi , ground movements , war damage and theft . the war damage to angkor wat 's temples however has been very limited , compared to the rest of cambodia 's temple ruins , and it has also received the most attentive restoration . the restoration of angkor wat in the modern era began with the establishment of the conservation d'angkor ( angkor conservancy ) by the école française d'extrême-orient ( efeo ) in 1908 ; before that date , activities at the site were primarily concerned with exploration . the conservation d'angkor was responsible for the research , conservation , and restoration activities carried out at angkor until the early 1970s , and a major restoration of angkor was undertaken in the 1960s . however , work on angkor was abandoned during the khmer rouge era and the conservation d'angkor was disbanded in 1975 . between 1986 and 1992 , the archaeological survey of india carried out restoration work on the temple , as france did not recognise the cambodian government at the time . criticisms have been raised about both the early french restoration attempts and particularly the later indian work , with concerns over damage done to the stone surface by the use of chemicals and cement . in 1992 , following an appeal for help by norodom sihanouk , angkor wat was listed in unesco 's world heritage in danger ( later removed in 2004 ) and world heritage site together with an appeal by unesco to the international community to save angkor . zoning of the area was set up to protect the angkor site in 1994 , apsara was established in 1995 to protect and manage the area , and a law to protect cambodian heritage was passed in 1996 . a number of countries such as france , japan and china are currently involved in various angkor wat conservation projects . the german apsara conservation project ( gacp ) is working to protect the devatas , and other bas-reliefs which decorate the temple , from damage . the organisation 's survey found that around 20 % of the devatas were in very poor condition , mainly because of natural erosion and deterioration of the stone but in part also due to earlier restoration efforts . german apsara conservation project , conservation , risk map , p . 2 . other work involves the repair of collapsed sections of the structure , and prevention of further collapse : the west facade of the upper level , for example , has been buttressed by scaffolding since 2002 , while a japanese team completed restoration of the north library of the outer enclosure in 2005 . world monuments fund began conservation work on the churning of the sea of milk gallery in 2008 after several years of studies on its condition . the project restored the traditional khmer roofing system and removed cement used in earlier restoration attempts that had resulted in efflorescence behind the bas-relief , discoloring and damaging the sculpted surfaces . the main phase of work ended in 2012 , with the final component being the installation of finials on the roof of the gallery in 2013 . microbial biofilms have been found degrading sandstone at angkor wat , preah khan , and the bayon and west prasat in angkor . the dehydration- and radiation-resistant filamentous cyanobacteria can produce organic acids that degrade the stone . a dark filamentous fungus was found in internal and external preah khan samples , while the alga trentepohlia was found only in samples taken from external , pink-stained stone at preah khan . replicas have been made to replace some of the lost or damaged sculptures . . tourism . since the 1990s , angkor wat has become a major tourist destination . in 1993 , there were only 7,650 visitors to the site ; by 2004 , government figures show that 561,000 foreign visitors had arrived in siem reap province that year , approximately 50 % of all foreign tourists in cambodia . the number reached over a million in 2007 , and over two million by 2012 . most visited angkor wat , which received over two million foreign tourists in 2013 , and 2.6 million by 2018 . the site was managed by the private sokimex group between 1990 and 2016 , which rented it from the cambodian government . the influx of tourists has so far caused relatively little damage , other than some graffiti ; ropes and wooden steps have been introduced to protect the bas-reliefs and floors , respectively . tourism has also provided some additional funds for maintenance—as of 2000 approximately 28 % of ticket revenues across the whole angkor site was spent on the temples—although most work is carried out by teams sponsored by foreign governments rather than by the cambodian authorities . tales of asia , preserving angkor : interview with ang choulean ( 13 october 2000 ) since angkor wat has seen significant growth in tourism throughout the years , unesco and its international co-ordinating committee for the safeguarding and development of the historic site of angkor ( icc ) , in association with representatives from the royal government and apsara , organised seminars to discuss the concept of '' cultural tourism '' . wanting to avoid commercial and mass tourism , the seminars emphasised the importance of providing high-quality accommodation and services in order for the cambodian government to benefit economically , while also incorporating the richness of cambodian culture . in 2001 , this incentive resulted in the concept of the '' angkor tourist city '' which would be developed with regard to traditional khmer architecture , contain leisure and tourist facilities , and provide luxurious hotels capable of accommodating large numbers of tourists . the prospect of developing such large tourist accommodations has encountered concerns from both apsara and the icc , claiming that previous tourism developments in the area have neglected construction regulations and more of these projects have the potential to damage landscape features . also , the large scale of these projects have begun to threaten the quality of the nearby town 's water , sewage , and electricity systems . it has been noted that such high frequency of tourism and growing demand for quality accommodations in the area , such as the development of a large highway , has had a direct effect on the underground water table , subsequently straining the structural stability of the temples at angkor wat . locals of siem reap have also voiced concern that the charm and atmosphere of their town have been compromised in order to entertain tourism . since this local atmosphere is the key component to projects like angkor tourist city , the local officials continue to discuss how to successfully incorporate future tourism without sacrificing local values and culture . at the asean tourism forum 2012 , it was agreed that borobudur and angkor wat would become sister sites and the provinces sister provinces . . see also . indosphere greater india hinduism in southeast asia buddhism in southeast asia list of hindu temples list of buddhist temples . references . bibliography . falser , michael ( 2020 ) angkor wat – a transcultural history of heritage . volume 1 : angkor in france . from plaster casts to exhibition pavilions . volume 2 : angkor in cambodia . from jungle find to global icon . berlin-boston degruyter briggs , lawrence robert ( 1951 , reprinted 1999 ) . the ancient khmer empire . white lotus . forbes , andrew ; henley , david ( 2011 ) . angkor , eighth wonder of the world . chiang mai : cognoscenti books . freeman , michael and jacques , claude ( 1999 ) . ancient angkor . river books . higham , charles ( 2001 ) . the civilization of angkor . phoenix . higham , charles ( 2003 ) . early cultures of mainland southeast asia . art media resources . hing thoraxy . achievement of '' apsara '' : problems and resolutions in the management of the angkor area . petrotchenko , michel ( 2011 ) . focusing on the angkor temples : the guidebook , 383 pages , amarin printing and publishing , 2nd edition , ray , nick ( 2002 ) . lonely planet guide to cambodia ( 4th edition ) . external links . buckley , michael ( 1998 ) . vietnam , cambodia and laos handbook . avalon travel publications . online excerpt the churning of the ocean of milk retrieved 25 july 2005 . glaize , maurice ( 2003 edition of an english translation of the 1993 french fourth edition ) . the monuments of the angkor group . retrieved 14 july 2005 . university of applied sciences cologne . german apsara conservation project retrieved 2 may 2010 . university of heidelberg , germany , chair of global art history , project ( michael falser ) : heritage as a transcultural concept – angkor wat from an object of colonial archaeology to a contemporary global icon bbc horizon ( 4 november 1999 ) . atlantis reborn ( script ) . broadcast bbc2 4 november 1999 , retrieved 25 july 2005 . battle of kurukshetra mural at angkor wat , centre for 21st century humanities , 2018 angkor wat and angkor photo gallery by jaroslav poncar may 2010 angkor digital media archive – photos , laser scans , panoramas of angkor wat 's western causeway and banteay kdei from a cyark/sophia university/university of california partnership . bbc : map reveals ancient urban sprawl august 2007 guide to the angkor monuments – pdf downloadable english translation of maurice glaize 's 1944 guide inventory of angkor wat devata ( sacred khmer women ) february 2010 laser technology reveals lost city around angkor wat june 2013 roland fletcher , director of the greater angkor project , lectures on '' lidar , water and the demise of greater angkor '' in november , 2013 voice of angkor , an angkor temples guide