Johann Jakob Reiske

biography . reiske was born at zörbig , in the electorate of saxony . from the orphanage in halle he passed in 1733 to the university of leipzig , and there spent five years . he tried to find his own way in middle greek literature , to which german schools then gave little attention ; but , as he had not mastered the grammar , he soon found this a sore task and took up arabic . he was poor , having almost nothing beyond his allowance , which for the five years was only two hundred thalers . but everything of which he could cheat his appetite was spent on arabic books , and when he had read all that was then printed he thirsted for manuscripts , and in march 1738 started on foot for hamburg , joyous though totally unprovided , on his way to leiden and the treasures of the warnerianum . at hamburg , he got some money and letters of recommendation from the hebraist friedrich august wolf , and took ship to amsterdam . there d'orville , to whom he had an introduction , proposed to retain him as his amanuensis at a salary of six hundred guilders . reiske refused , though he thought the offer very generous ; he did not want money , he wanted manuscripts . when he reached leiden ( june 6 , 1738 ) , he found that the lectures were over for the term and that the manuscripts were not open to him . but d'orville and albert schultens helped him to private teaching and reading for the press , by which he was able to live . he heard the lectures of a . schultens , and practised himself in arabic with his son j.j . schultens . through schultens too he got at arabic manuscripts , and was even allowed sub rosa to take them home with him . ultimately he seems to have got free access to the collection , which he catalogued—the work of almost a whole summer , for which the curators rewarded him with nine guilders . reiske 's first years in leiden were not unhappy , until he got into serious trouble by introducing emendations of his own into the second edition of burmann 's petronius , which he had to see through the press . his patrons withdrew from him , and his chance of perhaps becoming professor was gone ; d'orville indeed soon came round , for he could not do without reiske , who did work of which his patron , after dressing it up in his own style , took the credit . but a . schultens was never the same as before to him ; reiske indeed was too independent , and hurt him by his open criticisms of his master 's way of making arabic mainly a handmaid of hebrew . reiske himself , however , admitted that schultens always behaved honourably to him . in 1742 , by schultens ' advice reiske took up medicine as a study by which he might hope to live if he could not do so by philology . in 1746 , he graduated as m.d . , the fees being remitted at schultens ' intercession . it was schultens too who conquered the difficulties opposed to his graduation at the last moment by the faculty of theology on the ground that some of his theses had a materialistic ring . on june 10 , 1746 , he left the netherlands and settled in leipzig , where he hoped to get medical practice . but his shy , proud nature was not fitted to gain patients , and the leipzig doctors would not recommend one who was not a leipzig graduate . in 1747 , an arabic dedication to the electoral prince of saxony got him the title of professor , but neither the faculty of arts nor that of medicine was willing to admit him among them , and he never delivered a course of lectures . he had still to go on doing literary task-work , but his labour was much worse paid in leipzig than in leiden . still he could have lived and sent his old mother , as his custom was , a yearly present of a piece of leather to be sold in retail if he had been a better manager . but , careless for the morrow , he was always printing at his own cost great books which found no buyers . in his autobiography '' lebensbeschreibung '' he depicted his academical colleagues as hostile ; and suspected ernesti , under a show of friendship , secretly hindered his promotion . on the other hand , his unsparing reviews made bad blood with the pillars of the university . in 1755 to 1756 he turned his attention to oriental coins . the custodian at the münzkabinett in dresden , richter , invited him to study the coins with arabic inscriptions . richter asked him to explain the texts on the coins . his resulting '' letters on arabic coinage ( briefe über das arabische münzwesen ) '' were posthumously published by johann gottfried eichhorn . he did it very eagerly with the hope to find a suitable bread job in dresden . however , the seven years ' war ended all hopes to find anything in oriental studies . his '' letters on arabic coinage '' were the first serious attempt to compare the historical information gathered from the islamic coins - bearing up to 150 words – with the information from chronicles , to achieve new insights in medieval islamic history . among the orientalists at his time he was now known as someone knowledgeable on islamic coins . he was later approached by carsten niebuhr to identify the coins which he brought with him from his travels . but reiske never came back seriously to this topic . at length in 1758 the magistrates of leipzig rescued him from his misery by giving him the rectorate of st . nicolai , and , though he still made no way with the leading men of the university and suffered from the hostility of men like ruhnken and j.d . michaelis , he was compensated for this by the esteem of frederick the great , of lessing , niebuhr , and many foreign scholars . the last decade of his life was made cheerful by his marriage with ernestine müller , who shared all his interests and learned greek to help him with collations . in proof of his gratitude , her portrait stands beside his in the first volume of the oratores graeci . reiske died in leipzig on 14 august 1774 , and his manuscript remains passed , through lessing 's mediation , to the danish historian p.f . suhm , and are now in the royal library , copenhagen . achievements . reiske excelled as a scholar of arabic literature . interested in the history and the realia of the literature , he cared less for the verse of the poets than for the historical notices to be found in their scholia - the much praised poetry of hariri seemed to him a grammatical pedant . the scholia on jarir provided information on the prevalence of buddhism doctrine and asceticism in iraq under the omayyads . in the adnotationes historicae to his abulfeda ( abulf . annales moslemici , 5 vols . , copenhagen , 1789–91 ) , he collected a veritable treasure of sound and original research ; he knew the byzantine writers as thoroughly as the arabic authors , and was alike at home in modern works of travel in all languages and in ancient and medieval authorities . he was interested too in numismatics . to comprehensive knowledge and very wide reading he added a sound historical judgment . he was not , like schultens , deceived by the pretended antiquity of the yemenite qasidas . errors no doubt he made , as in the attempt to ascertain the date of the breach of the dam of ma'rib . although abulfeda as a late epitomator afforded no starting point for methodical study of the sources , reiske 's edition with his version and notes laid the foundation for research into arab history , and a historical criticism of oriental numismatics with his letters on arabic coinage ( in j . g . eichhorn 's repertorium , vols . ix.-xi . ) . the foundation of arabic philology , however , was laid not by him but by silvestre de sacy . reiske 's linguistic knowledge was great , but he used it only to understand his authors ; he had no feeling for form , for language as language , or for metre . in leipzig reiske worked mainly at greek , while he continued to draw on his arabic stores accumulated in leiden . his merit as an arabist was sooner recognized than the value of his greek work . reiske the greek scholar has been rightly valued only in recent years , and it is now recognized that he was the first german since sylburg who had a living knowledge of the greek tongue . his reputation does not rest on his numerous editions , often hasty or even made to booksellers ' orders , but in his remarks , especially his conjectures . he himself designates the animadversiones in scriptores graecos as flos ingenii sui , and in truth these thin booklets outweigh his big editions . closely following the author 's thought he removes obstacles whenever he meets them , but he is so steeped in the language and thinks so truly like a greek that the difficulties he feels often seem to us to lie in mere points of style . his criticism is empirical and unmethodical , based on immense and careful reading , and applied only when he feels a difficulty ; and he is most successful when he has a large mass of tolerably homogeneous literature to lean on , whilst on isolated points he is often at a loss . his corrections are often hasty and false , but a surprisingly large proportion of them have since received confirmation from manuscripts , and , though his merits as a grecian lie mainly in his conjectures , his realism is felt in this sphere also ; his german translations especially show more freedom and practical insight , more feeling for actual life , than is common with the scholars of that age . selected works . arabic philology . abulfedae annales moslemici . latinos ex arabicis fecit io . iacobus reiske . ( leipzig , 1754 ) . islamic numismatics . briefe über das arabische münzwesen von johann jacob reiske mit anmerkungen und zusätzen von johann gottfried eichhorn . in : repertorium für biblische und morgenländische litteratur 9 ( 1781 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 199–268 ; 10 ( 1782 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 165–240 ; 11 ( 1782 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 1–44 . greek philology . constantini porphyrogeniti libri ii . de ceremoniis aulae byzant . vol . iii . ( bonn , 1829 ) animadv . ad graecos auctores ( 5 vols . , leipzig , 1751–66 ) ( the rest lies unprinted at copenhagen ) oratorum graec . quae supersunt ( 8 vols , leipzig , 1770–73 ) apparatus criticus et exegeticus ad demosthenem ( 5 vols . , leipzig , 1774–75 ) maximus tyr . ( leipzig , 1774 ) plutarchus ( leipzig , 1774–79 ) dionys . halic . ( 6 vols . , leipzig , 1774–77 ) libanius ( 4 vols . , altenburg , 1784–97 ) . autobiography . von ihm selbst aufgesetzte lebensbeschreibung . ( leipzig , 1783 ) . notes . references . hans-georg ebert - thoralf hanstein ( eds . ) , johann jacob reiske : persönlichkeit und wirkung ( beiträge zur leipziger universitäts- und wissenschaftsgeschichte 7 ) , leipzig , 2005 . the book includes several studies on various aspects of reiske 's life and work , including a bibliography . boris liebrenz , ″johann jacob reiskes arabistische schüler , '' in heinrich leberecht fleischer – leben und wirkung . ein leipziger orientalist des 19 . jahrhunderts mit internationaler ausstrahlung . hrsg . von hans-georg ebert und thoralf hanstein ( frankfurt am main 2013 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 169–196 . ; attribution