Bluto

character . bluto is a cruel , bearded , muscular bully who serves as popeye 's nemesis and arch-rival for the love of olive oyl . he usually uses brute force and/or trickery to accomplish his various goals . his voice is very loud , harsh and deep , with an incomprehensible bear-like growl between words and sentences . this voice , as well as the dark beard , crooked teeth , and bulk , were similar to that of the well-known at the time villain red flack in the 1930 film the big trail , played by tyrone power sr . bluto , like popeye , is enamored of olive oyl , and he often attempts to kidnap her . however , with the help of some spinach , popeye usually ends up defeating him . some cartoons portray popeye and bluto as navy buddies , although in these episodes bluto usually turns on popeye when an object of interest ( usually olive ) is put between them . bluto 's strength is portrayed inconsistently . in some episodes he is weaker than popeye and resorts to underhanded trickery to accomplish his goals . other times popeye stands no chance against bluto in a fight until he eats his spinach . in yet other cartoons the two characters are closely matched with bluto eventually gaining the upper hand before popeye eats his spinach and defeats bluto . in some shorts bluto is a match for popeye even after he has eaten his spinach . bluto is sometimes portrayed as having a glass jaw . he has , on occasion , been knocked out by olive oyl and even by popeye 's infant ward swee'pea . on rare occasions bluto tries to sabotage popeye before confronting him , such as when he tried to thwart his own defeat by using a forklift to steal popeye 's store of spinach cans and disposing of them in a garbage dump . in one case , popeye forces a defeated bluto to consume spinach , after which bluto easily beats up popeye , resulting in olive pitying him and choosing him over bluto . in most cases , the name '' bluto '' is used as a first name . in cartoons where bluto portrays alternate characters , or '' roles , '' the name can be used as a surname , as with lumberjack '' pierre bluto '' in the cartoon axe me another and etiquette teacher '' professor bluteau '' in learn polikeness . . bluto vs . brutus . after the theatrical popeye cartoon series ceased production in 1957 , bluto 's name was changed to brutus because it was incorrectly believed that paramount pictures , distributors of the fleischer studios ( later famous studios ) cartoons , owned the rights to the name '' bluto '' . king features actually owned the name , as bluto had been originally created for the comic strip . due to a lack of thorough research , they failed to realize this and reinvented him as brutus to avoid supposed copyright problems . '' brutus '' ( often pronounced '' brutusk '' by popeye ) appears in the 1960–1962 popeye the sailor television cartoons , with his physical appearance changed , making him obese rather than muscular . he normally sported a blue shirt and brown pants , and did n't appear to wear any socks . the character reverted to bluto for hanna-barbera 's the all-new popeye hour , the 1980 live-action popeye movie , as well as the 1987 popeye and son series also by hanna-barbera . the character was also named bluto in the 2004 movie popeye 's voyage : the quest for pappy . brutus later appeared in the popeye arcade game released by nintendo . prior to the name change to brutus , the bearded strongman was called or referred to as '' the big guy that hates popeye '' , '' a big brute '' , '' mean man '' , and the sea hag 's '' sonny boy '' . the name '' brutus '' was first used on popeye-related products in 1960 and in print by 1962 . in the comic book series , the name '' brutus '' debuted in popeye 64 ( 1962 ) but '' sonny boy '' again was used in issue 66 ( 1962 ) . for issue 67 ( 1963 ) the name '' brutus '' stuck with the character . september 30 , 1962 appears to be the first sunday page using the name '' brutus '' . in the daily strip olive oyl first called the sea hag 's son '' brutus '' on january 29 , 1963 . once brutus became a regular in the comic strip he was no longer related to the sea hag . animated views : fifty years of brutus , october 25 , 2010 during the run of charlton comics ' popeye series , brutus again became the son of the sea hag . for two cartoons in 1963 he was called '' pleeto '' . it is generally accepted that bluto and brutus are one and the same . however , a 1988 popeye comic book , published by ocean comics , presented the two characters as twin brothers . in 1991 bobby london , who wrote and drew the popeye daily strip for six years , created the '' return of bluto '' story where the 1932 version of bluto returns and discovers a number of obese , bearded bullies have taken his place , calling themselves '' brutus '' ( each one being a different version of popeye 's rival ) . the popeye comic strip added bluto in the capacity of twin brother of brutus in comic strips dated december 28 , 2008 and april 5 , 2009 . december 28 , 2008 popeye cartoon ; retrieved july 14 , 2009 . april 5 , 2009 popeye cartoon ; retrieved july 14 , 2009 . in all spanish-speaking countries , in brazil and in the philippines , the character is mostly known as '' brutus '' . his name , in italian , has been translated as '' bruto '' or , occasionally , as '' timoteo '' ( timothy ) . in french , it has also been translated alternatively as '' brutus '' or '' timothée '' . in germany , he was named '' bonzo '' in the comic books '' popeye , der spinatmatrose '' . voice . in the paramount theatrical cartoons , bluto was voiced by a number of actors , including william pennell , gus wickie , jack mercer , pinto colvig , dave barry , tedd pierce , and jackson beck , who took over the role in 1944 . beck also supplied the voice for brutus in the early 1960s . in the 1980 live-action movie , he was portrayed by paul l . smith . in the all-new popeye hour and popeye and son , he was voiced by allan melvin . in popeye 's voyage : the quest for pappy , he was voiced by garry chalk . other characters . in the animated cartoons , popeye 's foe is almost always bluto , functioning in some capacity & mdash ; fellow sailor , generic thug , carnival hypnotism , sheik , lecherous instructor , etc . however , in the famous era shorts there have also been '' original '' one-time characters with bluto-like personalities and mannerisms such as the blond , beardless lifeguard in '' beach peach '' . jackson beck voiced these characters using the same voice . references . external links . popeye at don markstein 's toonopedia