Intensive farming

history . paddy-based rice farming has been practised in korea since ancient times . a pit-house at the daecheon-ni archaeological site yielded carbonized rice grains and radiocarbon dates indicating that rice cultivation may have begun as early as the middle jeulmun pottery period ( c . 3500–2000 bc ) in the korean peninsula . the earliest rice cultivation there may have used dry-fields instead of paddies . british agricultural revolution saw a massive increase in agricultural productivity and net output . this in turn contributed to unprecedented population growth , freeing up a significant percentage of the workforce , and thereby helped enable the industrial revolution . historians cited enclosure , mechanization , four-field crop rotation , and selective breeding as the most important innovations . overton , mark . agricultural revolution in england 1500–1850 ( september 19 , 2002 ) , bbc . valenze , deborah . the first industrial woman ( new york : oxford university press , 1995 ) , p . 183 . kagan , donald . the western heritage ( london : prentice hall , 2004 ) , pp . 535–539 . industrial agriculture arose in the industrial revolution . by the early 19th century , agricultural techniques , implements , seed stocks , and cultivars had so improved that yield per land unit was many times that seen in the middle ages . the industrialization phase involved a continuing process of mechanization . horse-drawn machinery such as the mccormick reaper revolutionized harvesting , while inventions such as the cotton gin reduced the cost of processing . during this same period , farmers began to use steam-powered threshers and tractors . in 1892 , the first gasoline engine tractor was successfully developed , and in 1923 , the international harvester farmall tractor became the first all-purpose tractor , marking an inflection point in the replacement of draft animals with machines . mechanical harvesters ( combines ) , planters , transplanters , and other equipment were then developed , further revolutionizing agriculture . these inventions increased yields and allowed individual farmers to manage increasingly large farms . the identification of nitrogen , phosphorus , and potassium ( npk ) as critical factors in plant growth led to the manufacture of synthetic fertilizers , further increasing crop yields . in 1909 , the haber-bosch method to synthesize ammonium nitrate was first demonstrated . npk fertilizers stimulated the first concerns about industrial agriculture , due to concerns that they came with side effects such as soil compaction , soil erosion , and declines in overall soil fertility , along with health concerns about toxic chemicals food chain . ( ebook } the discovery of vitamins and their role in nutrition , in the first two decades of the 20th century , led to vitamin supplements , which in the 1920s allowed some livestock to be raised indoors , reducing their exposure to adverse natural elements . following world war ii synthetic fertilizer use increased rapidly . the discovery of antibiotics and vaccines facilitated raising livestock by reducing diseases . developments in logistics and refrigeration as well as processing technology made long-distance distribution feasible . integrated pest management is the modern method to minimize pesticide use to more sustainable levels . there are concerns over the sustainability of industrial agriculture , and the environmental effects of fertilizers and pesticides , which has given rise to the organic movement and has built a market for sustainable intensive farming , as well as funding for the development of appropriate technology . techniques and technologies . livestock . . pasture intensification . pasture intensification is the improvement of pasture soils and grasses to increase the food production potential of livestock systems . it is commonly used to reverse pasture degradation , a process characterized by loss of forage and decreased animal carrying capacity which results from overgrazing , poor nutrient management , and lack of soil conservation . this degradation leads to poor pasture soils with decreased fertility and water availability and increased rates of erosion , compaction , and acidification . degraded pastures have significantly lower productivity and higher carbon footprints compared to intensified pastures . management practices which improve soil health and consequently grass productivity include irrigation , soil scarification , and the application of lime , fertilizers , and pesticides . depending on the productivity goals of the target agricultural system , more involved restoration projects can be undertaken to replace invasive and under-productive grasses with grass species that are better suited to the soil and climate conditions of the region . these intensified grass systems allow higher stocking rates with faster animal weight gain and reduced time to slaughter , resulting in more productive , carbon-efficient livestock systems . another technique to optimize yield while maintaining the carbon balance is the use of integrated crop-livestock ( icl ) and crop-livestock-forestry ( iclf ) systems , which combine several ecosystems into one optimized agricultural framework . these synergies between these systems provide benefits to pastures through optimal plant usage , improved feed and fattening rates , increased soil fertility and quality , intensified nutrient cycle , integrated pest control , and improved biodiversity . the introduction of certain legume crops to pastures increases carbon accumulation and nitrogen fixation in soils , while their digestibility helps animal fattening and reduces methane emissions from enteric fermentation . iclf systems yield beef cattle productivity up to ten times that of degraded pastures , additional crop production from maize , sorghum , and soybean harvests , and greatly reduced greenhouse gas balances due to forest carbon sequestration . in the twelve aprils grazing program for dairy production , developed by the usda-sare forage crops for dairy herds are planted into a perennial pasture . . rotational grazing . rotational grazing is a variety of foraging in which herds or flocks are regularly and systematically moved to fresh , rested grazing areas ( sometimes called paddocks ) to maximize the quality and quantity of forage growth . it can be used with cattle , sheep , goats , pigs , chickens , turkeys , ducks , and other animals . the herds graze one portion of pasture , or a paddock , while allowing the others to recover . resting grazed lands allows the vegetation to renew energy reserves , rebuild shoot systems , and deepen root systems , resulting in long-term maximum biomass production . pasture systems alone can allow grazers to meet their energy requirements , but rotational grazing is especially effective because grazers thrive on the more tender younger plant stems . parasites are also left behind to die off , minimizing or eliminating the need for de-wormers . with the increased productivity of rotational systems , the animals may need less supplemental feed than in continuous grazing systems . farmers can therefore increase stocking rates . . concentrated animal feeding operations . intensive livestock farming or '' factory farming '' , is the process of raising livestock in confinement at high stocking density . sources discussing '' intensive farming '' , '' intensive agriculture '' or '' factory farming '' : fraser , david . animal welfare and the intensification of animal production : an alternative interpretation , food and agriculture organization of the united nations , 2005 . turner , jacky . '' history of factory farming '' , united nations : '' fifty years ago in europe , intensification of animal production was seen as the road to national food security and a better diet . the intensive systems—called 'factory farms ' —were characterised by confinement of the animals at high stocking density , often in barren and unnatural conditions . '' john humphrys . why the organic revolution had to happen , the observer , april 21 , 2001 : '' nor is a return to 'primitive ' farming practices the only alternative to factory farming and highly intensive agriculture . '' baker , stanley . '' factory farms – the only answer to our growing appetite ? , the guardian , december 29 , 1964 : '' factory farming , whether we like it or not , has come to stay . in a year which has been as uneventful on the husbandry side as it has been significant in economic and political developments touching the future of food procurement , the more far-seeing would name the growth of intensive farming as the major development . '' ( note : stanley baker was the guardian 's agriculture correspondent . ) '' head to head : intensive farming '' , bbc news , march 6 , 2001 : '' here , green mep caroline lucas takes issue with the intensive farming methods of recent decades . in the wake of the spread of bse from the uk to the continent of europe , the german government has appointed an agriculture minister from the green party . she intends to end factory farming in her country . this must be the way forward and we should end industrial agriculture in this country as well . '' sources discussing '' industrial farming '' , '' industrial agriculture '' and '' factory farming '' : '' annex 2 . permitted substances for the production of organic foods '' , food and agriculture organization of the united nations : '' 'factory ' farming refers to industrial management systems that are heavily reliant on veterinary and feed inputs not permitted in organic agriculture . '' head to head : intensive farming '' , bbc news , march 6 , 2001 : '' here , green mep caroline lucas takes issue with the intensive farming methods of recent decades . in the wake of the spread of bse from the uk to the continent of europe , the german government has appointed an agriculture minister from the green party . she intends to end factory farming in her country . this must be the way forward and we should end industrial agriculture in this country as well . '' kaufmann , mark . '' largest pork processor to phase out crates '' , the washington post , january 26 , 2007 . '' eu tackles bse crisis '' , bbc news , november 29 , 2000 . '' is factory farming really cheaper ? '' in new scientist , institution of electrical engineers , new science publications , university of michigan , 1971 , p . 12 . '' concentrated animal feeding operations '' ( cafo ) , or '' intensive livestock operations '' , can hold large numbers ( some up to hundreds of thousands ) of cows , hogs , turkeys , or chickens , often indoors . the essence of such farms is the concentration of livestock in a given space . the aim is to provide maximum output at the lowest possible cost and with the greatest level of food safety . danielle nierenberg ( 2005 ) happier meals : rethinking the global meat industry . worldwatch paper 121 : 5 the term is often used pejoratively . cafos have dramatically increased the production of food from animal husbandry worldwide , both in terms of total food produced and efficiency . food and water is delivered to the animals , and therapeutic use of antimicrobial agents , vitamin supplements , and growth hormones are often employed . growth hormones are not used on chickens nor on any animal in the european union . undesirable behaviors often related to the stress of confinement led to a search for docile breeds ( e.g . , with natural dominant behaviors bred out ) , physical restraints to stop interaction , such as individual cages for chickens , or physical modification such as the de-beaking of chickens to reduce the harm of fighting . the cafo designation resulted from the 1972 u.s . federal clean water act , which was enacted to protect and restore lakes and rivers to a '' fishable , swimmable '' quality . the united states environmental protection agency identified certain animal feeding operations , along with many other types of industry , as '' point source '' groundwater polluters . these operations were subjected to regulation . sweeten , john et al . '' fact sheet 1 : a brief history and background of the epa cafo rule '' . midwest plan service , iowa state university , july 2003 . in 17 states in the u.s . , isolated cases of groundwater contamination were linked to cafos . for example , the ten million hogs in north carolina generate 19 million tons of waste per year . the u.s . federal government acknowledges the waste disposal issue and requires that animal waste be stored in lagoons . these lagoons can be as large as . lagoons not protected with an impermeable liner can leak into groundwater under some conditions , as can runoff from manure used as fertilizer . a lagoon that burst in 1995 released 25 million gallons of nitrous sludge in north carolina 's new river . the spill allegedly killed eight to ten million fish . orlando , laura . mcfarms go wild , dollars and sense , july/august 1998 , cited in scully , matthew . dominion , st . martin 's griffin , p . 257 . the large concentration of animals , animal waste , and dead animals in a small space poses ethical issues to some consumers . animal rights and animal welfare activists have charged that intensive animal rearing is cruel to animals . crops . the green revolution transformed farming in many developing countries . it spread technologies that had already existed , but had not been widely used outside of industrialized nations . these technologies included '' miracle seeds '' , pesticides , irrigation , and synthetic nitrogen fertilizer . brown , 1970 . . seeds . in the 1970s , scientists created high-yielding varieties of maize , wheat , and rice . these have an increased nitrogen-absorbing potential compared to other varieties . since cereals that absorbed extra nitrogen would typically lodge ( fall over ) before harvest , semi-dwarfing genes were bred into their genomes . norin 10 wheat , a variety developed by orville vogel from japanese dwarf wheat varieties , was instrumental in developing wheat cultivars . ir8 , the first widely implemented high-yielding rice to be developed by the international rice research institute , was created through a cross between an indonesian variety named '' peta '' and a chinese variety named '' dee geo woo gen '' . with the availability of molecular genetics in arabidopsis and rice the mutant genes responsible ( reduced height ( rht ) , gibberellin insensitive ( gai1 ) and slender rice ( slr1 ) ) have been cloned and identified as cellular signalling components of gibberellic acid , a phytohormone involved in regulating stem growth via its effect on cell division . photosynthate investment in the stem is reduced dramatically in shorter plants and nutrients become redirected to grain production , amplifying in particular the yield effect of chemical fertilizers . high-yielding varieties outperformed traditional varieties several fold and responded better to the addition of irrigation , pesticides , and fertilizers . heterosis is utilized in many important crops to greatly increase yields for farmers . however , the advantage is lost for the progeny of the f1 hybrids , meaning seeds for annual crops need to be purchased every season , thus increasing costs and profits for farmers . crop rotation . crop rotation or crop sequencing is the practice of growing a series of dissimilar types of crops in the same space in sequential seasons for benefits such as avoiding pathogen and pest buildup that occurs when one species is continuously cropped . crop rotation also seeks to balance the nutrient demands of various crops to avoid soil nutrient depletion . a traditional component of crop rotation is the replenishment of nitrogen through the use of legumes and green manure in sequence with cereals and other crops . crop rotation can also improve soil structure and fertility by alternating deep-rooted and shallow-rooted plants . a related technique is to plant multi-species cover crops between commercial crops . this combines the advantages of intensive farming with continuous cover and polyculture . irrigation . crop irrigation accounts for 70 % of the world 's fresh water use . pimentel , berger , et al . , '' water resources : agricultural and environmental issues '' , bioscience 54.10 ( oct 2004 ) , p909 flood irrigation , the oldest and most common type , is typically unevenly distributed , as parts of a field may receive excess water in order to deliver sufficient quantities to other parts . overhead irrigation , using center-pivot or lateral-moving sprinklers , gives a much more equal and controlled distribution pattern . drip irrigation is the most expensive and least-used type , but delivers water to plant roots with minimal losses . water catchment management measures include recharge pits , which capture rainwater and runoff and use it to recharge groundwater supplies . this helps in the replenishment of groundwater wells and eventually reduces soil erosion . dammed rivers creating reservoirs store water for irrigation and other uses over large areas . smaller areas sometimes use irrigation ponds or groundwater . weed control . in agriculture , systematic weed management is usually required , often performed by machines such as cultivators or liquid herbicide sprayers . herbicides kill specific targets while leaving the crop relatively unharmed . some of these act by interfering with the growth of the weed and are often based on plant hormones . weed control through herbicide is made more difficult when the weeds become resistant to the herbicide . solutions include : cover crops ( especially those with allelopathic properties ) that out-compete weeds or inhibit their regeneration multiple herbicides , in combination or in rotation strains genetically engineered for herbicide tolerance locally adapted strains that tolerate or out-compete weeds tilling ground cover such as mulch or plastic manual removal mowing grazing burning . terracing . in agriculture , a terrace is a leveled section of a hilly cultivated area , designed as a method of soil conservation to slow or prevent the rapid surface runoff of irrigation water . often such land is formed into multiple terraces , giving a stepped appearance . the human landscapes of rice cultivation in terraces that follow the natural contours of the escarpments , like contour ploughing , are a classic feature of the island of bali and the banaue rice terraces in banaue , ifugao , philippines . in peru , the inca made use of otherwise unusable slopes by building drystone walls to create terraces . rice paddies . a paddy field is a flooded parcel of arable land used for growing rice and other aquatic plant . paddy fields are a typical feature of rice-growing countries of east and southeast asia , including malaysia , china , sri lanka , myanmar , thailand , korea , japan , vietnam , taiwan , indonesia , india , and the philippines . they are also found in other rice-growing regions such as piedmont ( italy ) , the camargue ( france ) , and the artibonite valley ( haiti ) . they can occur naturally along rivers or marshes , or can be constructed , even on hillsides . they require large water quantities for irrigation , much of it from flooding . it gives an environment favourable to the strain of rice being grown , and is hostile to many species of weeds . as the only draft animal species which is comfortable in wetlands , the water buffalo is in widespread use in asian rice paddies . a recent development in the intensive production of rice is the system of rice intensification . developed in 1983 by the france jesuit priest henri de laulanie in madagascar , intensive rice farming in madagascar by h . de laulanié , in tropicultura , 2011 , 29 , 3 , 183–187 by 2013 the number of smallholder farmers using the system had grown to between 4 and 5 million . . aquaculture . aquaculture is the cultivation of the natural products of water ( fish , shellfish , algae , seaweed , and other aquatic organisms ) . intensive aquaculture takes place on land using tanks , ponds , or other controlled systems , or in the ocean , using cages . . sustainability . intensive farming practices which are thought to be sustainable have been developed to slow the deterioration of agricultural land and even regenerate soil health and ecosystem services . these developments may fall in the category of organic farming , or the integration of organic and conventional agriculture . pasture cropping involves planting grain crops directly into grassland without first applying herbicides . the perennial grasses form a living mulch understory to the grain crop , eliminating the need to plant cover crops after harvest . the pasture is intensively grazed both before and after grain production . this intensive system yields equivalent farmer profits ( partly from increased livestock forage ) while building new topsoil and sequestering up to 33 tons of co2/ha/year . biointensive agriculture focuses on maximizing efficiency such as per unit area , energy input and water input . agroforestry combines agriculture and orchard/forestry technologies to create more integrated , diverse , productive , profitable , healthy and sustainable land-use systems . intercropping can increase yields or reduce inputs and thus represents ( potentially sustainable ) agricultural intensification . however , while total yield per acre is often increased , yields of any single crop often diminish . there are also challenges to farmers relying on farming equipment optimized for monoculture , often resulting in increased labor inputs . vertical farming is intensive crop production on a large scale in urban centers , in multi-story , artificially-lit structures , for the production of low-calorie foods like herbs , microgreens , and lettuce . an integrated farming system is a progressive , sustainable agriculture system such as zero waste agriculture or integrated multi-trophic aquaculture , which involves the interactions of multiple species . elements of this integration can include : intentionally introducing flowering plants into agricultural ecosystems to increase pollen-and nectar-resources required by natural enemies of insect pests oregon state university – integrated farming systems – insectary plantings – enhancing biological control with beneficial insectary plants using crop rotation and cover crops to suppress nematodes in potatoes oregon state university – integrated farming systems – nematode suppression by cover crops integrated multi-trophic aquaculture is a practice in which the by-products ( wastes ) from one species are recycled to become inputs ( fertilizers , food ) for another . holistic management was originally developed for reversing desertification . holistic planned grazing is similar to rotational grazing but accentuates the four principles of the water cycle , the mineral cycles ( including the carbon cycle ) , energy flow and ecology . . challenges . the challenges and issues of industrial agriculture for society , for the sector , and for animal rights , include the costs and benefits of both current practices and proposed changes to those practices . kershen , drew l . '' the contested vision for agriculture 's future : sustainable intensive agriculture and agroecology . '' creighton l . rev . 46 ( 2012 ) : 591 . beirne , piers . '' for a nonspeciesist criminology : animal abuse as an object of study . '' criminology 37.1 ( 1999 ) : 117-148 . this is a continuation of thousands of years of invention in feeding growing populations . population growth . very roughly : 30,000 years ago hunter-gatherer behavior fed 6 million people 3,000 years ago primitive agriculture fed 60 million people 300 years ago a more intensive agriculture fed 600 million people today industrial agriculture attempts to feed 8 billion people between 1930 and 2000 , u.s . agricultural productivity ( output divided by all inputs ) rose by an average of about 2 percent annually , causing food prices to decrease . '' the percentage of u.s . disposable income spent on food prepared at home decreased , from 22 percent as late as 1950 to 7 percent by the end of the century . '' . other impacts . . environmental . industrial agriculture uses huge amounts of water , energy , and chemical industry , increasing pollution in the arable land , usable water , and atmosphere . herbicides , insecticides , and fertilizers accumulate in ground and surface waters . industrial agricultural practices are one of the main drivers of global warming , accounting for 14–28 % of net greenhouse-gas emissions . many of the negative effects of industrial agriculture may emerge at some distance from fields and farms . nitrogen compounds from the midwest , for example , travel down the mississippi to degrade coastal fisheries in the gulf of mexico , causing so-called oceanic dead zones . but other adverse effects show up within agricultural production systems—for example , the rapidly developing resistance among pests renders herbicides and insecticides increasingly ineffective . union of concerned scientists article the costs and benefits of industrial agriculture last updated march 2001 . '' many of the negative effects of industrial agriculture are remote from fields and farms . nitrogen compounds from the midwest , for example , travel down the mississippi to degrade coastal fisheries in the gulf of mexico . but other adverse effects are showing up within agricultural production systems—for example , the rapidly developing resistance among pests rendering our arsenal of herbicides and insecticides increasingly ineffective . '' agrochemicals have been implicated in colony collapse disorder , in which the individual members of bee colonies disappear . ( agricultural production is highly dependent on bees to pollinate many varieties of fruits and vegetables . ) intensive monoculture increases the risk of failures due to pests , adverse weather and disease . for example : . social . a study for the u.s . office of technology assessment concluded that regarding industrial agriculture , there is a '' negative relationship between the trend toward increasing farm size and the social conditions in rural communities '' on a '' statistical level '' . macrosocial accounting project , dept . of applied behavioral sciences , univ . of california , davis , ca agricultural monoculture can entail social and economic risks . . see also . convertible husbandry dryland farming environmental issues with agriculture green revolution pekarangan small-scale agriculture intensive animal farming . references . external links . fall 2012 farm values report