Shōgun (novel)

plot . john blackthorne , an english pilot , serving on the dutch warship erasmus , is the first englishman to reach japan . england ( and holland ) seek to disrupt portuguese-catholic relations with japan and establish ties of their own through trade and military alliances . erasmus is blown ashore on the japanese coast at the village of anjiro during a storm . blackthorne and 10 survivors are taken captive by local samurai , kasigi omi , until his daimyō and uncle , kasigi yabu , arrives . yabu puts blackthorne and his crew on trial as pirates , using a jesuit priest to interpret for blackthorne . losing the trial , blackthorne attacks the jesuit and breaks his crucifix to show that the priest is his enemy . the japanese , who know only the catholic version of christianity , are shocked and yabu sentences them all to death . however , omi , who is quickly proving himself as a clever adviser , convinces yabu to spare them to learn more about european ways . omi throws the crew into a pit to '' tame '' them and tells them yabu has ordered that they pick one among them ( other than blackthorne ) to die , so that the others may live . blackthorne leads his crew in a futile resistance , but one of them is taken and is boiled alive , to satisfy yabu . blackthorne then agrees to submit to japanese authority and is placed in a household , with his crew still held as hostages . on omi 's advice , yabu also plans to confiscate the rutters , muskets , cannons , and silver coins recovered from erasmus , but word reaches toranaga , lord of the kwanto and president of the council of regents . toranaga sends his commander in chief , general toda '' iron fist '' hiro-matsu , to take erasmus , its cargo , and crew to gain an advantage against toranaga 's main rival on the council , ishido . blackthorne is given the name anjin ( navigator or pilot ) because the japanese ca n't pronounce his name . hiro-matsu takes blackthorne and yabu back to osaka , where the meeting of the council is taking place at the castle , which is ishido 's stronghold . they travel by one of toranaga 's galleys , captained by the portuguese pilot rodrigues . blackthorne and rodrigues find themselves in a grudging friendship , despite their national and religious enmity . rodrigues tries to kill blackthorne during a storm , but is himself swept overboard . blackthorne not only saves rodrigues but also safely navigates the ship . at osaka , blackthorne is interviewed by toranaga through the translation of the senior jesuit priest martin alvito , who realizes the threat that blackthorne presents . as a protestant , blackthorne tries to turn toranaga against the jesuits . he reveals to a surprised toranaga that the christian faith is divided . alvito is honor-bound to translate as blackthorne tells toranaga his story . the interview ends abruptly when ishido enters , curious about the barbarian blackthorne . toranaga has blackthorne thrown into prison as a ruse to keep him from ishido . blackthorne is then befriended by a franciscan friar , who reveals further details about the jesuit conquests and the portuguese black ship , which each year takes the vast profits from the silk trade between china and japan back to europe . he is taught some basic japanese and a little about their culture . blackthorne is then taken from prison by ishido 's men , but toranaga intervenes , capturing blackthorne from his rival and making ishido lose face . in their next interview , toranaga has the lady toda mariko translate . she is a catholic , torn between her new faith and her loyalty , as a samurai , to toranaga . during this second interview with blackthorne , toranaga is incredulous when blackthorne reveals that portugal has been granted the right to claim japan as territory by the pope , and how the spanish and portuguese are exploiting the new world in both south america and asia in the name of spreading catholicism . during his stay with toranaga at osaka castle , blackthorne is attacked by an assassin who is revealed to be a member of the secretive amida tong , a group of operatives who train all their lives to be the perfect weapon for one kill . after the assassin is dispatched , toranaga summons yabu the next day for questioning , since hiro-matsu says yabu would be one who would know how to hire them . yabu is evasive in his answers , adding more fuel to toranaga 's distrust of him . it is also hinted that the jesuits may have hired the assassin to kill blackthorne , to prevent him from revealing any more of what he knows . the council of regents ' negotiations goes badly and toranaga is threatened with forced seppuku . to escape the verdict , and to paralyze the council ( since five regents are needed for any decisions , and a new appointment seems politically unlikely ) , toranaga resigns . he departs the castle in the guise of his consort in a litter , leaving with a train of travelers . blackthorne inadvertently spots the exchange and , when ishido shows up at the gate of the castle and nearly discovers toranaga , blackthorne saves him by creating a diversion . in this way , he gradually gains the trust of toranaga and enters into his service . toranaga 's party reaches the coast but their ship is blockaded by ishido 's boats . at blackthorne 's suggestion , a nearby portuguese ship is asked to lend cannon to blast the boats clear but , in return , the jesuits will only offer aid in exchange for blackthorne . toranaga agrees and the ship clears the coast . the portuguese pilot , rodrigues , repays his debt to blackthorne by having him thrown overboard to swim back to toranaga 's ship . toranaga 's ship escapes by staying alongside the portuguese ship as both pass through the gap left between the opposing boats . toranaga and his party return to his ship , which then goes back to anjiro . blackthorne slowly builds up his japanese-language skills and gains an understanding of the japanese and their culture , eventually learning to respect it . the japanese , in turn , are torn over blackthorne 's presence ( as he is an outsider and a leader of a disgracefully filthy and uncouth rabble ) , but also a formidable sailor and navigator with extensive knowledge of the world . as such , he is both beneath contempt and incalculably valuable . a turning point is blackthorne 's attempt at seppuku . the japanese prevent this attempt ( as blackthorne is worth more alive ) , but they also come to respect him for his knowledge and attempts to assimilate to their culture . when he also rescues toranaga in an earthquake , he is granted the status of samurai and hatamoto – a high-status vassal similar to a retainer , with the right of direct audience . as they spend more time together , blackthorne comes to deeply admire both toranaga and ( specifically ) mariko , and they secretly become lovers . eventually , he visits the survivors of his original crew in yedo , and is astonished at how far he has ventured from the standard 'european ' way of life ( which he now sees to be filthy , vulgar , and ignorant ) , and he is actually disgusted by them . blackthorne 's plans to attack the 'black ship ' are also complicated by his respect and friendship for his portuguese colleague , rodrigues , who is now to pilot the vessel . he returns to osaka by sea with his crew and with 200 samurai ( granted to him by toranaga ) . parallel with this plot , the novel also details the intense power struggle between the various war-lords , toranaga and ishido , and also & nbsp ; – as a subtext & nbsp ; – the political manoeuvring of the protestant and catholic powers in the far east . there is also an internal conflict between christian daimyōs ( who are motivated in part by a desire to preserve and expand their ( new ) religion ) and the daimyōs who oppose the christians , as followers of foreign beliefs and representatives of the 'barbarian ' cultural and fiscal influence on their society . in the novel , ishido is holding many family members of the other daimyōs as hostages in osaka , referring to them as '' guests '' . as long as he has these hostages , the other daimyōs , including toranaga , do not dare to attack him . unforeseen by toranaga , a replacement regent has also been chosen . ishido hopes to lure or force toranaga into the castle and , when all the regents are present , obtain from them an order for toranaga to commit seppuku . to extricate toranaga from this situation , mariko goes to what will be her likely death at osaka castle & nbsp ; – to face down ishido and to obtain the hostages ' release . at the castle , mariko defies ishido and forces him to either dishonor himself ( by admitting to holding the samurai families as hostages ) or to back down and let them leave . when mariko tries to fulfill toranaga 's orders and to leave the castle , a battle ensues between ishido 's samurai and her escort , until she is forced to return . however , she states that she is disgraced and will commit suicide . as she is about to do so , ishido gives her the papers to leave the castle on the next day . but that night , a group of ninja that ishido has hired , aided by yabu , slips into toranaga 's section of the castle to kidnap mariko . however , she and blackthorne and the other ladies of toranaga 's '' court '' , escape into a locked room . as the ninja prepare to blow the door open mariko stands against the door and is killed by the explosion . after her cremation , ishido lets the hostages leave the castle , seriously reducing his control over them . blackthorne then discovers that his ship has been burned , ruining his chances of attacking the black ship and gaining riches and also sailing home to england . however , mariko has left him some money and toranaga provides him with men to start building a new ship . toranaga orders yabu – who he learns had helped the attack in osaka with the aim of being on the winning side – to commit seppuku for his treachery . yabu complies , giving his prized katana to blackthorne . the last chapter involves toranaga as he reveals his inner monologue : that he himself had ordered blackthorne 's ship to be burned , as a way to placate the christian daimyōs , and to save blackthorne 's life from them , as well as to bring them to his side against ishido . he then encourages blackthorne to build another ship . it is blackthorne 's karma to never leave japan ; and mariko 's karma to die for her lord , and for toranaga to become eventually shogun , with absolute power . in a brief epilogue after the final battle of sekigahara , ishido is captured alive and toranaga has him buried up to his neck . the novel states that '' ishido lingered three days and died very old '' . characters . many of the characters in the novel are based on their real-life counterparts : yoshi toranaga – tokugawa ieyasu ( 1543–1616 ) yoshi sudara – tokugawa hidetada ( 1579–1632 ) yoshi naga – matsudaira tadayoshi ( 1580–1607 ) ishido – ishida mitsunari ( 1561–1600 ) ochiba – yodo-dono ( 1569–1615 ) yaemon – toyotomi hideyori ( 1593–1615 ) onoshi – otani yoshitsugu ( 1558–1600 ) harima – arima harunobu ( 1567–1612 ) kiyama – konishi yukinaga ( 1555–1600 ) sugiyama – maeda toshiie ( 1539–1599 ) zataki – hisamatsu sadakatsu ( 1560–1624 ) john blackthorne – miura anjin/william adams ( 1564–1620 ) toda mariko – hosokawa gracia ( 1563–1600 ) toda hiro-matsu '' iron fist '' – hosokawa fujitaka ( 1534–1610 ) toda buntaro – hosokawa tadaoki ( 1563–1646 ) toda saruji – hosokawa tadatoshi ( 1586–1641 ) kasigi yabu – honda masanobu ( 1538–1616 ) kasigi omi – honda masazumi ( 1566–1637 ) goroda – oda nobunaga ( 1534–1582 ) nakamura – toyotomi hideyoshi ( 1536–1598 ) akechi jinsai – akechi mitsuhide ( 1528–1582 ) lady genjiko – oeyo ( 1573–1626 ) martin alvito – joão rodrigues ( 1561/1562–1633/1634 ) johann vinck – jan joosten van lodensteijn ( 1556 ? –1623 ) spillbergen – jacob quaeckernaeck ( ? –1606 ) father dell'aqua – alessandro valignano ( 1539–1606 ) brother michael – miguel chijiwa ( 1569 ? –1633 ) captain-general ferriera – horatio neretti , captain of the black ship in 1600 . background . clavell stated that reading a sentence in his daughter 's textbook that stated that '' in 1600 , an englishman went to japan and became a samurai '' inspired the novel . shogun was therefore based on an actual series of events involving adams , who reached japan in 1600 and became involved with the future shogun tokugawa . he achieved high status managing commercial activities for tokugawa 's shogunate , though much of the interaction between the various characters in the novel was invented . the first draft was 2,300 pages and clavell cut it down to 1,700 with the help of his editor , german gollob . . themes . the main theme of the novel is the precarious peace of japan in 1600 , a nation consumed by endless civil war and political machinations . the heir to the taiko , the deceased supreme leader of japan , is too young to rule , and five daimyōs specifically chosen by the late taiko for their inability to work together hold power as a council of regents until the boy comes of age . the novel details the intense power struggle between the two most powerful daimyōs , toranaga and ishido , as they both seek to usurp power from the taiko 's heir . as a subtext , there is also the political manoeuvring of the protestant and catholic powers in the far east . this translates an internal conflict in japan between christian daimyōs ( who are motivated in part by a desire to preserve and expand their religion ) and the daimyōs who oppose the japanese christians as followers of foreign beliefs and potential traitors whose loyalty is questionable . portugal , which holds the sole right to trade with japan , and the catholic church , mainly through the order of the jesuits , have gained a religious , economic , and political foothold and seek to extend their power in japan ( as they have done in nearby places such as goa , macao , and the philippines ) . guns and other modern military capabilities brought to japan by the portuguese , and indirectly by blackthorne , are still a novelty and coveted by powerful lords looking to gain an advantage over their rivals , but are despised by many samurai as a threat to their traditional methods of fighting . in contrast , however , the silk trade is viewed as essential , and the portuguese traders regularly amass huge profits via their annual '' black ship '' fleets from macao . japanese society is shown to be very insular and xenophobic , with foreigners referred to as '' barbarians '' and shunned for their arrogance , eating habits , lack of fluency in the japanese language , and inability to respect japanese social customs . as a result , there are many internal conflicts between the '' eastern '' and '' western '' cultures – especially to do with duty , honor , sexuality , cleanliness , diet , obligations , hierarchies , loyalties , and – more particularly – the essence of 'self ' . blackthorne is also torn between his growing affection for mariko ( who is married to a powerful , abusive , and dangerous samurai , buntaro ) , his increasing loyalty to toranaga , his household and consort , a '' geisha '' courtesan named kiku , and his desire to return to the open seas aboard erasmus so he can intercept the black ship fleet before it reaches japan . a recurring motif in the book is toranaga engaging in falconry . he compares his various birds to his vassals and mulls over his handling of them , flinging them at targets , giving them morsels , and bringing them back to his fist for re-hooding . there are other recurring themes of eastern values , as opposed to western values , masculine ( patriarchal ) values as opposed to human values , etc . another is the granting of honours and favours to those who display loyalty - including the trading of secrets by a mama-san called gyoko , which allows toranaga to gain an upperhand in his power play for the shogunate . reception . '' i ca n't remember when a novel has seized my mind like this one '' , the new york timess webster schott wrote . he added , '' it 's almost impossible not to continue to read shōgun once having opened it '' . in addition to becoming a best-seller , with more than six million copies of the novel in 14 hardcover and 38 paperback printings by 1980 , shōgun had great impact on westerners ' knowledge of , and interest in , japanese history and culture . the editor of learning from shōgun : japanese history and western fantasy ( 1980 ) estimated that 20 to 50 % of all students in american college-level courses about japan had read the novel . he described the book as '' a virtual encyclopedia of japanese history and culture ; somewhere among those half-million words , one can find a brief description of virtually everything one wanted to know about japan '' , and stated that '' in sheer quantity , shōgun has probably conveyed more information about japan to more people than all the combined writings of scholars , journalists , and novelists since the pacific war '' . the author of james clavell : a critical companion calls the novel '' one of the most effective depictions of cross-cultural encounters ever written '' , and '' clavell 's finest effort '' . clavell said that shōgun '' is b.c . and a.d . it made me . i became a brand name , like heinz baked beans '' . he reported that the ruler of a middle eastern petrostate offered him a full oil tanker for a novel that would do for his country what shōgun did for japan . . adaptations . in 1976 clavell hired robert bolt to write a screenplay . the novel was adapted as a nine-hour television miniseries in 1980 , a broadway musical , and several computer games . the television series starred richard chamberlain , toshiro mifune , yoko shimada , and john rhys-davies . it was also edited into a two-hour theatrical release , a 5-disc dvd release in 2003 , and a 3-disc blu-ray release in 2014 . there have been three computer games based on the shōgun novel . two text adventure games with sparse graphics were produced for the amiga and pc , and marketed as james clavell 's shōgun , by infocom , and shōgun by mastertronic . a unique graphical adventure game , shōgun , was also produced for systems including the commodore 64 , amstrad cpc and ibm pc by lee & mathias and released by virgin entertainment in 1986 . on august 3 , 2018 , it was announced that fx would be adapting the novel into a miniseries . . related works . clavell was not the first author to novelise the story of will adams ; several earlier and less successful attempts exist . the first , by william dalton , was called will adams , the first englishman in japan : a romantic biography ( london , 1861 ) . dalton had never been to japan and his book reflects romanticised victorian british notions of the exotic asian . richard blaker 's the needlewatcher ( london , 1932 ) is the least romantic of the novels ; blaker consciously attempted to de-mythologize adams and write a careful historical work of fiction . james scherer 's pilot and shōgun is less a novel than a series of incidents in adams life . american robert lund wrote daishi-san ( new york , 1960 ) . finally christopher nicole 's lord of the golden fan was published just two years before shōgun , in 1973 . adams is portrayed as sexually frustrated by the morals of his time and seeks freedom in the east , where he has numerous encounters . the work is considered light pornography . references . external links . shogun at factbehindfiction.com