William de St-Calais

early life . st-calais was a norman , and a native of bayeux ; powell and wallis house of lords p . 36 he may have been a member of one of its clerical dynasties . barlow '' st calais , william of '' oxford dictionary of national biography his mother 's name , ascelina or anselma , is given in durham 's records ; his father , whose name is unknown , became a monk at the monastery of saint-calais in maine , and may previously have been a knight . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 287 although st-calais is generally referred to as saint calais or st-calais , the main source of information about his life , the monastic chronicle of symeon of durham , does not call him such . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 288 st-calais studied under odo , bishop of bayeux , the half-brother of the future william i of england , who was then duke of normandy . barlow william rufus pp . 60–62 other bishops educated at bayeux around this time included archbishop thomas of york and samson , bishop of worcester . barlow english church 1066–1154 p . 58 symeon of durham considered st-calais to be well-educated in classics and the scriptures ; at some point st-calais also acquired a knowledge of canon law . he became a benedictine monk at saint-calais in maine , where his father had become a monk , and soon became the prior of that house . he became abbot of st vincent-des-prés near le mans in maine , sometime around 1078 . as abbot , his only appearance in historical records is his upholding of the monasteries ' right to some property , and his acceptance of a gift of property in the town . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham pp . 288–289 william the conqueror nominated him to the see of durham on 9 november 1080 , and he was duly consecrated on either 27 december 1080 or 3 january 1081 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 241 greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : durham : bishops his elevation may have been a reward for diplomatic services he rendered to the king in france , barlow english church p . 64 or to help secure the see from further disorder following the death of the previous bishop , william walcher , during a feud . however , it was most likely in recognition of his administrative ability . symeon of durham stated that st-calais was chosen as a bishop for this reason , aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham pp . 289–290 describing him as '' very well versed in sacred and secular learning , very conscientious in matters of divine and worldly business , and so remarkable for good conduct that he had no equal amongst his contemporaries '' . quoted in aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 290 . early ecclesiastical affairs . the chronicler symeon of durham asserted that when st-calais was consecrated bishop by archbishop thomas of york , he managed to avoid professing obedience to the archbishop , which , if true , would have freed st-calais from interference in his diocese . barlow english church p . 39 after his appointment , st-calais decided to replace his cathedral chapter of clergy with monks , and consulted the king and lanfranc , the archbishop of canterbury , before going to rome to receive permission from pope gregory vii . knowles monastic order p . 169 these consultations , and the conditions within his diocese , may have kept st-calais from visiting durham until some time after his elevation . green aristocracy pp . 109–110 in 1083 he expelled the married clergy from the cathedral , chibnall anglo-norman england p . 42 and moved a small community of monks from bede 's old monastery at jarrow to durham , to form the new chapter . this community had been founded at jarrow by reinfrid , a norman ex-knight and monk of evesham abbey , and eadwine , an english monk from winchcombe abbey . douglas william the conqueror p . 328 after the community had settled in durham , st-calais named eadwine as prior , and arranged for lands to be set aside to support the monks . the expelled clergy were offered the option of joining the new monastic house , but only one actually joined . st-calais enjoyed good relations with his cathedral chapter , and they supported him when construction began on a new church in 1093 . knowles monastic order pp . 169–170 after demolishing an old saxon church , he and prior turgot of durham laid the foundation stone on 11 august 1093 for what would later become durham cathedral . page , ed . '' houses of benedictine monks '' history of the county of durham pp . 86-103 st-calais also gave a set of constitutions to the cathedral chapter , modeled on lanfranc 's rule for canterbury . knowles monastic order p . 131 symeon of durham said that the bishop acted towards the monks of his chapter as a '' loving father '' , and that the monks fully returned the sentiment . knowles monastic order p . 623 st-calais is said to have researched exhaustively the pre-norman conquest customs of the cathedral , before re-establishing monks in the cathedral . knowles monastic order p . 625 he imposed the monastic constitutions of lanfranc on the community , instead of the older regularis concordia . williams english and the norman conquest p . 136 williams english and the norman conquest p . 153 . work for william the conqueror . during william the conqueror 's reign , st-calais was a frequent witness on charters . while it is often difficult to determine who was considered most important on a charter 's witness list , placement near the top of the list is usually understood to mean that the signatory was considered important . almost always during the conqueror 's reign , st-calais is listed right below the royal family and the archbishops . the king sent st-calais on diplomatic missions to the french royal court and to rome . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 291 after the king 's imprisonment of odo of bayeux , pope gregory vii complained to him . the pope was also concerned about the king 's refusal to allow the delivery of papal letters to the english bishops unless royal permission was secured . to placate the pope , the king dispatched st-calais to rome , possibly with lanfranc , to explain to the pope the reasons for imprisoning odo . barlow feudal kingdom p . 130 st-calais also served as a commissioner in the south-western part of england for the domesday book , which aimed to survey the whole of england and record who owned the lands . chibnall anglo-norman england p . 111 holt '' 1086 '' domesday studies p . 47 some historians , including david bates , have argued that st-calais was the driving force behind the organization of the entire domesday survey , chaplais '' william of saint-calais '' domesday studies pp . 76–77 bates william the conqueror p . 201 although other candidates have been put forward , including samson , bishop of worcester , before he became bishop . chaplais '' william of saint-calais '' domesday studies pp . 68–70 pierre chaplais , who argues for st-calais being the main organizer of the survey , argues the bishop 's exile in 1088 interrupted work on the little domesday book , a subproject of the survey which was left uncompleted . roffe decoding domesday p . 98 . rebellion . soon after the accession of william rufus , st-calais became one of the king 's most trusted lieutenants , mason william ii pp . 53–55 along with the recently released odo of bayeux . poole domesday book to magna carta pp . 100–104 later chroniclers often referred to the position that st-calais held as justiciar , although the formal office did not yet exist . lyon constitutional and legal history pp . 152–153 around easter 1088 , odo of bayeux and many of the nobles revolted against the king and tried to place the king 's elder brother robert curthose , duke of normandy , on the throne . after the king had set off with st-calais and some troops to counter odo in kent , st-calais suddenly deserted , shutting himself in durham castle . why st-calais joined the rebellion , or at least did nothing to aid the king , is unclear . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 293 he and odo had never been close , and despite the fact that st-calais was educated at bayeux , there is no evidence that odo helped st-calais ' career . some historians , including w . m . aird , have suggested that st-calais felt the division of the conqueror 's realm between two sons was unwise . it has been suggested that st calais joined the rebellion to reunite the normans and english under one ruler . st-calais was the only bishop who did not actively aid the king ; the rebelling magnates included roger de montgomery earl of shrewsbury , robert de mowbray earl of northumbria , and odo 's brother robert count of mortain . the rebellion had failed by the end of the summer , powell and wallis house of lords p . 49 but st-calais continued to hold out in durham , at first claiming he had never actually rebelled . when the king 's army arrived , st-calais agreed to come out , but only after receiving a safe conduct that would allow him to attend a trial while his men continued to hold the castle . crouch normans p . 135 mason william ii pp . 64–71 st-calais 's actions suggest that he did rebel , whatever his claims to the contrary and affirmations of his innocence in northern chronicles . . trial . st-calais was brought before the king and royal court for trial on 2 november 1088 , at salisbury , barlow william rufus p . 85 before which the king seized his lands . at the trial , st-calais held that as a bishop he could not be tried in a secular court , and refused to answer the accusations . lanfranc presented the king 's case , declaring that the confiscated lands had been held as fiefs , and thus st-calais could be tried as a vassal , not as a bishop . st-calais objected , and continued to refuse to answer the allegations . after numerous conferences and discussions , the court held that st-calais could be tried as a vassal in a feudal court . st-calais then asked for an appeal to rome , which was rejected by the king and the judges . those judging the case held that because st-calais never answered the formal accusation , and because he appealed to rome , his fief , or lands , was forfeit . lyon constitutional and legal history p . 146 barlow william rufus pp . 82–89 although st-calais claimed to be defending the rights of clergy to be tried in clerical courts and to appeal to rome , his fellow bishops believed otherwise . lending support to their belief is the fact that st-calais never pursued his appeal to rome , and that later , in 1095 , he took the side of the king against anselm of canterbury when anselm tried to assert a right to appeal to rome . during the course of the trial , lanfranc is said to have stated that the court was '' trying you not in your capacity as bishop , but in regard to your fief ; and in this way we judged the bishop of bayeux in regard to his fief before the present king 's father , and that king did not summon him to that plea as bishop but as brother and earl . '' quoted in richardson and sayles governance p . 285 unlike the later case of thomas becket , st-calais received little sympathy from his fellow bishops . most of the bishops and barons that judged the case seem to have felt that the appeal to rome was made to avoid having to answer an accusation that st-calais knew was true . richardson and sayles governance pp . 285–286 the final judgement was only reached after the king lost his temper and exclaimed : '' believe me , bishop , you 're not going back to durham , and your men are n't going to stay at durham , and you 're not going to go free , until you release the castle . '' quoted in crouch normans p . 135 the extant de iniusta vexacione willelmi episcopi primi , or of the unjust persecution of the bishop william i , aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 284 details the trial of st-calais before the king . this work is the earliest surviving detailed contemporary report of an english state-trial ; some have doubted its authenticity , however , claiming st-calais would not have been as knowledgeable in canon law as the work portrays him . the historian mark philpott , however , argues that st-calais was knowledgeable in canon law , since he owned a copy of the canon law , the pseudo-isidore , which still survives . philpott '' de iniusta '' '' anglo-norman durham '' pp . 129–137 . return to favour . after the court adjourned , st-calais was held as a prisoner at wilton abbey until his followers in durham relinquished the castle . once the castle was back under the king 's control , st-calais was released , and exiled ; he left for normandy , and no more was heard of his appeal to rome . lyon constitutional and legal history p . 209 pope urban ii did write to the king in 1089 requesting that st-calais be restored to his see , but nothing came of it . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 51 in normandy , st-calais quickly became one of duke robert 's principal advisors and his chief administrator . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 294 on 14 november 1091 he regained the favour of william rufus , and was restored to his see . poole domesday book to magna carta p . 108 footnote 1 duke robert had persuaded the king to allow bishop william 's return , perhaps in recognition of a service st-calais performed for the king by brokering the end of a siege in normandy that the king 's forces were about to lose . the end of the siege prevented the loss of the castle . mason william ii p . 95 st-calais returned to durham on 11 september 1091 , barlow william rufus p . 294 with a large sum of money and gifts for his church . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 295 thereafter he remained in the king 's favour . in fact , in 1093 his lands were restored without the need to perform feudal services . for the rest of his life , st-calais remained a frequent advisor to the king . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 62 cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 71 it was st-calais , along with robert , count of meulan who negotiated with anselm , the abbot of bec , in 1093 over the conditions under which anselm would allow himself to be elected archbishop of canterbury . barlow william rufus p . 306 st-calais managed the king 's case against anselm at rockingham in 1095 , when anselm wished to go to receive his pallium from pope urban ii . powell and wallis house of lords p . 52 at that time st-calais opposed anselm 's attempt to appeal to rome over the issue , and steadfastly maintained the king 's position against anselm , even advocating that the archbishop be deprived of his lands and sent into exile . poole domesday book to magna carta p . 174 vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan pp . 182–185 later , when the king was negotiating with walter of albano , the papal legate sent by urban to convey the pallium to anselm and to secure the king 's recognition of urban as pope , st-calais was the king 's chief negotiator . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 92 the clerical reformers , eadmer among them , who supported anselm in these quarrels , later tried to claim that st-calais had supported the king out of a desire to succeed anselm as archbishop if anselm was deposed , but it is unlikely that st-calais seriously believed that anselm would be deposed . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 97 vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 188 barlow english church p . 67 st-calais secured grants from the king in return for his services . his efforts on behalf of the king earned him hostile accounts in eadmer 's later writings . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 285 . diocesan affairs . durham 's location in the north left it insecure , as malcolm canmore , king of scots , raided and invaded the north of england on a number of occasions . malcolm claimed northumbria , in which durham was located , as part of his kingdom . st-calais managed to befriend malcolm , and secured his support for the patron saint of durham , saint cuthbert . malcolm and his wife helped lay the foundation stone of the new cathedral dedicated to cuthbert . green aristocracy p . 111 respect for the saint did not mean that malcolm refrained entirely from raiding the north ; he was killed in 1093 while once more raiding northumbria . both the english king and st-calais did all in their power to support malcolm 's sons , who had been educated in england , in their attempts to secure the scottish throne . later , in 1095 , an english noble , robert de mowbray , who was earl of northumbria , challenged the bishop 's authority in the north . when mowbray rebelled again in 1095 , st-calais helped the king put down the rebellion , and mowbray was captured . barlow william rufus pp . 354–355 the death of malcolm and the capture of mowbray did much to make the north more secure . in st-calais ' time as bishop , a long-running dispute began between the monks of the cathedral chapter and successive bishops . this arose because st-calais did not make a formal division of the diocesan revenues between the bishop 's household and the monks of the chapter . nor had he allowed free elections of the prior . he may have promised these things to the monks before his death , but nothing was in writing . thus , when a non-monk was selected to replace st-calais , the monks began a long struggle to secure what they felt had been promised to them , including the forging of charters ascribed to st-calais that supported their case . these forged charters date from the second half of the 12th century . bates '' forged charters '' anglo-norman durham pp . 111–124 st-calais also ordered the destruction of the old cathedral that had been built by aldhun , to make way for the construction of a new , larger cathedral , the current romanesque-style durham cathedral . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 36 the construction of the new cathedral began on 29 july 1093 , when st-calais led his cathedral chapter in dedicating the site . the first stones were laid shortly afterwards , on 11 august 1093 . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham p . 283 however , st-calais ' exile after his trial as well as his employment in the royal service meant that he was often absent from his bishopric , and this probably is the cause of the medieval chronicler symeon of durham 's comparatively neutral treatment of st-calais in his works . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham pp . 286–287 there is no evidence of st-calais performing any of the normal episcopal functions , including consecrating priests or churches . probably dating from st-calais ' time is the confraternity relationship between the monks of durham and the monks of the monastery of saint calais in maine . the cult of saint calais appears to have been confined to the region around the monastery which the saint had founded . st-calais appears to have been a devotee of the cult , and the most likely date for the creation of the confraternity link between the two houses is during st-calais ' time as bishop . aird '' absent friend '' anglo-norman durham pp . 287–288 . death and legacy . shortly before christmas 1095 , one of st-calais ' knights , boso , fell ill and dreamed he was transported to the afterlife , where he found a large house with gates made of iron . suddenly , st-calais emerged from the gates , asking the knight the whereabouts of one of his servants . boso 's guide in the dream then informed boso that this was a warning that st-calais would soon die . boso recovered and warned st-calais of the dream . st-calais died on 2 january 1096 after falling gravely ill on the previous christmas . before his death he was consoled by anselm and was blessed by his former opponent . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 194 he was buried on 16 january 1096 in the chapter house at durham . barlow william rufus p . 356 the king had summoned st-calais shortly before christmas to answer an unknown charge , and it is possible that the stress of this threat caused his death . mason william ii pp . 163–164 in 1796 st-calais ' grave was supposedly found during the demolition of the chapter house at durham cathedral . found in the grave were a pair of sandals , which still survive , and fragments of a gold embroidered robe . carver '' early medieval durham '' medieval art and architecture p . 12 while in office as bishop , st-calais gave a copy of the false decretals to his cathedral library . the manuscript was an edition that had been collected or prepared by lanfranc for the use of the chapter of canterbury . brooke english church and the papacy p . 76 st-calais may have used this copy in his trial . brooke english church and the papacy p . 109 his plea for an appeal to rome was grounded in the false decretals , whether or not it was based on this particular manuscript . stafford unification and conquest p . 200 the manuscript itself is now in the peterhouse library . brooke english church and the papacy p . 162 st-calais also gave a copy of bede 's historia ecclesiastica gentis anglorum to his cathedral chapter ; this copy still survives . other works that st-calais gave to the cathedral library were copies of augustine of hippo 's de civitae dei and confessions ; gregory the great 's pastoral care , moralia , and homilies ; and ambrose 's de poenitentia . dawtry '' benedictine revival in the north '' studies in church history 18 pp . 97–98 st-calais was known to his contemporaries as an intelligent and able man . he had an excellent memory . frank barlow , a historian , describes him as a '' good scholar and a monk of blameless life '' . besides his copy of the decretals , he left at his death over fifty books to the monks of durham , and the list of those volumes still exists . knowles monastic order p . 523 his best-known legacy is the construction of durham cathedral , although the nave was not finished until 1130 . the construction technique of combining a pointed arch with another rib allowed a six-pointed vault , which enabled the building to attain a greater height than earlier churches . this permitted larger celestory windows , and let more light into the building . the technique of the six-pointed vault spread to saint-etienne in caen from which it influenced the development of gothic architecture near paris . adams history of western art p . 200 the system of rib vaulting in the choir was the earliest use of that technique in europe . croix gardner 's art through the ages p . 352 the historian frank barlow called the cathedral '' one of the architectural jewels of western christendom '' . . notes . citations . references . . further reading .