Jacen Solo

fictional history . childhood . jacen was created for the thrawn trilogy of novels by timothy zahn , set about five years after return of the jedi . he is introduced as one of an unnamed pair of twins leia is pregnant with in the first installment of the trilogy , the 1991 novel heir to the empire . in the third installment , the 1993 novel the last command , he is born five minutes after his sister jaina on coruscant . the twins , and eventually their younger brother anakin , were sent to live at various safe havens , under the protection of leia 's handmaiden , winter . in jedi search , the twins returned to coruscant at age three and had many adventures there . once , they became lost in the underworld of imperial city with c-3po , but they were quickly rescued and returned to their mother , the chief of state of the new republic . in the crystal star , all three children were abducted , together with many other children with force abilities , by hethrir . hethrir tried to brainwash them into becoming dark jedi in order to bring about the rebirth of the galactic empire , but the children defeated their captor . jedi academy years . in the young jedi knights series , jacen travels to yavin 4 with his sister to begin his jedi training . jacen discovers a strong connection to the living force & mdash ; the concentration on the present moment & mdash ; and can communicate with and calm many of the jungle creatures near the academy . he even keeps a small menagerie of animals in his room in the great massassi temple . he and his sister befriend the wookiee lowbacca ( nicknamed lowie by his friends ) and the warrior princess tenel ka . in heirs of the force and shadow academy , jacen and jaina discover a crashed tie fighter from the battle of yavin . jaina installs a hyperdrive in the downed starfighter and begins fixing it to fly again . jacen , lowbacca , and tenel ka help her to practice their force skills until all are held captive by the tie 's original pilot , qorl , who had been living in the jungle for two decades . they eventually escape , but so does qorl , leaving the jungle moon behind and searching for any remnants of the galactic empire . qorl discovers the shadow academy , a training ground for dark jedi commanded by one of luke skywalker 's fallen students , brakiss , along with the remains of the dathomiri nightsisters . these elements of the so-called second imperium kidnap jacen , jaina and lowbacca , but they resist the dark side and are rescued by luke skywalker and tenel ka . the friends return to coruscant for a short vacation , and are reunited with the twins ' childhood friend zekk . they are forced to fight jacen and jaina several times , and the twins and their friends finally progress far enough to be tasked with building their first lightsabers . jacen uses a corusca gem he had gained earlier for his focusing crystal . jacen 's hard-learned lesson hits home once again in lightsabers , when tenel ka rushes to complete her lightsaber to keep up with her friends . she uses an imperfect crystal and her blade shorts out in a sparring match with jacen . his lightsaber passes through thin air where her weapon had been seconds before and severs the young woman 's arm . though she bears him no ill will for the accident , jacen is wracked with guilt . in darkest knight , the twins and tenel ka go to kashyyyk with lowbacca to witness his sister 's adulthood rites . in jedi under siege , the jedi trainees and the shadow academy have their final confrontation on yavin 4 . the twins , with help from luke and zekk , bring down the shadow academy and the second imperium forever . throughout the series , jacen and jaina continue their training at yavin 4 , meeting new friends like raynar thul . they can not convince zekk to stay at the academy with them , but jacen and jaina remain friends with him . with his and raynar 's help , they discover a threat to the new republic : the diversity alliance , an alien , anti-human group . the alliance is building up massive support among peoples that had been oppressed by the empire . they are led by a twi'lek nolaa tarkona , the sister of oola , who was murdered by jabba the hutt in return of the jedi . in jedi bounty , jacen , jaina , and their friends are briefly held captive on ryloth and have to escape to its harsh surface . they have gone there in an attempt to rescue lowbacca , who had misguidedly joined the anti-human diversity alliance . in the following book , the emperor 's plague , they get to the bottom of a plot they had suspected all along , and catch up with raynar 's father , bornan thul , to race the diversity alliance fleet to an imperial storehouse hidden in the deep core . there is hidden a supply of deadly diseases created by general evir derricote almost two decades before . tarkona wishes to unleash a plague against humans and wipe them all out , but the jedi and alliance dissidents defeat her . she succumbs to one of the diseases herself on a faraway planet . bornan thul dies from one of the plagues right before his son 's eyes . in return to ord mantell , they go on a trip with their father to the titular planet to watch a race . there , they run into czethros , a bounty hunter who once hunted han . they are ambushed by black sun agents , but are helped by anja gallandro , a young woman who wields a lightsaber , though she is not a jedi . although attracted to tenel ka , jacen becomes infatuated with the older woman . anja had blamed han solo for killing her father , but solo reveals that her father died in a trap while finding treasure . in trouble on cloud city , they discover czethros is a minor leader of black sun , and is trying to gather enough power to overcome the new republic . jacen , tenel ka , and lowbacca are ambushed by several black sun mercenary , and jacen is almost killed . in crisis at crystal reef , jaina attempts to help kessel and capture czetheros while jacen rushes to help anja with her spice addiction and help her with black sun . with help , anja beats her addiction and accepts her father 's death . jacen thinks anja has jedi potential , but it turns out she did n't . he gets over his infatuation with anja when she goes to work for lando . yuuzhan vong war . in the new jedi order series , luke takes jacen as his jedi apprentice . jacen learns much from luke , though they disagree on many philosophical issues . jacen believes in the force not only as a tool , but as part of something greater . he tells his brother anakin that the force is a guide to find one 's place in destiny . when the yuuzhan vong attack the new republic in dark tide : onslaught , jacen comes to believe that many jedi are handling the threat too aggressively . he abandons his powers temporarily to contemplate the force and butts heads with his father over the morality of 'pirate ' attacks on peace brigade vessels . only his love for his mother brings jacen back into the front lines of the battle . eventually , han and jacen make their peace , the former declaring that while he does n't always understand his son , he is proud of him . in star by star jacen joins a daring mission to myrkr . a jedi strike force , led by anakin , is to infiltrate a yuuzhan vong cloning facility where the invaders craft deadly jedi-hunting beasts called voxyn . the mission is a disaster , ending with anakin 's death , in which jaina reacts by touching the dark side of the force . forced into the leadership position , jacen uses the force meld to bind the team together into a cohesive fighting unit . after destroying the voxyn queen , jacen is captured by the yuuzhan vong army under the command of vergere and nom anor . jacen disappears , along with his presence in the force . in traitor , jacen awakes to find himself in the embrace of pain , a rack-like torture device favored by the yuuzhan vong . the torture nearly breaks jacen 's spirit , until he learns to use the pain he suffers to sustain himself . he remains under the care and tutelage of the avian vergere , who he learns had once been a jedi of the old republic , and who had even met his grandfather , anakin skywalker . he is put to work on yuuzhan vong ship , where he uses a number of herbs to heal slaves and get his captors to trust him . using the implanted slave seed beneath his flesh as a conduit , jacen communicates with the living instruments of yuuzhan vong technology . he uses this connection to stage a daring escape from captivity , commanding yuuzhan vong amphistaffs to surround him like living armor . jacen and vergere flee to coruscant . the planet 's entire surface is undergoing a radical transformation . yuuzhan vong organic growths cover the once gleaming metropolis , remaking the planet into a yuuzhan vong paradise . the world is to be their new capital , a recreation of the planet that had spawned them , yuuzhan'tar . vergere removes the slave seed from jacen , but he can still sense the yuuzhan vong . jacen is later surrounded by yuuzhan vong warriors whom vergere had led to him . wanting revenge , jacen channels his hatred for vergere into force lightning ; he is frightened by this connection to the dark side , however , and runs away . vergere finds him in his destroyed home and gives him back full use of the force . he is once again surrounded by yuuzhan vong captors ; left with no choice , he surrenders and agrees to join their cause . he becomes the '' khattazz al'yun , '' or avatar of god . nom anor intends to use jacen to sacrifice jaina , thus fulfilling an ancient yuuzhan vong prophecy . jacen 's true allegiance is his own , however . during a test of jacen 's faith , the yuuzhan vong orders him to sacrifice captured jedi ganner rhysode . instead , the two jedi turn against their captors . as ganner holds off the yuuzhan vong , jacen confronts the world brain . the malevolent entity remembers the bond that jacen had forged earlier , and jacen suggests to it to work against the yuuzhan vong . ganner dies that day , though jacen escapes with vergere . he returns to the dwindling new republic territories a different man : haggard , thin and hardened . he goes on a much needed vacation , but returns to frontline combat aboard the cruiser ralroost . his ability to start the jedi meld is a large asset to admiral kre'fey , and jacen joined the alliance fleet with elements of garm bel iblis 's forces in a large-scale deception at ebaq 9 . the battle ends in a victory , but results in vergere 's death . her spectral form appears to him soon after . as the newly formed galactic alliance emerged , jacen accompanied his uncle luke skywalker into the unknown regions to seek a solution to the yuuzhan vong menace . jacen would be instrumental in the search for zonama sekot and in the efforts to convince the living planet to join the fight against the yuuzhan vong . jacen kills supreme overlord onimi , who had been using supreme overlord shimrra as a puppet , in a spectacular confrontation where the force uses jacen as a conduit to defeat onimi , considering that jacen was almost killed with just one hit by shimrra himself , and in that moment jacen started believing that he is beyond good and evil , marking the beginning of his fall . after the grueling final confrontation and the war 's end , jacen tells luke that he had decided to travel the galaxy to learn more about the force . while on his five-year journey jacen enters a realm of the force known as beyond shadows , thanks to his training with a sect called the mind walkers . in this realm jacen gazes into the pool of knowledge that holds the throne of balance , ( where in all future events are shown ) jacen sees a dark man ruling the galaxy and becomes determined to prevent this evil future . following this experience , jacen begins his descent to the dark side of the force . dark nest crisis . in dark nest , jacen feels an urge through the force and follows his sister to the unknown regions to help the insectoid killik against an invading chiss force . he returns to republic space after his parents , resulting in his uncle and aunt to come for him , jaina , and the other jedi . he then travels to the hapes cluster to ask tenel ka to assist with the chiss/killik conflict , believing that the fleet could act as a buffer between the two armies . she obliges and sends a fleet of hapan battle dragons to protect the killiks . in the unseen queen , tenel ka gives birth to his daughter , allana , who is then attacked by the gorog . jacen successfully repels the attack and keeps his daughter safe . possessed with a strong fear of his daughter or tenel ka being harmed , jacen uses the force to send tenel ka 's grandmother ( the person behind the attack ) into a coma . immediately afterward , he sees a vision of a neverending war that will destroy the galaxy , with the killiks at the heart of it . determined to save his daughter and the galaxy from his vision , he sets out to provoke the chiss into destroying the killiks . jacen later reveals that he never knew who started the war in his vision . in the swarm war , luke skywalker takes his nephew 's advice so many times that he even listens when jacen tells him that he is not ready to face lomi plo , the dark queen of the gorog . jacen , mara and luke know that doubt and fear would make lomi plo invisible to her enemy . jacen , along with r2-d2 , helps luke conquer some of his fears about mara 's involvement with the death of his mother , and then accompanies him to face plo . during the fight with plo , luke falters for a moment when mara is injured , and doubt enters his mind . plo then holds him in place , unable to move . in that instant , jacen is critically wounded by plo while saving mara skywalker 's life . a well-placed shot from mara injures plo , after which mara tends to jacen 's wounds . while he and mara recover , jacen beseeches luke to embrace his darker emotions . luke refuses and goes back to the true jedi way , defeating the dark queen and raynar thul without using the dark side . in the latter novel , jacen joins his uncle in watching holovideos of his grandparents , anakin skywalker and padmé amidala ; in particular , he sees anakin fall to the dark side and padmé die in childbirth partly as a result of anakin 's treachery . ( these scenes are first portrayed in star wars : episode iii – revenge of the sith ) . jacen actually sympathizes with anakin 's desire to protect his wife , and reminds luke that anakin was a fallible human being . legacy of the force . in betrayal , jacen starts training his young cousin ben in the ways of the force . after a successful mission to adumar that ends in a life-threatening attack , they return for a dinner party at his parents ' new home . there , han voices his concern over corellia trying to gain independence . luke orders jacen and ben to disable the centerpoint station , an ancient artifact that corellian leader ( and han 's cousin ) thrackan sal-solo is trying to use to his advantage . ben disables the station while jacen keeps thrackan busy , ensuring the galactic alliance 's partial victory as another fleet built in secret spoils the main attack . while travelling to a subterranean base , ben and nelani , a jedi knight , are forced out of a mining car . their guide , brisha syo creates a dark side phantom of luke skywalker , who attacks and very nearly kills jacen . eventually , brisha stops the projections and takes jacen to an office , where darth vectivus , the supposed sith lord they are hunting , lives . after fighting force projections with ben , nelani catches up with them . brisha is revealed to be lumiya , the dark lady of the sith . she reveals that vergere is a sith apprentice , and that jacen has already received sith training . lumiya says that jacen is going to become the next sith lord . unsure of his next move , jacen uses the force to create visions of the future . in each vision in which lumiya is arrested , the galaxy is consumed in an endless war that eventually places jacen against luke . in the vision , jacen kills his uncle . horrified , jacen spares lumiya . nelani then tries to arrest the sith , but jacen intervenes . jacen realizes that nelani will , if allowed to survive , possibly fulfill the dark vision he had seen . he then fights and kills her , asking her forgiveness before striking the fatal blow . he agrees to consider what lumiya had said and leaves the asteroid with an unconscious ben . jacen then erases ben 's memories of lumiya and tells him that both she and nelani had been killed by dark side phantoms . they return to coruscant ; however , after jacen departs , lumiya says that she had won . fully pledged to lumiya , jacen becomes head of the gffa 's newly formed secret police , the galactic alliance guard . with ben at his side , he begins rounding up corellians for internment and deportation . during an interrogation of a suspected assassin ( who turns out to be ailyn vel , boba fett 's daughter ) , jacen tries to use the force to extract information from her and kills her accidentally in the process . jacen also takes command of rogue squadron while it participates in the blockade of corellia . he shoots down a civilian freighter that was attempting to run the blockade , and had fired on him , then relieves his sister from duty because she had refused to do it . he also uses the anakin solo to fire upon the millennium falcon , while both his sister and his parents are on board . he believes his parents to have been involved in a failed attempt to assassinate tenel ka ; the solos had in fact been set up by dur gejjen , prime minister of corellia . in sacrifice , lumiya says she is pleased by his progress , but instructs him that to truly become a sith he would have to undergo the trial of sacrifice : to kill that which he loves most . doing this , he believes , would allow him to use the powers of the sith without becoming evil and would '' immortalize his love '' for his sacrifice . jacen decides there is only one way to fulfill this last obstacle : he would have to kill tenel ka and their daughter allana . nevertheless , after ben tells mara that he overheard jacen communicating with lumiya , mara tracks jacen down in the hapes consortium . after a long and heated battle , jacen kills mara jade ; the sacrifice necessary to becoming a sith lord is not jacen 's love , but ben 's . ben suspects jacen almost immediately , upon meeting jacen at his mother 's body . eventually , jacen chooses the darth darth caedus . by fury , darth caedus is the principal antagonist of the series , and the declared enemy of nearly every other major character : his parents and sister have disowned him , luke is sworn to redeem him , and ben is driven to seek justice for his mother . in the novel , caedus kidnaps allana so tenel ka and the hapans wo n't decide to leave the government , but han , leia , luke , jaina , ben , and their allies save allana . after saving allana , leia tells caedus to become a jedi again , but he refuses . han and leia later find out allana is caedus and tenel ka 's child . at the end , jaina plans to have training from boba fett to help her face off against caedus , despite her parents once being foes with fett . in revelation , caedus takes on a new apprentice , tahiri veila to replace ben and turns to the task of ending the war . he entices the imperial remnant to join him in an attack on the planet fondor . although admiral niathal wants to offer the planet the chance to surrender , caedus is determined to make an example of fondor by crippling the shipyards and its planetary government . after previously sharing military secrets , which leads to hundreds of deaths and compromises the battle plan at fondor , niathal arranges a cease-fire without consulting caedus . enraged at this treason , caedus orders the fleet to ignore niathal 's orders and bombard the major cities . niathal orders all ships loyal to her to attack the anakin solo . two-thirds of the fleet side with caedus , while the rest ally themselves with niathal . when the imperial remnant refuses to assist caedus , his new apprentice assassinates head of state gilad pellaeon and turns control over to the moffs who then come to aid jacen . a mysterious fleet led by admiral daala , loyal to pellaeon , appears , accompanied by one hundred mandalorian mercenaries . and together , owing to daala 's experimental weapons , they send the galactic alliance fleet into retreat . caedus then takes control of coruscant and claims sole control of the galactic alliance . in invincible , jaina takes it upon herself to defeat her brother . caedus 's meditations are disrupted by luke skywalker , in an attempt to hide jaina 's attack . jaina , accompanied by several mandalorian commandos , confronts caedus , who quickly dispatches the mandalorians , while jaina acts as a sniper . when she finally runs out of ammunition , she seizes a mandalorian saber and severs caedus ' arm . jaina withdraws , however , due to her own injuries . after escaping an attack led by luke skywalker on the bridge of the anakin solo , caedus sees a vision of his daughter allana on a white throne in a time of peace . this vision convinces caedus that he has won & mdash ; he would bring peace to the galaxy , and prevent his visions of war and suffering from coming true . at the book 's climax , caedus and jaina face off in a final lightsaber duel aboard caedus ' flagship , the anakin solo . in the midst of the duel , caedus comes back to the light and attempts to persuade jaina of his intentions to protect tenel ka and allana . jaina refuses to listen , however , and attacks him after he deactivates and holsters his lightsaber . she later slams the door shut in his face when he tries to leave the fight . after a grueling battle in which both are seriously injured , jacen is defeated when jaina severs his achilles tendon and stabs him in the heart . as he dies , jacen reaches out to both his former lover and his child through the force , warning them to flee from an approaching bio-warfare attack designed by the imperial remnant to kill them . in this act of selflessness , jaina sees the remnants of the good man her brother had once been . following caedus 's death and the war 's end , the galactic alliance emerges victorious over the confederation and peace is restored to the galaxy , just as jacen had foreseen through a vision in the force . fate of the jedi . though jacen makes few true appearances in the fate of the jedi , which follows the legacy of the force series , his legacy is felt throughout the series , as luke skywalker is arrested for negligence of duty and is sentenced to a ten-year exile , in which alongside his son ben , he tries to ascertain the circumstances of how and why jacen turned to the dark side . jacen 's spirit makes its first appearance in abyss , wherein he warns luke and ben about abeloth , the main antagonist of the series . then , in the final novel apocalypse , jacen 's spirit ( along with mara 's ) provides aid to luke as he partners with darth krayt in the final battle against abeloth . following abeloth 's destruction , jacen reveals that krayt was the dark figure he saw in his vision of the future and the source of his downfall ; he saw his daughter allana standing next to krayt . in response , krayt insists that while caedus 's actions simply delayed the sith , and they are eventually going to succeed in their planned takeover of the galaxy . in aiding the jedi against abeloth , jacen posthumously redeems himself ; however , he still refers to his fate as damnation . while luke does not forgive his nephew for his complicity in mara 's death , he does receive an understanding of what led jacen to that point . star wars : legacy . the second volume of the legacy comic series , set about 140 years after return of the jedi , features jacen 's descendant ania solo as the protagonist . in general , the descendants of jacen , jaina and ben are main characters in this era , set when and after darth krayt takes over the galaxy . although they themselves do not appear in person as spirits , older characters like luke and mara do . reception . ign listed jacen as 17 on their list of the top 100 star wars heroes , saying that he had a more '' profound effect '' than any of the other solo children on the star wars setting . jesse schedeen , writing for ign , also listed darth caedus as 5 in a reader-inspired list of top star wars villains , and called his '' defining moment of villainy '' his murder of mara jade . ugo.com listed jacen as their top star wars expanded universe character , calling him '' one of the most fearsome - and most tragic - villains in the star wars universe '' . . legacy . with the sequel film star wars : the force awakens in production , in april 2014 most of the licensed star wars novels and comics produced since the 1977 film star wars were declared non-canon to the franchise . the epilogue of '' family reunion and farewell '' , the series finale of star wars rebels , introduced a character named jacen syndulla by series creator dave filoni in honor of jacen solo . . see also . solo family kylo ren . references . external links .