Simon Crean

early life and education . crean was born in melbourne , the son of frank crean , a federal labor mp from 1951 to 1977 , who was both treasurer and deputy prime minister in the gough whitlam from 1972 to 1975 . one of his two brothers , david crean , was formerly a parliament of tasmania . his other brother , stephen crean , died while skiing alone at charlotte pass , new south wales in 1985 , aged 38 ; his body was not found for two years . crean was educated at melbourne high school , before going on to monash university where he graduated with a bachelor of economics and bachelor of laws . trade unionist . following his graduation from monash university , crean worked in several roles with various trade unions , before becoming an official within the storeman and packers union ( spu ) . in 1977 , his father , frank crean , retired from federal politics . simon contested the labor preselection for his father 's comfortably safe seat of melbourne ports , but lost to former victorian labor party clyde holding , who went on to win the seat . in 1979 , crean was elected general secretary of the spu , which entitled him to a seat on the board of the australian council of trade unions ( actu ) . in 1981 , crean was elected as actu vice president , before in 1985 winning election as actu president . in this role , he played a key role in negotiating numerous agreements on wages and other industrial issues as part of the prices and incomes accord with the government of prime minister bob hawke , himself a former actu president . political career . hawke and keating governments . ahead of the 1990 election , crean was easily selected as the labor candidate for the safe seat of hotham ; he was elected to parliament on 24 march , and immediately entered the cabinet as minister for science and technology . he became minister for primary industries and energy in 1991 , retaining this job when paul keating replaced bob hawke as prime minister in december 1991 . after labor 's victory at the 1993 election , keating moved crean to become minister for employment , education and training , a role he would hold until 1996 . . opposition . after the labor party was heavily defeated at the 1996 election , crean chose to contest the deputy leadership , but was defeated by gareth evans by 42 votes to 37 . he joined the shadow cabinet , and after evans retired from politics following labor 's 1998 election defeat , crean was easily elected to replace him , becoming deputy leader of the opposition and shadow treasurer . in january 2001 , crean was awarded the centenary medal . in november 2001 , following labor 's 2001 australian federal election , crean was elected unopposed to replace kim beazley as leader of the labor party , becoming leader of the opposition ; jenny macklin was elected as his deputy , also unopposed . on 4 february 2003 , crean led the labor party to condemn prime minister john howard 's decision to commit australian troops to the iraq war . throughout most of 2003 , poor opinion polling led to speculation of a leadership challenge against crean ; on 16 june 2003 , crean called a leadership spill intending to put an end to the leadership tensions , winning against kim beazley by 58 votes to 34 . this failed to stop crean losing even further ground to howard in opinion polls as preferred prime minister , and on 28 november 2003 , crean announced that he would resign as leader of the labor party , stating that he felt he no longer had the confidence of his colleagues ; this made him the first labor leader not to contest a federal election since 1916 . on 2 december , shadow treasurer mark latham defeated kim beazley in a ballot by 47 votes to 45 to replace crean ; latham subsequently appointed crean immediately as shadow treasurer . after labor suffered a fourth consecutive defeat at the 2004 election , crean resigned from his shadow treasurer position ; he initially intended to resign from the shadow cabinet entirely , but at latham 's insistence , he accepted the role of shadow minister for trade . crean retained this position when beazley returned to the leadership in january 2005 . however , in a reshuffle of the shadow cabinet in june 2005 , crean was demoted to shadow minister for regional development . he then faced a pre-selection challenge for his seat of hotham from martin pakula , a member of his former union , the spu , a move which crean publicly blamed on beazley , hong lim , and the labor right . beazley refused to publicly support either candidate , but several frontbenchers , including julia gillard , supported crean . this helped crean to comfortably win the pre-selection for his seat ; crean singled out senator stephen conroy for his part in the move against him , describing his front-bench colleague as '' venal '' and '' one of the most disloyal people i 've ever worked with in my life '' . following the replacement of kim beazley by kevin rudd as leader in december 2006 , rudd reappointed crean as shadow minister for trade . rudd and gillard governments . after labor 's victory at the 2007 election , new prime minister kevin rudd appointed crean to the cabinet as minister for trade . in this role , crean visited singapore and vietnam to pursue australia 's trade and economic interests at a range of ministerial and other high-level meetings . crean also attended the apec meeting of ministers responsible for trade and the oecd roundtable on sustainable development on behalf of the australian government . crean also co-chaired the 8th joint trade and economic cooperation committee with the vietnamese minister of planning and investment võ hồng phúc in hanoi , leading to an improvement in the trading relationship between australia and vietnam . australian minister for trade to visit vietnam this week following julia gillard 's election unopposed as prime minister in june 2010 , crean was appointed to replace gillard in the role of minister for education ( australia ) , with stephen smith taking over as minister for trade . after the 2010 election , gillard reshuffled the cabinet and appointed crean as minister for the arts and minister for regional development and local government . on 21 march 2013 , following significant leadership tensions arising from poor opinion polling , crean called for gillard to spill the leadership , with the aim of encouraging rudd to challenge for the position of prime minister . this marked a change in crean 's position ; he had long been a committed supporter of gillard . crean said he would challenge wayne swan for the role of deputy leader , if rudd ran for the leadership . however , rudd declined to run for the leadership , leaving gillard to retain the leadership unopposed . gillard quickly sacked crean from the cabinet , expressing publicly her disappointment at his '' disloyalty '' to her . before his sacking , crean had been one of the few federal politicians to have never spent a day on the backbench . after rudd did eventually replace gillard as prime minister in june 2013 , crean ran for the position of deputy leader but was defeated by anthony albanese by 61 votes to 38 . crean subsequently announced he would retire from politics at the 2013 election . crean retired as the first person to serve as a cabinet minister under four different labor prime ministers ( in crean 's case , hawke , keating , rudd and gillard ) since jack beasley ( who served under james scullin , john curtin , frank forde and ben chifley ) . career after politics . in october 2014 , crean was elected chairman of the australian livestock exporters council . he was re-elected for a second term in 2016 . . see also . fourth hawke ministry first keating ministry second keating ministry first rudd ministry first gillard ministry second gillard ministry . references . further reading . lyle allan ( 2002 ) , 'alp modernisation , ethnic branch stacking , factionalism and the law , ' in people and place , vol.10 , no.4 , pp . & nbsp ; 50–58 ross mcmullin ( 1992 ) , the light on the hill . the australian labor party 1891–1991 , oxford university press , south melbourne ( victoria ) , . external links . australian trade union archives biographical entry crean resigns as shadow treasurer mark latham steps in to save crean