Linguistic anthropology

historical development . linguistic anthropology emerged from the development of three distinct paradigms . these paradigms set the ways of approaching linguistic anthropology : the first , now known as '' anthropological linguistics '' , focuses on the documentation of languages ; the second , known as '' linguistic anthropology '' , engages in theoretical studies of language use ; the third , developed over the past two or three decades , studies issues from other sub-fields of anthropology with linguistic tactics . though they developed sequentially , all three paradigms are still practiced today . duranti , alessandro . 2003 . language as culture in u.s . anthropology : three paradigms . current anthropology 44 ( 3 ) :323–348 . . first paradigm : anthropological linguistics . the first paradigm is known as anthropological linguistics . the field is devoted to themes unique to the sub-discipline : documentation of languages that were then seen as doomed to extinction , with special focus on the languages of native north american tribes . it is also the paradigm most focused on linguistics . the themes include : grammatical description , linguistic typology and linguistic relativity . second paradigm : linguistic anthropology . the second paradigm can be marked by the switch from anthropological linguistics to linguistic anthropology , signalling a more anthropological focus on the study . this term was preferred by dell hymes , who was also responsible , with john gumperz , for the idea of ethnography of communication . the term linguistic anthropology reflected hymes ' vision for the future , where language would be studied in the context of the situation , and relative to the community speaking it . this new era would involve many new technological developments , such as mechanical recording . hymes had many revolutionary contributions to linguistic anthropology , the first of which was a new unit of analysis . unlike the first paradigm , which focused on linguistic tools like measuring of phonemes and morphemes , the second paradigm 's unit of analysis was the '' speech event '' . a speech event is an event defined by speech occurring during it ( ex . a lecture , debate ) . this is different from a speech situation , where speech could possibly occur ( ex . dinner ) . hymes also pioneered a linguistic anthropological approach to ethnopoetics . hymes had hoped that this paradigm would link linguistic anthropology more to anthropology . however , hymes ' ambition backfired as the second paradigm marked a distancing of the sub-discipline from the rest of anthropology . bauman , richard . 1977 . '' verbal art as performance . '' american anthropologist 77:290–311 . hymes , dell . 1981 1975 breakthrough into performance . in in vain i tried to tell you : essays in native american ethnopoetics . d . hymes , ed . pp . 79–141 . philadelphia : university of pennsylvania press . . third paradigm : anthropological issues studied via linguistic methods and data . the third paradigm , which began in the late 1980s , refocused on anthropology by providing a linguistic approach to anthropological issues . rather than focusing on exploring language , third paradigm anthropologists focus on studying culture with linguistic tools . themes include : investigations of personal and social identities shared ideology construction of narrative interactions among individuals furthermore , like how the second paradigm made use of new technology in its studies , the third paradigm heavily includes use of video documentation to support research . . areas of interest . contemporary linguistic anthropology continues research in all three of the paradigms described above : documentation of languages , study of language through context , and study of identity through linguistic means . the third paradigm , the study of anthropological issues , is a particularly rich area of study for current linguistic anthropologists . identity and intersubjectivity . a great deal of work in linguistic anthropology investigates questions of sociocultural identity linguistically and discursively . linguistic anthropologist don kulick has done so in relation to identity , for example , in a series of settings , first in a village called gapun in northern papua new guinea . kulick , don . 1992 . language shift and cultural reproduction : socialization , self and syncretism in a papua new guinea village . cambridge : cambridge university press . he explored how the use of two languages with and around children in gapun village : the traditional language ( taiap ) , not spoken anywhere but in their own village and thus primordially '' indexical '' of gapuner identity , and tok pisin , the widely circulating official language of new guinea . ( '' indexical '' points to meanings beyond the immediate context . ) silverstein , michael . 1976 . shifters , linguistic categories , and cultural description . in meaning in anthropology . k . basso and h.a . selby , eds . pp . 11–56 . albuquerque : school of american research , university of new mexico press . to speak the taiap language is associated with one identity : not only local but '' backward '' and also an identity based on the display of hed ( personal autonomy ) . to speak tok pisin is to index a modern , christian ( catholic ) identity , based not on hed but on save , an identity linked with the will and the skill to cooperate . in later work , kulick demonstrates that certain loud speech performances in brazil called um escândalo , brazilian travesti ( roughly , 'transvestite ' ) sex workers shame clients . the travesti community , the argument goes , ends up at least making a powerful attempt to transcend the shame the larger brazilian public might try to foist off on them , again by loud public discourse and other modes of performance . kulick , don , and charles h . klein . 2003 . scandalous acts : the politics of shame among brazilian travesti prostitutes . in recognition struggles and social movements : contested identities , agency and power . b . hobson , ed . pp . 215–238 . cambridge : cambridge university press . in addition , scholars such as émile benveniste , benveniste , emile . 1971 . problems in general linguistics . miami : university of miami press . mary bucholtz and kira hall bucholtz , m . , & hall , k . 2005 . identity and interaction : a sociocultural linguistic approach . discourse studies , 7 ( 4–5 ) , 585–614 . benjamin lee , lee , benjamin . 1997 . talking heads : language , metalanguage , and the semiotics of subjectivity . durham : duke university press . paul kockelman , kockelman , paul . 2004 . stance and subjectivity . journal of linguistic anthropology , 14 ( 2 ) , 127–150 . and stanton wortham wortham , stanton . 2006 . learning identity : the joint emergence of social identification and academic learning . new york , ny , us : cambridge university press . ( among many others ) have contributed to understandings of identity as '' intersubjectivity '' by examining the ways it is discursively constructed . socialization . in a series of studies , linguistic anthropologists elinor ochs and bambi schieffelin addressed the anthropological topic of socialization ( the process by which infants , children , and foreigners become members of a community , learning to participate in its culture ) , using linguistic and other ethnographic methods . ochs , elinor . 1988 . culture and language development : language acquisition and language socialization in a samoan village . cambridge : cambridge university press . ochs , elinor , and bambi schieffelin . 1984 . language acquisition and socialization : three developmental stories and their implications . in culture theory : essays on mind , self , and emotion . r . shweder and r.a . levine , eds . pp . 276–320 . new york : cambridge university . ochs , elinor , and carolyn taylor . 2001 . the “ father knows best ” dynamic in dinnertime narratives . in linguistic anthropology : a reader . a . duranti , ed . pp . 431–449 . oxford . malden , ma : blackwell . schieffelin , bambi b . 1990 . the give and take of everyday life : language socialization of kaluli children . cambridge : cambridge university press . they discovered that the processes of enculturation and socialization do not occur apart from the process of language acquisition , but that children acquire language and culture together in what amounts to an integrated process . ochs and schieffelin demonstrated that baby talk is not universal , that the direction of adaptation ( whether the child is made to adapt to the ongoing situation of speech around it or vice versa ) was a variable that correlated , for example , with the direction it was held vis-à-vis a caregiver 's body . in many societies caregivers hold a child facing outward so as to orient it to a network of kin whom it must learn to recognize early in life . ochs and schieffelin demonstrated that members of all societies socialize children both to and through the use of language . ochs and schieffelin uncovered how , through naturally occurring stories told during dinners in white middle class households in southern california , both mothers and fathers participated in replicating patriarchy ( the '' father knows best '' syndrome ) by the distribution of participant roles such as protagonist ( often a child but sometimes mother and almost never the father ) and '' problematizer '' ( often the father , who raised uncomfortable questions or challenged the competence of the protagonist ) . when mothers collaborated with children to get their stories told , they unwittingly set themselves up to be subject to this process . schieffelin 's more recent research has uncovered the socializing role of pastors and other fairly new bosavi converts in the southern highlands , papua new guinea community she studies . schieffelin , bambi b . 1995 . creating evidence : making sense of written words in bosavi . pragmatics 5 ( 2 ) :225–244 . schieffelin , bambi b . 2000 . introducing kaluli literacy : a chronology of influences . in regimes of language . p . kroskrity , ed . pp . 293–327 . santa fe : school of american research press . schieffelin , bambi b . 2002 . marking time : the dichotomizing discourse of multiple temporalities . current anthropology 43 ( supplement ) : s5-17 . schieffelin , bambi b . 2006 . plenary address : found in translating : reflexive language across time and texts in bosavi , png . twelve annual conference on language , interaction , and culture , university of california , los angeles , 2006 . pastors have introduced new ways of conveying knowledge , new linguistic epistemic markers —and new ways of speaking about time . and they have struggled with and largely resisted those parts of the bible that speak of being able to know the inner states of others ( e.g . the gospel of mark , chapter 2 , verses 6–8 ) . . ideologies . in a third example of the current ( third ) paradigm , since roman jakobson 's student michael silverstein opened the way , there has been an increase in the work done by linguistic anthropologists on the major anthropological theme of ideologies , silverstein , michael . 1979 . language structure and linguistic ideology . in the elements : a parasession on linguistic units and levels . r . cline , w . hanks , and c . hofbauer , eds . pp . 193–247 . chicago : chicago linguistic society . —in this case '' language ideology '' , sometimes defined as '' shared bodies of commonsense notions about the nature of language in the world . '' rumsey , alan . 1990 . '' word , meaning , and linguistic ideology . '' american anthropologist 92 ( 2 ) :346–361 . silverstein has demonstrated that these ideologies are not mere false consciousness but actually influence the evolution of linguistic structures , including the dropping of '' thee '' and '' thou '' from everyday english usage . silverstein , michael . 1985 . language and the culture of gender : at the intersection of structure , usage , and ideology . in semiotic mediation : sociocultural and psychological perspectives . e . mertz and r . parmentier , eds . pp . 219–259 . orlando : academic press . woolard , in her overview of '' code-switching '' , or the systematic practice of alternating linguistic varieties within a conversation or even a single utterance , finds the underlying question anthropologists ask of the practice—why do they do that ? —reflects a dominant linguistic ideology . it is the ideology that people should '' really '' be monoglot and efficiently targeted toward referential clarity rather than diverting themselves with the messiness of multiple varieties in play at a single time . woolard , kathryn a . 2004 . codeswitching . in companion to linguistic anthropology . a . duranti , ed . pp . 73–94 . malden : blackwell . much research on linguistic ideologies probes subtler influences on language , such as the pull exerted on tewa , a kiowa-tanoan language spoken in certain new mexican pueblos and on the hopi reservation in arizona , by '' kiva speech '' , discussed in the next section . kroskrity , paul v . 1998 . arizona tewa kiva speech as a manifestation of linguistic ideology . in language ideologies : practice and theory . b.b . schieffelin , k.a . woolard , and p . kroskrity , eds . pp . 103–122 . new york : oxford university press . other linguists have carried out research in the areas of language contact , language endangerment , and 'english as a global language ' . for instance , indian linguist braj kachru investigated local varieties of english in south asia , the ways in which english as a lingua franca among multicultural groups in india . british linguist david crystal has contributed to investigations of language death attention to the effects of cultural assimilation resulting in the spread of one dominant language in situations of colonialism . . heritage language ideologies . more recently , a new line of ideology work is beginning to enter the field of linguistics in relation to heritage language . specifically , applied linguist martin guardado has posited that heritage language ideologies are '' somewhat fluid sets of understandings , justifications , beliefs , and judgments that linguistic minorities hold about their languages . '' guardado , martin . 2018 . '' discourse , ideology and heritage language socialization : micro and macro perspectives . new york & berlin : de gruyter mouton . guardado goes on to argue that ideologies of heritage languages also contain the expectations and desires of linguistic minority families '' regarding the relevance of these languages in their children ’ s lives as well as when , where , how , and to what ends these languages should be used . '' although this is arguably a fledgling line of language ideology research , this work is poised to contribute to the understanding of how ideologies of language operate in a variety of settings . social space . in a final example of this third paradigm , a group of linguistic anthropologists have done very creative work on the idea of social space . duranti published a groundbreaking article on samoan greetings and their use and transformation of social space . duranti , alessandro . 1992 . '' language and bodies in social space : samoan greetings . '' american anthropologist 94:657–691 . before that , indonesianist joseph errington , making use of earlier work by indonesianists not necessarily concerned with language issues per se , brought linguistic anthropological methods ( and semiotic theory ) to bear on the notion of the exemplary center , the center of political and ritual power from which emanated exemplary behavior . errington , j . joseph . 1988 . structure and style in javanese : a semiotic view of linguistic etiquette . philadelphia : university of pennsylvania . errington demonstrated how the javanese priyayi , whose ancestors served at the javanese royal courts , became emissaries , so to speak , long after those courts had ceased to exist , representing throughout java the highest example of '' refined speech . '' the work of joel kuipers develops this theme vis-a-vis the island of sumba , indonesia . and , even though it pertains to tewa indians in arizona rather than indonesians , paul kroskrity 's argument that speech forms originating in the tewa kiva ( or underground ceremonial space ) forms the dominant model for all tewa speech can be seen as a direct parallel . silverstein tries to find the maximum theoretical significance and applicability in this idea of exemplary centers . he feels , in fact , that the exemplary center idea is one of linguistic anthropology 's three most important findings . he generalizes the notion thus , arguing '' there are wider-scale institutional 'orders of interactionality , ' historically contingent yet structured . within such large-scale , macrosocial orders , in-effect ritual centers of semiosis come to exert a structuring , value-conferring influence on any particular event of discursive interaction with respect to the meanings and significance of the verbal and other semiotic forms used in it . '' silverstein , michael . 2004 . cultural ' concepts and the language-culture nexus . '' current anthropology 45 ( 5 ) :621–652 . current approaches to such classic anthropological topics as ritual by linguistic anthropologists emphasize not static linguistic structures but the unfolding in realtime of a hypertrophic ' set of parallel orders of iconicity and indexicality that seem to cause the ritual to create its own sacred space through what appears , often , to be the magic of textual and nontextual metricalizations , synchronized . '' wilce , james m . 2006 . magical laments and anthropological reflections : the production and circulation of anthropological text as ritual activity . current anthropology . 47 ( 6 ) :891–914 . . race , class , and gender . addressing the broad central concerns of the subfield and drawing from its core theories , many scholars focus on the intersections of language and the particularly salient social constructs of race ( and ethnicity ) , class , and gender ( and sexuality ) . these works generally consider the roles of social structures ( e.g . , ideologies and institutions ) related to race , class , and gender ( e.g . , marriage , labor , pop culture , education ) in terms of their constructions and in terms of individuals ' lived experiences . a short list of linguistic anthropological texts that address these topics follows : . race and ethnicity . alim , h . samy , john r . rickford , and arnetha f . ball . 2016 . raciolinguistics : how language shapes our ideas about race . oxford university press . mary bucholtz . 2001 . '' the whiteness of nerds : superstandard english and racial markedness . '' journal of linguistic anthropology 11 ( 1 ) : 84–100 . mary bucholtz . 2010 . white kids : language , race , and styles of youth identity . cambridge university press . jenny l . davis . 2018 . talking indian : identity and language revitalization in the chickasaw renaissance . university of arizona press . dick , h . 2011 . '' making immigrants illegal in small-town usa . '' journal of linguistic anthropology . 21 ( s1 ) : e35-e55 . hill , jane h . 1998 . '' language , race , and white public space . '' american anthropologist 100 ( 3 ) : 680–89 . jane h . hill . 2008 . the everyday language of white racism . wiley-blackwell . garcía-sánchez , inmaculada m . 2014 . language and muslim immigrant childhoods : the politics of belonging . john wiley & sons . ibrahim , awad . 2014 . the rhizome of blackness : a critical ethnography of hip-hop culture , language , identity , and the politics of becoming . 1 edition . new york : peter lang publishing inc . rosa , jonathan . 2019 . looking like a language , sounding like a race : raciolinguistic ideologies and the learning of latinidad . oxford university press . smalls , krystal . 2018 . '' fighting words : antiblackness and discursive violence in an american high school . '' journal of linguistic anthropology . 23 ( 3 ) :356-383 . spears , arthur kean . 1999 . race and ideology : language , symbolism , and popular culture . wayne state university press . urciuoli , bonnie . 2013 . exposing prejudice : puerto rican experiences of language , race , and class . waveland press . wirtz , kristina . 2011 . '' cuban performances of blackness as the timeless past still among us . '' journal of linguistic anthropology . 21 ( s1 ) : e11-e34 . class . fox , aaron a . 2004 . real country : music and language in working-class culture . duke university press . shankar , shalini . 2008 . desi land : teen culture , class , and success in silicon valley . duke university press . nakassis , constantine v . 2016 . doing style : youth and mass mediation in south india . university of chicago press . gender and sexuality . bucholtz , mary . 1999 . why be normal ? ' : language and identity practices in a community of nerd girls '' . language in society . 28 ( 2 ) : 207–210 . fader , ayala . 2009 . mitzvah girls : bringing up the next generation of hasidic jews in brooklyn . princeton university press . gaudio , rudolf pell . 2011 . allah made us : sexual outlaws in an islamic african city . john wiley & sons . kira hall , and mary bucholtz . 1995 . gender articulated : language and the socially constructed self . new york : routledge . jacobs-huey , lanita . 2006 . from the kitchen to the parlor : language and becoming in african american women 's hair care . oxford university press . kulick , don . 2000 . '' gay and lesbian language . '' annual review of anthropology 29 ( 1 ) : 243–85 . kulick , don . 2008 . '' gender politics . '' men and masculinities 11 ( 2 ) : 186–92 . kulick , don . 1997 . '' the gender of brazilian transgendered prostitutes . '' american anthropologist 99 ( 3 ) : 574–85 . livia , anna , and kira hall . 1997 . queerly phrased : language , gender , and sexuality . oxford university press . manalansan , martin f . iv . performing ' the filipino gay experiences in america : linguistic strategies in a transnational context . '' beyond the lavender lexicon : authenticity , imagination and appropriation in lesbian and gay language . ed . william l leap . new york : gordon and breach , 1997 . 249–266 norma mendoza-denton . 2014 . homegirls : language and cultural practice among latina youth gangs . john wiley & sons . rampton , ben . 1995 . crossing : language and ethnicity among adolescents . longman . zimman , lal , jenny l . davis , and joshua raclaw . 2014 . queer excursions : retheorizing binaries in language , gender , and sexuality . oxford university press . ethnopoetics . . endangered languages : language documentation and revitalization . endangered languages are languages that are not being passed down to children as their mother tongue or that have declining numbers of speakers for a variety of reasons . therefore , after a couple generations these languages may no longer be spoken . anthropologists have been involved with endangered language communities through their involvement in language documentation and revitalization projects . in a language documentation project , researchers work to develop records of the language - these records could be field notes and audio or video recordings . to follow best practices of documentation , these records should be clearly annotated and kept safe within an archive of some kind . franz boas was one of the first anthropologists involved in language documentation within north america and he supported the development of three key materials : 1 ) grammars , 2 ) texts , and 3 ) dictionaries . this is now known as the boasian trilogy . language revitalization is the practice of bringing a language back into common use . the revitalization efforts can take the form of teaching the language to new speakers or encouraging the continued use within the community . one example of a language revitalization project is the lenape language course taught at swathmore college , pennsylvania . the course aims to educate indigenous and non-indigenous students about the lenape language and culture . language reclamation , as a subset of revitalization , implies that a language has been taken away from a community and addresses their concern in taking back the agency to revitalize their language on their own terms . language reclamation addresses the power dynamics associated with language loss . encouraging those who already know the language to use it , increasing the domains of usage , and increasing the overall prestige of the language are all components of reclamation . one example of this is the miami language being brought back from 'extinct ' status through extensive archives . while the field of linguistics has also been focused on the study of the linguistic structures of endangered languages , anthropologists also contribute to this field through their emphasize on ethnography understandings of the socio-historical context of language endangerment , but also of language revitalization and reclamation projects .