Friedrich Carl von Savigny

early life and education . savigny was born at frankfurt , of a family recorded in the history of lorraine , deriving its name from the castle of savigny near charmes in the valley of the moselle . left an orphan at the age of 13 , savigny was brought up by a guardian until , in 1795 , he entered the university of marburg , where , though in poor health , he studied under professors anton bauer and philipp friedrich weiss , the former a pioneer in the reform of the german criminal law , the latter distinguished for his knowledge of medieval jurisprudence . after the fashion of german students , savigny visited several universities , notably jena , leipzig and halle ; and returning to marburg , took his doctorate in 1800 . at marburg he lectured as privatdozent on criminal law and the pandects . work . in 1803 savigny published das recht des besitzes ( the law of possession ) . archive.org anton thibaut hailed it as a masterpiece which brought the old uncritical study of roman law to an end . it quickly obtained a european reputation , and remains a prominent landmark in the history of jurisprudence . in 1804 he married kunigunde brentano , sister of bettina von arnim and clemens brentano the poet . the same year he embarked on an extensive tour through france and south germany in search of fresh sources of roman law . in 1808 savigny was appointed full professor of roman law at landshut . he remained in this position for a year and a half . in 1810 he was appointed to the chair of roman law at the new university of berlin , chiefly at the insistence of wilhelm von humboldt . here , in connection with the faculty of law , he created a spruch-collegium , an extraordinary tribunal competent to deliver opinions on cases remitted to it by the ordinary courts ; and he took an active part in its labours . this was the busiest time of his life . he was engaged in lecturing , in government of the university ( of which he was the third rector ) , and as tutor to the crown prince in roman , criminal and prussian law . during his time in berlin , savigny befriended barthold georg niebuhr and karl friedrich eichhorn . in 1814 savigny wrote the pamphlet ( of the vocation of our age for legislation and legal science ) . in an earlier pamphlet thibaut had argued for the creation of a unified legal code for germany , independent of the influence of foreign legal systems . savigny argued that such a codification of the law would have an adverse effect . in his view , the damage that had been caused by the neglect of former generations of jurists could not be quickly repaired , and more time was required to set the house in order . moreover , a unified legal code would almost certainly be influenced by natural law , with its '' infinite arrogance '' and its '' shallow philosophy '' . it was savigny 's opinion that legal science should be saved from the '' hollow abstractions '' of such a work as christian wolff 's . savigny opposed this conception of legal science to the '' historical study of positive law '' , which according to him is '' a condition precedent to right understanding of the science of all law '' . savigny did not oppose the introduction of new laws or of a new system of laws , but considered that the laws of any nation should reflect the '' national spirit ( volksgeist ) '' . in 1815 savigny , together with eichhorn and johann friedrich ludwig göschen , founded the ( journal for historical legal science ) , the organ of the new historical school . in this periodical ( vol . iii . p . & nbsp ; 129 seq . ) savigny made known to the world the discovery by niebuhr in verona of the lost institutes of gaius . savigny pronounced it to be the work of gaius himself and not , as niebuhr had suggested , of ulpian . the same year , 1815 , savigny published the first volume of his ( history of roman law in the middle ages ) , geschichte des römischen rechts im mittelalter , erster band the sixth and final volume of which did not appear until 1831 . he had been prompted to write this work by his early instructor weiss . savigny intended it to be a literary history of roman law from irnerius to the present time . his design was in some respects narrowed ; in others it was widened . he did not continue the narrative beyond the 16th century , when the separation of nationalities disturbed the foundations of the science of law . in the first volume , savigny treated the history of roman law from the breaking up of the empire until the beginning of the 12th century . according to savigny , roman law , although considered dead , lived on in local customs , in towns , in ecclesiastical doctrines and school teachings , until it once again reappeared in bologna and other italian cities . in 1817 savigny was appointed a member of the commission for organizing the prussian provincial estates , and also a member of the department of justice in the ( state council ) . in 1819 he became a member of the supreme court of appeal for the rhine provinces . in 1820 he was made a member of the commission for revising the prussian code . in 1822 he was afflicted with nervous illness , which compelled him to seek relief in travel . in 1835 savigny began his elaborate work on contemporary roman law , ( 8 vols . , 1840–1849 ) . his activity as professor ceased in march 1842 , when he was appointed '' '' ( high chancellor ) , the head of the prussian legal system . in this position he carried out several important law reforms in regard to bills of exchange and divorce . he held the office until 1848 , when he resigned . in 1850 , on the occasion of the jubilee of obtaining his doctor 's degree , appeared in five volumes his vermischte schriften ( miscellaneous writings ) , consisting of a collection of minor works published between 1800 and 1844 . savigny was hailed throughout germany as '' the great master '' and founder of modern jurisprudence . in 1851 and 1853 he published the two volumes of his treatise on the law of obligations , , mostly on what english-speaking lawyers consider as contract law . it was a supplement to his work on modern roman law , in which he again argued for the necessity of the historical treatment of law . savigny died in berlin . his son , karl friedrich von savigny ( 1814–1875 ) , was prussian minister of foreign affairs in 1849 . he represented prussia in important diplomatic transactions , especially in 1866 . ideas and influence . savigny belongs to the german german historical school , founded by gustav hugo , and served a role in its consolidation . the works for which savigny is best known are the recht des besitzes and the beruf unserer zeit für gesetzgebung . according to jhering '' with the recht des besitzes the juridical method of the romans was regained , and modern jurisprudence born . '' it was seen as a great advance both in results and method , and rendered obsolete a large body of literature . savigny argued that in roman law possession had always reference to '' usucapion '' or to '' interdicts '' . it did not include a right to continuance in possession but only to immunity from interference as possession is based on the consciousness of unlimited power . these and other propositions were derived by the interpretation and harmonization of the roman jurists . however , many of savigny 's conclusions did not meet with universal acclaim . they were opposed by , among others , jhering , gans , and bruns . savigny argued in the beruf unserer zeit that law is part and parcel of national life . he opposed the idea , common to french 18th century jurists and bentham , that law can be arbitrarily imposed on a country irrespective of its state of civilization and history . another important idea of savigny is that the practice and theory of jurisprudence can not be divorced without injury to both . publications . major publications by savigny include : english translation by thomas erskine perry ( 1848 ) : '' von savigny 's treatise on possession : or , the jus possessionis of the civil law '' , ( 6 ed . ) . london : s . sweet . abridged english translation by kelleher , j . ( 1888 ) : '' possession in the civil law . abridged from the treatise of von savigny to which added the text of the title on possession from the digest '' . calcutta : thacker . english translation by abraham hayward ( 1831 ) : '' of the vocation of our age for legislation and jurisprudence '' . london : littlewood . english translation of volume 1 by holloway , william ( 1867 ) : '' system of the modern roman law , volume i '' . madras : higginbotham . english translation of volume 2 by rattigan , henry ( 1884 ) : '' iarchive : juralrelations/page/n7/mode/2up '' . london : wildly . english translation of volume 8 by guthrie , william ( 1869 ) : '' iarchive : privateinternat00guthgoog/page/n6/mode/2up '' . london : t & t clark . bibliography . .