Police brutality

sweden . since the reva ( legally certain and efficient enforcement ) project had been applied in sweden in an attempt to deport illegal immigrants , it had exposed the brutal and illegal methods used by police . officers have been shown to harass and racially profile non-white swedes who often live in segregated suburbs . the marginalised such as the poor , homeless , people of colour , users of illicit drugs , and the mentally ill are facing sweden as a police state . this has resulted in social disobedience with ordinary people in sweden updating others on twitter and facebook on the whereabouts of police . . examples . in 2013 police shot a man in his own home in front of his wife in the town of . the police alleged the man had been wielding a machete and threatening them with it . the stockholm riots were set off after the husby shooting , where more than 100 cars were torched . when the police showed up they had stones thrown at them . people said the police called them '' monkeys '' and used batons against them in the clash . in another incident in 2013 , an african-born swede was refused entry into a local club in malmö for wearing traditional african clothes . the police picked him up and in the process of his arrest broke his arm and locked him in a cell for nearly six hours with no medical aid . socially excluded groups have been targeted and the result of police investigations often means the police officers are not deemed to be at fault . the common denominator for people on a special police list is being or married to a romani people . a register of 4029 romani people is kept by police . the police say the document is a register of criminals and their associates and is used to fight crime in skåne county despite people being on it that have no connection with skåne or any association with criminal people . police target apparent ethnicity at stockholm subways for id-checks to see if they are illegal immigrants . the police claim that they are '' following orders '' , the '' rule of law '' and '' democratic process '' . in february 2016 , a nine-year-old was accused of not paying for a railway ticket in malmö . the police ordered the local security guards to stop the child . one guard tackled him to the ground and sat on him . he then pushed the child 's face into the pavement hard and covered his mouth . the child can be heard screaming and gasping on the video that has gone viral on the internet . the police then put him in handcuffs . . switzerland . february 2018 , lausanne : mike ben peter was held to the ground by police for six minutes . he then collapsed and died of cardiac arrest twelve hours later . there were reports that he was repeatedly kicked by the police in his genital area , and an autopsy confirmed severe bruising in this region . the police officers involved were not suspended , but have been charged with negligent homicide in an ongoing case . october 2017 , lausanne : lamin fatty was mistaken for another person with the same name and detained . he was found dead in his jail cell the following day . november 2016 , bex : hervé mandundu was shot several times and killed by police , who claim he tried to attack him with a knife . this account is disputed by his neighbors . may 2001 , valais : samson chukwu died of suffocation as a police officer put his weight on the back of a face-down chukwu . authorities originally claimed he died of a heart attack , but an autopsy later showed that postural asphyxiation led to chukwu 's death . 2001 , bern : cemal gomec was attacked by police officers with batons to the head , irritant gas , a shock grenade , rubber bullets . a sedative is said to have led to cardiac arrest which led to his death a few days later . 1999 , zurich : khaled abuzarifa died of suffocation after being bound and gagged by his police escort at the zurich airport . . united kingdom . in 2015 the united kingdom employed approximately 126,818 police officers in the 43 police forces of england , wales and the british transport police , the lowest number since march 2002 . . legislation and treaties . the 1967 criminal law act , the 2008 common law and the criminal justice and immigration act , the 1984 police and criminal evidence act , and the european convention on human rights ( echr ) set out the law and acceptable use of force in the uk . the use of unnecessary physical force is in principle an infringement of echr article 3 . the use of force should be '' reasonable '' in the circumstances . physical force is considered appropriate if : it is absolutely necessary for a purpose permitted by law , and the amount of force used is reasonable and proportionate this requires a consideration of the degree of force used . any excessive use of force by a police officer is unlawful and an officer could be prosecuted under criminal law . findings and statistics . since 2004/05 , the independent police complaints commission ( ipcc ) published complaint statistics reports for england and wales . in the 2014/15 annual report , the ipcc reported that there were 17 deaths in or following police custody and only one fatal police shooting from 2014 to 2017 . these figures more than doubled when the ipcc was first erected . the annual report for 2015/16 was published on 26 july 2016 . a total of 37,105 complaints were recorded in 2014/15 , marking a 6 % increase to the previous year , and a 62 % overall increase since 2004/05 . allegations of '' neglect or failure in duty '' accounted for 34 % of all allegations recorded while '' other assault '' and '' oppressive conduct '' or harassment made up only 8 % and 6 % respectively . . public dissatisfaction and discrimination . despite an average reduction in deaths in custody since 2004 , a 2014 public confidence survey revealed that public satisfaction following contact with the police was falling and that there was a greater willingness to file a complaint . the metropolitan police , who operate in some of the most ethnically diverse parts of the uk , received the greatest number of complaints in 2014/15 at 6,828 claims . however , young people and people from black or minority ethnic groups were much less likely to come forward with complaints . while instances of police brutality in the uk is comparatively less than its us counterpart , there are nonetheless high profile incidents that have received wide media coverage . examples . in may 2013 , 21-year-old julian cole was arrested outside a nightclub in bedford by six police officers . the altercation left mr cole in a vegetative state due to a severed spinal cord . expert evidence indicated that mr cole was struck with considerable force on his neck whilst his head was pulled back . despite calls by the ipcc to suspend the officers , bedfordshire chief constable colette paul refused to place the six police officers on restricted duties despite being under criminal investigation . the bedfordshire police denied allegations that the use of excessive force on cole was race-related . on 20 february 2014 , bedfordshire police constables christopher thomas and christopher pitts , chased faruk ali before allegedly knocking him over and punching him in the face outside his family home . ali was described as an autistic man who had the mental age of a five-year-old . the police officers who were accused of laughing throughout the ordeal were cleared of misconduct in public office by the aylesbury crown court . following an investigation by the ipcc , the officers were fired following breaches of standards of professional conduct including standards of honesty , integrity , authority , equality , and diversity . on 13 july 2016 , 18-year-old mzee mohammed died in police custody after being detained by merseyside police at a liverpool shopping centre . officers were called to the scene after mzee was allegedly behaving aggressively and erratically while armed with a knife . after successfully detaining mzee , the police called an ambulance after mzee suffered a '' medical episode '' and was pronounced dead . video evidence surfaced showing mohammed surrounded by officers and paramedics , seemingly fully unconscious while being placed face down with his hands handcuffed behind his back . questions remain about how appropriate medical condition could have been administered given how the handcuffs would restrict breathing . mohammed is the 21st black person to die in police custody in six years . north america . . canada . there have been several high-profile cases of alleged police brutality , including the 2010 g20 toronto summit protests , the 2012 quebec student protests , the killing of robert dziekański , and the shooting of sammy yatim . the public incidents in which police judgments or actions have been called into question raised concerns about police accountability and governance . on 16 march 2014 , 300 people were arrested in montreal at a protest against police brutality . united states . in the united states , major political and social movements have involved excessive force by police , including the civil rights movement of the 1960s , anti-war demonstrations , the war on drugs , and the global war on terrorism . in 2014 , the un committee against torture condemned police brutality and excessive use of force by law enforcement in the us , and highlighted the '' frequent and recurrent police shootings or fatal pursuits of unarmed black individuals '' . stephanie nebehay ( 28 november 2014 ) . u.n . torture watchdog urges u.s . crackdown on police brutality . reuters . retrieved 19 march 2015 . the united nations ' working group of experts on people of african descent 's 2016 report noted that '' contemporary police killings and the trauma that they create are reminiscent of the past racial terror of lynching . '' seven members of the united states maryland military police were convicted for the abu ghraib torture and prisoner abuse incidents in iraq . detainees were abused within the prison by being forced to jump on their naked feet , being videotaped in sexually exploitative positions , having chains around their neck for photos , and being kept naked for days . the united states has developed a notorious reputation for cases of police brutality . the united states has a far higher number of officer-involved killings compared to other western countries . u.s . police killed 1,093 people in 2016 and 1,146 people in 2015 . mass shootings have killed 339 people since 2015 , whereas police shootings over the same time span claimed the lives of 4,355 people . an fbi homicide report from 2012 observed that while black people represent 13 % of the us population , they amounted to 31 % of those killed by police . . examples . breonna taylor was killed at the age of 26 when police forced entry into the apartment as part of an investigation into drug dealing operations . officers said that they announced themselves as police before forcing entry , but walker said he did not hear any announcement , thought the officers were intruders , and fired a warning shot at them and hit mattingly in the leg , and the officers fired 32 shots in return . walker was unhurt but taylor was hit by six bullets and died . on september 23 , a state grand jury found the shooting of taylor justified but indicted officer hankison on three counts of wanton endangerment for endangering taylor 's neighbors with his shots . on 25 may 2020 , george floyd , who was unarmed and in handcuffs , died after a minneapolis police officer , derek chauvin , knelt on his neck for over nine minutes ( 8:46 seconds ) while 3 other officers appeared to hold down his back and legs . the officer involved was charged with 2nd degree murder and three colleagues stand accused of aiding and abetting . the death , captured on video , triggered protests against racial discrimination across the us and the world . . south america . . brazil . the police in brazil have a history of violence against the lower classes . it dates back to the nineteenth century when it primarily served as an instrument to control slaves . holloway , thomas h . '' policing rio de janeiro : repression and resistance in a 19th-century city '' stanford university press , 1993 . - chapter two . graden , d . torston . '' from slavery to freedom in brazil : bahia , 1835–1900 '' university of new mexico press , 2006 . - chapters two & three . in a mostly rural country , the police forces were heavily influenced by local large landowners known as '' colonels '' . koonings , k . & kruijt d . '' armed actors , organised violence and state failure in latin america '' zed books , 1988 . - page 41 . in the latter half of the twentieth century , the country was heavily urbanized , while over brazilian military government state governments became responsible for brazilian police forces experiencing which became heavily militarized . andrade , john . '' world police & paramilitary forces '' mstockton press , macmillan publishers ltd , 1985 . - pages 28-29 . heinz , w.s . & frühling , h . '' determinants of gross human rights violations by state and state sponsored actors in brazil , uruguay , chile , and argentina 1960–1990 '' martinus nijhoff publishers , 1999 . - chapter 5 . the militarist approach to dealing with social issues led the country to its highest violence levels and in 2015 brazil had more violent deaths than the syrian civil war , article at the independent , 29 october 2016 . with most people fearing the police . article at '' folha de são paulo '' , 31 july 2015 . more than 6,160 people were killed by the brazilian police in 2018 . in 2019 , the state of rio de janeiro alone registered 1,814 killings by members of the police force in 2019 , setting a new record . a significant portion of the officers involved had already been charged for crimes previously . . colombia . protests against police brutality started in bogotá , the country 's capital , following the death of javier ordóñez while in police custody on 9 september 2020 . the unrest has since spread to many cities throughout colombia . , 13 people have died and over 400 have been injured as part of the protests . . chile . in recent years , chile 's police force carabineros de chile has been under investigation because of various cases of power abuse and police brutality , particularly towards students participating in riots for better education and the indigenous mapuche people ; countless cases of violence were enacted on this group for allegedly committing crimes ; it was later discovered that some carabineros officers were responsible for these crimes and blamed mapuches . one of the recent cases involving the mapuche was camilo catrillanca 's death . the first reports of his death came from the carabineros who claimed that camilo shot at a police officer and others while being investigated for allegedly stealing 3 cars . the carabineros special forces team comando jungla was in the araucanía region searching for terrorists . after seeing camilo '' attacking '' policemen with a gun in an attempt to escape , the carabineros shot camilo in the head and killed him . it was later discovered that this was not what happened ; a partner of the police officer that killed camilo showed the video of the policeman killing him while he drove a tractor . carabineros was asked why they did not have a recording of the officer being shot at by camilo . the institution responded the officer destroyed the sd card because it had private photos and videos of his wife ; most people were not satisfied with the answer . the policeman was later discharged and prosecuted . rodrigo acuña . '' killing of an indigenous activist in chile provokes widespread protests '' , red pepper , london , 27 november 2018 . retrieved on 29 november 2018 . during the 2019–20 chilean protests , carabineros de chile has caused hundreds of eye mutilations on protesters and random civilians with so-called '' rubber '' bullets and tear gas canisters . the most notorious cases are of the victims with complete loss of vision gustavo gatica and fabiola campillai . . oceania . . australia . a police officer fatally shot the 19-year-old man , kumanjayi walker , in the central australian town of yuendumu . a police officer was charged with murder . . causes . police officers are legally permitted to use force . jerome herbert skolnick writes in regards to dealing largely with disorderly elements of the society , some people working in law enforcement may gradually develop an attitude or sense of authority over society , particularly under traditional reaction-based policing models ; in some cases , the police believe that they are above the law . there are many reasons why police officers can sometimes be excessively aggressive . it is thought that psychopathy makes some officers more inclined to use excessive force than others . in one study , police psychologists surveyed officers who had used excessive force . the information obtained allowed the researchers to develop five unique types of officers , only one of which was similar to the bad apple stereotype . these include personality disorders ; previous traumatic job-related experience ; young , inexperienced , or authoritarian officers ; officers who learn inappropriate patrol styles ; and officers with personal problems . schrivers categorized these groups and separated the group that was the most likely to use excessive force . scrivner , 1994 : 3–6 however , this '' bad apple paradigm '' is considered by some to be an '' easy way out '' . a broad report commissioned by the royal canadian mounted police on the causes of misconduct in policing calls it '' a simplistic explanation that permits the organization and senior management to blame corruption on individuals and individual faults – behavioural , psychological , background factors , and so on , rather than addressing systemic factors . '' the report continues to discuss the systemic factors , which include : pressures to conform to certain aspects of '' police culture '' , such as the blue code of silence , which can '' sustain an oppositional criminal subculture protecting the interests of police who violate the law '' and a '' 'we-they ' perspective in which outsiders are viewed with suspicion or distrust '' command and control structures with a rigid hierarchical foundation ( '' results indicate that the more rigid the authoritarian hierarchy , the lower the scores on a measure of ethical decision-making '' concludes one study reviewed in the report ) ; and deficiencies in internal accountability mechanisms ( including internal investigation processes ) . the use of force by police officers is not kept in check in many jurisdictions by the issuance of a use of force continuum , which describes levels of force considered appropriate in direct response to a suspect 's behavior . this power is granted by the government , with few if any limits set out in statutory law as well as common law . violence used by police can be excessive despite being lawful , especially in the context of political repression . police brutality is often used to refer to violence used by the police to achieve politically desirable ends ( terrorism ) and , therefore , when none should be used at all according to widely held values and cultural norms in the society ( rather than to refer to excessive violence used where at least some may be considered justifiable ) . studies show that there are officers who believe the legal system they serve is failing and that they must pick up the slack . this is known as '' vigilantism '' , where the officer-involved may think the suspect deserves more punishment than what they may have to serve under the court system . chevigny , p . ( 2008 ) . '' police brutality '' , in encyclopedia of violence , peace and conflict . oxford : elsevier science and technology , 2008 . during high-speed pursuits of suspects , officers can become angry and filled with adrenaline , which can affect their judgment when they finally apprehend the suspect . the resulting loss of judgment and heightened emotional state can result in inappropriate use of force . the effect is colloquially known as '' high-speed pursuit syndrome . '' . effects of police brutality in the united states . police brutality is the misuse of power by the police force to intentionally harm individuals . the excessive force imposed by police officers has significantly increased over the past decade and caused social misinterpretations of the role that police officers play in the community . in 2015 , the percentage of people who have confidence in the police hit its lowest since 1993 at 52 percent . citation error . see inline comment how to fix . of this 52 percent , democrats saw the biggest drop in confidence . democrats ' confidence in police dropped to 42 % from 2017–2018 compared with 2012–2013 , a larger change than for any other subgroup . over the same period , independents ' ( 51 % ) and republicans ' ( 69 % ) confidence in the police has not changed . the number of black people that trust the police in 2017–2018 averaged 30 percent , well below the national average of 53 % and much lower than for any other subgroup . firearms usage . individual state statutes and police department policies generally say that police officers are legally allowed to shoot in the instance that they feel the need to protect their lives or an innocent life or to prevent the suspect from escaping and posing a dangerous threat to bystanders in society . the supreme court decision of tennessee v . garner made it possible to shoot a fleeing suspect only if they may cause harm to innocent people to prevent officers from shooting every suspect that tries to escape . stereotypes . lorie fridell , associate professor of criminology at university of south florida states that '' racial profiling was the number one issue facing police in the 1990s '' , which led her to two conclusions : '' bias in policing was not just a few officers in a few departments and , overwhelmingly , the police in this country are well-intentioned . '' the country as a whole sets stereotypes as well as biases against black americans which inevitably leads to social misinterpretation of the safety of americans when a black person is present . an experiment done in 2014 conducted on white undergraduate female students suggests that there is a higher degree of fear of racial minorities which gives reason for authorities to believe racial minorities are dangerous , leading to many minority-related shootings . the experiment supports the theory of dehumanization and lack of empathetic concern for minorities displayed by citizens of the racial majority . incidents resulting in high profile deaths of innocent black men like eric garner in new york city , tamir rice in cleveland , and freddie gray in baltimore demonstrate to the black community that they can no longer trust the police force . as a result of this lack of trust in police officers , the black society created many social organizations , such as the black lives matter movement founded in 2013 . while the justice department reported that cleveland police officers used '' excessive deadly force , including shootings and head strikes with impact weapons ; unnecessary , excessive , and retaliatory force , including tasers , chemical sprays , and their fists '' on the victim , there was no real repercussions from their actions . . black americans and the us police . in a report released concerning the shooting of michael brown in ferguson , missouri , the justice department admitted to the ferguson 's police department 's pattern of racial bias . the department argued that it is typically an effort to ticket as many low-income black residents as possible in an attempt to raise local budget revenue through fines and court fees . the justice department explained police encounters could get downright abusive when the person being questioned by the police officers becomes disrespectful or challenges their authority . the department of justice also released a statement that confronted police officers ' susceptibility to implicit bias : one of the things they looked at was '' threat perception failure '' , where an officer may believe that the person was armed and it turned out not to be the case . these failures were observed to occur more frequently when the suspect was black . statistics . in the united states in the late 2010s there has been an increase in the number of police brutality cases . in 2013 , the number of deaths caused by police officer misconduct increased from 397 to 426 deaths . citation error . see inline comment how to fix . in a study done by the research triangle institute in 2015 , arrest-related deaths were ranked higher than supplementary homicide reports in us deaths by approximately 4 % . a study conducted by the police violence tracking website fatalencounters.org showed the records of over 26,000 people killed by police across the us since 2000 , at an average of over 1300 people per year until 2019 . in 2016 , police killed 574 white americans , 266 african americans , 183 hispanics , 24 native americans , and 21 asians . however , for every million in population , police killed 10.13 native americans , 6.66 african americans , 3.23 hispanics , 2.9 white americans , and 1.17 asians . in 2017 , there were 1,147 deaths accounted for by police , of which in 13 cases police officers were charged with a crime . 640 of the deaths caused by police officers that year were responses to non-violent offenses and no crime was reported . 149 people killed by the police were unarmed . a study done by mappingpoliceviolence.org shows that in 2019 there were only 27 days where police in the united states did n't kill someone . it also showed black people are three times more likely to be killed than white people . studies have shown that '' black people are three times more likely to be killed by police in the united states than white people . more unarmed black people were killed by police than unarmed white people last year , '' even though only 14 % of the population are black people . . global prevalence . the amnesty international 2007 report on human rights also documented widespread police misconduct in many other countries , especially countries with authoritarian regimes . in the uk , the reports into the death of new zealand teacher and anti-racism campaigner blair peach in 1979 was published on the metropolitan police website on 27 april 2010 . they concluded that peach was killed by a police officer , but that the other police officers in the same unit had refused to cooperate with the inquiry by lying to investigators , making it impossible to identify the actual killer . in the uk , ian tomlinson was filmed by an american tourist being hit with a baton and pushed to the floor as he was walking home from work during the 2009 g-20 london summit protests . tomlinson then collapsed and died . although he was arrested on suspicion of manslaughter , the officer who allegedly assaulted tomlinson was released without charge . he was later dismissed for gross misconduct . in serbia , police brutality occurred in numerous cases during protests against slobodan milošević , and has also been recorded at protests against governments since milošević lost power . the most recent case was recorded in july 2010 , when five people , including two girls , were arrested , handcuffed , beaten with clubs , and mistreated for one hour . security camera recordings of the beating were obtained by the media and public outrage when released . police officials , including ivica dačić , the serbian minister of internal affairs , denied this sequence of events and accused the victims '' to have attacked the police officers first '' . he also publicly stated that '' police are n't here to beat up citizens '' , but that it is known '' what one is going to get when attacking the police '' . some recent episodes of police brutality in india include the rajan case , the death of udayakumar , and of sampath . police violence episodes against peaceful demonstrators appeared during the 2011 spanish protests . spanish police clash with protesters over clean-up – the guardian los mossos d'esquadra desalojan a palos la plaza de catalunya – público furthermore , on 4 august 2011 , gorka ramos , a journalist of lainformacion was beaten by police and arrested while covering 15-m protests near the interior ministry in madrid . spanish riot police clash in madrid with anti-austerity protesters – the guardian los periodistas , detenidos y golpeados al cubrir las manifestaciones del 15-m – el mundo doce policías para detener a un periodista – público gorka ramos : '' me tiraron al suelo , me patearon y luego me detuvieron '' – lainformación la policía detiene al periodista gorka ramos – el país a freelance photographer , daniel nuevo , was beaten by police while covering demonstrations against the pope 's visit in august 2011 . spanish police officer slaps girl during pope protests – the telegraph la policía golpea a un fotógrafo y a una joven – público in brazil , incidents of police violence have been very well-reported and brazil has one of the highest prevalences of police brutality in the world today . south africa from apartheid to today has had incidents of police brutality , though police violence is not as prevalent as during the apartheid years . there have been several instances of police brutality towards protesters in the 2019–20 hong kong protests . investigation . in england and wales , an independent organization known as the independent police complaints commission ( ipcc ) investigates reports of police misconduct . they automatically investigate any deaths caused by or thought to be caused by , police action . a similar body known as the police investigations and review commissioner ( pirc ) operates in scotland . in northern ireland , the police ombudsman for northern ireland has a similar role to that of the ipcc and pirc . in africa , there exist two such bodies : one in south africa and another one in kenya known as the independent policing oversight authority . in the united states , more police are wearing body cameras after the death of michael brown . the us department of justice has made a call to action for police departments across the nation to implement body cameras into their departments so further investigation will be possible . . measurement . police brutality is measured based on the accounts of people who have experienced or seen it , as well as the juries who are present for trials involving police brutality cases , as there is no objective method to quantify the use of excessive force for any particular situation . in 1985 , only one out of five people thought that police brutality was a serious problem . police brutality is relative to a situation : it depends on if the suspect is resisting . out of the people who were surveyed about their account of the police brutality in 2008 , only about 12 % felt as if they had been resisting . although the police force itself can not be quantified , the opinion of brutality among various races , genders , and ages can . african americans , women , and younger people are more likely to have negative opinions about the police than caucasians , men and middle-aged to elderly individuals . . independent oversight . various community groups have criticized police brutality . these groups often stress the need for oversight by independent civilian review boards and other methods of ensuring accountability for police action . umbrella organizations and justice committees usually support those affected . amnesty international is a non-governmental organization focused on human rights with over 3 million members and supporters around the world . the stated objective of the organization is '' to conduct research and generate action to prevent and end grave abuses of human rights , and to demand justice for those whose rights have been violated '' . tools used by these groups include video recordings , which are sometimes broadcast using websites such as youtube . civilians have begun independent projects to monitor police activity to reduce violence and misconduct . these are often called '' cop watch '' programs .