Aquatint

technique . in intaglio printmaking techniques such as engraving and etching , the artist makes marks into the surface of the plate ( in the case of aquatint , a copper or zinc plate ) that are capable of holding ink . the plate is inked all over then wiped clean to leave ink only in the marks . the plate is passed through a printing press together with a sheet of paper , and strong pressure applied pushing the paper into the marks , so that a transfer of the ink to the paper occurs . this is repeated many times . like etching , aquatint uses the application of a mordant ( acid ) to etch into the metal plate . where etching uses a needle to scratch through an acid-proof resist and make lines , aquatint uses powdered rosin ( resin ) to create a tonal effect . the rosin is acid resistant and typically adhered to the plate by controlled heating ; where the grains are will print white , with black areas around . the tonal variation is controlled by the level of mordant exposure over large areas , and thus the image is shaped by large sections at a time . the rosin is then washed off the plate before printing . griffiths , 89–90 another tonal technique , mezzotint , begins with a plate surface that is evenly indented and roughened so that it will print as an even and fairly dark tone of ink . the mezzotint plate is then smoothed and polished to make areas carry less ink and thus print a lighter shade . alternatively , beginning with a smooth plate , areas are roughened to make them darker . occasionally the two techniques of aquatint and mezzotint are combined . history . early history . a variety of early experiments aimed to add tonal effects to etching included the first use of a resin dust ground by the painter and printmaker jan van de velde iv in amsterdam , around 1650 . however none of these developed a technique that caught on with other printmakers . griffiths , 92 ; hind , am ( 1963 ) a history of engraving and etching . dover publications , new york . experimentation by several artists with somewhat different techniques reached a peak after about 1750 , and as they were initially very secretive , the history of the emergence of the standard technique remains unclear . griffiths , 93–94 various claimants include the swede per floding working with the frenchman françois-philippe charpentier in 1761 , j . b . delafosse in 1766 , working with the amateur jean-claude richard ( often rather misleadingly known as the abbé de saint-non ) in 1766 , and jean-baptiste le prince in 1768–69 . le prince was more effective than the others in publicizing his technique , publishing découverte du procédé de graver au lavis in 1780 , though he failed to sell his secret in his lifetime . it was bought posthumously by the académie royale de peinture et de sculpture in 1782 , who released it on an open basis . griffiths , 94 ; ives ( mma ) though england was to become one of the countries using the technique most , the earliest english aquatints were not exhibited until 1772 , by the cartographer peter perez burdett . it was taken up by the watercolourist paul sandby , who also seems to have introduced technical refinements as well as inventing the name '' aquatint '' . griffiths , 94 ; ives ; ann v . gunn , '' sandby , greville and burdett , and the 'secret ' of aquatint , '' print quarterly , xxix , no . 2 , 2012 , pp . 178–180 . in england artists such as sandby and thomas gainsborough were attracted by the suitability of etched outlines with aquatint for reproducing the popular english landscape watercolours , which at this period usually also had been given an initial outline drawing in ink . publishers of prints and illustrations for expensive books , both important british markets at the time , also adopted the technique . in all these areas , a print with etching and aquatint gave very satisfactory results when watercolour was added by relatively low-skilled painters copying a model , with a flat wash of colour on top of the varied tones of the aquatint . griffiths , 94 after the french revolution , one of the most successful publishers in london , the german rudolf ackermann , had numbers of french refugees working on the floor above his shop in the strand in london , each brushing a single colour and then passing the sheet down a long table . mayor , 374–376 over the same period in france there was sustained interest in techniques for true colour printing using multiple plates , which used multiple printmaking techniques which often included aquatint ( or mezzotint ) for tone . artists included jean-françois janinet and philibert-louis debucourt , whose la promenade publique is often thought the masterpiece of the style . griffiths , 119 another branch of this french movement mostly used mezzotint for tone and came to specialize in illustrating medical textbooks . this was at first led by jacob christoph le blon ( 1667–1741 ) , who very nearly anticipated modern cmyk colour separation and then carried on by his pupil jacques fabien gautier d'agoty and later members of the d'agoty family until around 1800 . griffiths , 118–119 goya , maker of incontestably the greatest prints using aquatint , probably learned of the technique through giovanni david from genoa , the first significant italian to use it . goya used it , normally with etching and often burnishing and other techniques , in his great print series los caprichos ( 1799 ) , los desastres de la guerra ( 1810–19 ) , la tauromaquia ( 1816 ) and los disparates ( ca . 1816–23 ) . ives ( mma ) ; griffiths , 94 . revival . after a period of several decades in the central 19th century when the technique was little used , and definitively superseded for commercial uses , mayor , 612–614 it was revived near the end of the century in france , by édouard manet , félicien rops , degas , pissarro , jacques villon and other artists . griffiths , 94 in 1891 , mary cassatt , based in paris , exhibited a series of highly original coloured drypoint and aquatint prints , including woman bathing and the coiffure , inspired by an exhibition of japanese woodblock prints shown there the year before . these used multiple blocks for the different colours . cassatt was attracted to the simplicity and clarity of japanese design , and the skillful use of blocks of colour . in her interpretation , she used primarily light , delicate pastel colours and avoided black ( a '' forbidden '' colour among the impressionists ) . it continued to be used in the 20th century , with the czech t . f . šimon and the german johnny friedlaender notably frequent users . in the united states the printmaker pedro joseph de lemos popularized aquatints in art schools with his publications ( 1919–40 ) , which simplified the cumbersome techniques , and with traveling exhibitions of his award-winning prints . . modern process . an aquatint requires a metal plate , an acid , and something to resist the acid . traditionally copper or zinc plates were used . the artist applies a ground that will resist acid . ground is applied by dissolving powdered resin in spirits , by applying the powder directly to the surface of the plate , or by using a liquid acrylic resist . in all forms of etching the acid resist is commonly referred to as '' the ground . '' an aquatint box is used to apply resin powder . the powder is at the bottom of the box , a crank or a bellows is used to blow the powder up into the air of the box . a window allows the engraver to see the density of flowing powder and to place his plate in the box using a drawer . when the powder covers the plate , it can be extracted from the box for the next operations . the plate is then heated ; if the plate is covered with powder , the resin melts forming a fine and even coat ; if it is in spirits , the spirits evaporate and the result is essentially the same . now the plate is dipped in acid , producing an even and fine level of corrosion ( the '' bite '' ) sufficient to hold ink . at this point , the plate is said to carry about a 50 % halftone . this means that , were the plate printed with no further biting , the paper would display a gray color more or less directly in between white ( no ink ) and black ( full ink ) . at some point the artist will then etch an outline of any aspects of the drawing they wish to establish with line ; this provides the basis and guide for the later tone work . they may also have applied ( at the very start , before any biting occurs ) an acid-resistant '' stop out '' ( also called an asphaltum or hard ground ) if they intend to keep any areas totally white and free of ink , such as highlights . the artist then begins immersing the plate in the acid bath , progressively stopping out ( protecting from acid ) any areas that have achieved the designed tonality . these tones , combined with the limited line elements , give aquatints a distinctive , watery look . also , aquatints , like mezzotints , provide ease in creating large areas of tone without laborious cross-hatching ; but aquatint plates , it is noted , are generally more durable than mezzotint plates . the first etch should be for a short period ( 30 seconds to 1 minute , with a wide variation depending on how light the lightest tones are meant to be ) . a test piece may be made with etching times noted , as the strength of the etchant will vary . more than thirty minutes should produce a very dark area . etching for many hours ( up to 24 ) will be as dark as etching for one hour , but the deep etch would produce raised ink on the paper . contemporary printmakers often use spraypaint instead of a powder , particularly when using the technique known as sugar-lift . to produce a printing surface using sugar-lift , the artist makes a solution of india ink and sugar by melting sugar into heated ink . this mixture is then applied to a prepared plate with a brush , allowing for a bold expression not possible with the most etching techniques . when the ink/sugar mixture is dry the plate is coated with asphaltum ( liquid ground ) ; the plate is then submerged in warm water which dissolves the sugar so that the image '' lifts off '' the plate . the exposed areas are then aquatinted to hold ink and the plate is ready to be printed from . file : the iron forge between dolgelli and barmouth in merioneth shire , plate 6 of xii views in north wales met dp104271.jpg paul sandby , the iron forge between dolgelli and barmouth in merioneth shire , plate 6 of xii views in north wales , 1776 , etching and aquatint printed in brown . file : view near edwinsford , carnarvonshire sic.jpeg paul sandby , view near edwinsford , carnarvonshire , 1812 , with colours added by hand . file : plate 20 from the 'tauromaquia'-the agility and audacity of juanito apiñani in -the ring- at madrid . met mm27763.jpg goya , 20 from the tauromaquia series ( 1816 ) , the agility and audacity of juanito apiñani in the ring at madrid , etching and aquatint file : turk mounting his horse met dp851160.jpg eugène delacroix , turk mounting his horse , 1824 , aquatint only . file : edgar degas - dancers in the wings ( danseuses dans la coulisse ) - google art project.jpg edgar degas , dancers in the wings ( danseuses dans la coulisse ) , c . 1877 , etching , aquatint , and drypoint file : petite sorciere lacma m.80.277.75.jpg félicien rops , little sorceress , 1879 , etching and aquatint file : 'comedy of society ' , by jacques villon , honolulu museum of art.jpg comedy of society , jacques villon file : allan osterlind flamencotänzerin.jpg allan osterlind , flamenco dancers file : jeune fille et enfant de rosporden.jpg émile dezaunay file : t f simon booksellers.jpg t . f . šimon , second hand booksellers , spring ( in paris ) , 1912 , colour soft ground etching and aquatint file : john taylor arms - on lake como , number two - google art project.jpg john taylor arms , on lake como , number two , 1919 , colour printed etching and aquatint file : sydney long - hawkesbury landscape.jpg sydney long , hawkesbury landscape , са . 1928 , аquatint printed in dark blue ink . . famous examples . francisco goya famously took great advantage of aquatint printmaking , in his los caprichos series ( 1799 ) ; los desastres de la guerra ( 1810–19 ) ; la tauromaquia ( 1816 ) ; and los disparates ( ca . 1816–23 ) . master engraver robert havell used aquatint for john james audubon 's birds of america ( 1826–38 ) . david hockney , known for his many paintings of the los angeles lifestyle in the 1960s , has created a number of aquatints and etchings used with color in his '' the blue guitar '' series of prints . la belle assemblée , a british women 's magazine published from 1806 to 1837 had many aquatint colored plates . notes . references . bamber gascoigne . how to identify prints : a complete guide to manual and mechanical processes from woodcut to inkjet , 1986 ( 2nd edition , 2004 ) , thames & hudson , , ( sections instead of numbered pages ) griffiths , antony , prints and printmaking , 1996 , british museum press ( in uk ) , 2nd edn ives , colta felle ( 1974 ) , the great wave : the influence of japanese woodcuts on french prints , 1974 , the metropolitan museum of art , ives , colta ( mma ) . '' the printed image in the west : aquatint '' . in heilbrunn timeline of art history . new york : the metropolitan museum of art , 2000– . accessed january 2019 a . hyatt mayor , prints and people , metropolitan museum of art/princeton , 1971 , fully available online as pdf , . further reading . prideaux , s . t . aquatint engraving ; a chapter in the history of book illustration ( london : duckworth & co . , 1909 ) .