Family tree

family history representations . genealogical data can be represented in several formats , for example as a pedigree or . family trees are often presented with the oldest generations at the top and the newer generations at the bottom . an ancestry chart , which is a tree showing the ancestors of an individual , will more closely resemble a tree in shape , being wider at the top than the bottom . in some ancestry charts , an individual appears on the left and his or her ancestors appear to the right . a descendancy chart , which depicts all the descendants of an individual will be narrowest at the top . family trees can have many themes . one might encompass all direct descendants of a single figure , or all known ancestors of a living person . another might include all members of a particular surname ( e.g . male-line descendants ) . yet another approach is to construct a tree including all holders of a certain office , such as kings of germany . this relies on dynastic marriage to hold together the links between dynasties . not every family tree is viewed from the side ( pedigree or bracket chart ) . by looking down vertically at the top of a descendant tree , growing outward from one generation to the next , a family tree can be shown in a compact space . a time scale is used expanding radially about the center in decades . children of the parent form branches around the center and their names are plotted in their birth year of the time scale . spouse names join children names and families grow new branches to grandchildren , and so on . it is convenient to use great grandparents in the center to portray four or five generations , which appear in the natural growth pattern of a tree as seen from the top . in a descendant tree , living relatives are common on the outer branches and contemporary cousins appear adjacent to each other . privacy should be considered when preparing a living family tree . john meng-frecker , family tree tops , the image of the tree probably originated with one in medieval art of the tree of jesse , simon julian gilmour ( 2000 ) daz sint noch ungelogeniu wort : a literary and linguistic commentary on the gurnemanz episode in book iii of wolfram 's parzival . universitätsverlag winter , 2000 . p.64 used to illustrate the genealogy of christ in terms of a prophecy of isaiah ( isaiah 11:1 ) . possibly the first non-biblical use , and the first to show full family relationships rather than a purely patrilineal scheme , was that involving family trees of the classical gods in boccaccio 's genealogia deorum gentilium ( '' on the genealogy of the gods of the gentiles '' ) , whose first version dates to 1360 . ahnentafel . image : waldburg ahnentafel.jpg thumb an ahnentafel family tree displaying an ancestor chart of house of waldburg an ahnentafel ( german for '' ancestor table '' ) is a genealogical numbering system for listing a person 's direct ancestors in a fixed sequence of ascent : subject ( or proband ) father mother paternal grandfather paternal grandmother maternal grandfather maternal grandmother and so on , back through the generations . apart from , who can be male or female , all even-numbered persons are male , and all odd-numbered persons are female . in this scheme , the number of any person 's father is double the person 's number , and a person 's mother is double the person 's number plus one . this system can be displayed as a tree : . fan chart . a '' fan chart '' features a half circle chart with concentric rings : the person of interest is the inner circle , the second circle is divided in two ( each side is one parent ) , the third circle is divided in four , and so forth . fan charts depict paternal and maternal ancestors . graph theory . while family trees are depicted as trees , family relations do not in general form a tree in the sense of graph theory , since distant relatives can mate , so a person can have a common ancestor on their mother 's and father 's side . however , because a parent must be born before their child is born , a person can not be their own ancestor , and thus there are no loops , so ancestry forms a directed acyclic graph . the graphs of matrilineal descent ( '' mother '' relationships between women ) and patrilineal descent ( '' father '' relationships between men ) are trees however . assuming no common ancestor , an ancestry chart is a perfect binary tree , as each person has exactly one mother and one father , for two parents ; these thus have a regular structure . a descendancy chart , on the other hand , does not in general have a regular structure , as a person can have any number of children , or none at all . notable examples . the longest family tree in the world is that of the chinese philosopher and educator confucius ( 551–479 bc ) , and he is the descendant of king tang ( 1675–1646 bc ) . the tree spans more than 80 generations from him , and includes more than 2 million members . an international effort involving more than 450 branches around the world was started in 1998 to retrace and revise this family tree . a new edition of the confucius genealogy was printed in september 2009 by the confucius genealogy compilation committee , to coincide with the 2560th anniversary of the birth of the chinese thinker . this latest edition is expected to include some 1.3 million living members who are scattered around the world today . confucius family tree has two million members from china daily , unknown date , updated february 16 , 2008 there are extensive genealogies for the ruling dynasties of china , but these do not form a single , unified family tree ; and it is unclear at which point ( s ) the most ancient historical figures named become mythological . in japan , the ancestry of the imperial family is traced back to the mythological origins of japan . the connection to persons from the established historical record begins in the mid-first millennium ad . another very old and extensive tree is that of the lurie lineage—which includes sigmund freud and martin buber—and traces back to jehiel lurie , a 13th-century rabbi in brest-litovsk , and from there to rashi and purportedly back to the legendary king david , as documented by neil rosenstein in his book the lurie legacy . the 1999 edition of the guinness book of records recorded the lurie family in the '' longest lineage '' category as oldest-known living family in the world today . the biblical genealogies of jesus also claim descent from the house of david ; covering a period of approximately 1000 years . in the torah and old testament , genealogies are provided for many biblical persons , including a record of the descendants of adam . according to the torah , the kohanim are descended from aaron . genetic testing performed at the technion has shown that most modern kohanim share common y-chromosome origins , although there is no complete family tree of the kohanim . in the islamic world , claimed descent from the prophet mohammed greatly enhanced the status of political and religious leaders . new dynasties often used claims of such descent to help establish their legitimacy . in europe , the pedigree of niall noígíallach would be a contender for the longest , through conn of the hundred battles ( fl . 123 ad ) ; in the legendary history of ireland he is further descended from breogán , and ultimately from adam , through the sons of noah . many noble and aristocratic families of european and west-asian origin can reliably trace their ancestry back as far as the mid to late first millennium ad ; some claiming undocumented descent from classical antiquity or mythological ancestors . before the dark ages , in the greco-roman world , some reliable pedigrees dated back perhaps at least as far as the first half of the first millennium bc ; with claimed or mythological origins reaching back further . roman clan and family lineages played an important part in the structure of their society , and were the basis of their intricate system of personal names . however , there was a break in the continuity of records-keeping at the end of classical antiquity . records of the lines of succession of the popes and the eastern roman emperors through this transitional period have survived , but these are not continuous genealogical histories of single families . see : descent from antiquity . in africa , the ruling dynasty of ethiopia claimed descent from king solomon via the queen of sheba . through this claim , the family traced their descent back to the aforementioned house of david . the genealogy of ancient egyptian ruling dynasties was recorded from the beginnings of the pharaonic era circa 3000 bc , to the end of the ptolomaic dynasty ; although this is not a record of one continuously-linked family lineage , and surviving records are incomplete . elsewhere in africa , oral traditions of genealogical recording predominate . members of the keita dynasty of mali , for example , have had their pedigrees sung by griots during annual ceremonies since the 14th century . meanwhile , in nigeria , many ruling clans – most notably those descended from oduduwa – claim descent from the legendary king kisra . here too , pedigrees are recited by griots attached to the royal courts . in some pre-contact native american civilizations , genealogical records of ruling and priestly families were kept , some of which extended over at least several centuries . in many human cultures , clan and tribal associations are based on claims of common ancestry ; although detailed documentation of those origins is often very limited . other uses . the author pete frame is notable for having produced '' family trees '' of rock bands . in this instance , the entries represent membership of certain groups , and personnel changes within them , rather than family relationships . several books have been produced with his family trees , which in turn have led to a bbc television series about them , including interviews from the bands depicted in the trees . another common use is in the creation of episcopal trees in christian traditions that believe in apostolic succession . in this case , the connection is not made through blood , but through the bishop who ordered the other . see also . gedcom genealogical numbering systems genealogy software genogram list of family trees pedigree chart tree of life ( biology ) wikitree . references . external links .