Dave Gorman

early life . david james gorman was born in stafford on 2 march 1971 . dave gorman 's googlewhack adventure he has a twin brother named nicholas . he studied mathematics at the university of manchester but never graduated , dropping out after a year of study . . career . early work . before his solo successes , he was in demand as a writer , having co-written three series of the mrs merton show , as well as writing for many other television series in the uk , including the fast show . in 2003 , he was listed in the observer as one of the 50 funniest acts in british comedy . as a producer , gorman contributed to two series featuring jenny eclair . he has also written for comedians harry hill and steve coogan . gorman 's first one-man '' documentary style '' show was entitled reasons to be cheerful . billed as '' a ninety minute show based on a four-minute pop song '' , it was based on the song '' reasons to be cheerful , part 3 '' by ian dury and the blockheads . the show examined the song 's lyrics in detail , with a view to establishing whether or not each of the items listed in the song was really a reason to be cheerful . the visual aspect of the show was provided by each '' reason '' being illustrated by one of a collection of second-hand slides that he had accumulated for the show . the show was first performed at the 1998 edinburgh festival fringe and toured theatres afterwards . his second full-length show , dave gorman 's better world , was first performed in edinburgh in 1999 . for the show he wrote anonymous letters to thousands of local newspapers and asked the public to suggest ways in which one man could make the world a better place . he then attempted to carry out their suggestions in order to determine their efficacy . are you dave gorman ? . gorman shot to fame following a drunken bet with his flatmate danny wallace . the bet was thus : gorman claimed that he shared the name '' dave gorman '' with the assistant manager of east fife f.c . and that there must be '' loads '' of others around . wallace disagreed with him , so the two travelled to methil ( about from london ) , with a polaroid camera , to meet the assistant manager , whose name was indeed dave gorman . the bet soon evolved into a monster as , on the way to meet dave gormans numbers 4 and 5 , wallace decided gorman must meet one for every card in the deck ( including the jokers ) . his quest to meet this target is described , with highlights including : five people changing their names by deed poll ( two of whom were women ) ; a trip to new york that resulted in failure when he discovered the man he had gone to meet was not dave gorman , but b . david gorman and therefore was ineligible ; and the american journey included a meeting with an actor who had played a character called david gorman , the validity of which is hotly contested in the book . dave gorman 's important astrology experiment . his second television series , broadcast on bbc two in september 2002 , was entitled dave gorman 's important astrology experiment and was based upon the idea of a controlled experiment , although naturally not a serious one . the series had six episodes . the premise was that it would test whether or not astrology really worked . over the course of 40 days , he would try to follow any instructions given to people with his star sign in a selection of horoscopes , while his '' control experiment '' ( his fraternal twin brother , nick ) ignored them . each would record the events of each day , and how they fared in each of three areas of life : love , health and wealth . on each episode of the show , gorman would show footage of the amusing situations he got into by trying to follow his horoscope , and then asked a panel of '' experts '' , agony aunt denise robertson ( love ) , gmtv 's dr . hilary jones ( health ) and financial expert alvin hall ( wealth ) , in the studio to assess how he had fared in the three areas . following an audience vote , gorman would display on a '' happiness graph '' the difference between how he and his twin brother had fared that week , and whether it showed that astrology had produced a positive effect , a negative effect , or no significant effect at all . the results of the '' experiment '' showed that his overall happiness , love , and wealth steadily began to recede over time ( especially wealth as he was forced to travel excessively ) . throughout the experiment , he had numerous adventures , including travelling to new york city to meet a long lost friend and then leaving a few hours later because he was ordered to spend as much time at home as possible , sharing pizza in a park while dressed in a rubber suit , and reading an illegally acquired pornographic magazine at sunday lunch in front of his mother . the most notable stunt he had to perform was standing in covent garden on one leg with his foot in a bucket of water , a tangerine in one hand and some breakfast cereal in the other ( in a bowl that cost £85 from harrods ) , singing the national anthem backwards and balancing three books on his head . this was taken entirely literally from a very odd horoscope by jonathan cainer , which gorman deemed so implausible that he did in fact present the copy of the newspaper which published it in the studio , while noting his suspicion that perhaps the author of the horoscope found out about his experiment and was pulling a prank on him . gorman showed that his wealth was rapidly declining , as were happiness and love , until , on the last day , he invested the last of his money to travel to dubai to watch a golf tournament ( the dubai desert classic ) and bet on ian woosnam , a golfer that shared his birthday ( and would therefore share his luck ) . he emptied his account to travel there and , using his lucky number of the day from each of the 40 days of his experiment to determine how much he should bet , went ahead with the plan . however , he then found out that not only was gambling illegal in the country , but also that his lucky number indicated he should bet 2,903 dirhams , which at the time was £549 . ultimately , he borrowed the money from his mother and asked her to bet the sum on ian woosnam to win the match of the day , as he had been instructed by his horoscope . with his happiness at an all-time low , love scraping the bottom , and his finances in an extremely negative position , the experts , his mother , wallace , the crowd and gorman himself could only hope the bet would pay off – which it ultimately did at odds long enough to place him not only back at level wealth , but supplying him with twice as much cash as he had started off with . therefore , he '' proved '' that astrology works and has made him happier than the control . dave gorman 's googlewhack adventure . in 2003 , gorman toured britain with a show entitled dave gorman 's googlewhack adventure , and published a book of the same name . it is another true story . at 31 gorman decided to give up his stupid ways , grow a beard and write a novel . as a result , he believes people took him more seriously and a new novel was commissioned . while trying to write a novel for his publisher , random house , gorman became obsessed with googlewhacks when someone notified him that his site had one ( francophile namesakes ) , and caused him to travel across the world finding people who had authored them ( one of whom turned out to be one of the dave gormans he had met in his first adventure ) . he eventually spent his publisher 's advance on the quest , without writing any of the promised novel , and had to create the dave gorman 's googlewhack adventure show to pay them back . this show was premiered at the melbourne international comedy festival and then went on to sell out for a two-week run at the sydney opera house 's studio theatre . it also sold out at the george square theatre as part of the 2003 edinburgh festival fringe before embarking on a major uk tour of 75 shows in the space of three months . it won gorman the award for best one person show at the hbo u.s . comedy arts festival in aspen , colorado , an award he had previously won for the show are you dave gorman ? he ended up writing a book about his googlewhack adventure which went on to be the sunday times number one best seller . during his googlewhack adventure , gorman had a nervous breakdown , which he discusses frankly in the show . in 2004 , a dvd of the googlewhack adventure was released which was filmed at swansea grand theatre . in 2005 , gorman toured the u.s . and performed his googlewhack show in several cities . while in los angeles , he appeared on the tonight show , elaborating on his travels and his quest . this tour , in which he stayed at chain motels and experienced corporate america , led him to undertake a road-trip across the u.s . in which he avoided such hotels and corporate petrol stations in favour of family-owned businesses . the road trip was documented as the book and film america unchained . dave gorman versus the rest of the world . in 2011 , gorman published a book about his adventures in various british towns , during a period of his life when he challenged people to invite him to game-playing sessions . the book explains games of khet , kubb , smite , settlers of catan , monopoly , poker and others . '' dave gorman vs . the rest of the world '' ebury press , england , 2011 . genius . . radio series . he hosted a bbc radio 4 show called genius , in which members of the public submitted suggestions to make a better world . gorman and a guest then assess the idea in order to determine whether it qualifies as '' genius '' . one series of five episodes was broadcast between 27 october and 24 november 2005 , with a cd of the first series released on 27 november 2006 . the second series was broadcast between 7 september and 12 october 2006 , with a cd released on 7 january 2008 and a third series between 1 october and 5 november 2007 . he has made many references to disliking darren day in various episodes of the show . tv series . a pilot for a television version of genius was recorded on 23 november 2007 , and a series was commissioned in the spring of 2008 . the series was created by ali crockatt and david scott , and is produced by simon nicholls . the six-part series started on friday 20 march , 10pm on bbc2 . a second series for 2010 was commissioned by the bbc . the show broadcast its first episode on monday 27 september 2010 at 10pm on bbc two . the daily show with jon stewart . on 24 april 2006 , gorman made his first appearance as a reporter ( he had previously appeared as a guest on 11 december 2001 promoting are you dave gorman ? ) , in which he was credited as the show 's senior new correspondent . on 27 april , he debuted as the host of the show 's satirical statistical analysis piece called '' poll smoking with dave gorman '' . he was the first daily show correspondent to have been born in england , and the third daily show correspondent to have been born outside of the united states . his most recent appearance on the show was on 5 october 2006 . he has also appeared co-hosting a segment called '' controversy '' with the daily show 's other english correspondent , john oliver , in which the pair calmly and genteelly discussed former uk prime minister tony blair over tea , parodying american stereotypes of britons . . america unchained . between 22 october and 5 december 2006 , gorman undertook a coast-to-coast road trip through 17 states from the west coast to east coast of the united states . a book about the trip , entitled america unchained : a freewheeling roadtrip in search of non-corporate usa , was released on 3 april 2008 . the rationale for the trip was to discover whether it is possible to travel across the united states without ever patronising any corporate or chain-style businesses ( '' the man '' ) . gorman ate , slept , and filled his car in restaurants , hotels , and petrol stations which were all independently owned . america unchained also is the name of an annual campaign spearheaded by the american independent business alliance since 2004 to promote the economic , cultural , and democratic importance of independent locally owned businesses . a documentary film of the adventure was also made and was aired on the british tv channel more4 on 5 february 2008 and released on dvd on 11 february . in 2007 , it won the audience award for best documentary feature at the austin film festival . gorman 's journey started in coronado , california , and ended in savannah , georgia , and he was continually challenged to find independently owned gas stations , as well as repairing the car itself – which broke down surprisingly little , considering the age and mileage ( 124,000 at start ) . absolute radio . gorman was a regular guest on the geoff show , having been on a guest on the show three times ( and also entering a phone-in competition whilst undertaking the important astrology experiment ) , while he also had weekly interviews on geoff lloyd 's hometime show to discuss his bikeathon during his sit down , pedal , pedal , stop and stand up tour . he filled in for weekend presenter frank skinner for three weeks during the summer of 2009 . the station subsequently announced that he would have a full-time show ; his first show aired on 11 october , with gorman joined by danielle ward and martin white . white left the show in april 2012 , to be replaced by michael legge . the show ended on 18 november 2012 . . stand-up . gorman performed numerous times as a stand up earlier in his career . on 30 august 2009 , he began a 32-date tour called sit down , pedal , pedal , stop and stand up . the tour saw him covering the extremes of the british mainland as he cycled from britain 's southernmost point to its northernmost tip , taking in the most easterly and westerly points along the way and performing each night of the journey . in 2010 , gorman performed a 37-date tour as an extension of his 2009 sit down , pedal , pedal , stop and stand up tour . about this show he said , '' i wo n't be cycling to these . same show , fewer blisters . '' on 12 july 2010 , he performed the show again – twice in one evening – at the bloomsbury theatre in london , which was recorded for a dvd release ( dave gorman stand-up . live . ) . prior to the recording , gorman performed the act again as the warm up show at four small venues in the uk in order to freshen his memory . modern life is goodish . in september 2013 , gorman returned to television with a new show , modern life is goodish , on the dave channel . in january 2014 , the show was renewed for two additional series to follow the initial three . the fourth series commenced in november 2016 . the fifth series ran from 31 october to 20 december 2017 , after which gorman confirmed that it was the final series . at its peak , the series attracted 1.5 million viewers . . with great powerpoint comes great . on 13 november 2017 , towards the end of the run of modern life is goodish , gorman announced a new stage show to conclude the series called with great powerpoint comes great . the show had an initial run from 6 september to 25 november 2018 . since then , gorman has announced 19 more tour dates for january–february 2019 due to the number of tickets sold . while dave has wished for the contents of the show to remain unspoiled for people going into the show , he has requested that people talk about the giraffe joke , which gorman has cited as being the best giraffe joke in the world . due to the popularity of the show , after a short break during the filming of terms and conditions apply , dave continued to tour until november 2019 . . terms and conditions apply . in june 2019 , it was announced on chortle that gorman will be hosting a new tv series on dave called terms and conditions apply . there will be eight one-hour long episodes . the format is similar to that of modern life is goodish , however gorman shall be joined by guest stars on each episode , competing in various games based on the subjects presented . filming for the first series took place from 2 july to 29 august 2019 . it began airing on dave in october 2019 . . other appearances . gorman appeared one episode of absolutely fabulous in 2001 . he played the part of rimmer , a photographer , in the third episode of the fourth season '' paris '' . he also appeared for two series as one of the team captains on the bbc three television show , rob brydon 's annually retentive . the programme was a comedy about the making of a celebrity panel show hosted by rob brydon , and ran from 2006 to 2007 . in 2006 , he also became an occasional contributor on comedy central 's the daily show with jon stewart . he has listed among his ambitions a wish to become a captain on the quiz show call my bluff . gorman appeared in two episodes of have i got news for you , including the famous episode broadcast in the week that news broke of host angus deayton 's scandal involving prostitutes and the use of illegal drugs . he also appeared in an episode of the sports comedy quiz they think it 's all over . gorman also appeared on , and won , episode nine of the first series of qi , in which the guests included jo brand and jeremy hardy . he appeared again in 2011 in the ninth series , winning again . he appeared as a guest on the frank skinner show opinionated on 23 april 2010 . in 2009 , he appeared in robert llewellyn 's online programme carpool which was broadcast on dave , and can be viewed at llewellyn 's youtube channel , llewtube . he presented bravo tv 's first live pdc darts coverage alongside james richardson during the 2010 european championship darts . gorman appeared on the week-long special grand designs , in which he showcased eccentric houses in the united states in 2015 . gorman was a regular alongside geoff lloyd on virgin radio 's the geoff show , also appearing on the same presenter 's hometime show . following the rebranding of the station to absolute radio , gorman joined the station as a presenter himself . he has made many appearances on channel 5 's the wright stuff , and has appeared on several episodes of radio 4 's just a minute . gorman was also the '' curator '' for john lloyd 's bbc radio 4 series museum of curiosity in the fourth series , as well as standing in for jon richardson in one edition of the third series after the latter was air travel disruption after the 2010 eyjafjallajökull eruption . in october 2014 , it was announced that gorman would voice a character in the upcoming crowdfunded animated film doug and the meaning of life . however , as of 2019 , the domain hosting the website has been shut down , and no further updates have been posted to the kickstarter page of the project . only a small clip featuring gorman 's audition for his role seems to exist , via the official youtube channel for the film . gorman has also provided voiceover for a television campaign by homebase , the uk diy chain . when lee mack appeared on a who wants to be a millionaire ? celebrity special on 3 january 2012 , gorman was the phone-a-friend to whom mack turned , successfully identifying carte blanche as a james bond novel , without requiring the 4 multiple choice answers . since 2000 , gorman has also compiled crosswords for the independent , a uk newspaper . . personal life . gorman and his wife , beth , were married on 8 october 2010 . they reside in bournemouth with their son , eric stanley gorman ( born 3 october 2015 ) , having previously lived in east london . during his stand-up show dave gorman 's powerpoint presentation at the 2011 edinburgh fringe festival , gorman referred to himself as an '' atheism from a christian background '' . during one episode of modern life is goodish , he spoke about how he 'd previously been mistaken for being jewish , which led to his inclusion in the jewish magazine jlifestyles list of '' literary jews '' in 2008 . 25 literary jews jlifestyle , issue 3 , april/may 2008 . gorman is a pescatarian , but has often been incorrectly described as a vegetarian due to his tendency to simply say he does not eat meat rather than specifying that he still eats seafood . . references . external links . official website