Livonian Brothers of the Sword

organization . the livonian brothers had a set of rules adopted of the knight templars , as to be of noble birth and take vows of obedience , poverty , and celibacy . the order also included soldiers , artisans , and clerics as members . the knights made up a general assembly , which selected a grandmaster and other officials . the grandmaster served for life in the order . he chose a council and a military chief for each district castle , where the order 's knights were living . wenno von rohrbach was the first master of the order ( 1204–1209 ) , followed by volkwin schenk von winterstein , who died in the battle of saule in 1236 . in the beginning , the main duty of the livonian brothers was to protect priests and missionaries . the characteristics of the territory brought a moral challenge for the crusaders due to livs and letts did n't own land that was previously christian . therefore , they did n't have any justification to attack them . the division of conquered territory also was a problem faced by the order . swordbrothers were to garrison the built castles to maintain the control along the daugava . however , garrison duties did n't imply ownership . albert of riga established that one-third of any new territory could be retained by the order . meanwhile , the rest of the territory was handed over to the bishop . . history . image : livoniaknight.jpg thumb left 240px a teutonic order on the left and a swordbrother on the right . foundation . albert , bishop of riga ( also called prince-bishop of livonia ) ( or possibly theoderich von treyden ) the discovery of the baltic the reception of a catholic world-system in the european north ( ad 1075-1225 ) blomkvist , nils . 2004 ( p.539 ) realized that standing-army in livonia would be more useful than crusaders staying a short time . as rewards for secular knights in the baltic area were not enough to ensure their long-terms stance , albert founded the brotherhood in 1202 to aid the bishopric of riga in the conversion of the pagan livonians , latgalians and selonians living across the ancient trade routes from the gulf of riga eastwards . the brotherhood had its headquarters at viljandi in present-day estonia , where the walls of the master 's castle stand . other strongholds included cēsis , sigulda and aizkraukle . the commanders of fellin , kuldīga , alūksne , tallinn , and the bailiff of paide belonged to the five-member entourage of the order 's master . battles . in 1205 , the first battle of the livonian brothers occurred . the semigallian duke viestards visited riga to request the help of the swordbrothers after a local semigallian tribe was devasted by the lithuanians . the brotherhood was reluctant to go to war due to the absence of the bishop albert . however , viesthard successfully persuaded swordbrothers . they prepared an ambush against the lithuanians that were returning with the booty , where the lithuanian leader was beheaded . in 1206 , the duke vladimir of polozk demanded tribute from the inhabitants of the daugava when the terms of service of the crusaders expired . the swordbrothers , with the help of the remained crusaders , beat the russians troops that arrived suddenly to daugava . in 1207 , the swordbrothers faced an attack from lithuania launched during the winter . the swordbrothers and allies stayed at the castle of lielvārde on the north of the daugava . lithuanian army challenged the order to battle and was defeated by the order . this victory served to show the value of the castle line along the river . the chain of castles allowed successful communication . meanwhile , the local militia could assemble at the nearest fort to the raider 's return route and attack them . the swordbrothers have superiority in heavy cavalry . for that reason , natives try to avoid pitched battles during the livonian crusade . most of the confrontations consisted of raids . the order built a fortified line along the daugava that created a peaceful time in the region . livonian people began to consider swordbrothers as efficient protectors . despite that , some native leaders felt that the order represented a challenge to their authority , as the case of vyachko , the original owner of the koknese castle . king vetseke massacred german workers who were rebuilding the fortress . he was punished after that . in 1211 , several threats around livonian prompted albert of riga to reinforce the defenses . for safeguarding the northern flank , albert organized an invasion of southern estonia . swordbrothers were the core of the crusader army , allied with russians , loyal livs and letts , and lead by engelbert von thisenhusen , brother-in-law of albert of riga . after a siege , they took fellin and negotiated a settlement with the condition that pagans accept baptism . the following year the order destroyed the saccalian resistance in a battle where 2,000 saccalians felt . between 1211-1212 , swordbrothers realized that winter was the best season for warfare due to frozen swamps , weak undergrowth , and difficulty of their enemies to cover their tracks . also , the knights could use frozen rivers as high-speed paths . the order used that advantages in their campaigns until 1218 , when they conquered southern estonian , meanwhile they beat off counter-attacks from russians and lithuanians . in 1230 , kurland was conquested and converted by the order . . indiscipline . from its foundation , the indisciplined order tended to ignore its supposed vassalage to the bishops . the desires of the swordbrothers to expand to the north of daugava river , along the gauja , brought the order into confrontation with bishop albert . albert wanted to extend to the south of the river and did n't have an interest in estonia , previously promised to king valdemar ii of denmark . master wenno advanced to the north without the permission of bishop albert . first , the order took and occupied the turaida . in 1208 , they founded the sigulda in the aa valley , and the cēsis castle further upstream . the last one grew as a fortress and master wenno located the headquarters of the order there . wickbert , a man loyal to albert of riga , was placed to manage the wenden castle . master wenno removed him , but wickbert fled to the protection of albert of riga and killed wenno with an axe . in 1218 , albert asked king valdemar ii of denmark for assistance , but valdemar instead arranged a deal with the brotherhood and conquered danish estonia ( now known as danish estonia ) for denmark . in 1219 , king valdemar ii conquered the north of estonia with the help of bishop albert . in 1222 , estonia was partitioned between valdemar ii and albert of riga in an agreement unsatisfactory to the swordbrothers . after that , they exploited the peasants until a revolt arose . the pope rebuked the order for the way they managed the conflict . then , they tried to seize danish land in estonia until a papal legate made them give it back . when the papal legate left , the swordbrothers took the danish land again . they also invaded the territory of bishop albert and levied tolls on traffic on the daugava . after the death of albert of riga in 1229 , ecclesiastical authorities considered that the order was useless anymore . the papal legate bernard of aulne decided that they should be suppressed , and he tried to recapture the danish castle at reval . however , the order defeated him and took him as a prisoner . pope gregory ix asked the brothers to defend finland from the novgorodian attacks in his letter of november 24 , 1232 . . ( in latin ) hosted by the national archive of finland . see diplomatarium fennicum however , no known information regarding the knights ' possible activities in finland has survived . ( sweden eventually conquered finland following the second swedish crusade in 1249 . ) . incorporation into the teutonic knights . the order was decimated in the battle of saule in 1236 against lithuanians and semigallians . andrejs plakans , a concise history of the baltic states , ( cambridge university press , 2011 ) , 44 . this disaster led the surviving brothers to become incorporated into the order of teutonic knights in the following year , and from that point on they became known as the livonian order . they continued , however , to function in all respects ( rule , clothing and policy ) as an autonomous branch of the teutonic order , headed by their own master ( himself de jure subject to the teutonic order 's hochmeister ) . masters . wenno ( von rohrbach ) 1204–1209 volkwin ( schenk von winterstein ) 1209–1236