Persimmon

names and etymology . the word diospyros comes from the ancient greek words '' dios '' ( δῐος ) and '' pyron '' ( πῡρον ) . a popular etymology construed this as '' divine fruit '' , or as meaning '' wheat of zeus '' or '' god 's pear '' and '' jove 's fire '' . the dio- , as shown by the short vowel ' i ' , has nothing to do with 'divine ' ( δῑoς ) , dio- being an affix attached to plant names , and in classical greek the compound referred to '' the fruit of the nettle tree '' . the word persimmon itself is derived from putchamin , pasiminan , or pessamin , from powhatan , an algonquian language of the eastern united states , meaning '' a dry fruit '' . mish , frederic c . , editor in chief webster 's ninth new collegiate dictionary springfield , massachusetts , u.s.a.:1984—merriam-webster page 877 . description . like the tomato , persimmons are not commonly considered to be berries , but morphologically the fruit is in fact a berry . the tree diospyros kaki is the most widely cultivated species of persimmon . typically the tree reaches in height and is round-topped . it usually stands erect , but sometimes can be crooked or have a willowy appearance . the leaf are long , and are oblong in shape with brown-hairy petioles in length . they are leathery and glossy on the upper surface , brown and silky underneath . the leaves are deciduous and bluish-green in color . in the fall , they turn to yellow , orange , or red . persimmon trees are typically dioecy , meaning male and female flowers are produced on separate trees . some trees have both male and female flowers and in rare cases may bear a perfect flower , which contains both male and female reproductive organs in one flower . male flowers are pink and appear in groups of 3 . they have a 4-parted calyx , a corolla , and 24 stamens in 2 rows . female flowers are creamy-white and appear singly . they have a large calyx , a 4-parted , yellow corolla , 8 undeveloped stamens , and a rounded ovary bearing the style and stigma . 'perfect ' flowers are a cross between the two . persimmon fruit matures late in the fall and can stay on the tree until winter . in color , the ripe fruit of the cultivated strains range from glossy light gold ( color ) to dark red-orange depending on the species and variety . they similarly vary in size from in diameter , and in shape the varieties may be spherical , acorn- , or pumpkin-shaped . the flesh is astringent until fully ripe and is yellow , orange , or dark-brown in color . the calyx generally remains attached to the fruit after harvesting , but becomes easy to remove once the fruit is ripe . the ripe fruit has a high glucose content and is sweet in taste . selected species . while many species of diospyros bear fruit inedible to humans or only occasionally gathered , the following are grown for their edible fruit : . diospyros kaki ( oriental persimmon ) . oriental persimmon , chinese persimmon or japanese persimmon ( diospyros kaki ) is the most commercially important persimmon . it is native to china , northeast india and northern indochina . it was first cultivated in china more than 2000 years ago , and introduced to japan in the 7th century and to korea in the 14th century . china , japan and south korea are also the top producers of persimmon . it is known as shi ( 柿 ) in chinese , kaki ( 柿 ) in japanese and gam ( 감 ) in korean . later it was introduced to california and southern europe in the 1800s and to brazil in the 1890s . the persimmon was first introduced to the state of são paulo , afterwards expanding across brazil through japanese immigration ; the state of são paulo is still the greatest producer within brazil , with an area of 3,610 hectares dedicated to persimmon culture in 2003 ; cf . todafruta.com.br it is deciduous , with broad , stiff leaves . its fruits are sweet and slightly tangy with a soft to occasionally fibrous texture . numerous cultivars have been selected . some varieties are edible in the crisp , firm state but it has its best flavor when allowed to rest and soften slightly after harvest . the japanese cultivar 'hachiya ' is widely grown . the fruit has a high tannin content , which makes the unripe fruit astringent and bitter . the tannin levels are reduced as the fruit matures . persimmons like 'hachiya ' must be completely ripened before consumption . when ripe , this fruit comprises thick , pulpy jelly encased in a waxy thin-skinned shell . '' sharon fruit '' ( named after the sharon plain in israel ) is the marketing name for the israeli-bred cultivar 'triumph' . the encyclopedia of fruit & nuts , by jules janick , robert e . paull , cabi , 2008 , page 327 as with most commercial pollination-variant-astringent persimmons , the fruit are ripened off the tree by exposing them to carbon dioxide . the '' sharon fruit '' has no core , is seedless and particularly sweet , and can be eaten whole . in the valencia region of spain , there is a variegated form of kaki called the '' ribera del xuquer '' , '' spanish persimmon '' , or '' rojo brillante '' ( '' bright red '' ) . . diospyros lotus ( date-plum ) . date-plum ( diospyros lotus ) , also known as lotus persimmon , is native to southwest asia and southeast europe . its english name probably derives from persian khormaloo خرمالو literally '' date-plum '' , referring to the taste of this fruit , which is reminiscent of both plums and dates . diospyros virginiana ( american persimmon ) . american persimmon ( diospyros virginiana ) is native to the eastern united states . harvested in the fall or after the first frost , its fruit is eaten fresh , in baked goods , or in steamed puddings , and sometimes its timber is used as a substitute for true ebony or african blackwood ( e.g . , in musical instruments ) . diospyros nigra ( black sapote / chocolate pudding fruit / black persimmon ) . black sapote ( diospyros nigra ) is native to mexico . its fruit has green skin and white flesh that turns dark brown to black when ripe . diospyros discolor ( velvet persimmon ) . the mabolo or velvet-apple ( diospyros discolor ) is native to taiwan , the philippines and borneo . it is bright red when ripe . diospyros peregrina ( indian persimmon / wild persimmon/ tendu fruit / tembhra ) . indian persimmon ( diospyros peregrina ) is a slow-growing tree , native to coastal west bengal . the fruit is green and turns yellow when ripe . it is relatively small with an unremarkable flavor and is better known for uses in ayurvedic medicine rather than culinary applications . diospyros texana ( texas persimmon ) . texas persimmon ( diospyros texana ) is native to central and west texas and southwest oklahoma in the united states , and eastern chihuahua , coahuila , nuevo león , and tamaulipas in northeastern mexico . the fruit of d . texana are black on the outside ( as opposed to just on the inside as with the mexican persimmon ) subglobose berries with a diameter of ripen in august . the fleshy berries become edible when they turn dark purple or black , at which point they are sweet and can be eaten from the hand or made into pudding or custard . fruit . commercially and in general , there are two types of persimmon fruit : astringent and non-astringent . the heart-shaped hachiya is the most common variety of astringent persimmon . astringent persimmons contain very high levels of soluble tannins and are unpalatable if eaten before completely softened , but the sweet , delicate flavor of fully ripened persimmons of varieties that are astringent when unripe is particularly relished . the astringency of tannins is removed in various ways . examples include ripening by exposure to light for several days and wrapping the fruit in paper ( probably because this increases the ethylene concentration of the surrounding air ) . ethylene ripening can be increased in reliability and evenness , and the process can be greatly accelerated by adding ethylene gas to the atmosphere in which the fruit is stored . for domestic purposes , the most convenient and effective process is to store the ripening persimmons in a clean , dry container together with other varieties of fruit that give off particularly large quantities of ethylene while they are ripening ; apples and related fruits such as pears are effective , and so are bananas and several others . other chemicals are used commercially in artificially ripening persimmons or delaying their ripening . examples include ethanol and carbon dioxide , which change tannin into the insoluble form . such bletting processes sometimes are jump-started by exposing the fruit to cold or frost . the resultant cell damage stimulates the release of ethylene , which promotes cellular wall breakdown . astringent varieties of persimmons also can be prepared for commercial purposes by drying . tanenashi fruit will occasionally contain a seed or two , which can be planted and will yield a larger , more vertical tree than when merely grafted onto the d . virginiana rootstock most commonly used in the u.s . such seedling trees may produce fruit that bears more seeds , usually 6 to 8 per fruit , and the fruit itself may vary slightly from the parent tree . seedlings are said to be more susceptible to root nematodes . the non-astringent persimmon is squat like a tomato and is most commonly sold as fuyu . non-astringent persimmons are not actually free of tannins as the term suggests but rather are far less astringent before ripening and lose more of their tannic quality sooner . non-astringent persimmons may be consumed when still very firm and remain edible when very soft . there is a third type , less commonly available , the pollination-variant non-astringent persimmons . when fully pollinated , the flesh of these fruit is brown inside & mdash ; known as goma in japan & mdash ; and the fruit can be eaten when firm . these varieties are highly sought after . tsurunoko , sold as '' chocolate persimmon '' for its dark brown flesh , maru , sold as '' cinnamon persimmon '' for its spicy flavor , and hyakume , sold as '' brown sugar '' , are the three best known . before ripening , persimmons usually have a '' chalky '' or bitter taste . where they will continue to ripen . in northern china , unripe persimmons are frozen outside during winter to speed up the ripening process . nutrient and phytochemical content . compared to apples , persimmons have higher levels of dietary fiber and some dietary minerals , but overall are not a significant source of micronutrients , except for manganese ( 17 % of the daily value , dv ) and provitamin a beta-carotene ( 10 % dv , table for raw japanese persimmons per 100-gram amount ) . in a 100-gram amount , raw american persimmons are a rich source of vitamin c ( 80 % dv ) and iron ( 19 % dv ) . persimmon fruits contain phytochemicals , such as catechin , gallocatechin and betulinic acid . . unripened persimmons and bezoars . unripened persimmons contain the soluble tannin shibuol , which , upon contact with a weak acid , polymerizes in the stomach and forms a gluey coagulum , a '' foodball '' or phytobezoar , that can affix with other stomach matter . these phytobezoars are often very hard and almost woody in consistency . more than 85 % of phytobezoars are caused by ingestion of unripened persimmons . persimmon bezoars ( diospyrobezoars ) often occur in epidemics in regions where the fruit is grown . merck manual , rahway , new jersey , sixteenth edition , gastrointestinal disorders , section 52 , page 780 . wood . though persimmon trees belong to the same genus as ebony trees , persimmon tree wood has a limited use in the manufacture of objects requiring hard wood . it is hard , but cracks easily and is somewhat difficult to process . persimmon wood is used for paneling in traditional korean and japanese furniture . in north america , the lightly colored , fine-grained wood of d . virginiana is used to manufacture billiard cues and textile shuttles . it is also used to produce the shafts of some musical percussion mallets and drumsticks . persimmon wood was also heavily used in making the highest-quality heads of the golf clubs known as '' woods '' until the golf industry moved primarily to metal woods in the last years of the 20th century . in fact , the first metal woods made by taylormade , an early pioneer of that club type , were branded as '' pittsburgh persimmons '' . persimmon woods are still made , but in far lower numbers than in past decades . over the last few decades persimmon wood has become popular among bow craftsmen , especially in the making of traditional longbows . persimmon wood is used in making a small number of wooden flutes and eating utensils such as wooden spoons and cornbread knives ( wooden knives that may cut through the bread without scarring the dish ) . like some other plants of the genus diospyros , older persimmon heartwood is black or dark brown in color , in stark contrast to the sapwood and younger heartwood , which is pale in color . folklore . in ozark folklore , the severity of the upcoming winter is said to be predictable by slicing a persimmon seed and observing the cutlery-shaped formation within it . in korean folklore the dried persimmon ( gotgam , korean : 곶감 ) has a reputation for scaring away tigers . . gallery . image : unripe persimmon.jpg a persimmon harvested while still unripe file : persimmon leaves 2222.jpg persimmon leaves file : persimmon.jpg persimmon leaves in autumn file : diospiros kaki fruit img 5472s.jpg ripe kaki , soft enough to remove the calyx and split the fruit for eating file : orderly dried fruit.jpg peeled , flattened , and dried persimmons ( shìbǐng ) in a xi'an market image : limekaki.jpg kaki preserved in limewater image : dried kaki fruit.jpg hoshigaki , japanese dried persimmon image : persimmon kkakdugi.jpg dangam kkakdugi image : japanese persimmons drying.jpg japanese persimmons hung to dry after fall harvest file : persimmonssidebyside.jpg comparison of hachiya cultivar and jiro cultivar kaki persimmon size image : korean persimmonwood chest.jpg an example of persimmon wood furniture image : persimmonwatercolor.jpg japanese persimmon ( cultivar 'hachiya ' ) - watercolor 1887 . references . external links . de : kaki it : diospyros kaki