Bluebell Railway

history . in 1877 an act of parliament authorised construction of the lewes and east grinstead railway ( l & egr ) . , pp 189-190 . the line was sponsored by local landowners , including the earl of sheffield . a year later another act enabled the london , brighton and south coast railway company ( lb & scr ) , chaired by samuel laing , to acquire and operate the line . the line had six stations , but only barcombe was within walking distance of a village . chailey parish had two stations , one at and the other at . it was customary for a rural line supported by a company or individuals to have stations close to the residences of its sponsors . thus sheffield park station was built for the earl of sheffield , and newick and chailey for newick park and reedens , the homes of two other sponsors . the other stations were at , and . a branch ran from a junction at horsted keynes to and on the lb & scr main line . the 1877 and 1878 acts included a clause that : this imposed a legal requirement to provide a service , and the only way to remove this obligation was to pass another act . designed under instructions from lb & scr chief engineer frederick banister , the line was constructed to take double track . however , only the section between east grinstead and horsted keynes ( and thence to haywards heath via ardingly ) was laid as such ; south of the junction at horsted keynes the line was single track with passing loops at stations . the line was opened in 1882 . goods traffic on the line consisted of local produce ; milk : farm products and coal , and timber to and from albert turner & son , a sawmill . the only time sheffield park received a substantial number of passengers was when lord sheffield entertained the australian cricket team , with a match between them and lord sheffield 's own team . accident . on 31 july 1943 , newlyweds ronald knapp and winifred standing were killed when they were pulled under a train from lewes to east grinstead . article on local news website the couple walked along the railway on a dark rainy night . when the train got to horsted keynes , the guard found a raincoat covered with blood on the engine . another coat was found near two bodies in the middle of the tracks . the ganger who found them told the inquest the couple must have been walking with their backs to the train . '' there was a very heavy squall at the time and the couple would probably have not heard a thing , '' he said . the coroner said ronald and winifred were trespassing and no blame could be attached to any railway worker . little more than a week after they were married , the couple 's funeral was at st giles ' church , horsted keynes , where they are buried together in a grave marked by a war graves commission headstone . . closure . in 1954 , long before the beeching axe , the branch line committee of british railways proposed closing the line from east grinstead to culver junction near lewes . this was challenged by local residents , but closure was agreed in february 1955 for 15 june 1955 , although the line closed on 29 may due to a rail strike . an acrimonious battle between british railways and the users of the bluebell line then ensued , and lasted three years . shortly after closure , margery bessemer of chailey discovered in the 1877 and 1878 acts the clause relating to the '' statutory line '' , and demanded british railways reinstate services . on 7 august 1956 british railways reopened the line , with trains stopping at stations mentioned in the acts . british railways took the case to the house of commons in 1957 , resulting in a public inquiry . british railways were censured , but later the transport commission persuaded parliament to repeal the special section of the act . by this means the line was finally closed on 17 march 1958 . . preservation . on 15 march 1959 a group that included the future president of the society , bernard holden , met in ardingly and formed the lewes and east grinstead railway preservation society . the society elected john leroy as the first chairman , and £940 was raised in donations to start the society . on a vote at the meeting , the society changed its name to the bluebell railway preservation society . the society 's initial aim was to reopen the whole line from east grinstead to culver junction as a commercial service , using a two-car dmu . the plans came to nothing : the society failed to buy the whole line , and most local residents were not interested . the committee then recommended that the stretch of track between sheffield park and horsted keynes could be run as a tourist attraction , with vintage locomotives and stock operated by unpaid volunteer staff . . sheffield park to horsted keynes . as br still ran an electrified line from horsted keynes to ardingly , the society leased a stretch of track from br just south of this . in 1960 the interim line was opened , running from sheffield park to bluebell halt , south of horsted keynes . in 1962 the society extended services to horsted keynes . also in 1962 a halt was opened at holywell ( waterworks ) . however , this was closed the following year . br withdrew passenger services from horsted keynes to haywards heath in 1963 ; and with complete closure of the line north of horsted keynes , the bluebell line was severed from the br system . horsted keynes to kingscote . in 1974 the society purchased the freehold of the demolished west hoathly station , allowing the first steps to be taken towards an extension northwards towards east grinstead station . it then purchased the freehold of the site of kingscote station in january 1985 . these efforts culminated in a public inquiry , with the secretaries of state for the environment and transport giving planning permission and a light railway order for an extension to east grinstead in 1985 . the bluebell railway preservation society completed the extension from horsted keynes to kingscote in april 1994 , re-laying track through sharpthorne tunnel , which at is the longest on a uk heritage railway . at the north end of sharpthorne tunnel , the line passes through the site of the former west hoathly railway station . it was demolished in 1967 , but remains of the platforms and goods dock are still visible . 2010 marked the bluebell 's 50th anniversary of running trains . to mark the event , the railway held a gala over 6–8 august 2010 with all available home engines and two visitor engines . 50th anniversary events some of the society 's founder members gathered at horsted keynes to mark the arrival of a commemorative lb & scr a1x class 55 stepney-hauled steam train . the entourage then travelled towards sheffield park . . kingscote to east grinstead via imberhorne . from its inception , the society had always planned to work northwards towards east grinstead , where the line would connect with the national network . br donated imberhorne viaduct to the railway in 1992 , but the purchase of the final pieces of the by then privately owned track bed north to east grinstead was only completed in 2003 , allowing physical civil engineering activity to be undertaken from that year . a major problem was the former landfill site in the cutting just south of imberhorne viaduct . it had been filled with domestic waste by east grinstead town council in the 1960s and 1970s , but tests undertaken by contractors working for both the society and the borough council found the of waste within the cutting were not toxic . the excavated clay-cap covering the landfill site was taken south by rail , to fill the site of a removed viaduct and embankment on the old ardingly spur . in january 2008 agreement was given to start clearing foliage on the section of the tip between imberhorne lane and hill place bridges . in a public launch event , bbc news reader nicholas owen—a local resident and society volunteer—started removal of the actual waste on 25 november 2008 . initially rubbish was removed from the site by lorry , but , due to the substantial volume and cost of about £45/tonne , in 2009 a trial removal of spoil by rail was carried out by db schenker rail ( uk ) . at £25,000 per train and now undertaken by gb railfreight , this practice continued periodically as funds became available . however , an increase in the landfill tax was announced in 2008 , and this was due to take effect from april 2012 . it would increase the cost of removal from £25/tonne to £90/tonne . so the society formed an appeal to complete the removal of the landfill waste by the end of march 2012 . with the receiving site changed to appleford , oxfordshire and thanks to the '' tenner for the tip '' appeal , the cash target was met and the rubbish was removed by rail in time . in autumn 2008 work started on site clearance at east grinstead for construction of the new station about south of the national rail station . at the railway 's 50th anniversary celebration weekend in 2010 , east sussex resident vera lynn launched a £3.8 million appeal ; the greater part of this amount would be put towards reconnecting the line to east grinstead . mid sussex district council responded with a one-off donation of £50,000 towards the reconnection . on 7 march 2013 , the last section of track was formally joined using a white fishplate , with the honour of tightening the four bolts being given to barbara watkins , a long-standing bluebell railway volunteer . the extension to east grinstead was officially opened on saturday 23 march , with a two-week opening festival starting that day . . west : horsted keynes to haywards heath via ardingly . originally built as a double-track line , it was third rail in the 1930s , with 2-nol units used for the seaford-horsted keynes service . the line between horsted keynes and ardingly was operated as single-track in its final years , with 2-bil/class 401 and 2-hal/class 402 units . the second track was left in place and used for carriage storage , most notably the new kent coast electric stock prior to its introduction and later the steam-hauled stock that it replaced . after the line 's closure in 1963 , the trackbed was purchased in its entirety by a member of the local gentry . in the 1990s the society bought the abandoned trackbed west between horsted keynes and ardingly from his estate . this included up to the hanson plc depot built on the former ardingly station site . the society plans to reconnect the line with network rail at copyhold junction , to allow access to the brighton main line . stations could either be located at copyhold or haywards heath . there is a proposal that the line could be restored as third rail electrified , allowing operation of the society 's electric stock . while the lywood tunnel remains in good condition , there are two major areas of work that would be required to re-open the line , these being the replacement of a short girder-bridge span bridge and the sheriff mill viaduct , which was demolished in 1969 . the removed clay-cap from imberhorne cutting has been deposited on the banks of the former sherriff mill viaduct to allow later bridging of the gap . also in 2013 , the former tewkesbury and malvern railway bridge that crossed over the m50 motorway were donated to the railway for eventual installation in the replacement bridge . south : sheffield park to lewes . by the late victorian era , lewes station was the convergence point of three lines from the east sussex coast and three lines to the north all of which reached london via croydon . today , lewes has a line to the north which joins the brighton main line at burgess hill and from there on to gatwick airport , east croydon and london , a line west towards brighton , a line south to newhaven and seaford , and a line east to eastbourne , hastings and ashford . originally the bluebell line was the straightest and quickest route from lewes to london . the bluebell railway ran directly south from sheffield park to culver junction ( at culver farm just south of barcombe mills ) , with intermediate stations at and . at culver junction it joined the 1858 wealden line ( part of which is now restored as the nearby heritage lavender line ) , thereby gaining access to lewes . the section from east grinstead to culver junction was closed in 1958 , and the lewes to uckfield line in 1969 by british rail . bluebell supporters and committee members have expressed interest in re-building the line south by three more stations to lewes . however , a substantial number of large civil engineering obstacles and intrusions onto the former trackbed make this a difficult project to envisage the completion of . for execution , the project would require : the bridging of the raised , widened and re-aligned a275 road immediately south of sheffield park the re-excavation of waste-infill under the former road bridges just south of sheffield park and barcombe stations the in-filling since of the cutting and former route under the a272 road the re-excavation of waste-infill at the former , which includes industrial waste producing large amounts of methane gas discharges the fact that a large private housing estate has been built on and surrounding the former newick and chailey site the remaining undeveloped line from lewes to sheffield park has been safeguarded as a bridleway and footpath . lewes district council local plan , chapter 9 , paragraph 9.19 . stations . the various stations have been restored to show different periods of the railway 's life : sheffield park has been restored to a victorian ambience , as it would have appeared during the time of the london , brighton and south coast railway ( up to 1922 ) horsted keynes emulates the southern railway from 1923 to 1947 west hoathly ( if built ) will emulate the british railways of the late 1940s kingscote echoes the british railways of the 1950s east grinstead is an amalgam of british railways of the 1950s and 1960s . heritage railway . ; east grinstead to sheffield park east grinstead ( closed ) bluebell halt ( closed ) holywell ( waterworks ) ( closed ) freshfield halt ( closed ) ketches halt ( closed ) ; horsted keynes to ardingly ( proposed ) ( proposed ) . original stations . ; lewes to east grinstead ( low level ) kingscote west hoathly horsted keynes sheffield park newick and chailey barcombe lewes . rolling stock . the bluebell railway preserved a number of steam locomotives before the cessation of steam service on british mainline railways in 1968 . today it has the largest collection - over 30 - of steam locomotives in the uk after the national railway museum ( nrm ) . the society also has a collection of almost 150 carriages and wagons , most of them pre-war . a project is under way to recreate a long-lost type of locomotive ( lb & scr h2 class atlantic ) from a few surviving parts . in april 2008 , the heritage lottery fund provided a £2.8m grant towards new buildings next to , to provide weatherproof shelter for up to 17 carriages . the funds were also used to : create a museum and interpretation area ; create new facilities for locomotive crews ; create a rainwater catchment system from the roof of the carriage building , which is then processed and used to fill the steam engines ' boilers ; restore the railway 's historic platform buildings . . twinning . the bluebell railway is twinned with the museumstoomtram hoorn - medemblik , which links hoorn and medemblik , noord holland , the netherlands .