Parabolic reflector

theory . strictly , the three-dimensional shape of the reflector is called a paraboloid . a parabola is the two-dimensional figure . ( the distinction is like that between a sphere and a circle . ) however , in informal language , the word parabola and its associated adjective parabolic are often used in place of paraboloid and paraboloidal . if a parabola is positioned in cartesian coordinates with its vertex at the origin and its axis of symmetry along the y-axis , so the parabola opens upward , its equation is \scriptstyle 4fy x^2 , where \scriptstyle f is its focal length . ( see '' parabola in a cartesian coordinate system '' . ) correspondingly , the dimensions of a symmetrical paraboloidal dish are related by the equation : \scriptstyle 4fd r^2 , where \scriptstyle f is the focal length , \scriptstyle d is the depth of the dish ( measured along the axis of symmetry from the vertex to the plane of the rim ) , and \scriptstyle r is the radius of the dish from the center . all units used for the radius , focal point and depth must be the same . if two of these three quantities are known , this equation can be used to calculate the third . a more complex calculation is needed to find the diameter of the dish measured along its surface . this is sometimes called the '' linear diameter '' , and equals the diameter of a flat , circular sheet of material , usually metal , which is the right size to be cut and bent to make the dish . two intermediate results are useful in the calculation : \scriptstyle p 2f ( or the equivalent : \scriptstyle p \frac , where f , d , and r are defined as above . the parabolic reflector functions due to the geometric properties of the paraboloidal shape : any incoming ray that is parallel to the axis of the dish will be reflected to a central point , or '' focus '' . ( for a geometrical proof , click here . ) because many types of energy can be reflected in this way , parabolic reflectors can be used to collect and concentrate energy entering the reflector at a particular angle . similarly , energy radiating from the focus to the dish can be transmitted outward in a beam that is parallel to the axis of the dish . in contrast with spherical reflectors , which suffer from a spherical aberration that becomes stronger as the ratio of the beam diameter to the focal distance becomes larger , parabolic reflectors can be made to accommodate beams of any width . however , if the incoming beam makes a non-zero angle with the axis ( or if the emitting point source is not placed in the focus ) , parabolic reflectors suffer from an aberration called coma . this is primarily of interest in telescopes because most other applications do not require sharp resolution off the axis of the parabola . the precision to which a parabolic dish must be made in order to focus energy well depends on the wavelength of the energy . if the dish is wrong by a quarter of a wavelength , then the reflected energy will be wrong by a half wavelength , which means that it will interfere destructively with energy that has been reflected properly from another part of the dish . to prevent this , the dish must be made correctly to within about of a wavelength . the wavelength range of visible light is between about 400 and 700 nanometres ( nm ) , so in order to focus all visible light well , a reflector must be correct to within about 20 & nbsp ; nm . for comparison , the diameter of a human hair is usually about 50,000 & nbsp ; nm , so the required accuracy for a reflector to focus visible light is about 2500 times less than the diameter of a hair . for example , the flaw in the hubble space telescope mirror ( too flat by about 2,200 & nbsp ; nm at its perimeter ) caused severe spherical aberration until corrected with costar . microwaves , such as are used for satellite-tv signals , have wavelengths of the order of ten millimetres , so dishes to focus these waves can be wrong by half a millimetre or so and still perform well . variations . focus-balanced reflector . it is sometimes useful if the centre of mass of a reflector dish coincides with its focus . this allows it to be easily turned so it can be aimed at a moving source of light , such as the sun in the sky , while its focus , where the target is located , is stationary . the dish is rotated around axes that pass through the focus and around which it is balanced . if the dish is symmetrical and made of uniform material of constant thickness , and if f represents the focal length of the paraboloid , this '' focus-balanced '' condition occurs if the depth of the dish , measured along the axis of the paraboloid from the vertex to the plane of the rim of the dish , is 1.8478 times f . the radius of the rim is 2.7187 & nbsp ; f . the angular radius of the rim as seen from the focal point is 72.68 degrees . scheffler reflector . the focus-balanced configuration ( see above ) requires the depth of the reflector dish to be greater than its focal length , so the focus is within the dish . this can lead to the focus being difficult to access . an alternative approach is exemplified by the scheffler reflector , named after its inventor , wolfgang scheffler . this is a paraboloidal mirror which is rotated about axes that pass through its centre of mass , but this does not coincide with the focus , which is outside the dish . if the reflector were a rigid paraboloid , the focus would move as the dish turns . to avoid this , the reflector is flexible , and is bent as it rotates so as to keep the focus stationary . ideally , the reflector would be exactly paraboloidal at all times . in practice , this can not be achieved exactly , so the scheffler reflector is not suitable for purposes that require high accuracy . it is used in applications such as solar cooking , where sunlight has to be focused well enough to strike a cooking pot , but not to an exact point . . off-axis reflectors . a circular paraboloid is theoretically unlimited in size . any practical reflector uses just a segment of it . often , the segment includes the vertex of the paraboloid , where its curvature is greatest , and where the axis of symmetry intersects the paraboloid . however , if the reflector is used to focus incoming energy onto a receiver , the shadow of the receiver falls onto the vertex of the paraboloid , which is part of the reflector , so part of the reflector is wasted . this can be avoided by making the reflector from a segment of the paraboloid which is offset from the vertex and the axis of symmetry . for example , in the above diagram the reflector could be just the part of the paraboloid between the points p 1 and p 3 . the receiver is still placed at the focus of the paraboloid , but it does not cast a shadow onto the reflector . the whole reflector receives energy , which is then focused onto the receiver . this is frequently done , for example , in satellite-tv receiving dishes , and also in some types of astronomical telescope ( e.g . , the green bank telescope , the james webb space telescope ) . accurate off-axis reflectors , for use in solar furnaces and other non-critical applications , can be made quite simply by using a rotating furnace , in which the container of molten glass is offset from the axis of rotation . to make less accurate ones , suitable as satellite dishes , the shape is designed by a computer , then multiple dishes are stamped out of sheet metal . off-axis-reflectors heading from medium latitudes to a geostationary satellite somewhere above the equator stand steeper than a coaxial reflector . the effect is , that the arm to hold the dish can be shorter and snow tends less to accumulate in ( the lower part of ) the dish . file : astra2connect dish.jpg off-axis satellite dish file : off-axis_parabolic_reflector.svg the vertex of the paraboloid is below the bottom edge of the dish . the curvature of the dish is greatest near the vertex . the axis , which is aimed at the satellite , passes through the vertex and the receiver module , which is at the focus . . history . the principle of parabolic reflectors has been known since classical antiquity , when the mathematician diocles described them in his book on burning mirrors and proved that they focus a parallel beam to a point . archimedes in the third century bce studied paraboloids as part of his study of hydrostatic equilibrium , and it has been claimed that he used reflectors to set the roman fleet alight during the siege of syracuse . this seems unlikely to be true , however , as the claim does not appear in sources before the 2nd century ce , and diocles does not mention it in his book . parabolic mirrors were also studied by the physicist ibn sahl in the 10th century . james gregory , in his 1663 book optica promota ( 1663 ) , pointed out that a reflecting telescope with a mirror that was parabolic would correct spherical aberration as well as the chromatic aberration seen in refracting telescopes . the design he came up with bears his name : the '' gregorian telescope '' ; but according to his own confession , gregory had no practical skill and he could find no optician capable of actually constructing one . isaac newton knew about the properties of parabolic mirrors but chose a spherical shape for his newtonian telescope mirror to simplify construction . lighthouses also commonly used parabolic mirrors to collimate a point of light from a lantern into a beam , before being replaced by more efficient fresnel lenses in the 19th century . in 1888 , heinrich hertz , a german physicist , constructed the world 's first parabolic reflector antenna . . applications . the most common modern applications of the parabolic reflector are in satellite dishes , reflecting telescopes , radio telescopes , parabolic microphones , solar cookers , and many lighting devices such as spotlights , headlight , par lamps and led housings . the olympic flame is traditionally lit at olympia , greece , using a parabolic reflector concentrating sunlight , and is then transported to the venue of the games . parabolic mirrors are one of many shapes for a burning glass . parabolic reflectors are popular for use in creating optical illusions . these consist of two opposing parabolic mirrors , with an opening in the center of the top mirror . when an object is placed on the bottom mirror , the mirrors create a real image , which is a virtually identical copy of the original that appears in the opening . the quality of the image is dependent upon the precision of the optics . some such illusions are manufactured to tolerances of millionths of an inch . a parabolic reflector pointing upward can be formed by rotating a reflective liquid , like mercury , around a vertical axis . this makes the liquid-mirror telescope possible . the same technique is used in rotating furnaces to make solid reflectors . parabolic reflectors are also a popular alternative for increasing wireless signal strength . even with simple ones , users have reported 3 db or more gains .