William Warburton

life . warburton was born on 24 december 1698 at newark , nottinghamshire , where his father , george warburton was town clerk . he was educated at oakham and newark grammar schools , and in 1714 , he was articled to mr kirke , an attorney , at east markham . in 1719 , after serving his articles he returned to newark , where he began to practise as a solicitor , but , having studied latin and greek , changed his mind and was ordained deacon by the archbishop of york in 1723 . he was ordained as a priest in 1726 , and in the same year began to associate with literary circles in london . sir robert sutton gave warburton the small living of greasley , in nottinghamshire , exchanged next year for that of brant broughton in lincolnshire . he was , in addition , rector of firsby from 1730 until 1756 , although he never lived in the village . in 1728 , he was made an honorary m.a . of the university of cambridge . at brant broughton for 18 years he spent his time in study , the first result of which was his treatise on the alliance between church and state ( 1736 ) . the book brought warburton into favour at court , and he probably only missed immediate preferment by the death of queen caroline . a series of articles defending the writings of alexander pope against charges of religious unorthodoxy , led to a friendship with the poet which contributed greatly to warburton 's social advancement . pope introduced him to both william murray , later lord mansfield , who obtained for him the preachership of lincoln 's inn in 1746 , and to ralph allen , who , in dr johnson 's words , '' gave him his niece and his estate , and , by consequence , a bishopric . '' warburton married gertrude tucker , in september 1745 , and from that time lived at allen 's estate at prior park , in gloucestershire , which he eventually inherited in 1764 . he became prebendary of gloucester in 1753 , chaplain to the king in 1754 , prebendary of durham in 1755 , dean of bristol in 1757 , and bishop of gloucester in 1759 . literary works . by 1727 warburton had written the notes he contributed to lewis theobald 's edition of shakespeare , published a critical and philosophical enquiry into the causes of miracles , and contributed anonymously to a pamphlet on the jurisdiction of the court of chancery , the legal judicature in chancery stated ( 1727 ) . this was an answer to another anonymous pamphlet , written by philip yorke , later lord chancellor . the divine legation . after alliance between church and state , his next and best-known work , divine legation of moses demonstrated on the principles of a religious deist ( 1738–41 , in two volumes ) , preserves his name as the author of the most daring and ingenious of theological paradoxes . the deism had made the absence of any inculcation of the doctrine of a future life an objection to the divine authority of the pentateuch . warburton boldly admitted the fact and turned it against the adversary by maintaining that no merely human legislator would have omitted such a sanction of morality . warburton 's extraordinary power , learning and originality were acknowledged on all sides , though he excited censure and suspicion by his tenderness to the alleged heresies of conyers middleton . the book aroused much controversy . in a pamphlet of '' remarks '' ( 1742 ) , he replied to john tillard , and remarks on several occasional reflections ( 1744–45 ) was an answer to akenside , conyers middleton ( who had been his friend ) , richard pococke , nicholas mann , richard grey , henry stebbing and other critics . as he characterised his opponents in general as the '' pestilent herd of libertine scribblers with which the island is overrun , '' it is no surprise that the publication of the book created many bitter enemies . defence of pope . either in quest of paradox , or unable to recognise the real tendencies of alexander pope 's essay on man , warburton defended it against the examen of jean pierre de crousaz through a series of articles he contributed to the works of the learned in 1738–9 . whether pope had really understood the tendency of his own work has always been doubtful , but there is no question that he was glad of an apologist , and that in the long run warburton 's jeu d'esprit helped pope more than all his erudition . this led to a sincere friendship between the two men , with pope fostering warburton as a literary collaborator and editor . as part of this effort , in a 1743 edition of the dunciad published under warburton 's editorship , pope persuaded warburton to add a fourth book , and encouraged the substitution of colley cibber for theobald as the '' hero '' of the poem . on his death in 1744 , pope 's will bequeathed half of his library to warburton , as well as the copyright to all his printed works . warburton would subsequently publish a full edition of pope 's writings in 1751 . edition of shakespeare . in 1747 his edition of shakespeare was published , incorporating material from pope 's earlier edition . he had previously entrusted notes and emendations on shakespeare to sir thomas hanmer , whose unauthorised use of them led to a heated controversy . he also accused lewis theobald , with whom he had corresponded with on shakespearean subjects as early as 1727 , of stealing his ideas , and denied his critical ability . later works . warburton was further kept busy by replying the attacks on his divine legation from all quarters , by a dispute with bolingbroke respecting pope 's behaviour in the affair of bolingbroke 's patriot king , and by a vindication in 1750 of the alleged miraculous interruption of the rebuilding of the temple of jerusalem undertaken by julian , in answer to conyers middleton . according to the encyclopædia britannica eleventh edition , '' warburton 's manner of dealing with opponents was both insolent and rancorous , but it did him no disservice . '' he continued to write for as long as the infirmities of age allowed , collecting and publishing his sermons , and attempting to complete the divine legation , further fragments of which were published with his posthumous works . he wrote a defence of revealed religion in his view of lord bolingbroke 's philosophy ( 1754 ) , and hume 's natural history of religion called forth some remarks . by a gentleman of cambridge ( 1757 ) from warburton , in which his friend and biographer , richard hurd , had a share . in 1762 he launched a vigorous attack on methodism under the title of the doctrine of grace . he also engaged in a keen controversy with robert lowth , later bishop of london , on the book of job , in which lowth brought home charges of lack of scholarship and of insolence that admitted of no denial . his last important act was to found in 1768 the warburtonian lecture at lincoln 's inn , '' to prove the truth of revealed religion . from the completion of the prophecies of the old and new testament which relate to the christian church , especially to the apostasy of papal rome . '' . death . warburton died at gloucester on 7 june 1779 . he left no children , his only son having predeceased him . in 1781 his widow , gertrude , married the rev . martin stafford smith . . posthumous publications and biographies . his works were edited in seven volumes ( 1788 ) by richard hurd with a biographical preface , and the correspondence between the two friends—an important contribution to the literary history of the period—was edited by samuel parr in 1808 . warburton 's life was also written by john selby watson in 1863 , and mark pattison made him the subject of an essay in 1889 . see also . list of abolitionist forerunners shakespeare 's editors . notes . references . . external links . bibliographic directory from project canterbury faith working by charity to christian edification . a sermon preach 'd at the last episcopal visitation for confirmation , in the diocese of lincoln ( mdccxxxviii ) the nature of national offences truly stated : and the peculiar case of the jewish people rightly explained : shewing that great britain . may reasonably aspire to the distinguished protection of heaven ( 1746 ) a critical and philosophical enquiry into the causes of prodigies and miracles , as related by historians : with an essay towards restoring a method and purity in history ( 1727 )