Republic of Hawaii

politics . the president of hawaii was the head of state and head of government of the republic of hawaii . the constitution provided that the presidential term of office would be six years and specified that individuals could not be elected to consecutive terms in office . the president had the authority to veto legislation , which could be overridden by two-thirds majority in both houses of the legislature , and he was also commander-in-chief of the military . the president appointed , subject to the confirmation of the senate , members of his cabinet . cabinet members were considered usurers of both houses of the legislature , they could participate in proceedings , but could not vote as they were not elected members of the legislature . if the presidency became vacant , the foreign minister could serve as acting ( law ) until the legislature voted to elect a successor . article 23 of the constitution of 1894 specifically named sanford b . dole as the republic 's first president . he would also be the nation 's only president , as it was annexed by the united states in 1898 . upon annexation , hawaii became a u.s . territory and dole became its first governor . sanford ballard dole encyclopædia britannica the republic 's legislature consisted of a senate and a house of representatives . each had fifteen members with the former having six-year terms and the latter only two with the exception of the first legislature which was constitutionally granted a three-year term . appropriation bills originated from the finance minister and were delivered to the senate . the senate also held the right to confirm presidential appointments and ratify treaties which made it more powerful in every aspect over the lower house . it was possible for legislators to concurrently serve as president , cabinet minister , or supreme court justice . as royalist had boycotted the republic and refused to take the oath of allegiance to run for office ; the american union party won every seat in the 1894 and 1897 elections . there was also a property requirement of 1500 net worth to vote for senators , kept from the 1887 constitution , which ran counter to the prevailing trends of that period . the 1897 election had the lowest turnout in hawaii 's history with less than one percent of the population going to the polls . the new republic constitution allowed only men that were natural born citizens of the hawaiian kingdom , or naturalized citizens of the kingdom to vote in the new republic . this eliminated most all japanese , chinese , portuguese , and european immigrants from voting . as a result , native hawaiians had a two-thirds majority voting block and were the highest represented group in the republic legislature . the speaker of the house of the republic was also a hawaiian , john lot kaulukoʻu . wilcox rebellion of 1895 . robert william wilcox was a hawaiian native revolutionary . in 1889 , he led an army of 150 hawaiians , europeans and chinese in rebellion against the hawaiian kingdom . wilcox was brought to trial but released as juries refused to find him guilty of wrongdoing . in 1895 , wilcox participated in another attempt , this time to 1895 wilcox rebellion and to restore queen liliuokalani to power . royalist supporters landed a cargo of arms and ammunition from san francisco in a secret honolulu location . at the location on january 6 , 1895 , a company of royalists met to draft plans to capture the government buildings by surprise . a premature encounter with a squad of police alarmed honolulu and the plans were abandoned as the royalists were quickly routed . wilcox spent several days in hiding in the mountains before being captured . the son of one annexationist was killed . several other skirmishes occurred during the following week resulting in the capture of the leading conspirators and their followers . the government found arms and ammunition and some potentially evidential documents on the premises of washington place , liliuokalani 's private residence , outlining in her own handwriting who she would select for her cabinet after the counter revolution , further implicating her in the plot . liliuokalani 's trial . the republic of hawaii put the former queen on trial . the prosecution asserted that liliuokalani had committed misprision of treason , because she allegedly knew that guns and bombs for the wilcox attempted counter-revolution had been hidden in the flower bed of her personal residence at washington place . liliuokalani denied these accusations . she was sentenced to 5 years ' imprisonment at hard labor and a fine of 10,000 . however , the imprisonment was served in a large bedroom with a piano , bathroom with hot and cold running water bathtub and sink at iolani palace where she was allowed two maids in waiting while under guard by military personnel at all times . hawaii 's story by hawaii 's queen after eight months she was allowed to go to her washington place home and kept under house arrest by president sanford b . dole . a year later she was granted a full pardon , including the right to travel , and president dole gave her a passport to travel to washington d.c . to visit her friends and in-laws . however , she used that opportunity to lobby the u.s . senate in 1897 against annexation . end and annexation of the republic . upon the inauguration of william mckinley as the 25th president of the united states on march 4 , 1897 , the republic of hawaii resumed negotiations for annexation , which continued into the summer of 1898 . in april 1898 , the united states went to war with spain , and republic of hawaii declared its neutrality . in practice , it gave enormous support to the united states , demonstrating its value as a naval base in wartime , and winning widespread american approval for its non-neutral behavior . thomas a . bailey , '' the united states and hawaii during the spanish–american war '' american historical review 36 3 ( 1931 ) , pp . 552-560 online with the opposition weakened , hawaii was annexed by means of the newlands resolution , which required only a majority vote in both houses . most of the support came from republicans . it passed the house by a vote of 209 to 91 . it was approved on july 4 , 1898 and signed on july 7 by mckinley . the transfer of sovereignty over the hawaiian islands took place on august 12 , 1898 with the lowering of the flag of hawaii and hoisting of the '' stars and stripes '' flag of the united states over the former royal iolani palace in its place . it was renamed from the republic of hawaii to the territory of hawaii , which was formally organized as an organized incorporated territory of the united states two years later . popular controversy . the issue of annexation became a major political issue heatedly debated across the united states , which carried over into the 1900 presidential election . by then the national consensus was in favor of the annexation of both hawaii and the philippines . historian henry graff says that in the mid-1890s , '' public opinion at home seemed to indicate acquiescence . unmistakably , the sentiment at home was maturing with immense force for the united states to join the great powers of the world in a quest for overseas colonies . '' president cleveland 's biographer alyn brodsky argues his position was a deeply personal conviction that would not tolerate an immoral action against the little kingdom : : just as he stood up for the samoan islands against germany because he opposed the conquest of a lesser state by a greater one , so did he stand up for the hawaiian islands against his own nation . he could have let the annexation of hawaii move inexorably to its inevitable culmination . but he opted for confrontation , which he hated , as it was to him the only way a weak and defenseless people might retain their independence . it was not the idea of annexation that grover cleveland opposed , but the idea of annexation as a pretext for illicit territorial acquisition . cleveland had to mobilize support from southern democrats to fight the treaty . he sent former georgia congressman james h . blount as a special representative to hawaii to investigate and provide a solution . blount was well known for his opposition to imperialism . blount was also a leader in the white supremacy movement that in the 1890s was ending the right to vote by southern blacks . some observers speculated he would support annexation on grounds of the inability of the asiatics to govern themselves . instead , blount opposed imperialism , and called for the us military to restore queen liliuokalani . he argued that the hawaii natives should be allowed to continue their '' asiatic ways . '' tennant s . mcwilliams , '' james h . blount , the south , and hawaiian annexation . '' pacific historical review ( 1988 ) 57 1 : 25-46 online . a vigorous nationwide anti-expansionist movement , organized as the american anti-imperialist league , emerged that listened to cleveland and carl schurz , as well as democratic leader william jennings bryan and industrialist andrew carnegie , as well as author mark twain and sociologist william graham sumner . fred h . harrington , '' the anti-imperialist movement in the united states , 1898-1900 . '' mississippi valley historical review 22.2 ( 1935 ) : 211-230 . online the anti-imperialism opposed expansion , believing that imperialism violated the fundamental principle that just republicanism must derive from '' consent of the governed . '' the league argued that such activity would necessitate the abandonment of american ideals of self-government and non-intervention—ideals expressed in the declaration of independence , george washington 's farewell address and lincoln 's gettysburg address . fred harvey harrington , '' literary aspects of american anti-imperialism 1898–1902 , '' new england quarterly , 10 4 ( 1937 ) , pp 650-67 . online . however , the antis could not stop the even more energetic forces of imperialism . they were led by secretary of state john hay , naval strategist alfred t . mahan , republican congressman henry cabot lodge , secretary of war elihu root , and young politician theodore roosevelt . these expansionists had vigorous support from newspaper publishers william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer , whipping up popular excitement . mahan and roosevelt took the forging a global strategy calling for a competitive modern navy , pacific bases , an isthmian canal through nicaragua or panama , and , above all , an assertive role for america as the largest industrial power . warren zimmermann , '' jingoes , goo-goos , and the rise of america 's empire . '' the wilson quarterly ( 1976 ) 22 2 ( 1998 ) : 42-65 . online president mckinley 's position was that hawaii could never survive on its own . it would quickly be gobbled up by japan—already a fourth of the islands ' population was japanese . japan would then dominate the pacific and undermine american hopes for large-scale trade with asia . thomas j . osborne , '' the main reason for hawaiian annexation in july , 1898 , '' oregon historical quarterly ( 1970 ) 71 2 pp . & nbsp ; 161–178 in jstor thomas a . bailey , '' japan 's protest against the annexation of hawaii '' journal of modern history 4 1 ( 1931 ) , pp . 46-61 online . see also . territorial evolution of the united states . notes . bibliography . allen , helena g . sanford ballard dole : hawaii 's only president , 1844-1926 ( 1998 ) . grenville , john a . s . and george berkeley young . politics , strategy , and american diplomacy : studies in foreign policy , 1873-1917 ( 1966 ) pp 102–124 on hawaii policy , 1893-1895 kuykendall , ralph simpson . hawaii : a history , from polynesian kingdom to american state ( 1961 ) morgan , william michael . pacific gibraltar : u.s.-japanese rivalry over the annexation of hawaii , 1885-1898 ( naval institute press , 2011 ) . a major scholarly history ; see online review by kenneth r . conklin , phd russ , william adam . the hawaiian revolution ( 1893-94 ) ( 1992 ) russ , william adam . the hawaiian republic ( 1894–98 ) and its struggle to win annexation ( susquehanna u press , 1992 ) ; a major scholarly history schweizer , niklaus r . his hawaiian excellency : the overthrow of the hawaiian monarchy and the annexation of hawaii ( 1994 ) . external links . morganreport.org online images and transcriptions of the entire morgan report