Paracelsus

toxicology . paracelsus extended his interest in chemistry and biology to what is now considered toxicology . he clearly expounded the concept of dose response in his third defense , where he stated that '' solely the dose determines that a thing is not a poison . '' ( sola dosis facit venenum '' the dose makes the poison '' ) paracelsus , dritte defensio , 1538 . this was used to defend his use of inorganic substances in medicine as outsiders frequently criticized paracelsus 's chemical agents as too toxic to be used as therapeutic agents . his belief that diseases locate in a specific organ was extended to inclusion of target organ toxicity ; that is , there is a specific site in the body where a chemical will exert its greatest effect . paracelsus also encouraged using experimental animals to study both beneficial and toxic chemical effects . paracelsus was one of the first scientists to introduce chemistry to medicine . he advocated the use of inorganic salts , minerals , and metals for medicinal purposes . he held the belief that organs in the body operated on the basis of separating pure substances from impure ones . humans must eat to survive and they eat both pure and impure things . it is the function of organs to separate the impure from the pure . the pure substances will be absorbed by the body while the impure will exit the body as excrement . he did not support hippocrates . instead of four humors , paracelsus believed there were three : salt , sulfur , and mercury which represent stability , combustibility , and liquidity respectively . separation of any one of these humors from the other two would result in disease . to cure a disease of a certain intensity , a substance of similar nature but the opposite intensity should be administered . these ideas constitute paracelsus 's principles of similitude and contrariety , respectively . . psychosomatism . in his work von den krankeiten paracelsus writes : '' thus , the cause of the disease chorea lasciva sydenham 's chorea , or st . vitus ' dance is a mere opinion and idea , assumed by imagination , affecting those who believe in such a thing . this opinion and idea are the origin of the disease both in children and adults . in children the case is also imagination , based not on thinking but on perceiving , because they have heard or seen something . the reason is this : their sight and hearing are so strong that unconsciously they have fantasies about what they have seen or heard . '' paracelsus called for the humane treatment of the mentally ill as he saw them not to be possessed by evil spirits , but merely 'brothers ' ensnared in a treatable malady . '' paracelsus is one of the first physicians to suggest that mental well-being and a moral conscience had a direct impact on physical health . he proposed that the state of a person 's psyche could cure and cause disease . theoretically , a person could maintain good health through sheer will . he also stated that whether or not a person could succeed in their craft depended on their character . for example , if a physician had shrewd and immoral intentions then they would eventually fail in their career because evil could not lead to success . when it came to mental illness , paracelsus stressed the importance of sleep and sedation as he believed sedation ( with sulfur preparations ) could catalyze healing and cure mental illness . . reception and legacy . portraits . the oldest surviving portrait of paracelsus is a woodcut by augustin hirschvogel , published in 1538 , still during paracelsus 's lifetime . a still older painting by quentin matsys has been lost , but at least three 17th-century copies survive , one by an anonymous flemish artist , kept in the louvre , one by peter paul rubens , kept in brussels , and one by a student of rubens , now kept in uppsala . another portrait by hirschvogel , dated 1540 , claims to show paracelsus '' at the age of 47 '' ( sue aetatis 47 ) , i.e . less than a year before his death . in this portrait , paracelsus is shown as holding his sword , gripping the spherical pommel with the right hand . above and below the image are the mottos alterius non sit qui suus esse potest ( '' let no man belong to another who can belong to himself '' ) and omne donum perfectum a deo , inperfectum a diabolo ( '' all perfect gifts are from god , all imperfect ones from the devil '' ) ; later portraits give a german rendition in two rhyming couplets ( eines andern knecht soll niemand sein / der für sich bleiben kann allein /all gute gaben sint von got / des teufels aber sein spot ) . werneck in beiträge zur praktischen heilkunde : mit vorzüglicher berücksichtigung der medicinischen geographie , topographie und epidemiologie , volume 3 ( 1836 ) , 212–216 . neues journal zur litteratur und kunstgeschichte , volume 2 ( 1799 ) , 246–256 . posthumous portraits of paracelsus , made for publications of his books during the second half of the 16th century , often show him in the same pose , holding his sword by its pommel . the so-called '' rosicrucian portrait '' , published with philosophiae magnae paracelsi ( heirs of arnold birckmann , cologne , 1567 ) , is closely based on the 1540 portrait by hirschvogel ( but mirrored , so that now paracelsus 's left hand rests on the sword pommel ) , adding a variety of additional elements : the pommel of the sword is inscribed by azoth , and next to the figure of paracelsus , the bombast von hohenheim arms are shown ( with an additional border of eight cross patty ) . the von hohenheim arms showed a blue ( azure ) bend with three white ( argent ) balls in a yellow ( or ) field ( julius kindler von knobloch , oberbadisches geschlechterbuch vol . 1 , 1894 , p . 142 ) , i.e . without the border . franz hartmann , life and doctrines ( 1887 ) , p . 12 describes the arms shown on the monument in st sebastian church , salzburg as '' a beam of silver , upon which are ranged three black balls '' . shown in the background are '' early rosicrucian symbols '' , including the head of a child protruding from the ground ( indicating rebirth ) . the portrait is possibly a work by frans hogenberg , acting under the directions of theodor birckmann ( 1531/33–1586 ) . paracelsianism and rosicrucianism . paracelsus was especially venerated by german rosicrucians , who regarded him as a prophet , and developed a field of systematic study of his writings , which is sometimes called '' paracelsianism '' , or more rarely '' paracelsism '' . francis bacon warned against paracelsus and the rosicrucians , judging that '' the ancient opinion that man was microcosmus '' had been '' fantastically strained by paracelsus and the alchemists '' . f . a . yates , rosicrucian enlightenment ( 1972 ) , p . 120 . '' paracelsism '' also produced the first complete edition of paracelsus 's works . johannes huser of basel ( c . 1545–1604 ) gathered autographs and manuscript copies , and prepared an edition in ten volumes during 1589–1591 . huser quart edition ( medicinal and philosophical treatises ) , ten volumes , basel , 1589–1591 ; huser 's edition of paracelsus 's surgical works was published posthumously in strasbourg , 1605 . the prophecies contained in paracelsus 's works on astrology and divination began to be separately edited as prognosticon theophrasti paracelsi in the early 17th century . his prediction of a '' great calamity just beginning '' indicating the end times was later associated with the thirty years ' war , and the identification of gustavus adolphus of sweden as the '' lion from the north '' is based in one of paracelsus 's '' prognostications '' referencing jeremiah 5:6 . eugen weber , apocalypses : prophecies , cults , and millennial beliefs through the ages ( 2000 ) , p . 86 . carl gustav jung studied paracelsus . two essays on paracelsus , one delivered in the house in which paracelsus was born at einsiedeln in june 1929 , the other to commemorate the 400th anniversary of paracelsus 's death in 1941 at zurich . c.w.c.g.jung vol.15 'the spirit of man , art and literature ' pub.rkp 1966 . in literature and drama . a number of fictionalised depictions of paracelsus have been published in modern literature . the first presentation of paracelsus 's life in the form of a historical novel was published in 1830 by dioclès fabre d'olivet ( 1811–1848 , son of antoine fabre d'olivet ) , un médecin d'autrefois . la vie de paracelse , paris ( 1830 ) , reprinted 1838 , german translation by eduard liber as theophrastus paracelsus oder der arzt : historischer roman aus den zeiten des mittelalters , magdeburg ( 1842 ) . robert browning wrote a long poem based on the life of paracelsus , entitled paracelsus , published 1835 . paracelsus ( 1835 ) meinrad lienert in 1915 published a tale ( which he attributed to gall morel ) about paracelsus 's sword . the sword was said to contain the philosopher 's stone in its pommel , and morell 's tale concerns paracelsus 's death ( due to his being interrupted during the casting of a spell against poisoning ) and his command that the sword should be thrown into the sihl river after he dies . meinrad lienert , '' der hexenmeister '' in : schweizer sagen und heldengeschichten , stuttgart ( 1915 ) . the fullmetal alchemist character van hohenheim ( full name theophrastus bombastus von hohenheim ) is named after paracelsus . arthur schnitzler wrote a verse play paracelsus in 1899 . erwin guido kolbenheyer wrote a novel trilogy ( paracelsus-trilogie ) , published during 1917–26 . martha sills-fuchs ( 1896–1987 ) wrote three völkisch plays with paracelsus as the main character during 1936–1939 in which paracelsus is depicted as the prophetic healer of the german people . udo benzenhöfer , '' die paracelsus-dramen der martha sills-fuchs im unfeld des 'vereins deutsche volksheilkunde ' julius streichers '' in peter dilg , hartmut rudolph ( eds . ) , resultate und desiderate der paracelsus-forschun ( 1993 , 163–81 . the german drama film paracelsus was made in 1943 , directed by georg wilhelm pabst . also in 1943 , richard billinger wrote a play paracelsus for the salzburg festival . p . 73 . mika waltari 's mikael karvajalka ( 1948 ) has a scene fictionalising paracelsus 's acquisition of his legendary sword . paracelsus is the main character of jorge luis borges 's short story la rosa de paracelso ( anthologized in shakespeare 's memory , 1983 ) . an alchemist based on him named van hohenheim is one of the main characters of the manga fullmetal alchemist . the rose of paracelsus : on secrets and sacraments , borrowing from jorge luis borges , is also a novel by william leonard pickard . . works . because of the work of karl widemann , who copied over 30 years the work of paracelsus , many unpublished works survived . ; published during his lifetime de gradibus et compositionibus receptorum naturalim , 1526 . vom holtz guaico ( on guaiacum ) , 1529 . practica , gemacht auff europen 1529 . von der frantzösischen kranckheit drey bücher ( on syphilis ) , 1530 . von den wunderbarlichen zeychen , so in vier jaren einander nach im hymmelgewelcke und luft ersehen 1534 von der bergsucht oder bergkranckheiten ( on miners ' diseases ) , 1534 . vonn dem bad pfeffers in oberschwytz gelegen ( pfäfers abbey ) , 1535 . praktica teutsch auff das 1535 jar 1535 die große wundarzney ( '' great book of surgery '' ) , ulm 1536 ( hans varnier ) ; augsburg 1536 ( haynrich stayner ( steyner ) ) , frankfurt 1536 ( georg raben/ weygand hanen ) . prognosticatio ad vigesimum quartum annum duratura 1536 ; posthumous publications wundt unnd leibartznei . frankfurt : christian egenolff , 1549 ( reprinted 1555 , 1561 ) . das buch paramirum , mulhouse : peter schmid , 1562 . aureoli theophrasti paracelsi schreiben von tartarjschen kranckheiten , nach dem alten nammen , vom grieß sand vnnd unnd stein , basel , c . 1563 . das buch paragranvm avreoli theophrasti paracelsi : darinnen die vier columnae , als da ist , philosophia , astronomia , alchimia , vnnd virtus , auff welche theophrasti medicin fundirt ist , tractirt werden , frankfurt , 1565 . opvs chyrvrgicvm , frankfurt , 1565 . ex libro de nymphis , sylvanis , pygmaeis , salamandris , et gigantibus etc . nissae silesiorum , excudebat ioannes cruciger ( 1566 ) von den krankheiten so die vernunfft berauben . basel , 1567 . philosophia magna , tractus aliquot , cöln , 1567 . philosophiae et medicinae utriusque compendium , basel , 1568 . neun bücher archidoxis . translated into latin by adam schröter . kraków : maciej wirzbięta , 1569 . zwölff bücher , darin alle gehaimnüß der natur eröffnet , 1570 astronomia magna : oder die gantze philosophia sagax der grossen und kleinen welt , frankfurt , 1571 . de natura rerum libri septem : opuscula verè aurea ; ex germanica lingua in latinam translata per m . georgium forbergium mysium philosophiae ac medicinae studiosum , 1573 . de peste , strasbourg : michael toxites , bey niclauss wyriot , 1574 . volumen paramirum , strasbourg : christian mülller , 1575 . metamorphosis theophrasti paracelsi : dessen werck seinen meister loben wirt , basel , 1574 . von der wundartzney : ph . theophrasti von hohenheim , beyder artzney doctoris , 4 bücher . basel : peter perna , 1577 . kleine wundartzney . basel : peter perna , 1579 . opus chirurgicum , bodenstein , basel , 1581 . huser quart edition ( medicinal and philosophical treatises ) , ten volmes , basel , 1589–1591 ; huser 's edition of paracelsus ' surgical works was published posthumously in strasbourg , 1605 . vol . 1 , in diesem theil werden begriffen die bücher , welche von ursprung und herkommen , aller kranckheiten handeln in genere . basel . 1589 vd16 p 365 vol . 2 , dieser theil begreifft fürnemlich die schrifften , inn denen die fundamenta angezeigt werden , auff welchen die kunst der rechten artzney stehe , und auß was büchern dieselbe gelehrnet werde , basel . 1589 vd16 p 367 vol . 3 , inn diesem theil werden begriffen deren bücher ettliche , welche von ursprung , ursach und heylung der kranckheiten handeln in specie . basel , 1589 vd16 p 369 vol . 4 , in diesem theil werden gleichfals , wie im dritten , solche bücher begriffen , welche von ursprung , ursach unnd heilung der kranckheiten in specie handlen . basel , 1589 vd16 p 371 vol . 5 , bücher de medicina physica basel , 1589 vol . 6 , in diesem tomo seind begriffen solche bücher , in welchen deß mehrer theils von spagyrischer bereitung natürlicher dingen , die artzney betreffend , gehandelt wirt . item , ettliche alchimistische büchlin , so allein von der transmutation der metallen tractiren . basel , 1590 vd16 p 375 vol . 7 , in diesem theil sind verfasset die bücher , in welchen fürnemlich die kräfft , tugenden und eigenschafften natürlicher dingen , auch derselben bereitdungen , betreffent die artzney , beschriben , werden . basel , 1590 vd16 p 376 vol . 8 , in diesem tomo ( welcher der erste unter den philosophischen ) werden solche bücher begriffen , darinnen fürnemlich die philosophia de generationibus & fructibus quatuor elementorum beschrieben wirdt . basel , 1590 vd16 p 377 vol . 9 , diser tomus ( welcher der ander unter den philosophischen ) begreifft solcher bücher , darinnen allerley natürlicher und ubernatürlicher heymligkeiten ursprung , ursach , wesen und eigenschafft , gründtlich und warhafftig beschriben werden . basel , 1591 vd16 p 380 vol . 10 , dieser theil ( welcher der dritte unter den philosophischen schrifften ) begreifft fürnemlich das treffliche werck theophrasti , philosophia sagax , oder astronomia magna genannt : sampt ettlichen andern opusculis , und einem appendice . basel , 1591 vd16 p 381 , frankfurt 1603 klage theophrasti paracelsi , uber seine eigene discipel , unnd leichtfertige ertzte , darbeneben auch unterricht , wie er wil , daß ein rechter artzt soll geschickt seyn , und seine chur verrichten , und die patienten versorgen , etc . ; auß seinen büchern auff das kürtzste zusammen gezogen , wider die thumkünen selbwachsende , rhumrhätige , apostatische ertzte , und leichtfertige alchymistische landtstreicher , die sich paracelsisten nennen ; … jetzo zum ersten also zusammen bracht , und in truck geben . 1594 vd16 p 383 kleine wund-artzney . straßburg ( ledertz ) , benedictus figulus . 1608 . opera omnia medico-chemico-chirurgica , genevae , vol . 3 , 1658 . prognosticon theophrasti paracelsi , vol . 4 of vi prognostica von verenderung vnd zufaelligem glueck vnd vnglueck der . potentaten im roemischen reich , auch des tuercken vnd pabst ed . henricus neotechnus , 1620 . ; modern editions paracelsus : sämtliche werke : nach der 10 bändigen huserschen gesamtausgabe ( 1589–1591 ) zum erstenmal in neuzeitliches deutsch übersetzt , mit einleitung , biographie , literaturangaben und erklärenden anmerkungen . edited by bernhard aschner . 4 volumes . jena : g . fisher , 1926–1932 . paracelsus : sämtliche werke . edited by karl sudhoff , wilhelm matthiessen , and kurt goldammer . part i ( medical , scientific , and philosophical writings ) , 14 volumes ( munich and berlin , 1922–1933 ) . part ii ( theological and religious writings ) , 7 volumes ( munich and wiesbaden , 1923–1986 ) . register zu sudhoffs paracelsus-ausgabe . allgemeines und spezialregister : personen , orte , pflanzen , rezepte , verweise auf eigene werke , bußler , e . , 2018 , theophrastus paracelsus : werke . edited by will-erich peuckert , 5 vols . basel and stuttgart : schwabe verlag , 1965–1968 . selected english translations . the hermetic and alchemical writings of paracelsus , two volumes , translated by arthur edward waite , london , 1894 . ( in google books ) , see also a revised 2002 edition ( preview only ) partial contents : coelum philosophorum ; the book concerning the tincture of the philosophers ; the treasure of treasures for alchemists ; the aurora of the philosophers ; alchemical catechism . paracelsus : essential readings . selected and translated by nicholas goodrick-clarke . berkeley , ca : north atlantic books , 1999 . paracelsus : his life and doctrines . franz hartmann , new york : theosophical publishing co . , 1918 paracelsus ( theophrastus bombastus von hohenheim , 1494–1541 ) . essential theoretical writings . edited and translated with a commentary and introduction by andrew weeks . leiden/boston : brill , 2008 , . paracelsus : selected writings ed . with an introduction by jolande jacobi , trans . norbert guterman , new york : pantheon , 1951 reprinted princeton 1988 . references . further reading . ball , philip . the devil 's doctor ( arrow books , random house ) moran , bruce t . ( 2005 ) distilling knowledge : alchemy , chemistry , and the scientific revolution ( harvard univ . press , 2005 ) , ch . 3 . walter pagel ( 2nd ed . 1982 ) . paracelsus : an introduction to philosophical medicine in the era of the renaissance . karger publishers , switzerland . webster , charles . ( 2008 ) paracelsus : medicine , magic , and mission at the end of time ( yale univ . press , 2008 ) forshaw , peter ( 2015 ) ‘ “ morbo spirituali medicina spiritualis convenit ” : paracelsus , madness , and spirits , ' in steffen schneider ( ed . ) , aisthetics of the spirits : spirits in early modern science , religion , literature and music , göttingen : v & r press senfelder , l . theophrastus paracelsus the catholic encyclopedia ( 1911 ) thomas fuller , the holy state ( 1642 ) p . & nbsp ; 56 franz hartmann the life and the doctrines of paracelsus ( 1910 ) . external links . ; online bibliographies and facsimile editions deutsche digitale bibliothek ( stiftung preußischer kulturbesitz ) digital library , university of braunschweig zürich paracelsus project dana f . sutton , an analytic bibliography of online neo-latin texts , philological museum , university of birmingham—a collection of '' digital photographic reproductions '' , or online editions of the neo-latin works of the renaissance . works by paracelsus ( bayerische staatsbibliothek ) images from prognosticatio eximii doctoris theophrasti paracelsi—from the college of physicians of philadelphia digital library azogue : a section of the e-journal azogue with original reproductions of paracelsian texts . ms 239/6 de tartaro et eius origine in corpore humano at openn ; other the zurich paracelsus project biographical notes from the galileo project paracelsus ( from the mystica ) paracelsus ( from alchemy lab ) paracelsus on the interpretation of dreams