Dao (sword)

general characteristics . while dao have varied greatly over the centuries , most single-handed dao of the ming period and later , and the modern swords that are based on them share a number of characteristics . dao blades are moderately curved and single-edged , though often with a few inches of the back edge sharpened as well ; the moderate curve allows them to be reasonably effective in the thrust . hilts are sometimes canted , curving in the opposite direction of the blade which improves handling in some forms of cuts and thrusts . cord is usually wrapped over the wood of the handle . hilts may also be pierced like those of jian ( straight-bladed chinese sword ) for the addition of lanyards , though modern swords for performances will often have tassels or scarves instead . guards are typically disc-shaped and often cupped . this was to prevent rainwater from getting into the sheath , and to prevent blood from dripping down to the handle , which would make it more difficult to grip . sometimes guards are thinner pieces of metal with an s-curve , the lower limb of the curve protecting the user 's knuckles ; very rarely they may have guards like those of the jian . other variations to the basic pattern include the large bagua dao and the long handled pudao . early history . the earliest dao date from the shang dynasty in china 's bronze age , and are known as zhibeidao ( 直背刀 ) & nbsp ; – straight backed knives . as the name implies , these were straight-bladed or slightly curved weapons with a single edge . originally bronze , these weapons were made of iron or steel by the time of the late warring states period as metallurgical knowledge became sufficiently advanced to control the carbon content . originally less common as a military weapon than the jian & nbsp ; – the straight , double-edged blade of china & nbsp ; – the dao became popular with cavalry during the han dynasty due to its sturdiness , superiority as a chopping weapon , and relative ease of use & nbsp ; – it was generally said that it takes a week to attain competence with a dao/saber , a month to attain competence with a qiang/spear , and a year to attain competence with a jian/straight sword . soon after dao began to be issued to infantry , beginning the replacement of the jian as a standard-issue weapon . late han dynasty dao had round grips and ring-shaped pommels , and ranged between 85 and 114 centimeters in length . these weapons were used alongside rectangular shields . by the end of the three kingdoms period , the single-edged dao had almost completely replaced the jian on the battlefield . the jian henceforth became known as a weapon of self-defense for the scholarly aristocratic class , worn as part of court dress . sui , tang , and song . as in the preceding dynasties , tang dynasty dao were straight along the entire length of the blade . single-handed ( '' belt dao '' ) were the most common sidearm in the tang dynasty . these were also known as hengdao ( '' horizontal dao '' or '' cross dao '' ) in the preceding sui dynasty . two-handed changdao ( '' long dao '' ) or were also used in the tang , with some units specializing in their use . during the song dynasty , one form of infantry dao was the shoudao , a chopping weapon with a clip point . while some illustrations show them as straight , the 11th century song military encyclopedia wujing zongyao depicts them with curved blades & nbsp ; – possibly an influence from the steppe tribes of central asia , who would conquer parts of china during the song period . also dating from the song are the falchion-like dadao , the long , two-handed zhanmadao , and the long-handled , similarly two-handed buzhandao ( 步战刀 ) . yuan , ming and qing . with the mongol invasion of china in the early 13th century and the formation of the yuan dynasty , the curved steppe saber became a greater influence on chinese sword designs . sabers had been used by turkic , tungusic , and other steppe peoples of central asia since at least the 8th century ce , and it was a favored weapon among the mongol aristocracy . its effectiveness for mounted warfare and popularity among soldiers across the entirety of the mongol empire had lasting effects . in china , mongol influence lasted long after the collapse of the yuan dynasty at the hands of the ming , continuing through both the ming and the qing dynasties ( the latter itself founded by an inner asian people , the manchu ) , furthering the popularity of the dao and spawning a variety of new blades . blades with greater curvature became popular , and these new styles are collectively referred to as . during the mid-ming these new sabers would completely replace the jian as a military-issue weapon . the four main types of are : . yanmaodao . the yanmaodao or '' goose-quill saber '' is largely straight like the earlier zhibeidao , with a curve appearing at the center of percussion near the blade 's tip . this allows for thrusting attacks and overall handling similar to that of the jian , while still preserving much of the dao 's strengths in cutting and slashing . . liuyedao . the liuyedao or '' willow leaf saber '' is the most common form of chinese saber . it first appeared during the ming dynasty , and features a moderate curve along the length of the blade . this weapon became the standard sidearm for both cavalry and infantry , replacing the yanmaodao , and is the sort of saber originally used by many schools of chinese martial arts . . piandao . the piandao or '' slashing saber '' is a deeply curved dao meant for slashing and draw-cutting . this weapon bears a strong resemblance to the shamshir and scimitar . a fairly uncommon weapon , it was generally used by skirmishers in conjunction with a shield . . niuweidao . the niuweidao or '' oxtail saber '' is a heavy bladed weapon with a characteristic flaring tip . it is the archetypal '' chinese broadsword '' of kung fu movies today . it is first recorded in the early 19th century ( the latter half of the qing dynasty ) and only as a civilian weapon : there is no record of it being issued to troops , and it does not appear in any listing of official weaponry . its appearance in movies and modern literature is thus often anachronism . besides these four major types of dao , the duandao or '' short dao '' was also used , this being a compact weapon generally in the shape of a liuyedao . the dadao saw continued use , and during the ming dynasty the large two-handed changdao and were used both against the cavalry of the northern steppes and the wokou ( pirates ) of the southeast coast ; these latter weapons ( sometimes under different names ) would continue to see limited use during the qing period . also during the qing there appear weapons such as the nandao , regional variants in name or shape of some of the above dao , and more obscure variants such as the '' nine ringed broadsword '' , these last likely invented for street demonstrations and theatrical performances rather than for use as weapons . the word dao is also used in the names of several polearms that feature a single-edged blade , such as the pudao and . the chinese spear and dao ( liuyedao and yanmaodao ) were commonly issued to infantry due to the expense of and relatively greater amount of training required for the effective use of chinese straight sword , or jian . dao can often be seen depicted in period artwork worn by officers and infantry . during the yuan dynasty and after , some aesthetic features of persian , indian , and turkish swords would appear on dao . these could include intricate carvings on the blade and '' rolling pearls '' : small metal balls that would roll along fuller-like grooves in the blade . . recent history . the dadao was used by some chinese militia units against japanese invaders in the second sino-japanese war , occasioning '' the sword march '' . the miaodao , a descendant of the changdao , also saw use . these were used during planned ambushes on japanese troops because the chinese military and patriotic resistance groups often had a shortage of firearms . most chinese martial arts schools still train extensively with the dao , seeing it as a powerful conditioning tool and a versatile weapon , with self-defense techniques transferable to similarly sized objects more commonly found in the modern world , such as canes , baseball or cricket bats , for example . there are also schools that teach double sword 雙刀 , forms and fencing , one dao for each hand . one measure of the proper length of the sword should be from the hilt in your hand and the tip of the blade at the brow and in some schools , the height of shoulder . alternatively , the length of the sword should be from the middle of the throat along the length of the outstretched arm . there are also significantly larger versions of dao used for training in some baguazhang and taijiquan schools . nandao . the nandao or '' southern broadsword '' is a modern innovation used for wushu ( sport ) practice . in contemporary wushu . daoshu refers to the competitive event in modern wushu taolu where athletes utilize a dao in a routine . it was one of the four main weapon events implemented at the 1st world wushu championships due to its popularity . the dao itself , consists of a flimsy blade that makes noise when stabbing or cutting techniques are used . over time , the blade has become more flimsy to create more noise , the sword has become lighter to allow for faster techniques , and the flag of the broadsword has become smaller to become less of a distraction . the iwuf has also created three different standardized routines for competition as well as an elementary routine . the first compulsory routine was created and recorded by zhao changjun in 1989 . daoshu routines in international competition require certain sword techniques including : chán tóu ( broadsword twining ) , guǒ nǎo , ( wrapping with the broadsword ) , pī dāo ( broadsword chop ) , zhā dāo ( broadsword thrust ) , zhǎn dāo ( broadsword hack ) , guà dāo ( broadsword hooking parry ) , yún dāo ( broadsword cloud waving ) , and bèi huā dāo ( broadsword wrist figure 8 behind the back ) . only the chán tóu and guǒ nǎo techniques have deduction content ( code 62 ) where the back of the blade has to be kept close to the body . image : wushu dao.jpg thumb right a dao as seen in modern wushu . popular culture . on avatar : the last airbender , zuko used twin dao swords . on pirates of the caribbean : at world 's end , sao feng used a dao sword . on the mummy : tomb of the dragon emperor , evy and rick o'connell used dao swords during their fight with the dragon emperor 's army . see also . chinese swords dao ( naga sword ) dha ( sword ) sabre . references . bibliography . . external links . sword with scabbard - 17th century example - metropolitan museum of art saber ( peidao ) with scabbard - 18th or 19th century example - metropolitan museum of art