Jack in the Box

advertising . the restaurant rebounded in popularity in 1994 after a highly successful marketing campaign that featured the fictitious jack in the box chairman jack character ( formerly voiced by the campaign 's creator rick sittig ) , who has a ping pong ball-like head , a yellow clown cap , two blue eyes , a pointy black nose , and a linear red smile that changes with his emotions , and is dressed in a business suit . jack was reintroduced specifically to signal the new direction the company was taking to refocus and regroup after the 1993 e . coli disaster , discussed below , which threatened the chain 's very existence . in the original spot that debuted in fall 1994 , jack ( '' through the miracle of plastic surgery '' , he says as he confidently strides into the office building ) reclaims his rightful role as founder and ceo , and , apparently as revenge for being blown up in 1980 , approaches the closed doors of the jack in the box boardroom ( a fictionalized version , shown while the aforementioned minimalist theme music from the 1980s jack in the box commercials plays ) , activates a detonation device , and the boardroom explodes in a shower of smoke , wood , and paper . the spot ends with a close-up shot of a small white paper bag , presumably filled with jack in the box food , dropping forcefully onto a table ; the bag is printed with the words '' jack 's back '' in bold red print , then another bag drops down with the jack in the box logo from that period . later ads feature the first bag showing the text of the food item or offer the commercial is promoting ( both bags have featured text since 1998 ) . a commercial was released in 1997 where jack goes to the house of a man who has records of calling jack in the box '' junk in the box '' . when the man shoves jack yelling '' beat it clown ! '' , jack chases him outside , tackles him to the ground , and forces him to try jack 's food and confess his deed . the commercial ends with jack saying '' i 'm sorry for the grass stains . '' '' really ? '' '' no '' . the commercials in the '' jack 's back '' campaign ( which has won several advertising industry awards ) tend to be lightly humorous and often involve jack making business decisions about the restaurant chain 's food products , or out in the field getting ideas for new menu items . while a series of ads claiming to ask when burger king and mcdonald 's will change their ways about making their hamburgers featured a phone number , the caller used to be a recording of jack himself ( as of 2019 , the number is a sex hotline ) . in addition , many commercials have advertised free car antenna balls with every meal , thus increasing brand awareness . often different types of antenna balls were available during a holiday or major event or themed toward a sports team local to the restaurant . the antenna balls have since been discontinued due to the demise of the mast-type car antenna . thumb image : jackinthebox.jpg right thumb jack in the box restaurant in willits , california image : jackintheboxheadquarters.jpg right thumb jack in the box headquarters in san diego , california ( february 2008 ) during the height of the now-defunct xfl , one of the continuing ad series involved a fictitious professional american football team owned by jack . the team , called the carnivores , played against teams such as the tofu eaters and the vegans . in 1997 , a successful advertising campaign was launched using a fictional musical group called the spicy crispy girls ( a take off of the spice girls , a british pop music girl group - at the time one of the most popular groups in the world ) , in comedic national television commercials . the commercials were used to promote the new jack in the box spicy crispy chicken sandwich ( now known as jack 's spicy chicken ) , with the girls dancing in '' the jack groove . '' the spicy crispy girls concept was used as a model for another successful advertising campaign called the 'meaty cheesy boys ' to promote the ultimate cheeseburger in 1999-2001 ( see below ) . at the 1998 association of independent commercial producers ( aicp ) show , one of the spicy crispy girls commercials won the top award for humor . the meaty cheesy boys , a mock boy band to promote the ultimate cheeseburger , were created in 1999 during an ad campaign featuring an out-of-control advertising executive previously fired by jack . the boy band would eventually perform their hit '' ultimate cheesebuger '' at the billboard music awards . the same ad exec featured in a 2001 spot where a medical doctor made exaggerated claims of the benefits of fast food that it would cure baldness , help trim extra pounds , and remove wrinkles . jack asks the ad exec incredulously , '' where did you find this guy ? '' the ad exec responds proudly , '' tobacco company . '' in 2000 , an ad involved a man washed up on a remote island with only a jack in the box antenna ball as a company . later that year , director robert zemeckis , claiming the agency had appropriated elements of his oscar-nominated film cast away for the ad , had his lawsuit against the ad agency thrown out . in april 2006 , jack in the box launched an ad campaign called bread is back , taking a stab at the low carbohydrate diets of recent years . in 2006 , jack in the box took the use of this perception creating a commercial featuring a typical stoner who is indecisive about ordering . when faced with a decision , the jack in the box figurine in his car tells him to '' stick to the classics '' and order 30 tacos implying that he has the '' munchies '' . this ad later stirred up controversy among a san diego teen group who claimed that the ad was irresponsible showing a teenager who was under the influence of drugs . to protest , they presented the company with 2000 postcards protesting the ad , despite the fact that it had not aired since the beginning of the previous month . this commercial was redone in 2009 to feature the new logo and the new campaign . another ad touting the chain 's milkshakes aired in 2001 and was shot in the stilted style of a 1970s-era anti-drug spot , urging kids to '' say no to fake shakes '' and featured '' larry the crime donkey , '' a parody of mcgruff the crime dog . in 2007 , jack in the box began a commercial campaign for their new 100 % sirloin beef hamburgers , implying that they were of higher quality than the angus beef used by carl 's jr . , hardee 's , wendy 's , and burger king . that may , cke restaurants , inc . , the parent company of carl 's jr . and hardee 's , filed a lawsuit against jack in the box , inc . cke claimed , among other things , that the commercials tried to give the impression that carl 's jr./hardee 's angus beef hamburgers contained cow anuses by having an actor swirl his finger in the air in a circle while saying '' angus '' in one commercial and having other people in the second commercial laugh when the word '' angus '' was mentioned . they also attacked jack in the box 's claim that sirloin , a cut found on all cattle , was of higher quality than angus beef , which is a breed of cattle . during super bowl xliii on february 1 , 2009 , a commercial depicted jack in a full-body cast after getting hit by a bus . in october 2009 , jack in the box debuted a popular commercial to market their '' teriyaki bowl '' meals . the commercial features employees getting '' bowl cut '' haircuts . at the end of the commercial , jack reveals that his '' bowl cut '' is a wig , to the dismay of the employees . logo . thumb the one variation has a miniature clown hat ( dating back to 1978 ) with three dots in the upper left-hand corner ; the clown head was removed in 1980 . in the 1970s , the clown head was in a red box all by itself , with the company name either below or next to the box ; signs in front of the restaurants had the clown head only . the '' clown head '' can be seen on several youtube videos depicting jack in the box commercials from the 1970s and 1980s . most jack in the box locations opened before late 2008 had this logo , although the company is slowly replacing them with the newer logo , along with general updating of the locations ' decor . some locations continue to use this logo as their '' open/closed '' sign . controversies . mislabeled meat . in 1981 , horse meat labeled as beef was discovered at a foodmaker plant that supplied hamburger and taco meat to jack in the box . the meat was originally from profreeze of australia , and during their checks on location , the food inspectors discovered other shipments destined for the united states which included kangaroo meat . alternate link via proquest . . e . coli outbreak . in 1993 , jack in the box suffered a major corporate crisis involving e . & nbsp ; coli o157 : h7 bacteria . four children died of hemolytic uremic syndrome and 600 others were reported sick after eating undercooked patties contaminated with fecal material containing the bacteria at a location in tacoma , washington and other parts of the pacific northwest . the chain was faced with several lawsuits , each of which was quickly settled ( but left the chain nearly bankrupt and losing customers ) . at the time , washington state law required that hamburgers be cooked to an internal temperature of at least , the temperature necessary to kill e . & nbsp ; coli bacteria , although the fda requirement at that time was only , which was the temperature jack in the box cooked . after the incident , jack in the box mandated that in all nationwide locations , their hamburgers be cooked to at least . additionally , all meat products produced in the united states are required to comply with haccp ( hazard analysis and critical control points ) regulations . every company that produces meat products is required to have a haccp plan that is followed continuously . jack in the box also worked with food safety experts from manufacturing companies and created a comprehensive program to test for bacteria in every food product . locations . in 2005 , jack in the box announced plans for nationwide expansion by 2010 . in support of this objective , the chain began airing ads in states several hundred miles from the nearest location . image : jack in the box in laredo , texas img 6011.jpg upright 0.8 right thumb this jack in the box off u.s . route 83 is one of five company outlets in laredo , texas . notice the 1980s logo . the expansion strategy at that time was targeted at colorado , delaware , florida and texas . in 2007 , the first new colorado store opened in golden , colorado , marking an end to jack in the box 's 11-year-long absence from the state . in albuquerque , new mexico , several locations opened in june 2009 . jack in the box restaurants last made an appearance in the albuquerque market about two decades prior . in september 2010 , it was announced that 40 under-performing company-owned jack in the box restaurants located mostly in texas and the southeast would close . in march 2011 , jack in the box launched the munchie mobile in san diego , a food truck that will serve jack 's burgers and fries . in june 2012 , jack in the box launched their second food truck in the southeast region of the united states . another truck was launched for the northern texas area in april 2013 . in january 2012 , jack in the box opened its first of three locations in the indianapolis area . a few months later , the first ohio location opened in september 2012 in west chester . . restatement . on december 16 , 2004 , the company restated three years of results due to an accounting change that prompted the company to cut first-quarter and 2005 earnings expectations . . sponsorship . in november 2017 jack in the box became a sponsor of the dallas fuel and team envy , a team in the overwatch league and a professional video game-playing team respectively . see also . list of hamburger restaurants . references . external links . official corporate website jack in the box on instagram