Batu Khan

personality and appearance . according to giovanni da pian del carpine , batu was '' kind enough to his own people , but he is greatly feared by them . he is , however , most cruel in fight ; he is very shrewd and extremely crafty in warfare , for he has been waging war for a long time . '' william of rubruck described him as about the height of his lord john de beaumont and his entire face was covered with reddish spots . early years . after his son jochi 's death , genghis khan assigned jochi 's appanages to his sons . but the great khan installed batu as khan of the golden horde ( also known as the ulus of jochi or kipchak khanate ) . jochi 's eldest son , orda khan , also agreed that batu should succeed their father . genghis khan 's youngest brother temüge attended the coronation ceremony as an official representative of genghis . h . h . howorth the history of the mongols , p.ii , d.ii , p . 37 . when genghis khan died in 1227 , he left 4,000 mongol men to jochi 's family . jochi 's lands were divided between batu and his older brother orda . orda 's white horde ruled the lands roughly between the volga river and lake balkhash , while batu 's horde ruled the lands west of the volga . in 1229 , ögedei dispatched three tumens under kukhdei and sundei to conquer the tribes on the lower ural river . according to abulghazi , batu joined ögedei 's military campaign against the jin dynasty in north china while his younger brother was fighting the bashkirs , the cumans , the bulghars and the alans in the west . despite heavy resistance of their enemies , the mongols conquered major cities of the jurchens and made the bashkirs their ally . in the 1230s , ögedei distributed lands in shanxi , china to batu and the family of jochi , but they appointed their officials under the supervision of the imperial governor likewise in khorasan , persia . thomas t . allsen culture and conquest in mongol eurasia , p . 45 . . conquest of kievan rus ' . at the kurultai in mongolia after the end of the mongol-jin war , the great khan ögedei ordered batu to conquer western nations . in 1235 batu , who earlier had directed the conquest of the crimean peninsula , was assigned an army of possibly 130,000 to oversee an invasion of europe . his relatives and cousins güyük , büri , möngke , khulgen , khadan , baidar and notable mongol generals subutai ( subeedei ) , borolday , and mengguser joined him by the order of his uncle ögedei . the army , actually commanded by subutai , crossed the volga and invaded volga bulgaria in 1236 . it took them a year to extinguish the resistance of the volga bulgarians , kypchaks , and alans . in november 1237 batu khan sent his envoys to the court of yuri ii of vladimir-suzdal and demanded his allegiance . when yuri refused to surrender the mongols besieged ryazan . after six days of bloody battle , the city was totally annihilated and never restored to its former glory . alarmed by the news , yuri ii sent his sons to detain the horde , but they were soundly defeated . having burnt kolomna and moscow , the horde laid siege to the capital of vladimir-suzdal on 4 february 1238 . three days later the city was taken and burnt to the ground . the royal family perished in the fire , while the grand prince hastily retreated northward . crossing the volga , he mustered a new army , which was totally exterminated by the mongols on the sit ' river on 4 march . thereupon batu khan divided his army into smaller units , which ransacked fourteen rus ' cities : rostov , uglich , yaroslavl , kostroma , kashin , ksnyatin , gorodets , galich , pereslavl-zalessky , yuriev-polsky , dmitrov , volokolamsk , tver , and torzhok . the most difficult to take was the small town of kozelsk , whose boy-prince titus and inhabitants resisted the mongols for seven weeks . as the story goes , at the news of mongol approach , the city of kitezh was submerged in a lake with all its inhabitants , where it may be seen to this day . khadan and buri stormed the city in three days after they joined batu . the only major cities to escape destruction were smolensk , which submitted to the mongols and agreed to pay tribute , and novgorod with pskov , which could not be reached by the mongols on account of considerable distance and the intervening marshlands . when batu drank a cup of wine before the others at the victory banquet , buri complained of the unfairness of batu receiving such a vast and fertile steppe , and the mongol army , along with güyük and others , ridiculed batu as an '' old woman with beard '' . they then left the banquet . batu sent an envoy to his uncle ögedei to complain of his cousins ' rude behavior . ögedei got angry on hearing the news and recalled buri and güyük . according to some sources , buri , who was sent to his grandfather chagatai , never returned to join the mongol conquest of europe ; güyük returned to the russian steppe after his father ögedei harshly criticized him . in the summer of 1238 , batu khan devastated the crimea and pacified mordovia and the kipchak-controlled steppe . in the winter of 1239 , he sacked chernigov and pereyaslav . after several days of siege , the mongols stormed kiev in december 1240 . despite fierce resistance by danylo of halych , batu khan managed to take the two principal capitals of his land , halych and volodymyr-volyns'kyi . ruthenian principalities became vassals of the mongol empire . invasion of central europe . the cuman refugees took shelter in the kingdom of hungary . batu sent at least five messengers to béla iv , the king of hungary , but they were all killed . for the last time batu demanded that bela have the cumans returned and warned : '' it is much easier for the cumans to escape than it is for you.you dwell in houses and have fixed towns and fortresses , so how will you escape me '' ? michael prawdin , gerard ( int ) chaliand the mongol empire , p . 262 . batu khan then decided to '' reach the ultimate sea '' , where the mongols could proceed no further . some modern historians speculate that batu intended primarily to assure his flanks were safe for the future from possible interference from the europeans , and partially as a precursor to further conquest . most believe he intended the conquest of all europe , as soon as his flanks were safe and his forces ready . having devastated the various rus ' principalities , subutai and batu sent spies into poland , hungary , and as far as austria in preparation for an attack into the heartland of europe . with a clear picture of the european kingdoms , they brilliantly prepared an attack . batu khan was the overall leader , but subutai was the actual commander in the field and as such was present in both the northern and southern campaigns against rus ' . the mongols invaded central europe in three groups . one group invaded and devastated poland , defeating a combined force under henry ii the pious , duke of silesia and the grand master of the teutonic order at legnica . a second crossed the carpathian mountains , and a third followed the danube . the armies swept the plains of hungary over the summer , and in the spring of 1242 they regained impetus and extended their control into austria and dalmatia , as well as invading morava . while the northern force under ögedei 's son khadan and baidar , the son of chagatai , won the battle of legnica , and another army of güyük or büri triumphed in transylvania , subutai was waiting for another victory over the magyars , the croats , and the templars on the hungarian plain . in 1241 , a tatar ( mongol ) army led by bujek crossed the mountains of the kara ulagh ( '' black vlachs '' ) ; bujek defeated the vlachs and one of their leader named mislau . curta , florin . southeastern europe in the middle ages 500-1250 after the siege of pest , batu 's army withdrew to the sajo river and inflicted a tremendous defeat on king béla iv and his allies at the battle of mohi on 11 april . khadan , baidar , and orda went to hungary , devastating moravia en route . the mongols appointed a darughachi in hungary and minted coins in the name of the khagan . michael prawdin , gerard ( int ) chaliand , the mongol empire , p . 268 . the country of béla was assigned to orda by batu as an appanage ; batu sent khadan in pursuit of béla , who fled to croatia . the mongol battalions checked the forces of the holy roman empire and babenberg austria . h . h . howorth the history of the mongols , p.ii , d.ii , pp . 48-50 . during his campaign in central europe , batu demanded that frederick ii , the holy roman emperor , dethrone himself , and said : '' i am coming to usurp your throne instead of you '' . the latter only replied that he would make a good falconer , for he understood birds very well . albericus trium fontium , monumenta , scriptores , xxiii . 943 . the emperor and pope gregory ix called for a crusade against the mongol empire , but europe was plagued by internal strife . subutai achieved lasting fame with his victories in europe , as he had in eastern persia . by late 1241 , batu and subutai were finalizing plans to invade austria , italy , and germany when the news came of the death of ögedei khan , who died in december 1241 . batu wanted to continue the war , but subutai reminded him of the law of yassa ( их засаг ) . the mongols withdrew in late spring of 1242 , as the princes of the blood , and subutai , were recalled to karakorum where the kurultai was held . the second bulgarian empire was forced to acknowledge batu 's supremacy . batu was a potential great khan , but when he failed to gain the title he turned to consolidate his conquests in asia and the urals . viceroy and struggle with güyük . withdrawing from hungary , batu made his camps along the banks of the volga . when the khatun töregene invited him to elect the next emperor of the mongol empire , batu announced his inability to attend any immediate kurultai , thus delaying the succession for several years . eventually , güyük was elected khagan in 1246 , with batu 's brothers representing the jochid lineage . as one of the oldest members of chingisid borjigin , batu became a viceroy over all the western parts of the empire , controlling routine affairs among the russian princes , nominating jochid retainers as governors of iran , and receiving in audience grandees from the caucasus . at no point , however , did he openly challenge the authority of the great khan . during the absence of batu , the mongols who were left behind put to death mstislav , the prince of rylsk , in kievan rus ' . on his return batu summoned the grand prince yaroslav ii of vladimir to meet him . yaroslav was well received by batu , who confirmed him as suzerain over the other russian princes , and gave him authority of kiev . the princes of suzdal followed yaroslav 's example . batu sent yaroslav to the imperial court of karakorum to assist at the inauguration of güyük khan in 1246 . plano carpini , who got approval from batu to go further , noted that the great khan 's aunt was executed . at the same time yaroslav was poisoned in mongolia . batu had commissaries in the various towns where the dependent russian princes and other princes held their courts . the princes from russian states such as vladimir constantine , boris , gleb , vasili , constatantine , vladimir constantinovich , vasil'ko and sviatoslav vsevolodovich of vladimir , went to the court of batu in person . when michael of chernigov , who had murdered the mongol envoy in kiev , arrived , the mongol overseers were engaged in taking a census of the inhabitants for the poll tax . michael was ordered to repair to batu . when summoned before batu , he was made to pass between two fires and ordered to prostrate himself before the tablets of genghis khan . michael replied that he did not object to do obeisance to batu himself but to adore images of a dead man was repugnant . as he persisted in his refusal , batu ordered his death . danylo of halych summoned to batu and diplomatically made obeisance to the mongols . batu , addressing him , said '' you have for a long time refused to come , but have effaced your ill conduct by your obedience '' and saluted him with a draught of kumis . they exchanged hostages whereby 100 families of keraites were re-settled in carpathian-galicia . after the defeat of the sultanate of rum , baiju freed david vii ulu from turkish imprisonment and sent him to batu and güyük . fearing baiju 's aggressive policy , queen rusudan of georgia sent her son david vi narin to batu 's court to get official recognition as heir apparent . batu supported david vi and granted him the rights above the georgian and armenian nobles and the mongol tammachis . but güyük made david ulu the senior king of georgia and ordered batu 's protege david narin to be subordinate to david ulu . suspicion between batu and güyük increased , however , and güyük replaced the officials in iran and the caucasus with his own men , including eljigidei . güyük gave a good reception to alexander nevsky and andrey ii . andrey was assigned the throne of vladimir-suzdal while alexander was given southern russia . when güyük began moving west , sorghaghtani beki , the widow of tolui , warned batu that he was actually the great khan 's target . when güyük summoned batu to appear before him , batu moved slowly . before meeting batu , güyük died suddenly . according to william of rubruck and a muslim chronicle , one of batu 's brothers murdered or poisoned the great khan güyük and batu then killed the imperial envoy , though this account is not completely confirmed by other major sources . möngke and batu . an opportunity had arrived for deposing the house of ögedei from the overlordship of the mongols , and batu was determined to avail himself of it . but batu seemed to allow oghul qaimish to serve as regent . he also suggested unruly princes listen to her words . when batu was ill , möngke went to the ulus of jochi to greet him as his mother sorghagtani advised . batu was much delighted on seeing him . at last , batu called a kurultai on his own territory in 1250 . members of the ögedeid and chagataid families refused to attend the kurultai beyond the mongolian heartland . the kurultai offered the throne to batu khan who had no interest in promoting himself as the new grand khan . rejecting it , he instead nominated möngke , who led a mongol army in russia , the northern caucasus , and hungary . the pro-tolui faction rose up and supported his choice . given its limited attendance and location , this kurultai was of questionable validity . batu sent möngke under the protection of his brothers , berke and tukhtemur , and his son sartaq to assemble a formal kurultai at kodoe aral in the heartland . the supporters of möngke invited oghul qaimish and other main ögedeid and chagataid princes to attend the kurultai , but they refused each time , demanding descendants of ögedei must be khan . in response , batu accused them of killing his aunt altalaun and defying ögedei 's nominee , shiremun . after the assembled throng proclaimed möngke great khan of the mongol empire in 1251 , he punished the ögedeid and chagataid families for the organized plot against him . möngke sent buri to batu who had him executed by buri 's opponent general . eljigidei was also ordered to be executed . the grand prince andrey ii allied with the rebellious-minded princes of western rus ' , giving umbrage to the mongols . batu sent a punitive expedition under nevrui . on their approach , andrey fled to pskov and thence to sweden . the mongols spread over vladimir and harshly punished the people there . the livonian knights stopped their advance to novgorod and pskov on hearing the news about the mongols . thanks to his friendship with sartaq , alexander was installed as the grand prince of vladimir ( i.e . , the supreme russian ruler ) by batu in 1252 . in 1256 andrey travelled to sarai to ask pardon for his former infidelity and was shown mercy . during the reign of möngke , batu 's prestige as kingmaker and viceroy of the great khans in the west reached its height . even so , batu allowed möngke 's census takers to operate freely in his realm . according to a muslim chronicle and the history of yuan , batu had free access to the imperial treasury . rené grousset the empire of the steppes : a history of central asia , p . 596 . of all the grandsons of genghis khan , he and möngke seemed most capable and the most dedicated to following the spirit of mongolian law . jack weatherford the secret history of the mongol queens : how the daughters of genghis khan rescued his empire , p . 109 . batu dispatched a large jochid delegation to participate in hulagu 's expedition in the middle east . however , berke 's persuasion might have forced him to delay to strengthen hulagu 's force , little suspecting that it would result in eliminating the jochid predominance there , for few years . batu , möngke , and other princely lines shared rule over the area from afghanistan to turkey . he left state affairs to his son sartaq before batu died in 1255 . family and legacy . batu khan was approximately five feet and seven inches tall ( 1.70 m ) , and had at least four children : sartaq , khan of the golden horde from 1255–1256 , son of batu khan and boraqchin toqoqan david morgan , the mongols , p . 224 . andewan ulagchi – probably the son of sartaq often named ju lai ( dzhulaibek ) batu 's mother ukhaa ujin belonged to the mongol onggirat clan rashid al-din universal history , jochids ' tale while his chief khatun boraqchin was an alchi-tatar . when batu and his son sartak died , after a brief regency of boraqchin for ulagchi , batu 's brother berke inherited the golden horde . berke was not inclined to unity with his cousins in the mongol family , making war on hulagu khan , though berke officially recognized möngke and the empire of the great khan as his overlords . in fact , berke was an independent ruler by then . berke did not share batu 's interest in conquering it , however , he demanded hungarian king béla iv 's submission and sent his general borolday to lithuania and poland . the kipchak khanate was known in rus and europe as the golden horde ( zolotaya orda ) some think because of the golden colour of the khan 's tent . '' horde '' comes from the mongol word '' orda/ordu '' or camp . '' golden '' is thought to have had a similar meaning to '' royal '' ( royal camp ) . of all the khanates , the golden horde ruled longest . long after the expulsion of the yuan dynasty from china to mongolia , and the fall of ilkhanate in middle east , the descendants of batu khan continued to rule the steppes in what is now ukraine , russia , and kazakhstan . however , batu 's line had ruled the jochid ulus until 1360 , a century after berke 's death in 1264 . descendants of his brothers , orda and tuqatimur , took the throne of the golden horde afterwards . ancestry . gallery . file : ryazan.jpg golden horde raid at ryazan file : kiev1240.jpg golden horde raid at kyev file : oborona kozelska.jpg golden horde raid at kozelsk file : mongols vladimir.jpg golden horde raid vladimir file : ephrosinia of suzdal.jpg golden horde raid suzdal