Names of China

list of derived terms . afrikaans : sjina , spelling now obsolete and spelled as china ( pronunciation is the same ) albanian : kinë amharic : chayna ( from english ) armenian : չինաստան assamese : azeri : çin basque : txina bengali : catalan : xina chinese : zhīnà ( obsolete and considered offensive due to shina ( word ) ; originated from early chinese translations of buddhist texts in sanskrit ) chinese : zhèndàn transcription of the sanskrit/pali '' cīnasthāna '' in the buddhist texts . czech : čína danish : kina dutch : china english : china esperanto : ĉinujo or ĉinio , or ĥinujo ( archaic ) estonian : hiina filipino : tsina finnish : kiina french : chine galician : china georgian : ჩინეთი german : china and , in the southern part of the german-speaking area also greek : κίνα ( kína ) hindustani : cīn or ( ipa hungarian : kína icelandic : kína indonesian : cina , unofficial ) , tiongkok ( for country ) , tionghoa ( for ethnicity , culture , and other non-country subject ) interlingua : china irish : an tsín italian : cina japanese : shina – considered offensive in china , now largely obsolete in japan and avoided out of deference to china ( the name chūgoku is used instead ) ; see shina ( word ) and kotobagari . javanese : cina ( low speech level ) ; cinten ( high speech level ) kapampangan : sina khmer : korean : jina ; latvian : ķīna lithuanian : kinija macedonian : кина ( kina ) malay : cina – considered less offensive than the historic tongsan but some have argued for use of the indonesian word tionghua malayalam : cheenan/cheenathi maltese : ċina marathi : cīn ( ipa nepali : cīn ( ipa norwegian : kina or pahlavi : čīnī persian : chīn polish : chiny portuguese : china romanian : china serbo-croatian : kina or sinhala : chinaya චීනය slovak : čína spanish : china swedish : kina tamil : cīnā thai : tibetan : rgya nag turkish : çin vietnamese : chấn đán or ( in buddhist texts ) . welsh : tsieina . seres , ser , serica . sēres ( σῆρες ) was the ancient greek and latin name for the northwestern part of china and its inhabitants . it meant '' of silk , '' or '' land where silk comes from . '' the name is thought to derive from the chinese word for silk , '' sī '' / . it is itself at the origin of the latin for silk , '' sērica '' . see the main article serica for more details . ancient greek : σῆρες seres , σηρικός serikos latin : serica this may be a back formation from sērikos ( σηρικός ) , '' made of silk '' , from sēr ( σήρ ) , '' silkworm '' , in which case sēres is '' the land where silk comes from . '' . sinae , sin . sīnae was an ancient greek and roman name for some people who dwelt south of the seres ( serica ) in the eastern extremity of the inhabitable world . references to the sinae include mention of a city that the romans called sēra mētropolis , which may be modern chang'an . the latin prefixes sino- and sin- as well as words such as sinica , which are traditionally used to refer to china or the chinese , came from sīnae . it is generally thought that chīna , sīna and thīna are variants that ultimately derived from qin , which was the westernmost state in china that eventually formed the qin dynasty . there are however other opinions on its etymology ( see section on china above ) . henry yule thought that this term may have come to europe through the arabs , who made the china of the farther east into sin , and perhaps sometimes into thin . hence the thin of the author of the periplus of the erythraean sea , who appears to be the first extant writer to employ the name in this form ; hence also the sinæ and thinae of ptolemy . some denied that ptolemy 's sinae really represented the chinese as ptolemy called the country sērice and the capital sēra , but regarded them as distinct from sīnae . marcian of heraclea ( a condenser of ptolemy ) tells us that the '' nations of the sinae lie at the extremity of the habitable world , and adjoin the eastern terra incognita '' . the 6th century cosmas indicopleustes refers to a '' country of silk '' called tzinista , which is understood as referring to china , beyond which '' there is neither navigation nor any land to inhabit '' . it seems probable that the same region is meant by both . according to henry yule , ptolemy 's misrendering of the indian sea as a closed basin meant that ptolemy must also have misplaced the chinese coast , leading to the misconception of serica and sina as separate countries . in the hebrew bible , there is a mention of a faraway country sinim in the book of isaiah 49:12 which some had assumed to be a reference to china . in genesis 10:17 , a tribes called the sinites were said to be the descendants of canaan , the son of ham , but they are usually considered to be a different people , probably from the northern part of lebanon . arabic : ṣīn french/english ( prefix of adjectives ) : sino- ( i.e . sino-american ) , sinitic ( the chinese language family ) . hebrew : sin . cathay . this group of names derives from khitan , an ethnic group that originated in manchuria and conquered parts of northern china early tenth century forming the liao dynasty , and later in the twelfth century dominated central asia as the kara khitan khanate . due to long period of domination of northern china and then central asia by these nomadic conquerors , the name khitan become associated with china to the people in and around the northwestern region . muslim historians referred to the kara khitan state as khitay or khitai ; they may have adopted this form of '' khitan '' via the uyghurs of kocho in whose language the final -n or -ń became -y . the name was then introduced to medieval and early modern europe through islamic and russian sources . in english and in several other european languages , the name '' cathay '' was used in the translations of the adventures of marco polo , which used this word for northern china . words related to khitay are still used in many turkic and slavic languages to refer to china . however , its use by turkic speakers within china , such as the uyghurs , is considered pejorative by the chinese authority who tried to ban it . belarusian : кітай ( kitay , bulgarian : китай ( kitay , buryat : хитад ( khitad ) classical mongolian : kitad english : cathay french : cathay kazakh : қытай ( qıtay ; kazan tatar : кытай ( qıtay ) kyrgyz : кытай ( kıtaj ; mongolian : хятад ( khyatad ) ( the name for china used in the state of mongolia ) polish : kitaj ; now archaic ) portuguese : catai russian : китай ( kitáy , serbo-croatian : kìtaj or кѝтај ( now archaic ; from russian ) slovene : spanish : catay tajik : хитой ( '' khitoy '' ) turkmen : hytaý ( '' хытай '' ) ukrainian : китай ( kytai ) uzbek : xitoy ( хитой ) there is no evidence that either in the 13th or 14th century , cathayans , i.e . chinese , travelled officially to europe , but it is possible that some did , in unofficial capacities , at least in the 13th century . during the campaigns of hulagu ( the grandson of genghis khan ) in persia ( 1256–65 ) , and the reigns of his successors , chinese engineers were employed on the banks of the tigris , and chinese astrologers and physicians could be consulted . many diplomacy communications passed between the hulaguid ilkhans and christian princes . the former , as the great khan 's liegemen , still received from him their seals of state ; and two of their letters which survive in the archives of france exhibit the vermilion impressions of those seals in chinese characters—perhaps affording the earliest specimen of those characters to reach western europe . tabgach . the word tabgach came from the metatheses of tuoba ( t'akbat ) , a dominant tribe of the xianbei , and the surname of the northern wei dynasty in the 5th century before sinicisation . it referred to northern china , which was dominated by half-xianbei , half-chinese people . medieval greek : taugats orhon kok-turk : tabgach ( variations tamgach ) . nikan . nikan ( manchu : , means '' han ethnicity '' ) was a manchu ethnonym of unknown origin that referred specifically to the ethnic group known in english as the han chinese ; the stem of this word was also conjugated as a verb , nikara ( -mbi ) , and used to mean '' to speak the chinese language . '' since nikan was essentially an ethnonym and referred to a group of people ( i.e . , a nation ) rather than to a political body ( i.e . , a state ) , the correct translation of '' china ( proper ) '' into the manchu language is nikan gurun , literally the '' nikan state '' or '' country of the nikans '' ( i.e . , country of the hans ) . this exonym for the han chinese is also used in the daur language , in which it appears as niaken or . samuel e . martin , dagur mongolian grammar , texts , and lexicon , indiana university publications uralic and altaic series , vol . 4 , 1961 as in the case of the manchu language , the daur word niaken is essentially an ethnonym , and the proper way to refer to the country of the han chinese ( i.e . , '' china '' in a cultural sense ) is niaken gurun , while niakendaaci- is a verb meaning '' to talk in chinese . '' . kara . japanese : kara ; variously written in kanji as or . an identical name was used by the ancient and medieval japanese to refer to the country that is now known as korea , and many japanese historians and linguists believe that the word '' kara '' referring to china and/or korea may have derived from a metonymy extension of the appellation of the ancient city-states of gaya . the japanese word karate , lit . '' empty hand '' ) is derived from the okinawan word karatii , lit . '' chinese/asian/foreign hand/trick/means/method/style '' ) and refers to okinawan martial arts ; the character for kara was changed to remove the connotation of the style originating in china . morokoshi . japanese : morokoshi ; variously written in kanji as or . this obsolete japanese name for china is believed to have derived from a kun reading of the chinese compound zhūyuè or baiyue as '' all the yue '' or '' the hundred ( i.e . , myriad , various , or numerous ) yue , '' which was an ancient chinese name for the societies of the regions that are now southern china . the japanese common noun tōmorokoshi , which refers to maize , appears to contain an element cognate with the proper noun formerly used in reference to china . although tōmorokoshi is traditionally written with chinese characters that literally mean '' jade shu millet , '' the etymology of the japanese word appears to go back to '' tang morokoshi , '' in which '' morokoshi '' was the obsolete japanese name for china as well as the japanese word for sorghum , which seems to have been introduced into japan from china . mangi . from chinese manzi ( southern barbarians ) . the division of north china and south china under the jin dynasty and song dynasty weakened the idea of a unified china , and it was common for non-han chinese to refer to the politically disparate north and south by different names for some time . while northern china was called cathay , southern china was referred to as mangi . manzi often appears in documents of the mongol yuan dynasty as a disparaging term for southern china . the mongols also called southern chinese nangkiyas or nangkiyad , and considered them ethnically distinct from north chinese . the word manzi reached the western world as mangi ( as used by marco polo ) , which is a name commonly found on medieval maps . note however that the chinese themselves considered manzi to be derogatory and never used it as a self-appellation . some early scholars believed mangi to be a corruption of the persian machin and arabic māṣīn , which may be a mistake as these two forms are derived from the sanskrit maha chin meaning great china . chinese : manzi latin : mangi