Yitzchok Hutner

early life . hutner was born in warsaw , poland , to a family with both ger hasidic and non-hasidic lithuanian jews roots . as a child he received private instruction in torah and talmud . as a teenager he was enrolled in the slabodka yeshiva in lithuania , headed by nosson tzvi finkel , where he was known as the '' warsaw illui '' ( genius of warsaw ) . gerber , alan jay ( august 5 , 2015 ) '' ravs kook and hutner , zichronum livracha '' , the jewish star . retrieved october 22 , 2020 . in 1925 , having obtained a solid grounding in talmud , hutner joined a group from the slabodka yeshiva that established the hebron yeshiva in mandatory palestine . he studied there until 1929 , narrowly escaping the 1929 hebron massacre because he was away for the weekend . hutner then returned to warsaw to visit his parents . he then moved to germany , to study philosophy at the university of berlin , where he befriended joseph b . soloveitchik '' joseph soloveitchik ( 1903-1993 ) '' , jewish virtual library . retrieved october 22 , 2020 . and menachem mendel schneerson , two future rabbinical leaders then studying in berlin . in 1932 , he authored a book called torat hanazir , a text dealing with the laws of the nazarite . in 1933 , hutner married masha lipshitz in kobryn . she was born in slutsk and raised in the united states . that same year , the couple traveled to mandatory palestine , where they remained for about a year . hutner reconnected with his mentor abraham isaac kook , and completed his research and writing of his kovetz ha'aros on hillel ben eliakim 's commentary on midrash sifra . rabbinic and teaching career . in march 1934 hutner moved to the united states ( his wife having preceded him by six months ) and settled in brooklyn , where hutner joined the faculty of the rabbi jacob joseph school . sometime between 1935–1936 he was appointed office manager of the newly established high school division of the yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin known as mesivta yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin . in 1940 , after receiving permission from the rosh yeshiva , yaakov moshe shurkin , he began to give a class to the 4th year of the post high school program . founded in 1904 , it was the oldest elementary yeshiva in brooklyn . over the years he built up the yeshiva 's post-high school beth midrash division and became yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin 's senior rosh yeshiva . in this effort he also received the help of shraga feivel mendlowitz who headed brooklyn 's yeshiva torah vodaas . hutner was able to construct an environment that produced young talmudic scholars in the model of their compatriots in eastern europe . by 1940 he had established a post-high-school beth midrash with hundreds of students . nevertheless , at chaim berlin , students were allowed to combine their yeshiva study with afternoon and evening classes at college , mainly brooklyn college and later touro college . hutner took great pride in the secular accomplishments of his students insofar as they fit into his vision of a material world governed by the principles of a spiritual torah way of life . one of his closest disciples , israel kirzner , is an economist who edited hutner 's written works , pachad yitzchok . many of hutner 's disciples earned doctorates , often with his blessing and guidance , including his daughter and only child , bruria david , who obtained her phd at columbia university 's department of philosophy as a student of salo baron . she subsequently founded and became the dean of beth jacob of jerusalem , a prominent jewish women 's seminary that caters to young women from haredi families in the united states . her dissertation discussed the dual role zvi hirsch chajes as both a traditionalist and maskil ( follower of the enlightenment ) . the list also includes ahron soloveichik ( law ) rosh yeshiva , aharon lichtenstein ( literature ) rosh yeshiva , and yitzhak aharon korff ( law , international law and diplomacy ) . many alumni of hutner 's yeshiva have attained success as attorneys , accountants , doctors , and in information technology . in the 1950s , he established a kollel ( post graduate division for married scholars ) to continue their in-depth talmudical studies . this school , kollel gur aryeh , was one of the first of its kind in america . many of his students became prominent educational , outreach , and pulpit rabbis . he stayed in touch with them and was involved in major communal policy decision-making as he worked through his network of students in positions of leadership . hutner established yeshiva pachad yitzchok in har nof , jerusalem , which he named for his book of the same name . he died in 1980 , and was buried in the mount of olives jewish cemetery in east jerusalem . . methodology . hutner 's methodology and style was complex , controversial , and difficult to pigeonhole . while placing great emphasis on intellectually penetrating talmudic study and analysis , emotionally he veered towards the hasidic-style , and more-so than his lithuanian-style colleagues reared as misnagdim could tolerate . the core of his synthesis of different schools of jewish thought was rooted in his studies of the teachings of judah loew ben bezalel ( 1525–1609 ) a scholar and mystic known as the maharal of prague . various pillars of hutner 's thought system were likely the works of the vilna gaon and moshe chaim luzzatto . he would only allude in the most general ways to other great mekubalim ( mystics ) such as the baal shem tov , the ari , shneur zalman of liadi , mordechai yosef leiner of izbitz and many other great hasidic masters , as he did with the works of kabbalah such as the zohar . hutner initiated a number of changes in yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin that differed greatly from the mussar ( ethics ) yeshiva practice in slabodka . he abolished the half-hour learning session in mussar and replaced it with one of ten or fifteen minutes . hutner viewed secular studies as essential for attending college , learning a profession and becoming self-supporting . he obtained , together with shraga feivel mendlowitz , a charter from the new york state board of regents to set up a combined yeshiva and college . however , this plan was dropped at the insistence of aharon kotler . hutner developed a style of celebrating shabbat and the jewish holidays by delivering a type of discourse known as a ma'amar . it was a combination of talmudic discourse , hasidic celebration ( tish ) , philosophic lecture , group singing , and when possible , like on purim , a ten-piece band was brought in as accompaniment . many times there was singing and dancing all night . all of this , together with the respect to his authority that he demanded , induced in his students an obedience and something of a '' heightened consciousness '' that passed into their lives transforming them into literal hasidim of their rosh yeshiva , who in turn encouraged this by eventually personally donning hasidic garb ( levush ) and behaving like something of a synthesis between a rosh yeshiva and a rebbe . he also instructed some of his students to do likewise . relationships with other rabbis . during his stay in palestine , hutner became a disciple of abraham isaac kook , the first chief rabbi of palestine , to whom he was distantly related . both men had a philosophical and mystical mind-set that made them kindred spirits . like kook , the young hutner eventually developed a warm attitude toward non-religious jews who were seeking to become more religious . after kook became associated with the mizrachi movement , hutner began to distance himself from him . even so , hunter maintained cordial relations with kook 's son and heir zvi yehuda kook and other prominent students of kook 's such as moshe-zvi neria . hutner eventually became a member of the non-zionist haredi moetzes gedolei hatorah ( council of torah sages ) of agudath israel of america following his immigration to the united states . hutner 's work pachad yitzchok has no overt reference to kook . a few of hutner 's early students recall hutner 's lengthy comments regarding kook . eliezer waldman said that hutner told them that '' rav kook was 20 times as great as those who opposed him '' . r . waldman as interviewed by ari shvat , mar . 29 , 2016 , 19 adar ii 5776 . similarly , moshe zvi neria heard hutner say that '' if i would not have met rav kook , i would be lacking 50 % of myself '' . chayei hareiya , tel-aviv 1983/5743 , p . 258 while staying in berlin , hutner developed a friendship with menachem mendel schneerson and joseph b . soloveitchik . the three maintained close personal relations throughout their lives , though each differed markedly in torah hashkafa ( weltanschauung ) . nevertheless , each developed a unique bridge and synthesis between the eastern european world-view and a western culture way of thinking . this enabled them to serve successfully as spiritual leaders after each of them immigrated to the united states of america . citing an anonymous source , hillel goldberg alleges that hutner became a fierce critic of the chabad-lubavitch hasidic group and the '' personality cult built up around '' schneerson . goldberg , hillel . between berlin and slobodka : jewish transition figures from eastern europe , ktav publishing house , 1989 , , p . 79 : '' rabbi hutner relentlessly sustained a biting critique of the lubavitcher movement on a number of grounds… '' , p . 187 footnote 41 : '' rabbi hutner was opposed to the personality cult built up around the lubavitcher rebbe , and to the public projection of both the rebbe and the lubavitch movement , by the movement , through public media-print and broadcast journalism , books , film , and the like . '' however the evidence is that he corresponded regularly with schneerson throughout his lifetime , seeking his views on a variety of halakhic , chassidic and kabbalistic subjects , and occasionally seeking his blessing . some of this correspondence has been published in igros kodesh , kehot 1986–2008 volumes 7- pp . 2 , 49 , 192 , 215 , 12- pp . 28 , 193 , 14- pp . 167 , 266 , 18- pp . 251 , 25- pp . 18–20 , and 26- p . 485 mibeis hagenozim , s.b . levine , kehot 2009 , pp . 88–98 where copies of rav hutners ' actual letters are provided alongside the relevant section hutner also had several lengthy private audiences with schneerson , during which they conversed for long periods of time . mibeis hagenozim , s.b . levine , kehot 2009 , p . 88 hutner reportedly forbade his students from attending lectures by soloveitchik . at the same time , he appointed soloveitchik 's younger brother , whom he had tutored in warsaw , ahron soloveichik ( later to head his own yeshiva in skokie near chicago , illinois ) as head of his own yeshivas rabbi chaim berlin . ahron soloveichik completed a doctorate in law at new york university at the same time that he lectured in hutner 's yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin . in the early 1940s , hutner asked a friend from slabodka , saul lieberman to become a dean-talmudical lecturer in yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin . lieberman instead accepted an offer from the jewish theological seminary of america ( jtsa ) , the seminary of conservative judaism . hutner had a number of disagreements with some of the religious scholars who taught in his yeshiva . these disputes were usually not over ideology , but about positions in the school . he eased out many of the older rabbis who were his contemporaries in favor of his disciples . rabbis prusskin ( a first cousin to his wife ) , goldstone , shurkin , snow , avrohom asher zimmerman and others are among them . though hutner was , by all accounts , quite steadfast in his opinions , he was not above begging forgiveness from those he had slighted , even when they had initiated attacks on him , rabbihutner , yitzchok . pachad yitzchok , gur aryeh , 2007 , vol.9 p . 273 and adopting a conciliatory tone . hutner , yitzchok . pachad yitzchok , gur aryeh , 2007 , vol.9 pp . 283 , 291 hutner appointed hebron yeshiva educated avigdor miller as the mashgiach ruchani ( '' spiritual mentor and supervisor '' ) of the yeshiva . after the yeshiva relocated to far rockaway , new york in the 1960s , miller resigned from his position due to the difficulties a daily commute from brooklyn entailed . twa hijacking . in the late 1960s he began to visit israel again , planning to build a new yeshiva there . on 6 september 1970 , he and his wife , daughter , and son-in-law yonasan david were returning to new york on twa flight 741 when their flight was hijacked by the pflp palestinian terrorist organization . the terrorists freed the non-jewish passengers and held the jewish passengers hostage on the plane for one week , after which the women and children were released and sent to cyprus . the hijacked airplanes were subsequently detonated . the remaining 40-plus jewish men – including hutner , david , and two students accompanying hutner , meir fund and yaakov drillman – and male flight crew continued to be held hostage in and around amman , jordan ; hutner was held alone in an isolated location while jews around the world prayed for his safe release . the terrorists tried to cut off his beard , but were stopped by their commanders . hutner was reunited with the rest of the hostages on 18 september , and was finally released on 26 september and flown together with his family members to nicosia , cyprus . israeli knesset member menachem porush chartered a private plane to meet the hutners in nicosia , and willie frommer , a former student , gave him his own shirt and tallit katan , since hutner 's tallit , tefillin , shirt , jacket and hat had been confiscated during his three-week ordeal . porush reported that hutner had also lost , and his students appeared similarly emaciated . on 28 september hutner and his group were flown back to new york via europe , and were home just in time for the first night of rosh hashana . bin-nun , dov and ginsberg , rachel . '' he swallowed my papers to save me '' . mishpacha , 14 september 2011 , pp . 34–43 . . published work . in 1938 hutner published a short booklet of halakha ( jewish law ) decisions sourced in the sifra but not cited in the babylonian talmud . many years later , he published what is considered to be his magnum opus , and which he named pachad yitzchok , ( '' fear of isaac '' , meaning the god whom isaac had feared ) . he called his outlook hilchot deot vechovot halevavot , ( '' laws of 'ideas ' and 'duties of the heart ' '' ) and wrote in a poetic modern-style hebrew reminiscent of his original mentor abraham isaac kook 's style , even though almost all of hutner 's original lectures were delivered in yiddish . notable students . he was a mentor to figures in modern jewish outreach , such as david weiss halivni , who became a prominent scholar at conservative judaism 's jtsa . another was a cousin to shlomo carlebach , who was appointed as the mashgiach ruchani ( spiritual supervisor ) at the yeshiva chaim berlin , but who split with hutner on policy matters in the 1970s . they were both holocaust survivors who hutner took upon himself to raise as his own '' sons '' together with others in similar circumstances . hutner is known to have given semikha to carlebach , during the days that the latter was still with lubavitch . other students included yonasan david ( his son-in-law ) and aharon schechter , his successors as rosh yeshivas of yeshiva rabbi chaim berlin ; aharon lichtenstein , son-in-law of joseph b . soloveitchik and rosh yeshiva of yeshivat har etzion in israel ; pinchas stolper of the orthodox union and founder of ncsy who followed hutner 's guidelines in setting up this youth outreach movement ; yaakov feitman , prominent rabbi , past president of the young israel council of rabbis and disseminator of hutner 's views ; shlomo freifeld who set up one of the first full-time yeshivas for baal teshuva students in the world ; joshua fishman , leader and executive vice president of torah umesorah the national society for hebrew day schools ; yaakov perlow , the novominsker rebbe of boro park ; and noah weinberg founder and head of aish hatorah and his brother yaakov weinberg of ner israel yeshiva in baltimore .