Scaffolding

history . antiquity . sockets in the walls around the paleolithic cave paintings at lascaux , suggest that a scaffold system was used for painting the ceiling , over 17,000 years ago . the berlin foundry cup depicts scaffolding in ancient greece ( early 5th century bc ) . egyptians , nubians and chinese are also recorded as having used scaffolding-like structures to build tall buildings . early scaffolding was made of wood and secured with rope knots . modern era . scaffolding was erected by individual firms with wildly varying standards and sizes . the process was revolutionized by daniel palmer jones and david henry jones . modern day scaffolding standards , practices and processes can be attributed to these men and their companies : rapid scaffold tie company ltd , tubular scaffolding company and scaffolding great britain ltd ( sgb ) . david palmer-jones patented the '' scaffixer '' , a coupling device far more robust than rope which revolutionized scaffolding construction . in 1913 , his company was commissioned for the reconstruction of buckingham palace , during which his scaffixer gained much publicity . palmer-jones followed this up with the improved '' universal coupler '' in 1919 - this soon became the industry standard coupling and has remained so to this day . advancements in metallurgy throughout the early 20th century saw the introduction of tubular steel water pipes ( instead of timber poles ) with standardized dimensions , allowing for the industrial interchangeable parts and improving the structural stability of the scaffold . the use of diagonal bracings also helped to improve stability , especially on tall buildings . the first frame system was brought to market by sgb in 1944 and was used extensively for the postwar reconstruction . . scaffolding today . the european standard , bs en 12811-1 , specifies performance requirements and methods of structural and general design for access and working scaffolds . requirements given are for scaffold structures that rely on the adjacent structures for stability . in general these requirements also apply to other types of working scaffolds . the purpose of a working scaffold is to provide a safe working platform and access suitable for work crews to carry out their work . the european standard sets out performance requirements for working scaffolds . these are substantially independent of the materials of which the scaffold is made . the standard is intended to be used as the basis for enquiry and design . . materials . the basic components of scaffolding are tubes , couplers and boards . the basic lightweight tube scaffolding that became the standard and revolutionised scaffolding , becoming the baseline for decades , was invented and marketed in the mid-1950s . with one basic 24 pound unit a scaffold of various sizes and heights could be assembled easily by a couple of labourers without the nuts or bolts previously needed . '' light weight scaffolding goes together without nuts or bolts . '' popular mechanics , february 1954 , p . 103 . tubes are usually made either of steel or aluminium ; although there is composite scaffolding which uses filament-wound tubes of glass fibre in a nylon or polyester matrix , because of the high cost of composite tube , it is usually only used when there is a risk from overhead electric cables that can not be isolated . if steel , they are either 'black ' or galvanised . the tubes come in a variety of lengths and a standard outside diameter of 48.3 & nbsp ; mm . ( 1.5 nps pipe ) . the chief difference between the two types of metal tubes is the lower weight of aluminium tubes ( 1.7 & nbsp ; kg/m as opposed to 4.4 & nbsp ; kg/m ) . however they are more flexible and have a lower resistance to stress . tubes are generally bought in 6.3 m lengths and can then be cut down to certain typical sizes . most large companies will brand their tubes with their name and address in order to deter theft . boards provide a working surface for scaffold users . they are seasoned wood and come in three thicknesses ( 38 & nbsp ; mm ( usual ) , 50 & nbsp ; mm and 63 & nbsp ; mm ) are a standard width ( 225 & nbsp ; mm ) and are a maximum of 3.9 m long . the board ends are protected either by metal plates called hoop irons or sometimes nail plates , which often have the company name stamped into them . timber scaffold boards in the uk should comply with the requirements of bs 2482 . as well as timber , steel or aluminium decking is used , as well as laminate boards . in addition to the boards for the working platform , there are sole boards which are placed beneath the scaffolding if the surface is soft or otherwise suspect , although ordinary boards can also be used . another solution , called a scaffpad , is made from a rubber base with a base plate moulded inside ; these are desirable for use on uneven ground since they adapt , whereas sole boards may split and have to be replaced . couplers are the fittings which hold the tubes together . the most common are called scaffold couplers , and there are three basic types : right-angle couplers , putlog couplers and swivel couplers . to join tubes end-to-end joint pins ( also called spigots ) or sleeve couplers are used . only right angle couplers and swivel couplers can be used to fix tube in a 'load-bearing connection ' . single couplers are not load-bearing couplers and have no design capacity . other common scaffolding components include base plates , ladders , ropes , anchor ties , reveal ties , gin wheels , sheeting , etc . most companies will adopt a specific colour to paint the scaffolding with , in order that quick visual identification can be made in case of theft . all components that are made from metal can be painted but items that are wooden should never be painted as this could hide defects . despite the metric measurements given , many scaffolders measure tubes and boards in imperial units , with tubes from 21 feet down and boards from 13 & nbsp ; ft down . bamboo scaffolding is widely used in hong kong and macau , '' craft of bamboo scaffolding '' praça do tap seac , edif . do instituto cultural , macau with nylon straps tied into knots as couplers . in india , bamboo or other wooden scaffolding is also mostly used , with poles being lashed together using ropes made from coconut hair ( coir ) . basic scaffolding . the key elements of the scaffolding are the standard , ledger and transoms . the standards , also called uprights , are the vertical tubes that transfer the entire weight of the structure to the ground where they rest on a square base plate to spread the load . the base plate has a shank in its centre to hold the tube and is sometimes pinned to a sole board . ledgers are horizontal tubes which connect between the standards . transoms rest upon the ledgers at right angles . main transoms are placed next to the standards , they hold the standards in place and provide support for boards ; intermediate transoms are those placed between the main transoms to provide extra support for boards . in canada this style is referred to as '' english '' . '' american '' has the transoms attached to the standards and is used less but has certain advantages in some situations . as well as the tubes at right angles there are cross braces to increase rigidity , these are placed diagonally from ledger to ledger , next to the standards to which they are fitted . if the braces are fitted to the ledgers they are called ledger braces . to limit sway a facade brace is fitted to the face of the scaffold every 30 metres or so at an angle of 35°-55° running right from the base to the top of the scaffold and fixed at every level . of the couplers previously mentioned , right-angle couplers join ledgers or transoms to standards , putlog or single couplers join board bearing transoms to ledgers - non-board bearing transoms should be fixed using a right-angle coupler . swivel couplers are to connect tubes at any other angle . the actual joints are staggered to avoid occurring at the same level in neighbouring standards . the spacings of the basic elements in the scaffold are fairly standard . for a general purpose scaffold the maximum bay length is 2.1 m , for heavier work the bay size is reduced to 2 or even 1.8 m while for inspection a bay width of up to 2.7 m is allowed . the scaffolding width is determined by the width of the boards , the minimum width allowed is 600 & nbsp ; mm but a more typical four-board scaffold would be 870 & nbsp ; mm wide from standard to standard . more heavy-duty scaffolding can require 5 , 6 or even up to 8 boards width . often an inside board is added to reduce the gap between the inner standard and the structure . the lift height , the spacing between ledgers , is 2 m , although the base lift can be up to 2.7 m . the diagram above also shows a kicker lift , which is just 150 & nbsp ; mm or so above the ground . transom spacing is determined by the thickness of the boards supported , 38 & nbsp ; mm boards require a transom spacing of no more than 1.2 m while a 50 & nbsp ; mm board can stand a transom spacing of 2.6 m and 63 & nbsp ; mm boards can have a maximum span of 3.25 m . the minimum overhang for all boards is 50 & nbsp ; mm and the maximum overhang is no more than 4x the thickness of the board . foundations . good foundations are essential . often scaffold frameworks will require more than simple base plates to safely carry and spread the load . scaffolding can be used without base plates on concrete or similar hard surfaces , although base plates are always recommended . for surfaces like pavements or tarmac base plates are necessary . for softer or more doubtful surfaces sole boards must be used , beneath a single standard a sole board should be at least with no dimension less than , the thickness must be at least . for heavier duty scaffold much more substantial baulks set in concrete can be required . on uneven ground steps must be cut for the base plates , a minimum step size of around is recommended . a working platform requires certain other elements to be safe . they must be close-boarded , have double guard rails and toe and stop boards . safe and secure access must also be provided . -- -- . ties . scaffolds are only rarely independent structures . to provide stability for a scaffolding ( at left ) framework ties are generally fixed to the adjacent building/fabric/steelwork . general practice is to attach a tie every 4 m on alternate lifts ( traditional scaffolding ) . prefabricated system scaffolds require structural connections at all frames - i.e . 2–3 m centres ( tie patterns must be provided by the system manufacturer/supplier ) . the ties are coupled to the scaffold as close to the junction of standard and ledger ( node point ) as possible . due to recent regulation changes , scaffolding ties must support +/- loads ( tie/butt loads ) and lateral ( shear ) loads . due to the different nature of structures there is a variety of different ties to take advantage of the opportunities . through ties are put through structure openings such as windows . a vertical inside tube crossing the opening is attached to the scaffold by a transom and a crossing horizontal tube on the outside called a bridle tube . the gaps between the tubes and the structure surfaces are packed or wedged with timber sections to ensure a solid fit . box ties are used to attach the scaffold to suitable pillars or comparable features . two additional transoms are put across from the lift on each side of the feature and are joined on both sides with shorter tubes called tie tubes . when a complete box tie is impossible a l-shaped lip tie can be used to hook the scaffold to the structure , to limit inward movement an additional transom , a butt transom , is placed hard against the outside face of the structure . sometimes it is possible to use anchor ties ( also called bolt ties ) , these are ties fitted into holes drilled in the structure . a common type is a ring bolt with an expanding wedge which is then tied to a node point . the least 'invasive ' tie is a reveal tie . these use an opening in the structure but use a tube wedged horizontally in the opening . the reveal tube is usually held in place by a reveal screw pin ( an adjustable threaded bar ) and protective packing at either end . a transom tie tube links the reveal tube to the scaffold . reveal ties are not well regarded , they rely solely on friction and need regular checking so it is not recommended that more than half of all ties be reveal ties . if it is not possible to use a safe number of ties rakers can be used . these are single tubes attached to a ledger extending out from the scaffold at an angle of less than 75° and securely founded . a transom at the base then completes a triangle back to the base of the main scaffold . bamboo scaffolding . bamboo scaffolding is a type of scaffolding made from bamboo and widely used in construction work for centuries . many famous landmarks , notably the great wall of china , were built using bamboo scaffolding , and its use continues today in some parts of the world . history . bamboo scaffolding was first introduced into the building industry in hong kong immediately after colonization in the 1800s . it was widely used in the building of houses and multi-story buildings ( up to four stories high ) prior to the development of metal scaffolding . it was also useful for short-term construction projects , such as framework for temporary sheds for cantonese opera performances . there are three types of scaffolding in hong kong : double-row scaffold ; extended bamboo scaffolding ; shop signs of bamboo scaffolding . gradual decline . in 2013 , there were 1,751 registered bamboo scaffolders and roughly 200 scaffolding companies in hong kong . the use of bamboo scaffolding is diminishing due to shortages in labor and material . despite the lack of labor force and material , recently safety issues have become another serious concern . the labor shortage may be due to the reluctance of younger generations to become scaffolders . “ they even think that it ’ s a dirty and dangerous job . they are not going to do that kind of work , ” said yu hang flord , who has been a scaffolder for 30 years and later became the director of wui fai holdings , a member of the hong kong and kowloon scaffolders general merchants association . “ they refuse to step in , although we give them high pay . they are scared of it . young generations do not like jobs that involve hard work . ” another reason fewer people are becoming scaffolders is that new recruits need to undergo training with the hong kong construction industry council in order to acquire a license . older scaffolders generally learned in apprenticeships , and may have been able to gather more hands-on experience . material shortages are also a contributing factor to the decline . the bamboo scaffolding material was imported from mainland china . bamboo—which matures after three years to the wide diameter and thick skin perfect for scaffolding—came from the shaoxing area in guangdong . over the past two decades , firms have had to look to guangxi instead . the industry 's fear is that one day supplies will be blocked due to export embargoes and environmental concerns . attempts to import bamboo from thailand , or switch to synthetic or plastic bamboo , have so far proved unsuccessful . in many african countries , notably nigeria , bamboo scaffolding is still used for small scale construction in urban areas . in rural areas , the use of bamboo scaffolding for construction is common . in fact , bamboo is an essential building and construction commodity in nigeria ; the bamboo materials are transported on heavy trucks and trailers from rural areas ( especially the tropical rain forest ) to cities and the northern part of nigeria . some of the structures in relaxation and recreation centres , both in urban and rural areas of nigeria , are put in place using bamboo materials . this is not for reasons of poverty ( especially in the cities ) but to add more aesthetics to these centres . bamboo materials are still used in the construction of some bukas ( local restaurants ) in rural areas . . specifications . forms of bamboo scaffolding include : double-row scaffold only double-row bamboo scaffold is allowed to be used for working at height . nylon mesh the perimeter of bamboo scaffold should be covered by nylon mesh against falling objects . the lapping of nylon mesh should be at least 100 & nbsp ; mm wide . access and egress suitable means of access should be provided from the building or ground level to the scaffold such as gangway , stairs and ladder etc . catch fan sloping catch fans shall be erected at a level close to the first floor and at no more than 15 metres , vertical intervals should give a minimum horizontal protection coverage of 1500 & nbsp ; mm . large catch fans should be erected at specific locations to protect the public and/or workers underneath . platform of catch fan or receptacle a suitable receptacle , covered with galvanized zinc sheet , should be provided within each catch-fan to trap falling objects . steel bracket steel brackets shall be provided for supporting the standard of scaffold at about six floor intervals . the horizontal distance between steel brackets is about 3 metres . putlogs mild steel bars or similar materials are required to tie any structure to maintain the bamboo scaffold in its position on every floor . the distance of adjacent putlogs is about 3 to 4 metres . working platform every working platform must be at least 400 & nbsp ; mm wide and closely boarded by planks . the edges of working platforms should be protected by no less than 2 horizontal bamboo members of the scaffold , at intervals between 750 & nbsp ; mm to 900 & nbsp ; mm and suitable toe-boards no less than 200 & nbsp ; mm high . special scaffold all scaffolds with a height excess of 15 metres shall be designed by an engineer . competent examiner they should complete a formal training in bamboo scaffolding work or hold a trade test certificate on bamboo scaffolding and have at least 10 years of relevant experience . trained worker they should complete formal training in bamboo scaffolding work or hold a trade test certificate on bamboo scaffolding and have at least 3 years of relevant experience . uses in construction . bamboo scaffolding is a temporary structure to support people and materials when constructing or repairing building exteriors and interiors . in bamboo scaffolding , plastic fibre straps and bamboo shoots are bound together to form a solid and secure scaffold structure without screws . bamboo scaffolding does not need to have a foundation on the ground , as long as the scaffolding has a fulcrum for structural support . bamboo scaffolding is mostly seen in developing asian countries such as india , bangladesh , sri lanka , and indonesia . cultural use . . chinese opera theatres . chinese opera is one of the world 's '' intangible cultural heritages '' . one of bamboo scaffolding 's main alternative uses is in drama theatres . the flexibility and convenience of this type of scaffolding suits stages set up for temporary use and also separates the audience from the performers . respecting and promoting the traditional cultures of chinese opera , a huge event called the west kowloon bamboo theatre has been held at the west kowloon waterfront promenade annually since 2012 . yu lan ghost festival . stages are built from bamboo scaffolding for the live chinese operas and chiu chow–style dramas performed during every yu lan ghost festival to worship ghostly ancestors . cheung chau bun festival . the bamboo tower used in the famous bun scrambling competition during the cheung chau bun festival on the island of cheung chau is constructed out of bamboo scaffolding . nine thousand buns , representing fortune and blessing , are supported on the fourteen-meter tall bamboo tower in front of the yuk hui temple . for the piu sik parade , bamboo stands and racks are used to hold the young costumed performers above the crowds . specialty scaffolding . types of scaffolding covered by the occupational health and safety administration in the united states include the following categories : pole ; tube and coupler ; fabricated frame ( tubular welded frame scaffolds ) ; plasterers ’ , decorators ’ , and large area scaffolds ; bricklayers ' ( pipe ) ; horse ; form scaffolds and carpenters ’ bracket scaffolds ; roof brackets ; outrigger ; pump jacks ; ladder jacks ; window jacks ; crawlingboards ( chicken ladders ) ; step , platform , and trestle ladder scaffolds ; single-point adjustable suspension ; two-point adjustable suspension ( swing stages ) ; multipoint adjustable suspension ; stonesetters ’ multipoint adjustable suspension scaffolds , and masons ’ multipoint adjustable suspension scaffolds ; catenary ; float ( ship ) ; interior hung ; needle beam ; multilevel suspended ; mobile ; repair bracket scaffolds ; and stilts . jeff ende . '' getting a grip on osha ’ s scaffolding regulations '' masonryconstruction.com publication m970339 copyright © 1997 , the aberdeen group . gallery of scaffold types . file : coupler 1.jpg tube and clamp scaffold detail . file:2512-échafaudage-réunion.jpg a type of metal pole scaffold in france . file : deva citadel 2011 - wall section under restoration-1.jpg wooden pole scaffold . file : carpenter at work on the first unit of the new alpine village at the outskirts of helen . when completed the project . - nara - 557731.jpg pipe staging is very common in the u.s . welded sections stack on top of each other and braced with cross braces , workers stand on planks or aluminum platforms . file : hk bambooscaffolding nylonknot.jpg bamboo scaffold with nylon knots . file : rietdekken - beilen - 20521600 - rce.jpg the putlog is the horizontal piece on which the platform rests , the upright pole is called a standard . in some masonry buildings the holes into which the putlogs are inserted remain unfilled and are called putlog holes . file : fotothek df tg 0003033 mechanik ^ hebezeug ^ winde ^ seil.jpg a type of putlog scaffold where the putlogs go through the wall and are relatively balanced on each side . file : exterieur verrotte draagconstructie loopgedeelte rondom houten opbouw - amsterdam - 20294998 - rce.jpg carpenters ' bracket scaffolding or wall brackets bolt through , and hang from , a wall . file : floriano ferramola rifiuta di abbandonare il cantiere davanti alle truppe di gaston de foix.jpg tall horse scaffold . file : scaffold ( psf ) . png swing stage file : rieten dak met ladder en ladderlift - blaricum - 20344468 - rce.jpg ladder brackets mount to the rungs of a ladder and hold planks . file : wrens train for new job- training for ship mechanics of the women 's royal naval service , england , uk , 1943 d17079.jpg trestle ladder scaffold . file : carpentry and painting lccn2001705885.tif a simple putlog type scaffolding and roof brackets . file : handwerker-stelzen.jpg stilts are considered a type of scaffold by osha in the usa . stilts are commonly used by drywall tapers working on ceilings . . putlog scaffold . in addition to the putlog couplers ( discussed above ) , there are also putlog tubes . these have a flattened end or have been fitted with a blade . this feature allows the end of the tube to be inserted into or rest upon the brickwork of the structure . a putlog scaffold may also be called a bricklayer 's scaffold . as such , the scaffold consists only of a single row of standards with a single ledger . the putlogs are transoms - attached to the ledger at one end but integrated into the bricks at the other . spacing is the same on a putlog scaffold as on a general purpose scaffold , and ties are still required . in recent years a number of new innovations have meant an increased scope of use for scaffolding , such as ladderbeams for spanning spaces that can not accommodate standards and the increased use of sheeting and structure to create temporary roofs . putlog tubes can also be used vertically when drove under downward pressure into the ground , most typically in greens and fields , where approx 1/4 of the putlog tube remains exposed above ground . the purpose for this alternative method is to create a good anchoring point for additional vertical scaffolding to clamp on to , most commonly used in live events and festivals with scaffolding poles upto 21foot in height where festoon lighting , cabling and bunting can be hung from safely . pump-jack . a pump-jack is a type of portable scaffolding system . the scaffold rests on supports attached to two or more vertical posts . the user raises the scaffolding by pumping the foot pedals on the supports , like an automobile jack . . baker staging . baker staging is a metal scaffold which is easy to assemble . rolling platforms typically wide by long and tall sections which can be stacked up to three high with the use of added outriggers . the work platform height is adjustable . x-deck ladder scaffolding . low level scaffolding that is height adjustable . it is a hybrid ladder scaffold work platform . standards . the widespread use of scaffolding systems , along with the profound importance that they earned in modern applications such as civil engineering projects and temporary structures , led to the definition of a series of standards covering a vast number of specific issues involving scaffolding . among the standards there are : din 4420 , a din standard divided in 5 parts which covers the design and detail of scaffolds , ladder scaffolds , safety requirements and standard types , materials , components , dimensions and loadbearing capacity . din 4421 , a din standard which covers the analysis , design and construction of falsework 29 cfr part 1926 : safety standards for scaffolds used in the construction industry from the u.s . occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) , with an accompanying '' construction etool '' . see also . index of construction articles national access and scaffolding confederation ( uk trade association ) steeplejack willow island disaster . references . external links . illustrated formwork and temporary work glossary new york city scaffolding regulations pdf ( shows nine types of scaffolding ) osha publication 3150 , a guide to scaffold use in the construction industry osha scaffold types illustrated illustrations of many kinds of scaffolding uk health & safety executive scaffold checklist