Bessarion

biography . bessarion was born in trabzon , the black sea port in northeastern anatolia that was the heart of pontic greek culture and civilization during the byzantine and ottoman periods . the year of his birth has been given as 1389 , 1395 or 1403 . bessarion 's neoplatonism . bessarion was educated in constantinople , then went in 1423 to mystras , peloponnese to study neoplatonism under gemistus pletho . james hankins , humanism and platonism in the italian renaissance , volume 1 , ed . di storia e letteratura , 2003 , p . 207 . under pletho , he '' went through the liberal arts curriculum… , with a special emphasis on mathematics…including the study of astronomy and geography '' that would have related '' philosophy to physics…cosmology and astrology '' and pletho 's '' mathematics would include pythagoreanism , plato ’ s cosmological geometry and the neoplatonic arithmetic which connected the material world with the world of plato ’ s forms . possibly it also included astrology… '' c.m . woodhouse , george gemistos plethon , the last of the hellenes ( oxford : clarendon press , 1986 ) , p . 33 woodhouse also mentions that bessarion '' had a mystical streak…and was proficient in neoplatonic vocabulary…mathematics…and platonic theology '' . bessarion 's neoplatonism stayed with him his whole life , even as a cardinal . he was very familiar with neoplatonist terminology and used it in his letter to pletho 's two sons , demitrios and andronikos , on the death of his still-beloved teacher in 1452 . woodhouse , george gemistos plethon , p . 13 perhaps the most remarkable thing about his life was that a neoplatonist could have played such a significant role in the roman catholic church for at least a brief time , though he was attacked for his views by more orthodox catholic academics shortly after his death . role in the council of ferrara . on becoming a tonsured monk , he adopted the name of an old egyptian anchorite bessarion , whose story he has related . in 1436 became abbot of a monastery in constantinople and in 1437 , he was made metropolitan of nicaea by the byzantine emperor john viii palaeologus , whom he accompanied to italy in order to bring about a reunion between the eastern ( orthodox ) and catholic church churches . the emperor hoped to use the possibility of re-uniting the churches to obtain help from western europe against the ottoman empire . bessarion participated in the byzantine delegation to the council of ferrara-florence as the most eminent representative of unionists , although originally belonged to the party of anti-unionists . on 6 july 1439 he was the one who read the declaration of the greek association of churches in the cathedral of florence , in the presence of pope eugene iv and the emperor john viii palaeologus . some historians have impugned bessarion 's sincerity in adhering to the union . miscellanea marciana di studi bessarionei , antenore , 1976 , p . 121 . however , gill upholds bessarion 's sincerity in being convinced to the truth of the roman position in the matters discussed at the council quoting from the bishop 's own oratio dogmatica : : upon his return to the east , he found himself bitterly resented for his attachment to the minority party that saw no difficulty in a reconciliation of the two churches . at the council of ferrara-florence ( 1438–1445 ) , bessarion supported the roman catholic church and gained the favour of pope eugene iv , who invested him with the rank of cardinal at a consistory of 18 december 1439 . from that time , he resided permanently in italy , doing much , by his patronage of learned men , by his collection of books and manuscripts , and by his own writings , to spread abroad the new learning . his palazzo in rome was a virtual academy for the studies of new humanistic learning , a center for learned greeks and greek refugees , whom he supported by commissioning transcripts of greek manuscripts and translations into latin that made greek scholarship available to western europeans . he supported regiomontanus in this fashion and defended nicholas of cusa . he is known in history as the original patron of the greek exiles ( scholars and diplomats ) including theodore gaza , george of trebizond , john argyropoulos , and janus lascaris . he held in succession the archbishopric of siponto and the suburbicarian sees of sabina and frascati . at the papal conclave , 1455 which elected the aragonese candidate , alfons de borja , as callixtus iii , cardinal bessarion was an early candidate for his disinterest in the competition between roman factions that pressed candidates of the orsini and colonna factions . '' johannes bessarion '' , catholic encyclopedia ( 1907 ) he was opposed for his greek background by the french cardinal alain de coëtivy . for five years ( 1450–1455 ) , he was legate at bologna , and he was engaged on embassies to many foreign princes , among others to louis xi of france in 1471 . other missions were to germany to encourage western princes to help their fellow christians in the east . for these efforts , his fellow humanist aeneas silvius piccolomini , then pius ii , gave him the purely ceremonial title of latin patriarch of constantinople in 1463 . as primus cardinalium ( from april 1463 ) – the title dean of the sacred college of cardinals was not yet in use – cardinal bessarion presided over the papal conclave , 1464 j . p . adams , sede vacante of 1464 . retrieved : 2016-04-06 . and papal conclave , 1471 . j . p . adams , sede vacante 1471 . retrieved : 2016-04-06 . he died on 18 november 1472 at ravenna . he is buried in the basilica of santi apostoli , rome . works . thumb bessarion was one of the most learned scholars of his time . besides his translations of aristotle 's metaphysics and xenophon 's memorabilia , his most important work is a treatise directed against george of trebizond , a vehement aristotelian who had written a polemic against plato , which was entitled in calumniatorem platonis ( '' against the slanderer of plato '' ) . bessarion , though a platonist , was not so thoroughgoing in his admiration as gemistus pletho , and he strove instead to reconcile the two philosophies . his work , by opening up the relations of platonism to the main questions of religion , contributed greatly to the extension of speculative thought in the department of theology . it was thanks to him that the bibliotheca ( pseudo-apollodorus ) , an important compendium of greek mythology , has survived to the present . his library , which contained a very extensive collection of greek manuscripts , was presented by him in 1468 to the senate of the republic of venice , and forms the nucleus of the famous library of st mark 's , the biblioteca marciana . it comprised 482 greek and 264 latin manuscripts . emblem of cardinal bessarion most of bessarion 's works are in migne , patrologia graeca , vol . 161 . see also . greek scholars in the renaissance joannes chortasmenos . references . attribution . sources . ( not fully exploited ) francis a . burkle-young , '' the election of pope calixtus iii ( 1455 ) '' bessarion an early candidate , opposed by the french . geanakoplos , deno john . greek scholars in venice : studies in the dissemination of greek learning from byzantium to the west ( cambridge , massachusetts : harvard , 1962 ) . gill , joseph . the council of florence ( cambridge , uk : cambridge university press , 1959 ) . harris , jonathan . greek emigres in the west ( camberley : porphyrogenitus , 1995 ) . henderson , duane . '' bessarion , cardinalis nicenus . a cardinalitial vita between ideal conceptions and institutional structures , '' , 79-122 . keller , a . '' a byzantine admirer of 'western ' progress : cardinal bessarion '' , in , cambridge historical journal , 11 ( 1953-5 ) , 343–8 . labowsky , carlota . bessarion 's library and the biblioteca marciana ( rome : edizioni di storia e letteratura , 1979 ) . legrand , émile . bibliographie hellenique ( paris : e . leroux ( e . guilmoto ) , 1885–1906 ) . volume 1 . mohler , ludwig kardinal bessarion als theologe , humanist und staatsmann ( aalen : scientia verlag ; paderborn : f . schöningh , 1923–42 ) , 3 volumes . monfasani , john . byzantine scholars in renaissance italy : cardinal bessarion and other émigrés ( aldershot , uk : variorum , 1995 ) . setton , k.m . '' the byzantine background to the italian renaissance '' , in , proceedings of the american philosophical society , 100 ( 1956 ) , 1–76 . vast , henri . le cardinal bessarion ( paris : hachette , 1878 ) , see also ( geneva : slatkine , 1977 ) . wilson , nigel guy . from byzantium to italy . greek studies in the italian renaissance ( london : duckworth , 1992 ) . external links . makripoulias christos , '' bessarion cardinal '' , encyclopaedia of the hellenic world , asia minor