Alexander Lukashenko

second term ( 2001–2006 ) . under the original constitution , lukashenko should have been up for reelection in 1999 . however , the 1996 referendum extended lukashenko 's term for two additional years . in the 9 september 2001 election , lukashenko faced uładzimir hančaryk and sergei gaidukevich . '' contemporary belarus : between democracy and dictatorship '' ( london : routledgecurzon , 2003 ) , with r . marsh and c . lawson during the campaign , lukashenko promised to raise the standards of farming , social benefits and increase industrial output of belarus . lukashenko won in the first round with 75.65 % of the vote . the organization for security and co-operation in europe ( osce ) said the process '' failed to meet international standards '' . jane 's intelligence digest surmised that the price of russian support for lukashenko ahead of the 2001 presidential election was the surrender of minsk 's control over its section of the yamal–europe pipeline . standish , m j a ( 11 january 2006 ) . '' editor 's notes . '' jane 's intelligence digest . after the results were announced declaring lukashenko the winner , russia publicly welcomed lukashenko 's re-election ; the russian president , vladimir putin , telephoned lukashenko and offered a message of congratulations and support . following the 2003 invasion of iraq , american intelligence agencies reported that aides of saddam hussein managed to acquire belarusian passports while in syria , but that it was unlikely that belarus would offer a safe haven for saddam and his two sons . this action , along with arms deals with iraq and iran , prompted western governments to take a tougher stance against lukashenko . the us was particularly angered by the arms sales , and american political leaders increasingly began to refer to belarus as '' europe 's last dictatorship '' . the eu was concerned for the security of its gas supplies from russia , which are piped through belarus , and took an active interest in belarusian affairs . with the accession of poland , latvia and lithuania , the eu 's border with belarus has grown to more than 1000 & nbsp ; kilometers . during a televised address to the nation on 7 september 2004 , lukashenko announced plans for a referendum to eliminate presidential term limits . this was held on 17 october 2004 , the same day as parliamentary elections , and , according to official results , was approved by 79.42 % of voters . previously , lukashenko had been limited to two terms and thus would have been constitutionally required to step down after the presidential elections in 2006 . opposition groups , the osce , the european union , and the us state department stated that the vote fell short of international standards . belarus grew economically under lukashenko , but much of this growth was due to russian crude oil which was imported at below-market prices , refined , and sold to other european countries at a profit . . third term ( 2006–2010 ) . after lukashenko confirmed he was running for re-election in 2005 , opposition groups began to seek a single candidate . on 16 october 2005 , on the day of solidarity with belarus , the political groups zubr and third way belarus encouraged all opposition parties to rally behind one candidate to oppose lukashenko in the 2006 election . their chosen candidate was alexander milinkevich . lukashenko reacted by saying that anyone going to opposition protests would have their necks wrung '' as one might a duck '' . on 19 march 2006 , exit polls showed lukashenko winning a third term in a landslide , amid opposition reports of vote-rigging and fear of violence . the belarusian republican youth union gave lukashenko 84.2 % and milinkevich 3.1 % . the gallup organisation noted that the belarusian republican youth union are government-controlled and released the exit poll results before noon on election day even though voting stations did not close until 8 & nbsp ; pm . belarusian authorities vowed to prevent any large-scale demonstrations following the election ( such as those that marked the orange revolution in ukraine ) . despite their efforts , the opposition had the largest number of demonstrators in years , with nightly protests in minsk continuing for a number of days after the election . the largest protest occurred on election night ; reporters for the associated press estimated that approximately 10,000 people turned out . election observers from the russia-led commonwealth of independent states ( cis ) and the organization for security and co-operation in europe ( osce ) differed on the belarusian election . the osce declared on 20 march 2006 that the '' presidential election failed to meet osce commitments for democratic elections . '' lukashenko '' permitted state authority to be used in a manner which did not allow citizens to freely and fairly express their will at the ballot box . a pattern of intimidation and the suppression of independent voices . was evident throughout the campaign . '' the heads of all 25 eu countries declared that the election was '' fundamentally flawed '' . in contrast , the russian minister of foreign affairs declared , '' long before the elections , the osce 's office for democratic institutions and human rights had declared that they the elections would be illegitimate and it was pretty biased in its commentaries on their progress and results , thus playing an instigating role . '' lukashenko later stated that he had rigged the election results , but against himself , in order to obtain a majority more typical of european countries . although he had won 93.5 % of the vote , he said , he had directed the government to announce a result of 86 % . some russian nationalists , such as dmitry rogozin and the movement against illegal immigration , stated that they would like to see lukashenko become president of russia in 2008 . lukashenko responded that he would not run for the russian presidency , but that if his health was still good , he might run for reelection in 2011 . alt url in september 2008 , parliamentary elections were held . lukashenko had allowed some opposition candidates to stand , though in the official results , opposition members failed to get a seat out of the available 110 . osce observers described the vote as '' flawed '' , including '' several cases of deliberate falsification of results '' . opposition members and supporters demonstrated in protest . '' belarus clean sweep poll 'flawed ' '' , bbc news , 29 september 2008 . according to the nizhny novgorod-based cis election observation mission , the findings of which are often dismissed by the west , the elections in belarus conformed to international standards . lukashenko later commented that the opposition in belarus was financed by foreign countries and was not needed . in april 2009 , he held talks with pope benedict xvi in the vatican , lukashenko 's first visit to western europe after a travel ban on him a decade earlier . belarus leader meets pope in landmark trip . agence france-presse . google news ( 27 april 2009 ) . retrieved 19 may 2012 . . fourth term ( 2010–2015 ) . lukashenko was one of ten candidates registered for the presidential election held in belarus on 19 december 2010 . though originally envisaged for 2011 , an earlier date was approved '' to ensure the maximum participation of citizens in the electoral campaign and to set most convenient time for the voters '' . belarus sets date of presidential election for 19 december 2010 . news.belta.by ( 14 september 2010 ) . retrieved 19 may 2012 . the run-up to the campaign was marked by a series of russian media attacks on lukashenko . rfe/rl . has moscow had enough of belarus 's lukashenka ? . ( 19 july 2010 ) . the central election committee said that all nine opposition figures were likely to get less than half the vote total that lukashenko would get . though opposition figures alleged intimidation and that '' dirty tricks '' were being played , the election was seen as comparatively open as a result of desire to improve relations with both europe and the us . on election day , two presidential candidates were seriously beaten by police in different opposition rallies . on the night of the election , opposition protesters chanting '' out ! '' , '' long live belarus ! '' and other similar slogans attempted to storm the building of the government of belarus , smashing windows and doors before riot police were able to push them back . the number of protesters was reported by major news media as being around or above 10,000 people . at least seven of the opposition presidential candidates were arrested . several of the opposition candidates , along with their supporters and members of the media , were arrested . many were sent to prison , often on charges of organizing a mass disturbance . examples include andrei sannikov , alexander otroschenkov , ales michalevic , mikola statkevich , and uladzimir nyaklyayew . sannikov 's wife , journalist iryna khalip , was put under house arrest . jaroslav romanchuk 's party leader , anatoly lebedko , was also arrested . the cec said that lukashenko won 79.65 % of the vote ( he gained 5,130,557 votes ) with 90.65 % of the electorate voting . the osce categorized the elections as '' flawed '' while the cis mission observers praised them as '' free and transparent '' . however , the osce also stated that some improvements were made in the run-up to the election , including the candidates ' use of television debates and ability to deliver their messages unhindered . several european foreign ministers issued a joint statement calling the election and its aftermath an '' unfortunate step backwards in the development of democratic governance and respect for human rights in belarus . '' lukashenko the loser . joint letter of foreign ministers of germany , sweden , poland and czech republic . nytimes ( 24 december 2010 ) lukashenko 's inauguration ceremony of 22 january 2011 was boycotted by eu ambassadors , and only thirty-two foreign diplomats attended . during this ceremony , lukashenko defended the legitimacy of his re-election and vowed that belarus would never have its own version of the 2004 orange revolution in ukraine or georgia 's 2003 rose revolution . lukashenko growls at inauguration , the moscow times ( 24 january 2011 ) effective 31 january 2011 , the eu renewed a travel ban , prohibiting lukashenko and 156 of his associates from traveling to eu member countries , as a result of the crackdown on opposition supporters . dempsey , judy ( 2 january 2011 ) . u.s . and e.u . join to show support for belarus opposition . new york times the european union has news for belarus ’ s alexander lukashenko : you ’ re grounded . macleans.ca ( 17 february 2011 ) . council decision 2011/69/cfsp . official journal of the european union . ( 31 january 2011 ) . lukashenko was supportive of china 's belt and road initiative global infrastructure development strategy , and the inception in 2012 of the associated low-tax china–belarus industrial park near minsk national airport planned to grow to by the 2060s . . fifth term ( 2015–2020 ) . on 11 october 2015 , lukashenko was elected for his fifth term as the president of belarus . just over three weeks later , he was inaugurated in the independence palace in the presence of attendees such as former president of ukraine leonid kuchma , chairman of the russian communist party gennady zyuganov and belarusian biathlon darya domracheva . on mid-september 2017 , lukashenko oversaw the advancement of joint russian and belarusian military relations during the military drills that were part of the zapad 2017 exercise . in august 2018 , lukashenko fired his prime minister andrei kobyakov and various other officials due to a corruption scandal . sergei rumas was appointed to take his place as prime minister . in may 2017 , lukashenko signed a decree on the foundation of the directorate of the 2019 european games in minsk . in april 2019 , lukashenko announced that the games were on budget and on time and eventually he opened the 2nd edition of the event on 21 june . between 1–3 july 2019 , he oversaw the country 's celebrations of the 75th anniversary of the minsk offensive , which culminated in an evening military parade of the armed forces of belarus on the last day , which is the country 's independence day . in august 2019 , lukashenko met with former kyrgyz president kurmanbek bakiyev , who has lived in exile in minsk since 2010 , in the palace of independence to mark bakiyev 's 70th birthday , which he had marked several days earlier . the meeting , which included the presentation of traditional flowers and symbolic gifts , angered the kyrgyz foreign ministry which stated that the meeting '' fundamentally does not meet the principles of friendship and cooperation between the two countries '' . on 29 august , john bolton , the national security advisor ( united states ) , was received by lukashenko during his visit to minsk , which was the first of its kind in 18 years . in november 2019 , lukashenko visited the austrian capital of vienna on a state visit , which was his first in three years to an eu country . during the visit , he met with president alexander van der bellen , chancellor brigitte bierlein , and national council president wolfgang sobotka . he also paid his respects at the soviet war memorial at the schwarzenbergplatz . during the course of the covid-19 pandemic , he undertook two working visits to russia , one of the few european leaders to undertake foreign visits during the pandemic . he also received hungarian prime minister viktor orbán during his state visit to minsk . orbán called for an end to eu sanctions on belarus during this visit . his first visit to russia was to attend the rescheduled moscow victory day parade on red square together with his son . . sixth term ( 2020–present ) . on 9 august 2020 , according to the preliminary count , lukashenko was re-elected for his sixth term as the president of belarus . us secretary of state mike pompeo has warned that the election was '' not free and fair '' . mass protests erupted across belarus following the 2020 belarusian presidential election which was marred by allegations of widespread electoral fraud . subsequently , opposition presidential candidate sviatlana tsikhanouskaya claimed she had received between 60 and 70 % of the vote and formed a coordination council to facilitate the peaceful and orderly transfer of power in belarus . on 15 august 2020 , lithuanian foreign minister linas linkevicius referred to lukashenko as the '' former president '' of belarus . it was reported that president lukashenko 's authorities asked kremlin representatives about the possibility of lukashenko escaping to russia . furthermore , it was reported that russia admits that lukashenko 's resignation from the post of head of state is likely . on 17 august , the members of the european parliament issued a joint statement which stated that they do not recognise alexander lukashenko as the president of belarus , considering him to be persona non grata in the european union . on 19 august , the member states of the european union agreed to not recognise the results and issued a statement saying '' the 9 august elections were neither free nor fair , therefore we do not recognise the results '' . the governments of the united states , united kingdom and canada have also refused to recognise the results . in an interview on 22 august , josep borrell explicitly stated that the european union does not recognise lukashenko as the legitimate president of belarus in the same manner that it does not recognise nicolás maduro as the legitimate president of venezuela . on 23 august , footage emerged showing lukashenko at the independence palace in minsk . in the first two videos , he is seen walking near a helicopter , wearing a bullet proof vest and holding a machine gun and then walking around the palace grounds . in the latter footage , lukashenko was heard to say '' leave me alone , '' and '' there is no one left there , right ? '' . his 15-year-old son , nikolai , was seen with him dressed in military uniform and holding a gun . in a third video , he is seen surveying protestors from a helicopter and is heard saying '' how the rats ran away '' in an apparent reference to the protesters . in a fourth video , lukashenko was seen removing the former flag of belarus from a flower bed , waving at security personnel and in reference to protesters , saying '' we will deal with them '' . on 30 august , the independence palace became again a scene of protests . when questioned about the whereabouts of alexander lukashenko on this day , his publicity team released an undated photograph of him walking around the grounds of the independence palace holding a gun . on 23 september , lukashenko was formally inaugurated president for a sixth term in a ceremony at the palace of independence attended by an invited group of 700 guests . on 27 november , lukashenko announced that he would resign once belarus 's new constitution was adopted . in december 2020 the executive board of the international olympic committee ( ioc ) decided to exclude until further notice all members of the belarusian olympic committee from all ioc events , specifically targeting lukashenko who was elected as its chairman in 1997 . . policy . . domestic policy . lukashenko promotes himself as a '' man of the people . '' lukashenko wanted to rebuild belarus when he took office ; the economy was in freefall due to declining industry and lack of demand for belarusian goods . lukashenko kept many industries under the control of the government . in 2001 , he stated his intention to improve the social welfare of his citizens and to make belarus '' powerful and prosperous . '' with the ascent to power of lukashenko in 1994 , the russification policy of russian imperial and soviet era was renewed . vadzim smok . belarusian identity : the impact of lukashenka ’ s rule // analytical paper . ostrogorski centre , belarusdigest , 9 december 2013 . belarus has an identity crisis // opendemocracy галоўная бяда беларусаў у беларусі — мова // novy chas аляксандар русіфікатар // nasha niva . dealing with demonstrators and planned construction of concentrantion camps . in january 2021 , an audio recording was released in which the commander of internal troops and deputy interior minister of belarus mikalai karpiankou tells security forces that they can cripple , maim and kill protesters in order to make them understand their actions . this , he says , is justified because anyone who takes to the streets is participating in a kind of guerrilla warfare . in addition , he discussed the establishment of camps , surrounded by barbed wire , where protesters will be detained until the situation calms down . a spokeswoman for the interior ministry stamped the audio file as a fake . however , a phonoscopic examination of the audio recording confirmed that the voice on the recording belongs to karpiankou . the organization for security and cooperation in europe expressed its concern about the remarks . according to radio free europe/radio liberty , such a camp was indeed used near the town of slutsk in the days from 13 to 15 august 2020 . many of those detained there are said to have been brought from the okrestina prison in minsk . . accusation of forced disappearances . in 1999 opposition leaders yury zacharanka and viktar hanchar together with his business associate anatol krasouski disappeared . hanchar and krasouski disappeared the same day of a broadcast on state television in which president alexander lukashenko ordered the chiefs of his security services to crack down on '' opposition scum . '' although the state security committee of the republic of belarus ( kgb ) had them under constant surveillance , the official investigation announced that the case could not be solved . the investigation of the disappearance of journalist dzmitry zavadski in 2000 has also yielded no results . copies of a report by the parliamentary assembly of the council of europe , which linked senior belarusian officials to the cases of disappearances , were confiscated . in september 2004 , the european union and the united states issued travel bans for five belarusian officials suspected in being involved in the kidnapping of zacharanka : interior affairs minister vladimir naumov , prosecutor general viktor sheiman , minister for sports and tourism yuri sivakov , and colonel dmitri pavlichenko from the belarus interior ministry . in december 2019 , deutsche welle published a documentary film in which yury garavski , a former member of a special unit of the ministry of internal affairs ( belarus ) , stated that it was his unit which had arrested , taken away and murdered zecharanka and that they later did the same with viktar hanchar and anatol krassouski . . economic policies . lukashenko 's early economic policies aimed to prevent issues that occurred in other post-soviet states , such as the establishment of oligarchy structures and mass unemployment . the unemployment rate for the country at the end of 2011 was at 0.6 % of the population ( of 6.86 & nbsp ; million eligible workers ) , a decrease from 1995 , when unemployment was 2.9 % with a working-eligible population of 5.24 & nbsp ; million . the per-capita gross national income rose from us 1,423 in 1993 to us 5,830 at the end of 2011 . one major economic issue lukashenko faced throughout his presidency was the value of the belarusian ruble . for a time it was pegged to major foreign currencies , such as the euro , us dollar and the russian ruble in order to maintain the stability of the belarusian ruble . yet , the currency has experienced several periods of devaluation . a major devaluation took place in 2011 after the government announced that average salaries would increase to us 500 . the 2011 devaluation was the largest on record for the past twenty years according to the world bank . belarus also had to seek a bailout from international sources and , although it has received loans from china , loans from the imf and other agencies depend on how belarus reforms its economy . some critics of lukashenko , including the opposition group zubr , use the term lukashism to refer to the political and economic system lukashenko has implemented in belarus . potupa , aleksandr ( 2 may 1997 ) . '' lukashism '' has the potential to spread beyond belarus . prism volume : 3 issue : 6 . the term is also used more broadly to refer to an authoritarian ideology based on a cult of personality and nostalgia for soviet times among certain groups in belarus . the us congress sought to aid the opposition groups by passing the belarus democracy act of 2004 to introduce sanctions against lukashenko 's government and provide financial and other support to the opposition . lukashenko supporters argue that his rule spared belarus the turmoil that beset many other former soviet countries . the belarus democracy act of 2004 . house.gov . 20 october 2004 . lukashenko commented on the criticism of him by saying : '' i 've been hearing these accusations for over 10 & nbsp ; years and we have got used to it . we are not going to answer them . i want to come from the premise that the elections in belarus are held for ourselves . i am sure that it is the belarusian people who are the masters in our state . '' . coronavirus . during the covid-19 pandemic , lukashenko stated that concerns about the pandemic were a '' frenzy and a psychosis '' and that working the tractors , drinking vodka and going to saunas could prevent people from infection from the virus . '' people are working in tractors . no one is talking about the virus '' , lukashenko said on 16 march 2020 . '' there , the tractor will heal everyone . the fields heal everyone '' . he also said : '' i don ’ t drink , but recently i ’ ve been saying that people should not only wash their hands with vodka , but also poison the virus with it . you should drink the equivalent of 40–50 milliliters of rectified spirit daily '' , but he advised against doing so while at work . by early may , belarus was reported to have 15,000 diagnosed cases , one of the highest per capita rates of infection in eastern europe . on 28 july , lukashenko announced he had asymptomatic covid-19 . neither the presidential administration nor the country 's health service have commented on this inadvertent statement . . foreign policy . lukashenko 's relationship with the eu has been strained , in part by choice and in part by his policies towards domestic opponents . lukashenko 's repression of opponents caused him to be called '' europe 's last dictator '' and resulted in the eu imposing visa sanctions on him and a range of belarusian officials . at times , the eu has lifted sanctions as a way to encourage dialogue or gain concessions from lukashenko . czachor , rafał ( 2011 ) polityka zagraniczna republiki białoruś w latach 1991–2011 . studium politologiczne , wydawnictwo dwspit , polkowice , p . 299 , since the eu adopted this policy of '' change through engagement '' , it has supported economic and political reforms to help integrate the belarusian state . lukashenko 's relationship with russia , once his powerful ally and vocal supporter , has significantly deteriorated . the run-up to the 2010 belarusian presidential election was marked by a series of russian media attacks on lukashenko . throughout july state-controlled channel ntv broadcast a multi-part documentary entitled '' the godfather '' highlighting the suspicious disappearance of the opposition leaders yury zacharanka and viktar hanchar , businessman anatol krasouski and journalist dzmitry zavadski during the late 1990s . rfe/rl . is lukashenka in the kremlin 's crosshairs ? . ( 8 july 2010 ) . lukashenko called the media attack '' dirty propaganda '' . rfe/rl . lukashenka calls russian media attacks 'dirty propaganda ' . ( 29 july 2010 ) . his policies have been praised by some other world leaders . in response to a question about belarus 's domestic policies , president hugo chávez of venezuela said '' we see here a model social state like the one we are beginning to create . '' the chairman of the chinese standing committee of national people 's congress wu bangguo noted that belarus has been rapidly developing under lukashenko . in 2015 , lukashenko sought to improve trade relations between belarus and latin america . following the 2014 syrian presidential election , president lukashenko congratulated president bashar al-assad . his cable '' expressed keenness to strengthen and develop bilateral relations between belarus and syria in all fields for the benefit of the two peoples . '' belarus condemned the military intervention in libya , and the foreign ministry stated that '' the missile strikes and bombings on the territory of libya go beyond resolution 1973 of the un security council and are in breach of its principal goal , ensuring safety of the civilian population . the republic of belarus calls on the states involved with the military operation to cease , with immediate effect , the military operations which lead to human casualties . the settlement of the conflict is an internal affair of libya and should be carried out by the libyan people alone without military intervention from outside . '' they have not recognized the national transitional council . upon hearing the news regarding the death of muammar gaddafi , president alexander lukashenko said '' aggression has been committed , and the country 's leadership , not only muammar gaddafi , has been killed . and how was it killed ? well , if they had shot him in a battle , it 's one thing , but they humiliated and tormented him , they shot at him , they violated him when he was wounded , they twisted his neck and arms , and then they tortured him to death . it 's worse than the nazis once did . '' he also condemned the current situation of libya and was critical regarding the future of the country . despite a historically good relationship with russia , tensions between lukashenko and the russian government started showing in 2020 . on 24 january 2020 , lukashenko publicly accused russian president vladimir putin of trying to make belarus a part of russia . this led to russia cutting economic subsidies for belarus . in july 2020 , the relationship between belarus and russia was described as '' strained '' after 33 russian military contractors were arrested in minsk . lukashenko afterwards accused russia of collaborating with opposition activist siarhei tsikhanouski and trying to cover up an attempt to send 200 fighters from a private russian military firm known as the wagner group into belarus on a mission to destabilize the country ahead of its 9 august presidential election . on 5 august 2020 , russia 's security chief dmitry medvedev warned belarus to release the contractors . lukashenko also claimed russia was lying about its attempts to use the wagner group to influence the upcoming election . . public image . lukashenko has made several controversial statements during his presidency which have been regarded as anti-semitic , homophobic and misogynistic . in 1995 , lukashenko was accused of making a remark which has been construed to be in praise of adolf hitler : '' the history of germany is a copy of the history of belarus . germany was raised from ruins thanks to firm authority and not everything connected with that well-known figure hitler was bad . german order evolved over the centuries and attained its peak under hitler . '' in october 2007 , lukashenko was accused of making antisemitic comments ; addressing the '' miserable state of the city of babruysk '' on a live broadcast on state radio , he stated : '' this is a jewish city , and the jews are not concerned for the place they live in . they have turned babruysk into a pigsty . look at israel—i was there and saw it myself . i call on jews who have money to come back to babruysk . '' in 1926 there were 21,558 jews in babruysk or 42 % of the town 's population ; by 1989 , they numbered just over 4 % and by 1999 a mere 0.6 % . see jewish heritage research group in belarus members of the us house of representatives sent a letter to the belarusian ambassador to the us , mikhail khvostov , addressing lukashenko 's comments with a strong request to retract them , and the comments also caused a negative reaction from israel . consequently , pavel yakubovich , editor of belarus today , was sent to israel , and in a meeting with the israel foreign ministry said that lukashenko 's comment was '' a mistake that was said jokingly , and does not represent his positions regarding the jewish people '' and that he was '' anything but anti-semitic , '' and had been '' insulted by the mere accusation . '' the belarusian ambassador to israel , igor leshchenya , stated that the president had a '' kind attitude toward the jewish people '' , and sergei rychenko , the press secretary at the belarusian embassy in tel aviv , said parts of lukashenko 's comments had been mistranslated . on 4 march 2012 , two days after eu leaders ( including openly gay german foreign minister guido westerwelle ) had called for new measures to pressure lukashenko over alleged human rights abuses in belarus at a summit in brussels , lukashenko provoked diplomatic rebuke from germany after commenting that it was '' better to be a dictator than gay '' germany rebukes lukashenko over anti-gay comment euronews , world news . euronews.com ( 5 march 2012 ) . retrieved 19 may 2012 . in response to westerwelle having referred to him as '' europe 's last dictator '' during the meeting . world news – 'better a dictator than gay , ' belarus president alexander lukashenko says . msn.com ( 5 march 2012 ) . retrieved 19 may 2012 . after some of the initial candidates for the 2020 belarusian presidential election were imprisoned , three women involved with the candidates , led by sviatlana tsikhanouskaya emerged as leading opposition against him and contested the results of the election . lukashenko has spoken dismissively about the role of women in belarus , saying that “ society is not mature enough to vote for a woman ” and , referring specifically to tsikanouskaya , that “ she just cooked a tasty cutlet , maybe fed the children , and the cutlet smelled nice . and now there ’ s supposed to be a debate about some issues ” and that the burden of the presidency would cause her to “ collapse , poor thing ” . . public opinion . independent polling is tightly restricted in belarus . surveys are monopolized by the government , which either does not publish its surveys or uses them for propagandistic purposes . according to a leaked internal poll , a third of the population had trust in lukashenko . the last credible public poll in belarus was a 2016 poll showing approximately 30 % approval for lukashensko . lukashenko is referred to as '' batska '' , '' father '' ) by his supporters . during the 2020–21 belarusian protests , opponents of lukashenko began to refer to him as '' sasha 3 % '' on the basis that they believed that he was only supported by three percent of the belarusian population . the term has subsequently become a popular meme within the belarusian opposition appearing on t-shirts and posters . lukashenko has also been referred to as '' tarakanishche '' ( '' cockroach '' ) by his opponents in reference to the poem the monster cockroach , in which a moustached cockroach inflicts a reign of terror on the other animals before being eaten by a sparrow . . personal life . lukashenko describes himself as an '' orthodox atheist '' and has said that he believes that the president should be a conservative person and avoid using modern electronic technology such as an ipad or iphone . д.медведев объяснил , почему заменил ipad блокнотом . rbc.ru . 15 may 2013 . he used to play the bayan , a musical instrument similar to an accordion александр лукашенко разучился играть на баяне . km.ru . 15 january 2013 . and has a pet dog , a spitz named umka . . family . lukashenko married galina lukashenko , his high school sweetheart , in 1975 . later that year , his oldest son , viktor , was born . their second son , dmitry , was born in 1980 . galina lives separately in a house in the village shklow . , though they are still legally married , galina lukashenko has been estranged from her husband since shortly after he became president . in a 2014 interview , lukashenko said that they had not lived together for 30 years and the only reason they had not divorced was that he did not want to traumatize his adult sons . lukashenko has been seen on public occasions with various beautiful women , when asked about this in the same 2014 interview he explained that he did not want to sit with an official with a '' sour face '' , preferring '' my son on one side , and a girl on the other , '' . lukashenko fathered a son , nikolai , who was born in 2004 . though never confirmed by the government , it is widely believed that the child 's mother is irina abelskaya—the two had an extramarital affair when she was lukashenko 's personal doctor . there has never been any public statement about who nikolai 's mother is , nikolai was raised solely by his father . it has been reported by western observers and media that nikolai , nicknamed '' kolya '' , is being groomed as lukashenko 's successor . according to belarusian state media , these speculations were dismissed by lukashenko , who also denied that he would remain in office for a further thirty years—the time nikolai will become eligible to stand for election and succeed him . . sports . lukashenko used to play football , but stopped playing during his presidency . his two elder sons also play hockey , sometimes alongside their father . президент-хоккей александра лукашенко . ng.ru . 1 october 2003 . lukashenko started training in cross-country running as a child , and in the 2000s still competed at the national level . александр лукашенко выиграл лыжные соревнования . vsesmi.ru . 3 march 2007 . he is a keen skier and ice hockey forward . ветераны « сборной звезд мира » проведут товарищескую игру . sports.ru . 12 december 2008 . in an interview he 's said himself that he plays ice hockey three times a week . he has established the belarus president 's team , an amateur team which he sometimes plays for . numerous ice rinks intended to enable competitive ice hockey games to be played , have been built all over belarus at lukashenko 's behest . lukashenko was instrumental in getting the 2014 iihf world championship in ice hockey to be hosted by belarus which was considered controversial due to lukashenko 's repressive regime . lukashenko 's game is up , andrew wilson current history ( 2011 ) 110 ( 738 ) : 277–282 . belarus was supposed to host the 2021 iihf world championship in may 2021 , but that was cancelled after international condemnation and threats by sponsors to withdraw . situation in belarus . european parliament resolution of 17 september 2020 on the situation in belarus ( 2020/2779 ( rsp ) ) . orders and honors . winner of the international premium of andrey pervozvanny '' for faith and loyalty '' ( 1995 ) the order of josé marti ( cuba , 2000 ) order of the revolution ( libya , 2000 ) special prize of the international olympic committee '' gates of olympus '' ( 2000 ) order for merit to the fatherland ( russia , 2001 ) honorary citizen of yerevan , armenia ( 2001 ) order of st . dmitry donskoy , first degree ( 2005 ) medal of the international federation of festival organizations '' for development of the world festival movement '' ( 2005 ) order of st . cyril ( by the belarusian orthodox church ) ( 2006 ) honorary diploma of the eurasian economic community ( 2006 ) order of st . vladimir , first degree ( 2007 ) keys to the city of caracas , venezuela ( 2010 ) order of distinguished citizen ( caracas , venezuela ; 2010 ) order of the republic of serbia ( 2013 ) presidential order of excellence ( georgia , 2013 ) order of alexander nevsky ( 2014 ) '' putin signed the decree about lukashenko 's rewarding with the order of alexander nevsky '' . itar-tass.com . 30 august 2014 . order of nazarbayev ( 2019 ) первый президент казахстана встретился с президентом республики беларусь александром лукашенко ( in kazakhstani ) , 28 march 2019 . accessed on 10 october 2019 . . notes . references . external links . president 's official site profile : alexander lukashenko — bbc news