Home rule

denmark . faroe islands . the faroe islands is a self-governing country in the danish realm . home rule was granted by the parliament of denmark in 1948 , after history of the faroe islands post-world war ii : home rule , with further autonomy granted in 2005 . state department of denmark : the faroe islands home rule arrangement . denmark 's monarch is the faroese head of state . the faroe islands are not part of the european union , even though denmark is . greenland . greenland is a self-governing country in the danish realm . following a referendum in greenland where the majority favored a higher degree of autonomy , home rule was granted by the parliament of denmark in 1979 . state department of denmark : the greenlandic home rule arrangement . after another referendum , further autonomy was granted in 2009 . denmark 's monarch is greenland 's head of state . greenland is not part of the european union , even though denmark is . ireland . the issue of irish home rule was the dominant political question of british and irish politics at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries . from the late nineteenth century , irish leaders of the home rule league , the predecessor of the irish parliamentary party , under isaac butt , william shaw , and charles stewart parnell demanded a form of home rule , with the creation of an irish parliament within the united kingdom of great britain and ireland . this demand led to the eventual introduction of four home rule bills , of which two were passed , the government of ireland act 1914 won by john redmond and most notably the government of ireland act 1920 ( which created the home rule parliaments of northern ireland and southern ireland – the latter state did not in reality function and was replaced by the irish free state ) . the home rule demands of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century differed from earlier demands for repeal by daniel o'connell in the first half of the nineteenth century . whereas home rule meant a constitutional movement towards a national all-ireland parliament in part under westminster , repeal meant the repeal of the 1801 act of union ( if need be , by physical force ) and the creation of an entirely independent irish state , separated from the united kingdom , with only a shared monarch joining them . 1886 : first irish home rule bill was defeated in the house of commons . 1893 : second irish home rule bill passed by the house of commons , vetoed in the house of lords . 1914 : third irish home rule bill passed to the statute books , temporarily suspended by intervention of world war i ( 1914–1918 ) , finally following the easter rising in dublin ( 1916 ) . 1920 : fourth irish home rule act ( government of ireland act 1920 ) fully implemented in northern ireland and partially implemented in southern ireland . liberal leader joseph chamberlain led the battle against home rule in parliament . he broke with the liberal leader william ewart gladstone who insisted on home rule , and in 1886 formed a new party , the liberal unionist party . it helped defeat home rule and eventually merged with the conservative party . chamberlain used anti-catholicism to built a base for the new party among '' orange '' nonconformist protestant elements in britain and ireland . liberal unionist john bright coined the party 's catchy slogan , '' home rule means rome rule . '' . india . several nationalist leaders banded together in 1916 under the leadership of annie besant to voice a demand for self-government , and to obtain the status of a dominion within the british empire as enjoyed by australia , canada , south africa , new zealand and newfoundland at the time . while enjoying considerable popularity for some years , its growth and activity were stalled by the rise of mohandas gandhi and his satyagraha art of revolution : non-violent , but mass-based civil disobedience , aimed at complete independence . united kingdom . england . english home rule has been discussed in relation to proposals for constitutional changes regarding england following the 2014 scottish independence referendum . . scotland . in a similar fashion to ireland , supporters of home rule in scotland have historically desired greater levels of devolved governance within the united kingdom . although the term 'home rule ' has been largely superseded by '' devolution , '' the home rule movement can be seen as the forerunner to the creation of the current devolved scottish parliament . administrative devolution was granted to scotland , with the creation of the scottish office , in 1885 . in the mid-20th century , the home rule movement became significant , campaigning for a scottish assembly . between 1947 and 1950 , the scottish covenant , a petition requesting a scottish legislature within the uk , received over two million signatures . it was not until 1979 that devolution entered the political sphere – the 1979 scottish devolution referendum was held . despite a vote of 51.6 % in favour of devolution , the scotland act 1978 was not put into effect due to a requirement that the 'yes ' vote receive the support of 40 % of the electorate , which was not met on 63.8 % turnout . in 1999 , due to the success of a second referendum , the scottish parliament was created . united states . local government . in the united states , some states constitutionally or legislatively grant home rule to cities , counties , and municipalities within their borders . these are called '' home rule states . '' local governments in home rule states are free to pass laws and ordinances as they see fit to further their operations , within the bounds of the state and federal constitutions . in other states , local governments have only the authority expressly granted to them by state legislatures , typically in accordance with the legal principle known as dillon 's rule . a city charter , awarded by the state , defines the limits to a municipality 's powers . . district of columbia . the us constitution gives jurisdiction over the capital city ( district of columbia or washington , d.c . ) to the united states congress in '' all cases whatsoever '' . this arrangement is due to the fact that the district is neither a state , nor part of a state . at certain times , and presently since 1973 , congress has provided for d.c . government to be carried out primarily by locally elected officials . however , congressional oversight of this local government still exists , and locally elected officials ' powers could theoretically be revoked at any time . native american reservations . the united states federal government provides limited self-rule to some federally recognised native american tribes over their lands on reservations . tribal lands are recognised as '' dependent domestic nations '' and operate a parallel system of governance and law independent of the state ( s ) which the reservation lies within , sometimes including separate police forces . for instance , some tribes are permitted to operate gambling establishments and produce narcotics which may be illegal in the surrounding state or states . reservations are not states and have no direct representation in congress , and the citizens vote as citizens of the state by which they are surrounded . furthermore , unlike the sovereignty of state legislatures , tribal sovereignty and land ownership are not guaranteed by the constitution and is granted only by an act of congress , which can be repealed or altered at any time . see also . autonomous communities of spain basque and pyrenean fueros federation home rule cities act ( michigan ) , an example of municipal home rule devolution , the practice of a national power granting specific powers to a region , state , or province municipal home rule , the legal ability in most american states where voters can adopt a home rule charter granting the municipal government greater local control plaid cymru protectorate scottish national party ( snp )