Operon

history . the term '' operon '' was first proposed in a short paper in the proceedings of the french academy of science in 1960 . from this paper , the so-called general theory of the operon was developed . this theory suggested that in all cases , genes within an operon are negatively controlled by a repressor acting at a single operator located before the first gene . later , it was discovered that genes could be positively regulated and also regulated at steps that follow transcription initiation . therefore , it is not possible to talk of a general regulatory mechanism , because different operons have different mechanisms . today , the operon is simply defined as a cluster of genes transcribed into a single mrna molecule . nevertheless , the development of the concept is considered a landmark event in the history of molecular biology . the first operon to be described was the lac operon in e . coli . the 1965 nobel prize in physiology and medicine was awarded to françois jacob , andré michel lwoff and jacques monod for their discoveries concerning the operon and virus synthesis . overview . operons occur primarily in prokaryotes but also in some eukaryotes , including nematodes such as c . elegans and the fruit fly , drosophila . rrna genes often exist in operons that have been found in a range of eukaryotes including chordates . an operon is made up of several structural genes arranged under a common promoter and regulated by a common operator . it is defined as a set of adjacent structural genes , plus the adjacent regulatory signals that affect transcription of the structural genes . 5 the regulators of a given operon , including repressors , corepressors , and activators , are not necessarily coded for by that operon . the location and condition of the regulators , promoter , operator and structural dna sequences can determine the effects of common mutations . operons are related to regulons , stimulons and modulons ; whereas operons contain a set of genes regulated by the same operator , regulons contain a set of genes under regulation by a single regulatory protein , and stimulons contain a set of genes under regulation by a single cell stimulus . according to its authors , the term '' operon '' is derived from the verb '' to operate '' . . as a unit of transcription . an operon contains one or more structural genes which are generally transcribed into one polycistronic mrna ( a single mrna molecule that codes for more than one protein ) . however , the definition of an operon does not require the mrna to be polycistronic , though in practice , it usually is . upstream of the structural genes lies a promoter sequence which provides a site for rna polymerase to bind and initiate transcription . close to the promoter lies a section of dna called an operator . operons versus clustering of prokaryotic genes . all the structural genes of an operon are turned on or off together , due to a single promoter and operator upstream to them , but sometimes more control over the gene expression is needed . to achieve this aspect , some bacterial genes are located near together , but there is a specific promoter for each of them ; this is called gene clustering . usually these genes encode proteins which will work together in the same pathway , such as a metabolic pathway . gene clustering helps a prokaryotic cell to produce metabolic enzymes in a correct order . . general structure . thumb an operon is made up of 3 basic dna components : promoter – a nucleotide sequence that enables a gene to be transcribed . the promoter is recognized by rna polymerase , which then initiates transcription . in rna synthesis , promoters indicate which genes should be used for messenger rna creation – and , by extension , control which proteins the cell produces . operator – a segment of dna to which a repressor binds . it is classically defined in the lac operon as a segment between the promoter and the genes of the operon . the main operator ( o1 ) in the lac operon is located slightly downstream of the promoter ; two additional operators , o1 and o3 are located at -82 and +412 , respectively . in the case of a repressor , the repressor protein physically obstructs the rna polymerase from transcribing the genes . structural genes – the genes that are co-regulated by the operon . not always included within the operon , but important in its function is a regulatory gene , a constantly expressed gene which codes for repressor proteins . the regulatory gene does not need to be in , adjacent to , or even near the operon to control it . an inducer ( small molecule ) can displace a repressor ( protein ) from the operator site ( dna ) , resulting in an uninhibited operon . alternatively , a corepressor can bind to the repressor to allow its binding to the operator site . a good example of this type of regulation is seen for the trp operon . regulation . control of an operon is a type of gene regulation that enables organisms to regulate the expression of various genes depending on environmental conditions . operon regulation can be either negative or positive by induction or repression . negative control involves the binding of a repressor to the operator to prevent transcription . in negative inducible operons , a regulatory repressor protein is normally bound to the operator , which prevents the transcription of the genes on the operon . if an inducer molecule is present , it binds to the repressor and changes its conformation so that it is unable to bind to the operator . this allows for expression of the operon . the lac operon is a negatively controlled inducible operon , where the inducer molecule is allolactose . in negative repressible operons , transcription of the operon normally takes place . repressor proteins are produced by a regulator gene , but they are unable to bind to the operator in their normal conformation . however , certain molecules called corepressors are bound by the repressor protein , causing a conformational change to the active site . the activated repressor protein binds to the operator and prevents transcription . the trp operon , involved in the synthesis of tryptophan ( which itself acts as the corepressor ) , is a negatively controlled repressible operon . operons can also be positively controlled . with positive control , an activator protein stimulates transcription by binding to dna ( usually at a site other than the operator ) . in positive inducible operons , activator proteins are normally unable to bind to the pertinent dna . when an inducer is bound by the activator protein , it undergoes a change in conformation so that it can bind to the dna and activate transcription . in positive repressible operons , the activator proteins are normally bound to the pertinent dna segment . however , when an inhibitor is bound by the activator , it is prevented from binding the dna . this stops activation and transcription of the system . the lac operon . the lac operon of the model bacterium escherichia coli was the first operon to be discovered and provides a typical example of operon function . it consists of three adjacent structural genes , a promoter , a terminator , and an operator . the lac operon is regulated by several factors including the availability of glucose and lactose . it can be activated by allolactose . lactose binds to the repressor protein and prevents it from repressing gene transcription . this is an example of the derepression ( from above : negative inducible ) model.so it is a negative inducible operon induced by presence of lactose or allolactose . the trp operon . discovered in 1953 by jacques monod and colleagues , the trp operon in e . coli was the first repressible operon to be discovered . while the lac operon can be activated by a chemical ( allolactose ) , the tryptophan ( trp ) operon is inhibited by a chemical ( tryptophan ) . this operon contains five structural genes : trp e , trp d , trp c , trp b , and trp a , which encodes tryptophan synthetase . it also contains a promoter which binds to rna polymerase and an operator which blocks transcription when bound to the protein synthesized by the repressor gene ( trp r ) that binds to the operator . in the lac operon , lactose binds to the repressor protein and prevents it from repressing gene transcription , while in the trp operon , tryptophan binds to the repressor protein and enables it to repress gene transcription . also unlike the lac operon , the trp operon contains a leader peptide and an attenuator sequence which allows for graded regulation . this is an example of the corepressible model . predicting the number and organization of operons . the number and organization of operons has been studied most critically in e . coli . as a result , predictions can be made based on an organism 's genomic sequence . one prediction method uses the intergenic distance between reading frames as a primary predictor of the number of operons in the genome . the separation merely changes the frame and guarantees that the read through is efficient . longer stretches exist where operons start and stop , often up to 40–50 bases . an alternative method to predict operons is based on finding gene clusters where gene order and orientation is conserved in two or more genomes . operon prediction is even more accurate if the functional class of the molecules is considered . bacteria have clustered their reading frames into units , sequestered by co-involvement in protein complexes , common pathways , or shared substrates and transporters . thus , accurate prediction would involve all of these data , a difficult task indeed . pascale cossart 's laboratory was the first to experimentally identify all operons of a microorganism , listeria monocytogenes . the 517 polycistronic operons are listed in a 2009 study describing the global changes in transcription that occur in l . monocytogenes under different conditions .