Corfe Castle (village)

history . burial mounds around the common of corfe castle suggest that the area was occupied from 6000 & nbsp ; bc . the common also points to a later celtic field system worked by the durotriges tribe . evidence suggests that the tribe co-existed with the romans in a trading relationship following the roman invasion c . 50 & nbsp ; ad . history . the corfe castle chamber of trade & commerce . retrieved 5 july 2008 . the name '' corfe '' is derived from the saxon word , ceorfan , meaning to cut or carve , referring to the gap in the purbeck hills where corfe castle is situated . in the 18th century , clay quarrying developed as an industry in the village . by the middle of the century , with the arrival of william pike – a merchant from devon , activity expanded significantly . in 1791 pike signed a five-year contract with josiah wedgwood to supply 1200 tons of clay and search for further deposits . from the 1796 corfe castle census of the 96 men involved in local industries and living in the town , 55 were clay cutters . clay extraction continued to provide major employment for the local population until the 20th century . geography . the parish of corfe castle encompasses a broad swathe of the isle of purbeck and has an area of . to the south , it includes the smaller village of kingston and a section of the jurassic coast facing the english channel . to the north , it includes a large area of heathland stretching as far as the southern shore of poole harbour , where furzey , green , long and round little islands also form part of the parish . to the north west on a clear day , the mendip hills in somerset can be seen in the distance from the castle . the village is constructed almost entirely from the local grey purbeck limestone and comprises two main streets , east street and west street , linked at their north end at the square . landmarks . the national trust runs a shop and a tearoom in the village . the corfe model village , located on the village square , is a scale model that shows what the castle and village would have looked like in 1646 before the castle was slighted . within the church of st . edward is an alabaster reredos inset with carvings in white marble , designed by the famous victorian architect george edmund street , which was presented by lord eldon in 1876 . michael habermann & liane hansen , 1996 . weekend edition . national public radio ; alistair hinton , 2000 . '' kaikhosru shapurji sorabji . '' a cross in the square commemorates queen victoria 's diamond jubilee of 1897 . next to the cross is a defunct village pump , bearing the village 's arms . mortons house hotel was built in 1590 and is one of the most notable buildings in the village . corfe castle . the castle stands above the village and dates back in some form to the 10th century . it was the site of the murder of edward the martyr in 978 . during the english civil war it was a royalist stronghold and was besieged twice , in 1643 and again in 1646 . it is currently owned by the national trust and is open to the public . governance . the former royal status of corfe meant that it existed as a borough electing two members of parliament . in the 17th and 18th centuries , with the bankes 's owning much of the property and thereby controlling most of the votes , the town was a rotten borough . the bankes family was able to ensure that at least one of the mps returned to the house of commons was a member of the family or a bankes nominee . the reform act 1832 abolished the rotten boroughs , and corfe lost its direct representation . the village and castle were part of corfe castle hundred . the parish now forms part of the purbeck ( district ) . it is within the south dorset constituency of the house of commons . prior to brexit in 2020 it was in the south west england constituency of the european parliament . there is an electoral ward called castle which is based on the village , but this includes studland and the intermediate areas . the total population of castle ward is 1,780 . . demography . in the 2011 census corfe castle civil parish had 738 dwellings , 612 households and a population of 1,355 . . transport . thumb the main route through the village is east street which forms part of the a351 main road taking traffic to wareham in the north and swanage in the south . separating the two streets is an area of common land called '' the halves '' . corfe castle railway station lies to the east of east street , adjacent to the village centre . originally the only intermediate station on the london and south western railway 's branch line from wareham to swanage , the station is now a stop on the swanage railway , a steam locomotive operated heritage railway . the railway links the tourist centres of corfe castle and swanage with each other , and with a park and ride site at norden station just to the north of corfe castle . notable residents . the village was for many years the residence of composer kaikhosru shapurji sorabji . brendan flockton , who scored the goal that won the local football team the dorset senior league title , lives in corfe . cultural references . keith roberts , an english science fiction writer who lived nearby , set his novel pavane partly around the castle and similar events in an alternate history . the children 's author enid blyton spent time in the area , and some of her adventure stories like the famous five ( kirrin island ) featured castles that were said to be based on corfe castle . in 1957 the children 's film foundation ( cff ) movie '' five on a treasure island '' was filmed in and around corfe castle , corfe castle village and the jurassic coast ( durdle door and stairhole at lulworth cove ) . the castle is a central setting in ron dawson 's children 's story , 'scary bones meets the wacky witches of wareham ' . one of the 'amazing adventures of scary bones the skeleton ' series , the story tells how a wicked wizard has become part of the castle itself . corfe was featured in the 1971 film bedknobs and broomsticks released by the walt disney company , doubling as the fictional village of pepperinge eye . the castle itself features prominently in mike leigh 's 1976 tv play '' nuts in may '' . the two main characters , keith and candice-marie , pay a visit to the castle during their camping holiday . the backside of corfe castle plus oliver 's bistro in corfe castle village are featured in the german tv thriller '' am ende des schweigens '' ( at the end of the silence ) based on the novel by charlotte link . the juxtaposition of castle and steam train at corfe castle is familiar to many television viewers throughout southern england , as it features in the opening sequences of the bbc 's south today regional news programme along with the official train . an episode of mary queen of shops centred on mary portas revamping the village 's convenience store . featured in 'the lady of hay ' by barbara erskine . see also . scoles manor the shrove tuesday football ceremony of the purbeck marblers national trust properties in england . references . external links . official corfe castle village website corfe castle parish council corfe castle information at the national trust purbeck mineral & mining museum for ball clay information