Schlieffen Plan

humphries and maker . in 2013 , mark humphries and john maker published germany 's western front 1914 , an edited translation of the volumes for 1914 , covering german grand strategy in 1914 and the military operations on the western front to early september . humphries and maker wrote that the interpretation of strategy put forward by delbrück had implications about war planning and began a public debate , in which the german military establishment defended its commitment to . the editors wrote that german strategic thinking was concerned with creating the conditions for a decisive ( war determining ) battle in the west , in which an envelopment of the french army from the north would inflict such a defeat on the french as to end their ability to prosecute the war within forty days . humphries and maker called this a simple device to fight france and russia simultaneously and to defeat one of them quickly , in accordance with of german military tradition . schlieffen may or may not have written the 1905 memorandum as a plan of operations but the thinking in it was the basis for the plan of operations devised by moltke ( the younger ) in 1914 . the failure of the 1914 campaign was a calamity for the german empire and the great general staff , which was disbanded by the treaty of versailles in 1919 . some of the writers of ( the frontier battles in the west 1925 ) , the first volume of , had already published memoirs and analyses of the war , in which they tried to explain why the plan failed , in terms that confirmed its validity . förster , head of the from 1920 and reviewers of draft chapters like groener , had been members of the great general staff and were part of a post-war '' annihilation school '' . under these circumstances , the objectivity of the volume can be questioned as an instalment of the '' '' battle of the memoirs '' , despite the claim in the foreword written by förster , that the would show the war as it actually happened , in the tradition of ranke . it was for the reader to form conclusions and the editors wrote that though the volume might not be entirely objective , the narrative was derived from documents lost in 1945 . the schlieffen memorandum of 1905 was presented as an operational idea , which in general was the only one that could solve the german strategic dilemma and provide an argument for an increase in the size of the army . the adaptations made by moltke were treated in , as necessary and thoughtful sequels of the principle adumbrated by schlieffen in 1905 and that moltke had tried to implement a plan based on the 1905 memorandum in 1914 . the historians 's version showed that moltke had changed the plan and altered its emphasis because it was necessary in the conditions of 1914 . the failure of the plan was explained in by showing that command in the german armies was often conducted with vague knowledge of the circumstances of the french , the intentions of other commanders and the locations of other german units . communication was botched from the start and orders could take hours or days to reach units or never arrive . , the decentralised system of command that allowed local commanders discretion within the commander 's intent , operated at the expense of co-ordination . aerial reconnaissance had more influence on decisions than was sometimes apparent in writing on the war but it was a new technology , the results of which could contradict reports from ground reconnaissance and be difficult for commanders to resolve . it always seemed that the german armies were on the brink of victory , yet the french kept retreating too fast for the german advance to surround them or cut their lines of communication . decisions to change direction or to try to change a local success into a strategic victory were taken by army commanders ignorant of their part in the ohl plan , which frequently changed . portrays moltke ( the younger ) in command of a war machine '' on autopilot '' , with no mechanism of central control . aftermath . analysis . in 2001 , hew strachan wrote that it is a cliché that the armies marched in 1914 expecting a short war , because many professional soldiers anticipated a long war . optimism is a requirement of command and expressing a belief that wars can be quick and lead to a triumphant victory , can be an essential aspect of a career as a peacetime soldier . moltke ( the younger ) was realistic about the nature of a great european war but this conformed to professional wisdom . moltke ( the elder ) was proved right in his 1890 prognostication to the reichstag , that european alliances made a repeat of the successes of 1866 and 1871 impossible and anticipated a war of seven or thirty years ' duration . universal military service enabled a state to exploit its human and productive resources to the full but also limited the causes for which a war could be fought ; social darwinism rhetoric made the likelihood of surrender remote . having mobilised and motivated the nation , states would fight until they had exhausted their means to continue . there had been a revolution in firepower since 1871 , with the introduction of breech-loading weapons , quick-firing artillery and the evasion of the effects of increased firepower , by the use of barbed wire and field fortifications . the prospect of a swift advance by frontal assault was remote ; battles would be indecisive and decisive victory unlikely . major-general ernst köpke , the of the german army in 1895 , wrote that an invasion of france past nancy would turn into siege warfare and the certainty of no quick and decisive victory . emphasis on operational envelopment came from the knowledge of a likely tactical stalemate . the problem for the german army was that a long war implied defeat , because france , russia and britain , the probable coalition of enemies , were far more powerful . the role claimed by the german army as the anti-socialist foundation on which the social order was based , also made the army apprehensive about the internal strains that would be generated by a long war . schlieffen was faced by a contradiction between strategy and national policy and advocated a short war based on , because of the probability of a long one . given the recent experience of military operations in the russo-japanese war , schlieffen resorted to an assumption that international trade and domestic credit could not bear a long war and this tautology justified . grand strategy , a comprehensive approach to warfare , that took in economics and politics as well as military considerations , was beyond the capacity of the great general staff ( as it was among the general staffs of rival powers ) . moltke ( the younger ) found that he could not dispense with schlieffen 's offensive concept , because of the objective constraints that had led to it . moltke was less certain and continued to plan for a short war , while urging the civilian administration to prepare for a long one , which only managed to convince people that he was indecisive . by 1913 , moltke ( the younger ) had a staff of to command an army five times greater than that of 1870 , which would move on double the railway mileage , relying on delegation of command , to cope with the increase in numbers and space and the decrease in the time available to get results . led to the stereotyping of decisions at the expense of flexibility to respond to the unexpected , something increasingly likely after first contact with the opponent . moltke doubted that the french would conform to schlieffen 's more optimistic assumptions . in may 1914 he said , '' i will do what i can . we are not superior to the french . '' and on the night of 1914 , remarked that if britain joined the anti-german coalition , no-one could foresee the duration or result of the war . in 2009 , david stahel wrote that the clausewitzian culminating point ( a theoretical watershed at which the strength of a defender surpasses that of an attacker ) of the german offensive occurred before the battle of the marne , because the german right ( western ) flank armies east of paris , were operating from the nearest rail-head , requiring week-long round-trips by underfed and exhausted supply horses , which led to the right wing armies becoming disastrously short of ammunition . stahel wrote that contemporary and subsequent german assessments of moltke 's implementation of in 1914 , did not criticise the planning and supply of the campaign , even though these were instrumental to its failure and that this failure of analysis had a disastrous sequel , when the german armies were pushed well beyond their limits in operation barbarossa , during 1941 . in 2015 , holger herwig wrote that army deployment plans were not shared with the navy , foreign office , the chancellor , the austro-hungarians or the army commands in prussia , bavaria and the other german states . no one outside the great general staff could point out problems with the deployment plan or make arrangements . '' the generals who did know about it counted on it giving a quick victory within weeks—if that did not happen there was no 'plan b ' '' . see also . manstein plan ( second world war plan with similarities ) . notes . footnotes . references . books journals theses websites . further reading . books journals theses . external links . zuber , t . inventing the schlieffen plan , 2013 translated text of the memorandum war against france december , 1905 ( the schlieffen plan ) the plan that broke the world : the '' schlieffen plan '' and world war i austria-hungary 's last war ( trans . hanna , s . ) pp . 8–15