Barnacle

description . barnacles are encrusters , attaching themselves temporarily to a hard substrate . the most common , '' acorn barnacles '' ( sessilia ) , are sessile , growing their shells directly onto the substrate . the order pedunculata ( goose barnacles and others ) attach themselves by means of a stalk . free-living barnacles are attached to the substratum by cement glands that form the base of the first pair of antennae ; in effect , the animal is fixed upside down by means of its forehead . in some barnacles , the cement glands are fixed to a long , muscular stalk , but in most they are part of a flat membrane or calcified plate . a ring of plates surrounds the body , homologous with the carapace of other crustaceans . these consist of the rostrum , two lateral plates , two carinolaterals , and a carina . in sessile barnacles , the apex of the ring of plates is covered by an operculum , which may be recessed into the carapace . the plates are held together by various means , depending on species , in some cases being solidly fused . inside the carapace , the animal lies on its stomach , with its limbs projecting downwards . segmentation is usually indistinct , and the body is more or less evenly divided between the head and thorax , with little , if any , abdomen . adult barnacles have few appendages on their heads , with only a single , vestigial pair of antennae , attached to the cement gland . the eight pairs of thoracic limbs are referred to as '' cirre '' , which are feathery and very long , being used to filter food , such as plankton , from the water and move it towards the mouth . barnacles have no true heart , although a sinus close to the esophagus performs a similar function , with blood being pumped through it by a series of muscles . the blood vascular system is minimal . similarly , they have no gills , absorbing oxygen from the water through their limbs and the inner membrane of their carapaces . the excretory organs of barnacles are maxillary glands . the main sense of barnacles appears to be touch , with the hairs on the limbs being especially sensitive . the adult also has three photoreceptors ( ocelli ) , one median and two lateral . these photoreceptors record the stimulus for the barnacle shadow reflex , where a sudden decrease in light causes cessation of the fishing rhythm and closing of the opercular plates . the photoreceptors are likely only capable of sensing the difference between light and dark . this eye is derived from the primary naupliar eye . . life cycle . barnacles have two distinct larval stages , the nauplius and the cyprid , before developing into a mature adult . nauplius . a fertilisation hatches into a nauplius : a one-eyed larva comprising a head and a telson , without a thorax or abdomen . this undergoes six moults , passing through five instars , before transforming into the cyprid stage . nauplii are typically initially brooded by the parent , and released after the first moult as larvae that swim freely using setae . . cyprid . the cyprid larva is the last larval stage before adulthood . it is not a feeding stage ; its role is to find a suitable place to settle , since the adults are sessile . the cyprid stage lasts from days to weeks . it explores potential surfaces with modified antennules ; once it has found a potentially suitable spot , it attaches head-first using its antennules and a secreted glycoproteinous substance . larvae assess surfaces based upon their surface texture , chemistry , relative wettability , color , and the presence or absence and composition of a surface biofilm ; swarming species are also more likely to attach near other barnacles . as the larva exhausts its finite energy reserves , it becomes less selective in the sites it selects . it cements itself permanently to the substrate with another proteinaceous compound , and then undergoes metamorphosis into a juvenile barnacle . . adult . typical acorn barnacles develop six hard calcareous plates to surround and protect their bodies . for the rest of their lives , they are cemented to the substrate , using their feathery legs ( cirri ) to capture plankton . once metamorphosis is over and they have reached their adult form , barnacles continue to grow by adding new material to their heavily calcified plates . these plates are not ecdysis ; however , like all ecdysozoans , the barnacle itself will still moult its cuticle . in refsouthward . . sexual reproduction . most barnacles are hermaphrodite , although a few species are gonochoric or androdioecy . the ovaries are located in the base or stalk , and may extend into the mantle , while the testes are towards the back of the head , often extending into the thorax . typically , recently moulted hermaphroditic individuals are receptive as females . self-fertilization , although theoretically possible , has been experimentally shown to be rare in barnacles . in refsouthward . the sessile lifestyle of barnacles makes sexual reproduction difficult , as the organisms can not leave their shells to mate . to facilitate genetic transfer between isolated individuals , barnacles have extraordinarily long penises⁠ . barnacles probably have the largest penis to body size ratio of the animal kingdom , up to eight times their body length . barnacles can also reproduce through a method called spermcasting , in which the male barnacle releases his sperm into the water and females pick it up and fertilise their eggs . the rhizocephala superorder used to be considered hermaphroditic , but it turned out that its males inject themselves into the female 's body , degrading to the condition of nothing more than sperm-producing cells . mechanism of fertilization : plants to humans , edited by brian dale . ecology . most barnacles are suspension feeders ; they dwell continually in their shells , which are usually constructed of six plates , and reach into the water column with modified legs . these feathery appendages beat rhythmically to draw plankton and detritus into the shell for consumption . other members of the class have quite a different mode of life . for example , members of the superorder rhizocephala , including the genus sacculina , are parasitic and live within crabs . although they have been found at water depths to , most barnacles inhabit shallow waters , with 75 % of species living in water depths less than , and 25 % inhabiting the intertidal zone . within the intertidal zone , different species of barnacles live in very tightly constrained locations , allowing the exact height of an assemblage above or below sea level to be precisely determined . since the intertidal zone periodically desiccates , barnacles are well adapted against water loss . their calcite shells are impermeable , and they possess two plates which they can slide across their apertures when not feeding . these plates also protect against predation . barnacles are displaced by limpets and mussels , which compete for space . they also have numerous predators . they employ two strategies to overwhelm their competitors : '' swamping '' and fast growth . in the swamping strategy , vast numbers of barnacles settle in the same place at once , covering a large patch of substrate , allowing at least some to survive in the balance of probabilities . fast growth allows the suspension feeders to access higher levels of the water column than their competitors , and to be large enough to resist displacement ; species employing this response , such as the aptly named megabalanus , can reach in length ; other species may grow larger still ( austromegabalanus psittacus ) . competitors may include other barnacles , and disputed evidence indicates balanoid barnacles competitively displaced chthalamoid barnacles . balanoids gained their advantage over the chthalamoids in the oligocene , when they evolved tubular skeletons , which provide better anchorage to the substrate , and allow them to grow faster , undercutting , crushing , and smothering chthalamoids . among the most common predators on barnacles are whelks . they are able to grind through the calcareous exoskeletons of barnacles and feed on the softer inside parts . mussels also prey on barnacle larvae . another predator on barnacles is the starfish species pisaster ochraceus . file : cornishbarnacles.jpg barnacles and limpets compete for space in the intertidal zone file : entenmuscheln.jpg goose barnacles , with their cirri extended for feeding file : chesaconcavus base detail.jpg underside of large chesaconcavus sp . ( miocene ) showing internal plates in bioimmured smaller barnacles the anatomy of parasitic barnacles is generally simpler than that of their free-living relatives . they have no carapace or limbs , having only unsegmented sac-like bodies . such barnacles feed by extending thread-like rhizomes of living cells into their hosts ' bodies from their points of attachment . . history of taxonomy . barnacles were originally classified by linnaeus and cuvier as mollusca , but in 1830 john vaughan thompson published observations showing the metamorphosis of the nauplius and cypris larvae into adult barnacles , and noted how these larvae were similar to those of crustaceans . in 1834 hermann burmeister published further information , reinterpreting these findings . the effect was to move barnacles from the phylum of mollusca to articulata , showing naturalists that detailed study was needed to reevaluate their taxonomy . charles darwin took up this challenge in 1846 , and developed his initial interest into a major study published as a series of monographs in 1851 and 1854 . darwin undertook this study , at the suggestion of his friend joseph dalton hooker , to thoroughly understand at least one species before making the generalisations needed for his theory of evolution by natural selection . . classification . some authorities regard the cirripedia as a full class or subclass , and the orders listed above are sometimes treated as superorders . in 2001 , martin and davis placed cirripedia as an infraclass of thecostraca and divided it into six orders : infraclass cirripedia burmeister , 1834 superorder acrothoracica gruvel , 1905 order pygophora berndt , 1907 order apygophora berndt , 1907 superorder rhizocephala müller , 1862 order kentrogonida delage , 1884 order akentrogonida häfele , 1911 superorder thoracica darwin , 1854 order pedunculata lamarck , 1818 order sessilia lamarck , 1818 . fossil record . the geological history of barnacles can be traced back to animals such as priscansermarinus from the middle cambrian ( on the order of , in refsouthward . although they do not become common as skeletal remains in the fossil record until the neogene ( last 20 & nbsp ; million years ) . in part , their poor skeletal preservation is due to their restriction to high-energy environments , which tend to be erosional – therefore it is more common for their shells to be ground up by wave action than for them to reach a depositional setting . trace fossils of acrothoracican barnacle borings ( rogerella ) are common in the fossil record from the devonian to the recent . barnacles can play an important role in estimating paleo-water depths . the degree of disarticluation of fossils suggests the distance they have been transported , and since many species have narrow ranges of water depths , it can be assumed that the animals lived in shallow water and broke up as they were washed down-slope . the completeness of fossils , and nature of damage , can thus be used to constrain the tectonic history of regions . file : balanus improvisus on mya arenaria shell.jpg balanus improvisus , one of the many barnacle taxa described by charles darwin file : megabalanus on breccia.jpg miocene ( messinian ) megabalanus , smothered by sand and fossilised file : chesaconcavus top view.jpg chesaconcavus , a miocene barnacle from maryland . relationship with humans . barnacles are of economic consequence , as they often attach themselves to synthetic structures , sometimes to the structure 's detriment . particularly in the case of ships , they are classified as fouling organisms . the amount and size of barnacles that cover ships can negatively impact their efficiency by causing hydrodynamic drag . fortunately , this is not a problem for boats on inland waterways , as barnacles are exclusively marine . uzun et al . ( 2020 ) provide a simplified approach for estimating the effect of real barnacle settlement in nature on the resistance and effective power of the ship . the stable isotope signals in the layers of barnacle shells can potentially be used as a forensic tracking method for whales , loggerhead turtles and marine debris , such as shipwrecks or a flaperon suspected to be from malaysia airlines flight 370 . some barnacles are considered edible by humans , including japanese goose barnacles ( e.g . capitulum mitella ) , and goose barnacles ( e.g . pollicipes pollicipes ) , a delicacy in spain and portugal . the resemblance of this barnacle 's fleshy stalk to a goose 's neck gave rise , in ancient times , to the notion that geese literally grew from the barnacle . indeed , the word '' barnacle '' originally referred to a species of goose , the barnacle goose branta leucopsis , whose eggs and young were rarely seen by humans because it breeds in the remote arctic . '' . all the evidence shows that the name was originally applied to the bird which had the marvellous origin , not to the shell . '' oxford english dictionary , 2nd edition , 1989 additionally , the picoroco barnacle is used in chilean cuisine and is one of the ingredients in curanto . file : siuslaw river-1.jpg barnacles slowly reclaim pilings along the siuslaw river in oregon . file : percebes.iguaria.jpg goose barnacle being enjoyed in a spanish restaurant in madrid . references . further reading . . external links . barnacles from the marine education society of australasia barnacles in spain article on barnacles in spain , and their collection and gastronomy .