Opium Wars

background . in the 18th century , great britain was the first western country to trade with china . in the sino-british trade , china sold porcelains , silk , and tea , but the western industrial goods were hard to sell in china 's self-sufficient natural economy , therefore , foreign countries had to offset the trade balance with silver . the british had nurtured an opium market in china since 1757 . ten years later , the amount of opium imported into china was 1,000 boxes per year ( each weighing 100-120 pounds ) . britain occupied bangladesh which produced opium . in the 1800 centuries , the british east india company expanded the cultivation of opium in its indian bengal territories . the british occupiers forced indian farmers to grow poppy and also set up opium processing plants in kolkata ( কলকাতা ) . in 1773 , the british and indian colonial government reached a deal to grow large quantities of opium for export . they granted the british east india company the monopoly of manufacturing and selling the opium to private traders who transported it to china and passed it on to chinese smugglers . by 1787 , the company was sending 4,000 boxes of opium ( each 77 kg ) per year . between 1800 and 1804 , opium exports averaged 3,500 boxes per year , and between 1820 and 1824 , increased to an average of more than 7,800 boxes per year . from 1838 to 1839 , the opium exported to china totaled 35,500 boxes . in the 1830s , opium accounted for more than half of britain 's shipments to china . american merchants also trafficked opium to china from turkey , persia , and other places . beginning in the 1830s , russia also smuggled opium from central asia to china . the chinese jiaqing emperor issued edicts making opium illegal in 1729 , 1799 , 1814 , and 1831 . despite the ban , britain carried out armed smuggling . concerned with the moral decay of the people and partly with the outflow of silver , the emperor charged high commissioner lin tse-hsu with ending the trade . in 1839 , commissioner lin published in canton , but did not send , an open letter to queen victoria pleading for a halt to the opium contraband . lin ordered the seizure of all opium in canton , including that held by foreign governments and trading companies ( called factories ) , and the companies prepared to hand over a token amount to placate him . charles elliot , chief superintendent of british trade in china , arrived 3 days after the expiry of lin 's deadline , as chinese soldiers enforced a shutdown and blockade of the factories . the standoff ended after elliot paid for all the opium on credit from the british government ( despite lacking official authority to make the purchase ) and handed over 20,000 boxes to lin ( of which 1,540 boxes were american ) and 2,119 sacks , weighing a total of more than 2.37 million pounds . all seized opium was thrown into the ocean and destroyed . in early august 1839 , the news of lin 's seizure and destruction of opium in guangdong reached britain , and the british trade groups immediately called for war . between 1837 and 1838 , before the opium war , britain was in the midst of a second economic crisis . during the period , britain 's industry and commerce was in a depression . a large number of businesses closed down , the backlog of goods , unemployment was very serious , and the british domestic workers ' movement was rising . given that a box of opium was worth nearly us 1,000 in 1800 , this was a substantial economic loss . angry british traders got the british government to promise for compensation of the lost drugs , but the treasury couldn ’ t afford it . the war would resolve the debt . first opium war . in june 1840 , george yuru led the '' oriental expeditionary force '' , consisting of 16 military vessels , 4 armed steamboats , 28 supply ships , 5 heavy cannons , and 400 soldiers ( later increased to 15,000 ) equipped with rifles capable of accurate long-range fire . chinese state troops “ bannermen ” were still equipped with matchlocks accurate only up to 50 yards and a rate of fire of one round per minute . after the british invading forces reached the sea in guangdong , they imposed a blockade on guangzhou ( 广州 ) . in july , british troops attacked xiamen ( 厦门 ) , north of zhejiang ( 浙江 ) , and dinghai ( 定海 ) . on november 6 , 1840 , the governor of the two rivers ( 两江 ) , irib , signed the zhejiang armistice agreement , the negotiations focused on the 6 million silver dollar compensation for the price of tobacco and the opening of more ports for trade . in early january 1841 , the british army launched a surprise attack , capturing the great cape , sha point fort ( 沙角炮台 ) , to pressure the negotiations . on january 27 , 1841 , the qing government declared war on britain . upon learning of the qing government 's troop transfer , the british army immediately attacked the humen fort ( 虎门炮台 ) . the british army surrounded and shelled the city of guangzhou ( 广州 ) . on august 27 , the british attacked xiamen ( 厦门 ) . in september , british troops continued to make it to the north of dinghai ( 定海 ) . on the 13th , the invading british army attacked and looted the city of ningbo ( 宁波 ) . in may 1840 , the british withdrew from ningbo and zhenhai ( 镇海 ) , concentrating their forces on the heavy sea defense of zhapu ( 乍浦 ) . in june , british troops invaded the yangtze river ( 长江 ) and attacked wu 's fort . the british continued to trace the yangtze river to the west and attacked zhenjiang ( 镇江 ) on july 21 . british troops invaded nanjing ’ s downriver ( 南京 ) in early august . the first unequal treaties on august 29 , 1842 , yan ying , irib and yan dingcha signed the sino-british treaty of jiangning ( 江宁条约 ) , or the treaty of nanjing ( 南京条约 ) , on the british warship '' yu gorgeous '' on the nanjing downriver . ( a ) china has opened five ports of commerce in guangzhou , fuzhou ( 福州 ) , xiamen , ningbo , and shanghai ( b ) china ceded hong kong to the united kingdom ( c ) china has to pay the united kingdom a total amount of 21 million silver dollars for the war compensation , with six million , paid immediately and the rest through specified instalments thereafter.14 additionally , the amend established : ( d ) when a british commits a crime at the ports of commerce , the defendant can only be tried in a british court under the laws of the united kingdom . ( e ) the right to live and rent land . the treaty provides that the british can lease land at the port . later , foreign aggressors used this privilege to create a special area completely out of the jurisdiction of the chinese government . the treaty of wangsha ( 望厦条约 ) gave the united states the same land-cutting and compensation the british enjoyed . through whampoa treaty ( 黄埔条约 ) , france has also obtained all the privileges stipulated in the sino-british and sino-american treaties . belgium , sweden , norway , and other western countries have also followed by asking for an '' assistance '' contract . at the time , portugal took the opportunity to usurp china 's jurisdiction over macau . second opium war . in 1854 , the united kingdom requested the qing government an amendment of the nanjing treaty in its entirety , china is required to open up trade throughout the country , legalize the opium trade , exempt import and exports from customs duty . the qing government refused . in the parliamentary re‑election of 1857 , the lord palmerston faction ( tories ) won a majority number of seats in the lower house and passed a proposal to expand the war of aggression against china . in december 1857 , the anglo-french coalition of more than 5,600 people , including 1,000 french troops , gathered at the mouth of the pearl river ( 珠江 ) . in april 1858 , the coalition decided to go north and attacked tagu ( 大沽 ) . on may 20 , the british and french forces marched up the white river , invading the outskirts of tianjin ( 天津 ) . on the evening of june 24 , 1859 , the invading forces broke two large chains of iron blocking the river destroying it . on the 25th , the british and french forces suddenly attacked the dyatshu fort ( 大沽口炮台 ) . after a day and night of fierce fighting , the chinese repelled a british attempt to take the forts by sinking four british ships and killing over 500 british soldiers . during the battle , the u.s . fleet helped the british and french forces to fight and to retreat . the news of the defeat of the british and french allied forces reached europe , and there was a clamor of revenge within the british and french classes . they called for massive retaliation against china , a full‑scale attack on china 's coastline , a full‑scale attack on the capital city , to ouster the emperor from the palace , and to teach the chinese a lesson so that they can learn the british are “ their master '' . in february 1860 , the british and french governments reappointed erkin and groh respectively to lead a coalition with more than 80,000 people , about 7,000 french troops , more than 200 ships , came to china to expand the war of aggression . in april , the british and french forces occupied zhoushan ( 舟山 ) . in may and june , british troops occupied dalian ( 大连市 ) and french troops occupied yantai ( 烟台 ) and sealed off bohai bay ( 渤海湾 ) . on the 18th of the month , the british and french forces entered zhangjiawan ( 张家湾 ) , british and french rifles gunned down 10,000 charging mongolian cavalrymen at the battle of eight mile bridge , eventually , tongzhou ( 通州 ) fell leaving beijing defenseless . at the beginning of october , the invading army occupied the yuanmingyuan ( 圆明园 ) which for more than 150 years holds a comprehensive chinese architectural art achievement , gathered ancient and modern art treasures and books from previous generations , the world 's rare magnificent palaces and gardens , after the looting , the invading army burned the place down . it then spent an entire year looting beijing , tianjin , and the surrounding countryside . a new revised treaty imposed on china legalized both christianity and opium , and added tianjin to the list of treaty ports , and fined the chinese government eight million silver dollars in indemnities . consequences of the opium wars . the russian empire was a massive profiteer from the second opium war . it encroached on more than 1.44 million square kilometers of qing territory through the treaty of aigun ( 嗳浑条约 ) , the treaty of beijing ( 北京条约 ) , and a series of demarcation treaties . on july 25 , 1894 , china freighted the british merchant ship “ high-rise ” to take soldiers to north korea across the yalu river , upon learning of this information , the empire of japan sent a joint fleet from the port of sasebo ( 佐世保军港 ) which intercepted and attacked the passenger ship , more than a thousand chinese soldiers drowned . the opium wars demonstrated to the rest of asia that china 's power was quickly diminishing , which contributed to the breakout and the qing 's failure , in the first sino-japanese war , and would go on to motivate nationalist , republican revolutionaries , such as sun yat sen to overthrow the qing , in 1911 . see also . destruction of opium at humen history of opium in china . references . 李侃 , 李时岳 , 李德征 , 中国近代史 1840-1919 , 第四版 , 第 8-30 , 67-73 , 78 , 194 页 , 1999 . 2021 the week publication inc . why the chinese military is still haunted by this 19th-century 'humiliation ' . available at : accessed on feb 8 , 2021 . yahoo ! entertainment . this is the war that destroyed china ( and could be the reason for another big war ) . available at : accessed on feb 8 , 2021 . further reading . beeching , jack . the chinese opium wars ( harvest books , 1975 ) fay , peter ward . the opium war , 1840–1842 : barbarians in the celestial empire in the early part of the nineteenth century and the war by which they forced her gates ajar ( univ of north carolina press , 1975 ) . gelber , harry g . opium , soldiers and evangelicals : britain 's 1840–42 war with china , and its aftermath . palgrave macmillan , 2004 ) . hanes , w . travis and frank sanello . the opium wars : the addiction of one empire and the corruption of another ( 2014 ) kitson , peter j . '' the last war of the romantics : de quincey , macaulay , the first chinese opium war '' wordsworth circle ( 2018 ) 49 3 online lovell , julia . the opium war : drugs , dreams , and the making of modern china ( 2011 ) . marchant , leslie r . '' the war of the poppies , '' history today ( may 2002 ) vol . 52 issue 5 , pp 42–49 , online popular history platt , stephen r . imperial twilight : the opium war and the end of china 's last golden age ( ny vintage , 2018 ) , 556 pp . kenneth pomeranz , '' blundering into war '' ( review of stephen r . platt , imperial twilight : the opium war and the end of china 's last golden age , vintage ) , the new york review of books , vol . lxvi , no . 10 ( 6 june 2019 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 38–41 . polachek , james m . , the inner opium war ( harvard univ asia center , 1992 ) . waley , arthur , ed . the opium war through chinese eyes ( 1960 ) . wong , john y . deadly dreams : opium , imperialism , and the arrow war ( 1856–1860 ) in china . ( cambridge up , 2002 ) yu , miles maochun . '' did china have a chance to win the opium war ? '' military history in the news july 3 , 2018 . external links . '' the opium wars '' , bbc radio 4 discussion with yangwen zheng , lars laamann , and xun zhou ( in our time , 12 april 2007 )