Christmas Eve

religious traditions . western churches . roman catholics and high church anglicans traditionally celebrate midnight mass , which begins either at or sometime before midnight on christmas eve . this ceremony , which is held in churches throughout the world , celebrates the birth of christ , which is believed to have occurred at night . midnight mass is popular in poland ( pasterka ) and lithuania ( piemenėlių mišios ) . in recent years some churches have scheduled their '' midnight '' mass as early as 7 & nbsp ; pm . this better suits the young children , whose choral singing has become a popular feature in some traditions . in spanish-speaking areas , the midnight mass is sometimes referred to as misa de gallo , or missa do galo in portuguese ( '' rooster 's mass '' ) . in the philippines , the custom has expanded into the nine-day simbang gabi , when filipinos attend dawn masses ( traditionally beginning around 04:00 to 05:00 pst ) from 16 december , continuing daily until christmas eve . in 2009 vatican officials scheduled the midnight mass to start at 10 & nbsp ; pm so that the 82-year-old pope benedict xvi would not have too late a night . a nativity scene may be erected indoors or outdoors , and is composed of figurines depicting the infant jesus resting in a manger , mary , and joseph . vermes , geza . the nativity : history and legend . penguin , 2006 other figures in the scene may include angels , shepherds , and various animals . the figures may be made of any material , dues , greg.catholic customs and traditions : a popular guide twenty-third publications , 2000 . and arranged in a stable or grotto . the magi may also appear , and are sometimes not placed in the scene until the week following christmas to account for their travel time to bethlehem . while most home nativity scenes are packed away at christmas or shortly thereafter , nativity scenes in churches usually remain on display until the feast of the baptism of the lord . whilst it does not include any kind of mass , the church of scotland has a service beginning just before midnight , in which carols are sung . the church of scotland no longer holds hogmanay services on new year 's eve , however . the christmas eve services are still very popular . on christmas eve , the christ candle in the center of the advent wreath is traditionally lit in many church services . in candlelight services , while singing silent night , each member of the congregation receives a candle and passes along their flame which is first received from the christ candle . lutherans traditionally practice christmas eve eucharistic traditions typical of germany and scandinavia . '' krippenspiele '' ( nativity plays ) , special festive music for organ , vocal and brass choirs and candlelight services make christmas eve one of the highlights in the lutheran church calendar . christmas vespers are popular in the early evening , and midnight services are also widespread in regions which are predominantly lutheran . the old lutheran tradition of a christmas vigil in the early morning hours of christmas day ( christmette ) can still be found in some regions . in eastern and middle germany , congregations still continue the tradition of '' quempas singing '' : separate groups dispersed in various parts of the church sing verses of the song '' he whom shepherds once came praising '' ( quem pastores laudavere ) responsively . methodism celebrate the evening in different ways . some , in the early evening , come to their church to celebrate eucharist with their families . the mood is very solemn , and the only visible light is the advent wreath , and the candles upon the lord 's table . others celebrate the evening with services of light , which include singing the song silent night as a variety of candles ( including personal candles ) are lit . other churches have late evening services perhaps at 11 & nbsp ; pm , so that the church can celebrate christmas day together with the ringing of bells at midnight . others offer christmas day services as well . the annual '' nine lessons and carols '' , broadcast from king 's college , cambridge on christmas eve , has established itself a christmas custom in the united kingdom . it is broadcast outside the uk via the bbc world service , and is also bought by broadcasters around the world . . eastern churches . in the byzantine rite , christmas eve is referred to as paramony ( '' preparation '' ) . it is the concluding day of the nativity fast and is observed as a day of strict fasting by those devout byzantine christians who are physically capable of doing so . in some traditions , nothing is eaten until the first star appears in the evening sky , in commemoration of the star of bethlehem . the liturgical celebration begins earlier in the day with the celebration of the royal hours , followed by the divine liturgy combined with the celebration of vespers , during which a large number of passages from the old testament are chanted , recounting the history of salvation . after the dismissal at the end of the service , a new candle is brought out into the center of the church and lit , and all gather round and sing the troparion and kontakion of the feast . in the evening , the all-night vigil for the feast of the nativity is composed of great compline , matins and the first hour . the byzantine services of christmas eve are intentionally parallel to those of good friday , illustrating the theological point that the purpose of the incarnation was to make possible the crucifixion and resurrection . this is illustrated in eastern icons of the nativity , on which the christ child is wrapped in swaddling clothes reminiscent of his burial shroud . the child is also shown lying on a stone , representing the holy sepulchre , rather than a manger . the cave of the nativity is also a reminder of the cave in which jesus was buried . the services of christmas eve are also similar to those of the eve of theophany ( epiphany ) , and the two great feasts are considered one celebration . in some orthodox cultures , after the vesperal liturgy the family returns home to a festive meal , but one at which orthodox fasting rules are still observed : no meat or dairy products ( milk , cheese , eggs , etc . ) are consumed ( see below for variations according to nationality ) . then they return to the church for the all-night vigil . the next morning , christmas day , the divine liturgy is celebrated again , but with special features that occur only on great feasts of the lord . after the dismissal of this liturgy , the faithful customarily greet each other with the kiss of peace and the words : '' christ is born ! '' , to which the one being greeted responds : '' glorify him ! '' ( the opening words of the canon of the nativity that was chanted the night before during the vigil ) . this greeting , together with many of the hymns of the feast , continue to be used until the leave-taking of the feast on 29 december . the first three days of the feast are particularly solemn . the second day is known as the synaxis of the theotokos , and commemorates the role of the virgin mary in the nativity of jesus . the third day is referred to simply as '' the third day of the nativity '' . the saturday and sunday following 25 december have special epistle and gospel readings assigned to them . 29 december celebrates the holy innocents . byzantine christians observe a festal period of twelve days , during which no one in the church fasts , even on wednesdays and fridays , which are normal fasting days throughout the rest of the year . during this time one feast leads into another : 25–31 december is the afterfeast of the nativity ; 2–5 january is the forefeast of the epiphany . meals . . bulgaria . in bulgaria , the meal consists of an odd number of lenten dishes in compliance with the rules of fasting . they are usually the traditional sarma , bob chorba ( bean soup ) , fortune kravai ( pastry with a fortune in it ; also called bogovitsa , vechernik , kolednik ) , stuffed peppers , nuts , dried fruit , boiled wheat . bulgarian main courses the meal is often accompanied with wine or bulgaria 's traditional alcoholic beverage rakia , in the past olovina ( a type of homemade rye beer ) . the meals used to be put on top of hay , directly on the floor , together with a ploughshare or a coulter . христо вакарелски . етнография на българия . наука и изкуство . софия 1977 . с . 500 . czech republic . in the czech republic , feasting on the day of christmas eve ( or only eating meatless food ) is a medieval tradition . the belief is that if one lasted until christmas dinner , they would see a golden pig , which is a symbol of luck . a typical christmas breakfast is a sweet braided bread vánočka . christmas eve dinner traditionally consists of a carp ( baked or fried ) and a potato salad . . france . in french-speaking places , réveillon is a long dinner eaten on christmas eve . italy . while other christian families throughout the world celebrate the christmas eve meal with various meats , italians ( especially sicilians ) celebrate the traditional catholic '' feast of the seven fishes '' which was historically served after a 24-hour fasting period . although christmas fasting is no longer a popular custom , some italian-americans still enjoy a meatless christmas eve feast and attend the midnight mass . in various cultures , a festive dinner is traditionally served for the family and close friends in attendance , when the first star ( usually sirius ) arrives on the sky . lithuania . lithuanian christmas eve blends pagan and christian traditions as initially it was a celebration of winter solstice . traditionally , lithuanians believed that animals could talk on that night , and it was possible to predict the future with charms and various games . kūčios ( '' holy meal '' ) is the most important event of the year and family reunion . dead relatives are remembered with an empty plate set at the table . the feast starts after the rise of the evening star . no products made from meat , milk and alcohol are allowed during the kūčios . in all , 12 dishes are served , all of them rustic , made from grains , fish , dried fruit or mushrooms including kūčiukai . small biscuits soaked in poppy milk are served . after the dinner is over the table is left uncleared overnight for the feast of vėlės ( spirits or soul ) . . poland . a tradition similar to italy ( wigilia , or 'christmas vigil ' ) exists in poland . the number of dishes is traditionally 12 , but has been an odd number in the past . according to the słownik etymologiczny języka polskiego ( etymological dictionary of the polish language ) by aleksander brückner , the number of dishes was traditionally related to social class : the peasants ' vigil consisted of 5 or 7 dishes , the gentry usually had 9 , and the aristocracy , 11 dishes , but the even number 12 is also found today to remember the twelve apostles . it is obligatory to try a portion of all of them . some traditions specify that the number of guests can not be odd . in poland , gifts are unwrapped on christmas eve , as opposed to christmas day . it comes from fusion saint nicolas 's day ( december 6th ) and christmas traditions . in the past gifts has been made on the saint nicolas 's day morning . russia , ukraine . in russia , ukraine , traditional , meatless , 12-dishes christmas eve supper is served on christmas eve before opening gifts . the table is spread with a white cloth symbolic of the swaddling clothes the child jesus was wrapped in , and a large white candle stands in the center of the table symbolizing light of the world ( jesus ) . next to it is a round loaf of bread symbolizing christ bread of life . hay is often displayed either on the table or as a decoration in the room , reminiscent of the manger in bethlehem . the twelve dishes ( which differ by nationality or region ) symbolize the twelve apostles . the holy meal was a common eastern orthodox tradition in the russian empire , but during the era of the soviet union it was greatly discouraged as a result of the official atheism of the former regime . it is coming back in russia and continues to be popular in ukraine . the main attributes of holy meal in ukraine are kutia , a poppy seed , honey and wheat dish , and uzvar , a drink made from reconstituted dried fruits . other typical dishes are borscht , varenyky , and dishes made of fish , phaseolus and cabbage . serbia . in accordance with the serbian christmas traditions , their festive meal has a copious and diverse selection of foods , although it is prepared according to the rules of fasting . as well as a round , unleavened loaf of bread and salt , which are necessary , this meal may comprise roast fish , cooked beans , sauerkraut , noodles with ground walnuts , honey , and wine . families in some slavic countries leave an empty place at the table for guests ( alluding to mary and joseph looking for shelter in bethlehem ) . gift giving . during the reformation in 16th- and 17th-century europe , many protestants changed the gift bringer to the christ child or christkindl , and the date of giving gifts changed from 6 december to christmas eve . forbes , bruce david , christmas : a candid history , university of california press , 2007 , , pp . 68–79 . it is the night when santa claus makes his rounds delivering gifts to good children . many trace the custom of giving gifts to the magi who brought gifts for the christ child in the manger . in austria , croatia , the czech republic , hungary , and slovakia , where saint nicholas ( sv . mikuláš/szent mikulás ) gives his sweet gifts on 6 december , the christmas gift-giver is the christkind ( ježíšek in czech , jézuska in hungarian , ježiško in slovak and isusek in croatian ) . the christmas encyclopedia mcfarland p.143 . & co . , 2005 in most parts of austria , the czech republic , germany , hungary , poland , slovakia , and switzerland , presents are traditionally exchanged on the evening of 24 december . children are commonly told that presents were brought either by the christkind ( german for christ child ) , the christmas almanack p.56 . random house reference , 2004 or by the weihnachtsmann . both leave the gifts , but are in most families not seen doing so . in germany , the gifts are also brought on 6 december by '' the nikolaus '' with his helper knecht ruprecht . in estonia jõuluvana , finland joulupukki , denmark julemanden , norway julenissen and sweden jultomten , personally meets children and gives presents in the evening of christmas eve . llewellyn 's sabbats almanac : samhain 2010 to mabon 2011 p.64 . llewellyn worldwide , 2010 festivals of western europe p.202 . forgotten books , 1973 in argentina , austria , brazil , colombia , denmark , estonia , the faroe islands , finland , france , germany , hungary , iceland , latvia , lithuania , luxembourg , norway , poland , portugal , french canada , romania , uruguay , slovakia , slovenia , sweden , switzerland and the czech republic , christmas presents are opened mostly on the evening of the 24th – following german tradition , this is also the practice among the british royal family since it was introduced by queen victoria and albert , prince consort – while in italy , the united states , the united kingdom , republic of ireland , english canada , south africa , new zealand and australia , this occurs mostly on the morning of christmas day . in other latin american countries , people stay awake until midnight , when they open the presents . in spain , gifts are traditionally opened on the morning of 6 january , epiphany day ( '' día de los tres reyes magos '' ) , francis , charles wisdom well said p.224 levine mesa press , 2009 though in some other countries , like mexico , argentina and uruguay , people receive presents both around christmas and on the morning of epiphany day . in belgium and the netherlands saint nicholas or sinterklaas and his companion zwarte piet deliver presents to children and adults alike on the evening of 5 december , the eve of his nameday . concepts of person in religion and thought walter de gruyter , 1990 on 24 december they go to church or watch the late-night mass on tv , or have a meal . christmas eve around the world . christmas eve is celebrated in different ways around the world , varying by country and region . elements common to many areas of the world include the attendance of special religious observances such as a midnight mass or vespers and the giving and receiving of presents . along with easter , christmastime is one of the most important periods on the christian calendar , and is often closely connected to other holidays at this time of year , such as advent , the feast of the immaculate conception , st . nicholas day , st . stephen 's day , new year 's , and the feast of the epiphany . celebrations . among christians , as well as non-christians who celebrate christmas , the significant amount of vacation travel , and travel back to family homes , that takes place in the lead-up to christmas means that christmas eve is also frequently a time of social events and parties , worldwide . eugene fodor , fodor 's south 1980 : alabama , florida , georgia , kentucky , louisiana , 1979 , at p . 87 , available at google books gary sigley , a chinese christmas story , in shi-xu , ed . , discourse as cultural struggle , 2007 , at p . 99 , available at google books adebayo oyebade , culture and customs of angola , 2007 , at pp . 103 , 140 , available at google books see , e.g . , getqd twas the night before christmas tonic tonic nightclub vancouver bc , 2009 see , e.g . , upcoming.org , the college night out , 2009 . in jewish culture . nittel nacht is a name given to christmas eve by jewish scholars in the 17th century . in contemporary american-jewish culture . with christmas day a work holiday throughout the united states , there is a space of unfilled free time during which much of american commerce and society is not functioning , and which can give rise to a sense of loneliness or alienation for american jews . jessica gresko , '' dec . 24 becomes party night for jewish singles '' , associated press ( washington post ) , 24 december 2006 barbara lewis , '' matzoball detroit : jewish singles now have their own party on christmas eve '' , detroit jewish news , 18 december 2014 jews also typically do not engage in the family gathering and religious worship activities that are central to christmas eve for christians . typical contemporary activities have usually been limited to '' chinese and a movie '' —consuming a meal at a chinese restaurant , which tend to be open for business on the christmas holiday , and watching a movie at the theater or at home , stereotypically a rerun of it 's a wonderful life . since the 1980s a variety of social events for young jews have sprung up , and become popular , on christmas eve . these include the matzo ball , the ball , and a number of local events organized by jewish communities and local jewish federations in north america . . in chinese culture . in mandarin , christmas eve is called , '' peaceful night '' , etymologically from the chinese title of the christmas carol silent night ) . people exchange apples , because the word for '' apple '' 果 ) is a rhyming wordplay with '' peace '' 安 ) . . in inuit culture . in inuit territories , christmas eve is called quviasukvik . the inuit celebrate it as their new year . sex in our strange world : why christmas has always been about sex christmas in the big igloo inulariuyunga ; imngirnik quvigiyaqaqtunga ! . historical events . a number of historical events have been influenced by the occurrence of christmas eve . christmas truce . during world war i in 1914 and 1915 there was an unofficial christmas truce , particularly between british and german troops . the truce began on christmas eve , 24 december 1914 , when german troops began decorating the area around their trenches in the region of ypres , belgium , for christmas . they began by placing candles on trees , then continued the celebration by singing christmas carols , most notably stille nacht ( '' silent night '' ) . the british army in the trenches across from them responded by singing english carols . the two sides shouted christmas greetings to each other . soon there were calls for visits across the '' no man 's land '' when small gifts were exchanged . the truce also allowed a breathing space during which recently killed soldiers could be brought back behind their lines by burial parties . funerals took place as soldiers from both sides mourned the dead together and paid their respects . at one funeral in no man 's land , soldiers from both sides gathered and read a passage from psalm 23 . the truce occurred in spite of opposition at higher levels of the military command . earlier in the autumn , a call by pope benedict xv for an official truce between the warring governments had been ignored . apollo 8 reading from genesis . on 24 december 1968 , in what was the most watched television broadcast to that date , the astronauts bill anders , jim lovell and frank borman of apollo 8 surprised the world with a reading of the creation from the book of genesis as they orbited the moon . madalyn murray o'hair , an atheist activist , filed a lawsuit under the establishment clause of the first amendment . the trial court dismissed the lawsuit , which was upheld on appeal . o'hair v . paine , 312 f . supp . 434 ( w.d . tex . 1969 ) , aff 'd , 432 f.2d 66 ( 5th cir . 1970 ) ( per curiam ) , cert . denied , . see also o'hair v . paine ( dismissing direct appeal of trial court order remanding from three-judge panel ) . in 1969 , the united states postal service issued a stamp ( scott 1371 ) commemorating the apollo 8 flight around the moon . the stamp featured a detail of the famous photograph , earthrise , of the earth '' rising '' over the moon ( nasa image as8-14-2383hr ) , taken by anders on christmas eve , and the words , '' in the beginning god . '' .