1950 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1950 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . notable films released in 1950 . us unless stated . . 47 morto che parla , starring totò – ( italy ) 711 ocean drive , starring edmond o'brien and joanne dru . a . abbott and costello in the foreign legion , starring bud abbott and lou costello the admiral was a lady , starring wanda hendrix and edmond o'brien all about eve , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring bette davis , anne baxter , george sanders , celeste holm , hugh marlowe , marilyn monroe – winner of 6 oscars ambush , starring robert taylor and arlene dahl annie get your gun , starring betty hutton , howard keel , louis calhern armored car robbery , starring charles mcgraw and william talman the asphalt jungle , directed by john huston , starring sterling hayden , louis calhern , sam jaffe , james whitmore , jean hagen and marilyn monroe the astonished heart , starring celia johnson and noël coward – ( gb ) at war with the army , starring dean martin and jerry lewis . b . babul ( father 's house ) , starring dilip kumar and nargis – ( india ) backfire , starring virginia mayo and gordon macrae the bandit queen , starring barbara britton and phillip reed the baron of arizona , starring vincent price beauty and the devil ( la beauté du diable ) , directed by rené clair , starring michel simon – ( france/italy ) beqasoor , starring madhubala – ( india ) the big lift , starring montgomery clift and paul douglas bitter springs , starring tommy trinder and chips rafferty – ( australia/gb ) the black forest girl , starring sonja ziemann and rudolf prack – ( west germany ) the black rose , starring tyrone power and orson welles – ( gb/us ) the blue lamp , starring jack warner and dirk bogarde – ( gb ) born to be bad , starring joan fontaine and robert ryan born yesterday , directed by george cukor , starring broderick crawford , judy holliday and william holden the breaking point , directed by michael curtiz , starring john garfield and patricia neal bright leaf , starring gary cooper , lauren bacall and patricia neal broken arrow , starring james stewart and jeff chandler . c . café paradis – ( denmark ) caged , starring eleanor parker caiçara , directed by and starring adolfo celi – ( brazil ) captain carey , u.s.a . , starring alan ladd and wanda hendrix captain china , starring john payne and gail russell champagne for caesar , starring ronald colman , celeste holm , vincent price , art linkletter cheaper by the dozen , starring clifton webb and myrna loy cinderella , a disney animated film . directed by clyde geronimi , hamilton luske , and wilfred jackson , starring ilene woods , eleanor audley , verna felton , rhoda williams , james macdonald , luis van rooten , don barclay , mike douglas , and lucille bliss comanche territory , starring maureen o'hara convicted , starring glenn ford and broderick crawford crisis , starring cary grant and jose ferrer cyrano de bergerac , starring josé ferrer . d . d.o.a . , starring edmond o'brien dallas , starring gary cooper the damned do n't cry , starring joan crawford dance hall , directed by charles crichton , starring diana dors and petula clark – ( gb ) darah dan doa , directed and produced by usmar ismail – ( indonesia ) , first native-produced indonesian film dark city , directed by william dieterle , starring charlton heston ( in his first studio film ) , lizabeth scott , viveca lindfors , dean jagger , mike mazurki , ed begley the daughter of rosie o'grady , starring june haver and gordon macrae death is a caress ( døden er et kjærtegn ) – ( norway ) deported , starring jeff chandler destination moon , starring john archer the devil is a woman ( doña diabla ) – ( mexico ) devil 's doorway , starring robert taylor , louis calhern , paula raymond dial 1119 , starring marshall thompson , virginia field , william conrad dieu a besoin des hommes ( god needs man ) , directed by jean delannoy – ( france ) . e . the eagle and the hawk , starring rhonda fleming and john payne edge of doom , starring farley granger and mala powers les enfants terribles , directed by jean-pierre melville – ( france ) escape at dawn ( akatsuki no dasso ) – ( japan ) . f . the fall of berlin ( padeniye berlina ) – ( ussr ) fancy pants , starring bob hope and lucille ball father is a bachelor , starring william holden and colleen gray father of the bride , directed by vincente minnelli , starring spencer tracy , joan bennett and elizabeth taylor the file on thelma jordon , starring barbara stanwyck the fireball , starring mickey rooney and pat o'brien the flame and the arrow , starring burt lancaster and virginia mayo the flowers of st . francis ( francesco , giullare di dio ) , directed by roberto rossellini – ( italy ) for heaven 's sake , starring clifton webb and joan bennett frenchie , starring joel mccrea and shelley winters the fuller brush girl , starring lucille ball and eddie albert the furies , directed by anthony mann , starring barbara stanwyck and walter huston . g . gabriela , directed by géza von cziffra , starring zarah leander – ( west germany ) gerald mcboing-boing the glass menagerie , based on the play by tennessee williams , starring jane wyman , kirk douglas , gertrude lawrence and arthur kennedy gone to earth , starring jennifer jones – ( gb ) guilty of treason , starring charles bickford and bonita granville gun crazy ( aka deadly is the female ) , starring john dall and peggy cummins the gunfighter , starring gregory peck gunman in the streets , starring simone signoret – ( france ) . h . the happiest days of your life , starring alastair sim and margaret rutherford – ( gb ) harriet craig , starring joan crawford and wendell corey harvey , starring james stewart and josephine hull highly dangerous , starring margaret lockwood and dane clark – ( gb ) highway 301 , starring steve cochran and virginia grey the hollywood ten , documentary by john berry house by the river , starring louis hayward and jane wyatt hunt the man down , starring gig young and carla balenda . i-j . the iroquois trail , starring george montgomery i was a shoplifter , starring scott brady and mona freeman i 'll get by , starring june haver , gloria dehaven , steve allen , dennis day in a lonely place , directed by nicholas ray , starring humphrey bogart and gloria grahame the jackie robinson story , starring robinson as himself , with ruby dee jogan , starring dilip kumar and nargis – ( india ) johnny one-eye , starring pat o'brien julius caesar , starring charlton heston justice is done ( justice est faite ) – ( france ) . k . key to the city , starring clark gable and loretta young the kid ( xi lu xiang ) , starring 10-year-old bruce lee – ( hong kong ) kill the umpire , starring william bendix , william frawley , una merkel the killer that stalked new york , starring evelyn keyes kim , starring errol flynn king solomon 's mines , starring deborah kerr and stewart granger kiss tomorrow goodbye , starring james cagney . l . a lady without passport , starring hedy lamarr and john hodiak last holiday , starring alec guinness – ( gb ) the lawless , directed by joseph losey , starring macdonald carey let 's dance , starring fred astaire and betty hutton life ( jeevitham ) , directed by a . v . meiyappan , starring vyjayanthimala in her telugu film debut – ( india ) a life of her own , starring lana turner and ray milland the life of wu xun ( wu xun zhuan ) – ( china ) louisa , starring ronald reagan love happy , starring the marx brothers and , in a non-speaking role , marilyn monroe . m . the magnificent yankee , starring louis calhern the man who cheated himself , starring lee j . cobb and jane wyatt the men , starring marlon brando in his film debut , with teresa wright , everett sloane , jack webb and , in a bit part , deforest kelley the miniver story , starring greer garson , walter pidgeon and john hodiak mirror of holland ( spiegel van holland ) – ( netherlands ) winner of short film palme d'or mister 880 , starring burt lancaster and edmund gwenn montana , starring errol flynn and alexis smith morning departure ( aka operation disaster ) , starring john mills and richard attenborough – ( gb ) mrs . o'malley and mr . malone , starring marjorie main and james whitmore the mudlark , starring irene dunne and alec guinness – ( gb/us ) mussorgsky – ( ussr ) my blue heaven , starring betty grable my friend irma goes west , starring dean martin and jerry lewis mystery street , starring ricardo montalbán . n . nancy goes to rio , starring ann sothern , jane powell , barry sullivan , carmen miranda , louis calhern , and scotty beckett the nevadan , starring randolph scott and dorothy malone night and the city , directed by jules dassin , starring richard widmark and gene tierney – ( gb ) no man of her own , starring barbara stanwyck no peace under the olive tree ( non c ' è pace tra gli ulivi ) , starring raf vallone – ( italy ) no way out , starring richard widmark , linda darnell , stephen mcnally and sidney poitier . o . odette , starring anna neagle and trevor howard – ( gb ) los olvidados , directed by luis buñuel – photograph of gabriel figueroa – ( mexico ) once a thief , starring cesar romero and lon chaney , jr . one way street , starring james mason orphée , directed by jean cocteau , starring jean marais – ( france ) outrage , directed by ida lupino , starring mala powers outside the wall , starring richard basehart and marilyn maxwell . p-q . panic in the streets , directed by elia kazan , starring richard widmark , jack palance , zero mostel and barbara bel geddes path of hope ( il cammino della speranza ) , directed by pietro germi , starring raf vallone – ( italy ) perfect strangers , starring ginger rogers please believe me , starring deborah kerr , peter lawford and robert walker post office box 1001 ( apartado de correos 1001 ) – ( spain ) prehistoric women , directed by gregg c . tallas prima comunione ( aka father 's dilemma ) , starring aldo fabrizi – ( italy ) quicksand , starring mickey rooney and peter lorre . r . rashomon , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune and masayuki mori – ( japan ) riding high , directed by frank capra , starring bing crosby right cross , starring june allyson and dick powell rio grande , directed by john ford , starring john wayne and maureen o'hara rocketship x-m , starring lloyd bridges , hugh o'brian and noah beery , jr . rocky mountain , starring errol flynn and patrice wymore rogues of sherwood forest , starring john derek la ronde ( the merry-go-round ) , directed by max ophüls , starring simone signoret and anton walbrook – ( france ) room to let , directed by godfrey grayson . s . scandal ( sukyandaru ) , directed by akira kurosawa – ( japan ) the second face , starring ella raines the secret fury , starring claudette colbert and robert ryan september affair , starring joan fontaine and joseph cotten seven days to noon , directed by the boulting brothers , starring barry jones – ( gb ) shadow on the wall , starring ann sothern , zachary scott , nancy davis side street , starring farley granger and cathy o'donnell sierra , starring wanda hendrix and audie murphy the sleeping city , starring richard conte so long at the fair , starring jean simmons and dirk bogarde – ( gb ) the sound of fury , starring frank lovejoy and lloyd bridges stage fright , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring jane wyman , marlene dietrich , michael wilding and richard todd – ( gb ) stars in my crown , starring joel mccrea state secret , starring douglas fairbanks jr . and jack hawkins – ( gb ) story of a love affair ( cronaca di un amore ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni – ( italy ) stromboli , directed by roberto rossellini , starring ingrid bergman – ( italy/us ) summer stock , starring judy garland and gene kelly , with phil silvers sunday in august ( domenica d'agosto ) – ( italy ) sunset boulevard , directed by billy wilder , starring william holden , gloria swanson , erich von stroheim , nancy olson . t . también de dolor se canta ( they also sing from sadness ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) tea for two , starring doris day and gordon macrae tension , starring richard basehart and audrey totter this life of mine ( wo zhe yi bei zi ) – ( china ) three came home , starring claudette colbert three little words , starring fred astaire and red skelton three secrets , starring eleanor parker , patricia neal , ruth roman a ticket to tomahawk , starring anne baxter and dan dailey the titan : story of michelangelo , award-winning documentary by robert j . flaherty to joy ( till glädje ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) to please a lady , starring clark gable and barbara stanwyck the toast of new orleans , starring kathryn grayson and mario lanza tomorrow is too late ( domani è troppo tardi ) , starring pier angeli and vittorio de sica – ( italy ) the trap ( past ) , directed by martin frič – ( czechoslovakia ) treasure island , starring robert newton – ( gb/us ) trio , starring nigel patrick , wilfred hyde-white , jean simmons – ( gb ) tripoli , starring maureen o'hara and john payne two flags west , starring joseph cotten and linda darnell two weeks with love , starring jane powell and ricardo montalban . u-v . el último caballo ( the last horse ) – ( spain ) the underworld story , starring dan duryea union station , starring william holden until we meet again ( mata au hi made ) – ( japan ) variety lights ( luci del varietà ) , directed by federico fellini – ( italy ) vendetta , starring faith domergue ( filmed in 1946 but not released until 1950 due to delays from howard hughes ) . w . wabash avenue , starring betty grable ( a remake of grable 's 1943 film coney island ) wagon master , directed by john ford , starring ben johnson , joanne dru and ward bond watch the birdie , starring red skelton , arlene dahl and ann miller the west point story , starring james cagney and doris day when willie comes marching home , starring dan dailey where danger lives , starring robert mitchum and faith domergue in her film debut where the sidewalk ends , directed by otto preminger , starring dana andrews and gene tierney winchester '73 , starring james stewart , shelley winters , stephen mcnally , dan duryea , and with early appearances by rock hudson and tony curtis the woman in question , directed by anthony asquith , starring jean kent and dirk bogarde – ( gb ) woman in hiding , starring ida lupino , howard duff and stephen mcnally woman on the run , starring ann sheridan and dennis o'keefe the wooden horse , starring leo genn and anthony steel – ( gb ) . y-z . the yellow cab man , starring red skelton and gloria dehaven the young and the damned ( los olvidados ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) young man with a horn , directed by michael curtiz , starring kirk douglas , lauren bacall , doris day zhukovsky – ( ussr ) . serials . atom man vs . superman , starring kirk alyn , noel neill and lyle talbot cody of the pony express desperadoes of the west , starring tom keene flying disc man from mars , starring walter reed and lois collier the invisible monster , starring richard webb and aline towne pirates of the high seas , starring buster crabbe . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1952 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) donald duck ( 1936–1956 ) pluto ( 1937–1951 ) goofy ( 1939–1953 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) the fox and the crow ( 1941–1950 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) chip and dale ( 1943–1956 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) noveltoons ( 1943–1967 ) . births . january 24 – daniel auteuil , french actor january 30 – trinidad silva , american comedian and character actor ( d . 1988 ) february 5 – jonathan freeman , american actor , voice actor , singer and puppeteer february 12 – michael ironside , canadian actor february 18 cybill shepherd , american actress john hughes , american director , producer and screenwriter ( d . 2009 ) february 22 – julie walters , english actress february 25 – neil jordan , irish director march 11 – jerry zucker , director and producer march 13 – william h . macy , actor march 18 – brad dourif , actor march 20 – william hurt , actor march 26 martin short , canadian comedian and actor alan silvestri , american film composer and conductor march 30 – robbie coltrane , scottish actor april 4 – christine lahti , actress april 13 – ron perlman , actor april 16 – david graf , american actor april 22 – thierry zéno , belgian director ( d . 2017 ) april 20 – jay leno , american comedian , actor , writer , producer and late-night television host april 29 – phillip noyce , australian director may 8 – robert mugge , american director and producer may 12 – gabriel byrne , irish actor may 22 – peter wildman , canadian actor june 1 – john m . jackson , american film and television actor june 6 – chantal akerman , belgian director ( d . 2015 ) june 8 – kathy baker , american actress june 13 – belinda bauer , australian actress june 19 – daria nicolodi , italian actress and screenwriter ( d . 2020 ) june 24 – nancy allen , american actress june 25 – thomas jefferson byrd , american actor ( d . 2020 ) august 12 – jim beaver , american actor august 13 – jane carr , english actress september 7 – julie kavner , american film and television actress , voice actress and comedian september 11 – amy madigan , american actress september 21 – bill murray , american actor and comedian september 28 – john sayles , american director and screenwriter october 1 – randy quaid , american actor october 17 – howard rollins , american actor ( d . 1996 ) october 18 – om puri , indian actor october 31 – john candy , canadian comedian and actor ( d . 1994 ) november 13 – jules sylvester , british wild animal trainer , actor and television presenter november 28 – ed harris , american actor december 10 – gregg berger , american voice actor december 13 – wendie malick , american-canadian actress and former fashion model . deaths . january 2 – emil jannings , 65 , swiss-born german actor , the blue angel , the last laugh january 12 – john m . stahl , 63 , american film director and producer , leave her to heaven , imitation of life january 22 – corinne luchaire , 28 , french actress , prison without bars , conflict march 10 – marguerite de la motte , 47 , american actress , the mark of zorro , the iron mask march 18 – edgar rice burroughs , 74 , american writer , creator of tarzan march 25 – frank buck , 66 , american actor and animal expert , bring 'em back alive , africa screams april 7 – walter huston , 67 , american academy award-winning actor , the treasure of the sierra madre , dodsworth may 1 – ernst laemmle , 49 , german director and screenwriter , the phantom of the opera , the palm beach story june 22 – jane cowl , 66 , american actress , no man of her own , payment on demand july 17 – antonie nedošinská , 65 , czech actress , falešná kočička aneb když si žena umíní , capek 's tales september 13 – sara allgood , 69 , irish actress , how green was my valley , the lodger october 23 – al jolson , 64 , lithuanian-born american actor , singer , entertainer , the jazz singer , rhapsody in blue , the singing fool october 29 – maurice costello , 73 , american actor , du barry was a lady , tin pan alley december 4 – james kevin mcguinness , 56 , irish-american producer and screenwriter , madame x , rio grande december 28 – william garwood , 66 , american silent-film actor and director , the cowboy millionaire , proxy husband . film debuts . marlon brando – the men carol channing – paid in full richard crenna – let 's dance tippi hedren – the petty girl piper laurie – louisa sophia loren – totò tarzan rita moreno – so young , so bad jack palance – panic in the streets peter sellers – the black rose robert wagner – the happy years . references .