Ilan Ramon

biography . ramon was born in ramat gan , israel , to tonya ( 1929–2003 ) and eliezer wolferman ( 1923–2006 ) . he grew up in beersheba . his father was from germany , and his family fled nazi persecution in 1935 . his mother and grandmother were from poland , and were holocaust survivors , having been in auschwitz . they emigrated to israel in 1949 . his first name , ilan , means '' tree '' in hebrew . ilan changed his last name from wolferman to ramon , a more '' israeli '' name , when he joined the iaf . this was customary and expected of iaf pilots at the time . ramon graduated from high school in 1972 . in 1987 , he graduated with a b.sc . degree in electronics and computer engineering from tel aviv university . . air force career . ilan ramon was a colonel ( aluf mishne ) and a fighter pilot in the israeli air force , with thousands of hours of flight experience . he began the fighter pilot 's course at the israeli air force flight academy in 1972 but was forced to suspend his studies after breaking his hand . he served in an electronic warfare unit in the sinai during the yom kippur war , and afterwards returned to the flight academy . he graduated from the fighter pilots ' course in 1974 . from 1974 to 1976 he participated in a-4 skyhawk basic training and operations . from 1976 to 1980 he participated in training and operations for the mirage iii-c . in 1980 , as one of the iaf 's establishment team of the first f-16 squadron in israel , he attended the f-16 training course at hill air force base , utah . from 1981 to 1983 , he served as the deputy squadron commander b , f-16 squadron . in 1981 he was the youngest pilot taking part in operation opera , israel 's strike against iraq 's unfinished osirak nuclear reactor . the facility was destroyed , killing ten iraqi soldiers and one french researcher . he participated in the 1982 lebanon war . after attending the tel aviv university , he served as deputy squadron commander a , 119 squadron , flying the f-4 phantom ( 1988–1990 ) . during 1990 , he attended the squadron commanders course and between 1990 and 1992 , commanded 117 squadron , flying the f-16 . from 1992–1994 , he was head of the aircraft branch in the operations requirement department . in 1994 , he was promoted to the rank of colonel and assigned as head of the department of operational requirement for weapon development and acquisition . he stayed at this post until 1998 . ramon accumulated over 3,000 flight hours on the a-4 , mirage iii-c , and f-4 , and over 1,000 flight hours on the f-16 . . nasa experience . thumb . nasa on-ground trainings . in 1997 , ramon was selected as a payload specialist . he was designated to train as prime for a space shuttle mission with a payload that included a multispectral camera for recording desert aerosol ( dust ) . in july 1998 , he reported for training at the johnson space center , houston , where he trained until 2003 . he flew aboard sts-107 , logging 15 days , 22 hours and 20 minutes in space . space flight : sts-107 , space shuttle columbia . right sts-107 columbia ( january 16 – february 1 , 2003 ) , a 16-day flight , was a dedicated science and research mission . working 24 hours a day , in two alternating shifts , the crew successfully conducted approximately 80 experiments . personally nonreligious , ramon performed traditional observance while in orbit : '' i feel i am representing all jews and all israelis . '' he was the first spaceflight participant to request kosher food , and marked the sabbath . the sts-107 mission ended abruptly when space shuttle columbia was destroyed and its crew died during re-entry , 16 minutes before scheduled landing . ramon , whose mother and grandmother were survivors of auschwitz , was asked by s . isaac mekel , director of development at the american society for yad vashem , to take an item from yad vashem aboard sts-107 . ramon carried with him a pencil sketch , moon landscape , drawn by 16-year-old petr ginz , who died in auschwitz . ramon also took with him a microfiche copy of the torah given to him by israeli president moshe katsav and a miniature torah scroll ( from the holocaust ) that was given him by prof . yehoyachin yosef , a bergen belsen survivor . ramon asked the 1939 club , a holocaust survivor organization in los angeles , for a symbol of the holocaust to take into outer space with him . a barbed wire mezuzah by the san francisco artist aimee golant was selected . ramon also took with him a dollar of the lubavitcher rebbe , rabbi menachem m . schneerson . ramon and the rest of the columbia crew died over east texas in the southern united states during entry into earth 's atmosphere , 16 minutes prior to scheduled landing . on november 10 , 2013 , the american society for yad vashem held a special event with the participation of petr ginz 's nephew and ramon 's son tal , who performed a song he wrote in memory of his father . diary . among the recovered 40 % from the contents of the columbia space shuttle that crashed outside palestine , texas were 37 pages of ramon 's diary , which nasa returned to his wife . among the 37 pages from the diary he was keeping while in orbit survived the crash and were returned to his widow , rona , she shared an excerpt with the israeli public in a display at jerusalem 's israel museum . rona ramon brought it to israel museum forensic experts . only two pages were displayed , one containing ramon 's notes , and the other is a copy of the kiddush prayer . curator yigal zalmona said the diary was partially restored in one year , and needed four more , for police scientists to decipher 80 % of the text . zalmona stated : '' the diary survived extreme heat in the explosion , extreme atmospheric cold , and then '' was attacked by microorganisms and insects . it 's almost a miracle that it survived — it 's incredible . there is 'no rational explanation ' for how it was recovered when most of the shuttle was not , he said . '' ramon wrote on the last day of the journal : inscribed in black ink and pencil , it covered the first six days of the 16-day mission . the papers remained white even though , exposed at high speed above the earth , they should have burned . . family . ramon was survived by his wife rona and their four children ( assaf , tal , yiftah , and noa ) , who were in florida at the time of the accident . assaf ramon . ramon 's eldest son , assaf ( february 10 , 1988 – september 13 , 2009 ) , died aged 21 during a routine training flight while piloting his f-16a , three months after graduating from the iaf flight school hatzerim airbase as the top cadet in his class . death of ilan ramon 's son , asaf ramon ( hebrew ) he lost consciousness during a spell of vertigo , as a result of the high speed and g-force conditions to which he was subjected . this led to the plane crash and ramon 's subsequent death . assaf was considered an excellent pilot . a lieutenant of the israeli air force , he was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain . . rona ramon . ramon 's widow , rona ramon , served in the israel defense forces as a paramedic and later earned a ba at the wingate institute . after assaf 's death , rona returned to school and earned a master 's degree in holistic health at massachusetts ' lesley university . she also began to lecture about dealing with grief and finding coping mechanisms . she served as founding ceo of the nonprofit ramon foundation for youth academic excellence and social leadership through science and technology . rona died on december 17 , 2018 , after battling pancreatic cancer . after her death , she was awarded israel prize for lifetime achievement . awards and honors . military decorations : yom kippur war campaign ribbon ( 1973 ) 1982 lebanon war campaign ribbon ( 1982 ) f-16 1,000 flight hours ( 1992 ) . posthumously awarded : idf chief of staff medal of appreciation congressional space medal of honor ( ramon is the only non-u.s . citizen recipient to date ) nasa space flight medal . namesakes . image : keverramon.jpg thumb right ilan ramon 's grave in nahalal . in israel . ramon airport , named in honor of ilan and assaf ramon the international ilan ramon conference , hosted by the israel space agency ilan ramon youth physics center , ben-gurion university of the negev , beersheba ramon control tower , ben-gurion airport ilan ramon elementary school , be'er ya'akov ilan ramon elementary school , jerusalem ilan ramon elementary school , netanya ramon elementary school , modi'in ramon high school , hod hasharon ilan ramon junior high , kokhav ya'ir ilan ramon emergency center , kaplan hospital , rehovot ramon park , givat shmuel ilan ramon park , space-themed playground , beersheba . in north america . ilan ramon boulevard , vaughan , ontario , canada ramon hall , in the columbia village apartments , florida institute of technology ilan ramon aza 380 , boulder , colorado ilan ramon bbyo 5378 , oviedo , florida ramon aza 195 ( named after ilan and assaf ramon ) , sunnyvale , california ilan ramon crescent , côte-saint-luc ( montreal ) , quebec , canada ilan ramon day school , agoura , california . in space . asteroid 51828 ilanramon ramon hill , columbia hills on mars ramon crater , within the apollo basin , on the far side of the moon . see also . space shuttle columbia disaster columbia : the tragic loss , a documentary that focuses on ilan ramon . references . external links . photo of ilan ramon with chabad rabbi zvi konikov ilan ramon sts-107 crew memorial a collection of articles about ilan ramon ilan ramon memorial pages in the israel science and technology directory spacefacts biography of ilan ramon excerpts from ilan ramon 's diary ramon foundation