Laryngeal theory

history . the beginnings of the theory were proposed by ferdinand de saussure in 1879 , in an article chiefly devoted to something else altogether ( demonstrating that a and o were separate phonemes in pie ) . in the course of his analysis , saussure proposed that what had then been reconstructed as long vowels ā and ō , alternating with ǝ , was an ordinary type of pie ablaut . that is , it was an alternation between e-grade and zero grade like in '' regular '' ablaut ( further explanations below ) , but followed by a previously unidentified element . this '' element '' accounted for both the changed vowel colour and the lengthening ( short e becoming long ā or ō ) . so , rather than reconstructing ā , ō and ǝ as others had done before , saussure proposed something like ea alternating with a and eo with o , where a and o represented the unidentified elements . saussure called them simply '' coefficients sonantiques '' , which was the term for what are now in english more usually called resonants ; that is , the six elements present in pie which can be either consonants ( non-syllabic ) or vowels ( syllabic ) depending on the sounds they are adjacent to : y w r l m n . these views were accepted by a few scholars , in particular hermann möller , who added important elements to the theory . saussure 's observations , however , did not achieve any general currency , as they were still too abstract and had little direct evidence to back them up . this changed when hittite was discovered and deciphered in the early 20th & nbsp ; century . hittite phonology included two sounds written with symbols from the akkadian syllabary conventionally transcribed as , as in '' i put , am putting '' . this consonant did not appear to be related to any of the consonants then reconstructed for pie , and various unsatisfactory proposals were made to explain this consonant in terms of the pie consonant system as it had then been reconstructed . it remained for jerzy kuryłowicz to propose that these sounds lined up with saussure 's conjectures . he suggested that the unknown consonant of hittite was , in fact , a direct reflex of the coefficients sonantiques that saussure had proposed . their appearance explained some other matters as well : for example , why verb roots containing only a consonant and a vowel always have long vowels . for example , in dō- '' give '' , the new consonants allowed linguists to decompose this further into deh₃ . this not only accounted for the patterns of alternation more economically than before ( by requiring fewer types of ablaut ) but also brought the structure of these roots into line with the basic pie pattern which required roots to begin and end with a consonant . the lateness of the discovery of these sounds by indo-europeanists is largely because hittite and the other anatolian languages are the only indo-european languages for which at least some are attested directly and consistently as consonantal sounds . otherwise , their presence is to be inferred mostly through the effects they have on neighboring sounds , and on patterns of alternation that they participate in . when a laryngeal is attested directly , it is usually as a special type of vowel and not as a consonant , best exemplified in greek where syllabic laryngeals ( when they appeared next to only consonants ) developed as such : h₁ > e , h₂ > a , and h₃ > o . varieties of laryngeals . there are many variations of the laryngeal theory . some scholars , such as oswald szemerényi , reconstruct just one laryngeal . some follow jaan puhvel 's reconstruction of eight or more . . basic laryngeal set . most scholars work with a basic three : , the '' neutral '' laryngeal , the '' a-colouring '' laryngeal , the '' o-colouring '' laryngeal . additional laryngeals . some scholars suggest the existence of a fourth consonant , , which differs from in not being reflected as anatolian zair , n . , the reflexes of the proto-indo-european laryngeals in celtic ( brill , 2012 ) , pp . 3-4 . but being reflected , to the exclusion of all other laryngeals , as albanian h when word-initial before an originally stressed vowel . encyclopedia of indo-european culture by j . p . mallory , douglas q . adams edition : illustrated published by taylor & francis , 1997 , p . 462 . e.g . pie h₄órǵʰiyeh₂ '' testicle '' yields albanian herdhe '' testicle '' but hittite arki- '' testicle '' whereas pie '' bear '' yields alb . ari '' bear '' but hittite hart ( ag ) ga- ( /hartka-/ ) '' cultic official , bear-person '' . encyclopedia of indo-european culture by j . p . mallory , douglas q . adams edition : illustrated published by taylor & francis , 1997 , pp . 9-10 , 13-14 , 55 . when there is an uncertainty whether the laryngeal is or , the symbol may be used . doublet another such theory , but much less generally accepted , is winfred p . lehmann 's view , based on inconsistent reflexes in hittite , that was two separate sounds . ( he assumed that one was a glottal stop and the other a glottal fricative . ) . direct evidence for laryngeals . some direct evidence for laryngeal consonants comes from anatolian : pie a is a fairly rare sound , and in an uncommonly large number of good etymologies , it is word-initial . thus pie ( traditional ) anti '' in front of and facing '' > greek antí '' against '' ; latin ante '' in front of , before '' ; sanskrit ánti '' near ; in the presence of '' . but in hittite there is a noun '' front , face '' , with various derivatives ( ḫantezzi '' first '' , and so on ) , pointing to a pie root-noun '' face '' ( of which would be the locative singular ) . ( it does not necessarily follow that all reconstructed forms with initial a should automatically be rewritten . ) similarly , the traditional pie reconstruction for 'sheep ' is owi- ( a y-stem , not an i-stem ) whence sanskrit ávi- , latin ovis , greek ὄϊς . but luwian has ḫawi- , indicating instead a reconstruction . pronunciation . considerable debate still surrounds the pronunciation of the laryngeals and various arguments have been given to pinpoint their exact place of articulation . firstly the effect these sounds have had on adjacent phonemes is well documented . the evidence from hittite and uralic is sufficient to conclude that these sounds were '' guttural '' or pronounced rather back in the vocal tract . the same evidence is also consistent with the assumption that they were fricative sounds ( as opposed to approximants or stops ) , an assumption that is strongly supported by the behaviour of laryngeals in consonant clusters . h₁ . jens elmegård rasmussen ( 1983 ) suggested a consonantal realization for h₁ as the voiceless glottal fricative with a syllabic allophone ( mid central unrounded vowel ) . rasmussen ( 1999 ) , p . 77 this is supported by the closeness of to ( with which it combines in greek ) , rasmussen ( 1999 ) , p . 71 its failure ( unlike h₂ and h₃ ) to create an auxiliary vowel in greek and tocharian when it occurs between a semivowel and a consonant , and the typological likelihood of an given the presence of aspirated consonants in pie . rasmussen ( 1999 ) , p . & nbsp ; 76 it has been suggested by beekes ( 1995 ) that h₁ is a glottal stop . however , winfred p . lehmann instead theorized , based on inconsistent reflexes in hittite , that there were two h₁ sounds : a glottal stop and an h sound as in english hat . in 2004 , alwin kloekhorst argued that the hieroglyphic luwian sign no . & nbsp ; 19 ( 𔐓 , conventionally transcribed á ) stood for /ʔa/ ( distinct from /a/ , sign no . & nbsp ; 450 : 𔗷 a ) and represents the reflex of ; this would support the hypothesis that , or at least some cases of it , was . later , kloekhorst ( 2006 ) claimed that also hittite preserves pie h₁ as a glottal stop , visible in words like hittite e-eš-zi 'he is ' melchert ( 2010 ) , and weeden ( 2011 ) . recently , however , simon ( 2010 ) has supported kloekhorst 's thesis by suggesting that plene spelling in cuneiform luwian can be explained in a similar way . additionally , simon 's ( 2013 ) article revises the hieroglyphic luwian evidence and concludes that '' although some details of kloekhorst 's arguments could not be maintained , his theory can be confirmed . '' an occasionally advanced idea is that the laryngeals were dorsal fricatives corresponding directly to the three traditionally reconstructed series of dorsal stops ( '' palatal '' , velar , and labiovelar ) suggests a further possibility , a palatal fricative . h₂ . from what is known of such phonetic conditioning in contemporary languages , notably semitic languages , h₂ ( the '' a-colouring '' laryngeal ) could have been a pharyngeal fricative such as and . pharyngeal consonants ( like the arabic letter ح ( ħ ) as in muħammad ) often cause a-colouring in the semitic languages . uvular fricatives , however , may also colour vowels , thus is also a noteworthy candidate . weiss ( 2016 ) suggests that this was the case in proto-indo-european proper , and that a shift from uvular into pharyngeal may have been a common innovation of the non-anatolian languages ( before the consonant 's eventual loss ) . rasmussen ( 1983 ) suggested a consonantal realization for h₂ as a voiceless velar fricative , with a syllabic allophone , i.e . a near-open central vowel . . h₃ . likewise it is generally assumed that h₃ was rounded ( labialized ) due to its o-colouring effects . it is often taken to have been voiced based on the perfect form pi-bh₃- from the root peh₃ '' drink '' . rasmussen has chosen a consonantal realization for h₃ as a voiced labialized velar fricative , with a syllabic allophone , i.e . a close-mid central rounded vowel . kümmel instead suggests . . support for theory from daughter languages . the hypothetical existence of laryngeals in pie finds support in the body of daughter language cognates which can be most efficiently explained through simple rules of development . direct reflexes of laryngeals . unambiguous examples are confined to anatolian languages . words with hittite ḫ ( hh ) , luwian h and lycian x are explained as reflexes of pie roots with h₂ . clackson p . 56 . : : syllabic form of the mystery element ) saussure treated only two of these elements , corresponding to our h₂ and h₃ . later it was noticed that the explanatory power of the theory , as well as its elegance , were enhanced if a third element were added , our h₁ , which has the same lengthening and syllabifying properties as the other two but has no effect on the colour of adjacent vowels . saussure did not suggest as to the phonetics of these elements ; his term for them , '' coefficients sonantiques '' , was not however a fudge , but merely the term in general use for glides , nasals , and liquids ( i.e . , the pie resonants ) as in roots like bher- . as mentioned above , in forms like dwi-bhr-o- ( etymon of greek diphrós , above ) , the new '' coefficients sonantiques '' ( unlike the six resonants ) have no reflexes at all in any daughter language . thus the compound - '' to 'fix thought ' , be devout , become rapt '' forms a noun - seen in proto-indo-iranian mazdha- whence sanskrit medhá- /mēdha/ '' sacrificial rite , holiness '' ( regular development as in sedur greek ( homeric ) génos , -eos , sanskrit jánas- , avestan zanō , latin genus , -eris . ( b ) greek gené-tēs '' begetter , father '' ; géne-sis greek méga , sanskrit máha . in greek árotron '' plow '' welsh aradr , old norse arðr , lithuanian árklas . comments . the greek forms ánemos and árotron are particularly valuable because the verb roots in question are extinct in greek as verbs . this means that there is no possibility of some sort of analogical interference , for example , happened in the case of latin arātrum '' plow '' , whose shape has been distorted by the verb arāre '' to plow '' ( the exact cognate to the greek form would have been aretrum ) . it used to be standard to explain the root vowels of greek thetós , statós , dotós '' put , stood , given '' as analogical . most scholars nowadays probably take them as original , but in the case of '' wind '' and '' plow '' , the argument ca n't even come up . regarding greek híeros , the pseudo-participle affix -ro- is added directly to the verb root , so - > isero- > ihero- > híeros ( with regular throwback of the aspiration to the beginning of the word ) , and sanskrit iṣirá- . there seems to be no question of the existence of a root eysh- '' vigorously move/cause to move '' . if the thing began with a laryngeal , and most scholars would agree that it did , it would have to be h₁- , specifically ; and that 's a problem . a root of the shape h₁eysh₁- is not possible . indo-european had no roots of the type mem- , tet- , dhredh- , i.e . , with two copies of the same consonant . but greek attests an earlier ( and rather more widely attested ) form of the same meaning , híaros . if we reconstruct h₁eysh₂- , all of our problems are solved in one stroke . the explanation for the híeros/híaros business has long been discussed , without much result ; laryngeal theory now provides the opportunity for an explanation which did not exist before , namely the metathesis of the two laryngeals . it is still only a guess , but it is a much simpler and more elegant guess than the guesses available before . the syllabic in - '' father '' might not be isolated . certain evidence shows that the kinship affix seen in '' mother , father '' etc . might have been -h₂ter- instead of -ter- . the laryngeal syllabified after a consonant ( thus greek patḗr , latin pater , sanskrit pitár- ; greek thugátēr , sanskrit duhitár- '' daughter '' ) but lengthened a preceding vowel ( thus say latin māter '' mother '' , frāter '' brother '' ) — even when the '' vowel '' in question was a syllabic resonant , as in sanskrit yātaras '' husbands ' wives '' proto-italic sed-ē-ye-mos '' we are sitting '' > latin sedēmus ) . it is attested in celtic , italic , germanic ( the class iv weak verbs ) , and baltic/slavic , with some traces in indo-iranian ( in avestan the affix seems to form past-habitual stems ) . : :it seems likely , though it is less certain , that this same -h₁ underlies the nominative-accusative dual in o-stems : sanskrit vṛkā , greek lúkō '' two wolves '' . ( the alternative ending -āu in sanskrit cuts a small figure in the rigveda , but eventually becomes the standard form of the o-stem dual . ) : : -h₁s- derives desiderative stems as in sanskrit jighāṃsati '' desires to slay '' for the first half-century of its existence , the laryngeal theory was widely seen as ‘ an eccentric fancy of outsiders ’ . in germany it was roundly rejected . among its early proponents were hermann möller , who extended saussure 's system with a third , non-colouring laryngeal , albert cuny , holger pedersen , and karl oštir . the fact that these scholars were engaged in highly speculative long-range linguistic comparison further contributed to its isolation . although the founding fathers were able to provide some indirect evidence of a lost consonantal element ( for example , the origin of the indo-iranian voiceless aspirates in ch sequences and the ablaut pattern of the so-called heavy bases , cerə- ~ cr̥̄- in the traditional formulation ) , the direct evidence so crucial for the neogrammarian thinking was lacking . saussure 's structural considerations were foreign to the leading contemporary linguists . after kuryłowicz 's convincing demonstration that the hittite language preserved at least some of saussure 's coefficients sonantiques , the focus of the debate shifted . it was still unclear how many laryngeals are to be posited to account for the new facts and what effect they have had exactly . kuryłowicz , after a while , settled on four laryngeals , an approach further accepted by sapir , sturtevant , and through them much of american linguistics . the three-laryngeal system was defended , among others , by walter couvreur and émile benveniste . many individual proposals were made , which assumed up to ten laryngeals ( andré martinet ) . while some scholars , like heinz kronasser and giuliano bonfante , attempted to disregard anatolian evidence altogether , the ‘ minimal ’ serious proposal ( with roots in pedersen 's early ideas ) was put forward by hans hendriksen , louis hammerich and later ladislav zgusta , who assumed a single /h/ phoneme without vowel-colouring effects . by the 2000s , however , a widespread , though not unanimous , agreement was reached in the field on reconstructing möller 's three laryngeals . one of the last major critics of this approach was oswald szemerényi , who subscribed to a theory similar to zgusta 's . today the laryngeal theory is almost universally accepted in this new standard form . nevertheless , marginal attempts to undermine its bases are occasionally undertaken . . references . bibliography . . external links . kortlandt , frederik ( 2001 ) : initial laryngeals in anatolian ( pdf ) lexicon of early indo-european loanwords preserved in finnish