HTML editor

types of editors . there are two main varieties of html editors : text and wysiwyg ( what you see is what you get ) editors . text editors . text editors intended for use with html usually provide at least syntax highlighting . some editors additionally feature templates , toolbars and keyboard shortcuts to quickly insert common html elements and structures . wizards , tooltip prompts and autocomplete may help with common tasks . text editors commonly used for html typically include either built-in functions or integration with external tools for such tasks as version control , link-checking and validator , html tidy , spell-checking , uploading by ftp or webdav , and structuring as a project . some functions , such as link checking or validation may use web app , requiring a network connection . text editors require user understanding of html and any other web technologies the designer wishes to use like css , javascript and server-side scripting languages . to ease this requirement , some editors allow editing of the markup in more graphic organizer modes than simple color highlighting , but in modes not considered wysiwyg . these editors typically include the option of using palette windows or dialog boxes to edit the text-based parameters of selected objects . these palettes allow editing parameters in individual fields , or inserting new tags by filling out an onscreen form , and may include additional widgets to present and select options when editing parameters ( such as previewing an image or text styles ) or an outline editor to expand and collapse html objects and properties . wysiwyg html editors . image : w3c amaya 10 fullmode enwiki xfce4therapy.png thumb 250px amaya 10 html editor wysiwyg html editors provide an editing interface which resembles how the page will be displayed in a web browser . because using a wysiwyg editor may not require any html knowledge , they are often easier for an inexperienced computer user to get started with . the wysiwyg view is achieved by embedding a layout engine . this may be custom-written or based upon one used in a web browser . the goal is that , at all times during editing , the rendered result should represent what will be seen later in a typical web browser . wysiwym ( what you see is what you mean ) is an alternative paradigm to wysiwyg editors . instead of focusing on the format or presentation of the document , it preserves the intended meaning of each element . for example , page headers , sections , paragraphs , etc . are labeled as such in the editing program , and displayed appropriately in the browser . difficulties in achieving wysiwyg . a given html document will have an inconsistent appearance on various platforms and computers for several reasons : ; different browsers and applications will render the same markup differently . : the same page may display slightly differently in internet explorer and firefox on a high-resolution screen , but it will look very different in the perfectly valid text-only lynx browser . it needs to be rendered differently again on a pda , an internet-enabled television and on a mobile phone . usability in a speech or braille browser , or via a screen-reader working with a conventional browser , will place demands on entirely different aspects of the underlying html . all an author can do is suggest an appearance . ; web browsers , like all computer software , have bugs : they may not conform to current standards . it is hopeless to try to design web pages around all of the common browsers ' current bugs : each time a new version of each browser comes out , a significant proportion of the world wide web would need re-coding to suit the new bugs and the new fixes . it is generally considered much wiser to design to standards , staying away from 'bleeding edge ' features until they settle down , and then wait for the browser developers to catch up to your pages , rather than the other way round . for instance , no one can argue that css is still 'cutting edge ' as there is now widespread support available in common browsers for all the major features , even if many wysiwyg and other editors have not yet entirely caught up . ; a single visual style can represent multiple semantic meanings : semantic meaning , derived from the underlying structure of the html document , is important for search engines and also for various accessibility tools . on paper we can tell from context and experience whether bold text represents a title , or emphasis , or something else . but it is very difficult to convey this distinction in a wysiwyg editor . simply making a piece of text bold in a wysiwyg editor is not sufficient to tell the reader why the text is bold - what the boldness represents semantically . ; modern web sites are rarely constructed in a way that makes wysiwyg useful : modern web sites typically use a content management system or some other template processor-based means of constructing pages on the fly using content stored in a database . individual pages are never stored in a filesystem as they may be designed and edited in a wysiwyg editor , thus some form of abstracted template-based layout is inevitable , invalidating one of the main benefits of using a wysiwyg editor . valid html markup . html is a structured markup language . there are certain rules on how html must be written if it is to conform to w3c standards for the world wide web . following these rules means that web sites are accessible on all types and makes of computer , to able-bodied and people with disabilities , and also on wireless devices like mobile phones and pdas , with their limited bandwidths and screen sizes . however , most html documents on the web do not meet the requirements of w3c standards . in a study conducted in 2011 on the 350 most popular web sites ( selected by the alexa index ) , 94 percent of websites fail the web standards markup and style sheet validation tests , or apply character encoding improperly . even those syntactically correct documents may be inefficient due to an unnecessary use of repetition , or based upon rules that have been deprecated for some years . current w3c recommendations on the use of css with html were first formalised by w3c in 1996 and have been revised and refined since then . see css , xhtml , w3c 's current css recommendation and w3c 's current html recommendation . these guidelines emphasise the separation of content ( html or xhtml ) from style ( css ) . this has the benefit of delivering the style information once for a whole site , not repeated in each page , let alone in each html element . wysiwyg editor designers have been struggling ever since with how best to present these concepts to their users without confusing them by exposing the underlying reality . modern wysiwyg editors all succeed in this to some extent , but none of them has succeeded entirely . however a web page was created or edited , wysiwyg or by hand , in order to be successful among the greatest possible number of readers and viewers , as well as to maintain the 'worldwide ' value of the web itself , first and foremost it should consist of valid markup and code . it should not be considered ready for the world wide web , until its html and css syntax have been successfully validator using either the free w3c validator services ( w3c html validator and w3c css validator ) or some other trustworthy alternatives . accessibility of web pages by those with physical , eyesight or other disabilities is not only a good idea considering the ubiquity and importance of the web in modern society , but is also mandated by law . in the u.s . , the americans with disabilities act and in the uk , the disability discrimination act place requirement on web sites operated by publicly funded organizations . in many other countries similar laws either already exist or soon will . making pages accessible is more complex than just making them valid ; that is a prerequisite but there are many other factors to be considered . good web design , whether done using a wysiwyg tool or not needs to take account of these too . whatever software tools are used to design , create and maintain web pages , the quality of the underlying html is dependent on the skill of the person who works on the page . some knowledge of html , css and other scripting languages as well as a familiarity with the current w3c recommendations in these areas will help any designer produce better web pages , with a wysiwyg html editor and without . . see also . comparison of html editors list of html editors web template system website builder validator . references .