Extinct language

language death . normally the transition from a spoken to an extinct language occurs when a language undergoes language death by being directly replaced by a different one . for example , many native american languages were replaced by english , french , portuguese , spanish or dutch as a result of colonization . in contrast to an extinct language , which no longer has any speakers , or any written use , a historical language may remain in use as a literary or liturgical language long after it ceases to be spoken natively . such languages are sometimes also referred to as '' dead languages '' , but more typically as classical languages . the most prominent western example of such a language is latin , but comparable cases are found throughout world history due to the universal tendency to retain a historical stage of a language as liturgical language . historical languages with living descendants that have undergone significant language change may be considered '' extinct '' , especially in cases where they did not leave a corpus of literature or liturgy that remained in widespread use ( see corpus language ) , as is the case with old english or old high german relative to their contemporary descendants , english and german . some degree of misunderstanding can result from designating languages such as old english and old high german as extinct , or latin dead , while ignoring their evolution as a language . this is expressed in the apparent paradox '' latin is a dead language , but latin never died . '' a language such as etruscan , for example , can be said to be both extinct and dead : inscriptions are ill understood even by the most knowledgeable scholars , and the language ceased to be used in any form long ago , so that there have been no speakers , native or non-native , for many centuries . in contrast , old english , old high german and latin never ceased evolving as living languages , nor did they become totally extinct as etruscan did . through time latin underwent both common and divergent changes in phonology , morphology , syntax and lexicon and continues today as the native language of hundreds of millions of people , renamed as different romance languages and dialects ( french , italian , spanish , corsican , asturian , ladin , etc . ) . similarly , old english and old high german never died , but developed into various forms of modern english and german . with regard to the written language , skills in reading or writing etruscan are all but non-existent , but trained people can understand and write old english , old high german and latin . latin differs from the germanic counterparts in that an approximation of its ancient form is still employed to some extent liturgically . this last observation illustrates that for latin , old english , or old high german to be described accurately as dead or extinct , the language in question must be conceptualized as frozen in time at a particular state of its history . this is accomplished by periodizing english and german as old ; for latin , an apt clarifying adjective is classical , which also normally includes designation of high or formal register . minor languages are endangered mostly due to economic and cultural globalization and development . with increasing economic integration on national and regional scales , people find it easier to communicate and conduct business in the dominant lingua francas of world commerce : english , chinese , spanish and french . in their study of contact-induced language change , american linguists sarah grey thomason and terrence kaufman ( 1991 ) stated that in situations of cultural pressure ( where populations are forced to speak a dominant language ) , three linguistic outcomes may occur : first - and most commonly - a subordinate population may shift abruptly to the dominant language , leaving the native language to a sudden linguistic death . second , the more gradual process of language death may occur over several generations . the third and most rare outcome is for the pressured group to maintain as much of its native language as possible , while borrowing elements of the dominant language 's grammar ( replacing all , or portions of , the grammar of the original language ) . thomason , sarah grey & kaufman , terrence . language contact , creolization , and genetic linguistics , university of california press ( 1991 ) p . 100 . institutions such as the education system , as well as ( often global ) forms of media such as the internet , television , and print media play a significant role in the process of language loss . for example , when people migrate to a new country , their children attend school in the country , and the schools are likely to teach them in the majority language of the country rather than their parents ' native language . language revival . language revival is the attempt to re-introduce a recently extinct language in everyday use by a new generation of native speakers . the optimistic neologism '' sleeping beauty languages '' has been used to express such a hope . see pp . 57 & 60 in ghil'ad zuckermann 's a new vision for '' israeli hebrew '' : theoretical and practical implications of analysing israel 's main language as a semi-engineered semito-european hybrid language , journal of modern jewish studies 5 : 57–71 ( 2006 ) . dr anna goldsworthy on the barngarla language reclamation , the monthly , september 2014 hebrew is an example of a liturgical language that has successfully been revived for everyday use . the revival of hebrew has been largely successful due to extraordinarily favourable conditions , notably the creation of a israel in which it became the official language , as well as eliezer ben-yehuda 's extreme dedication to the revival of the language , by creating new words for the modern terms hebrew lacked . revival attempts for minor languages with no status as liturgical language typically have more modest results . the cornish language revival is an example of a major successful language revival : after a century of effort there are 3,500 claimed native speakers ; enough for unesco to change its classification from '' extinct '' to '' critically endangered '' . recently extinct languages . this is a list of languages reported as having become extinct since 2010 . for a more complete list , see list of extinct languages . see also . endangered language : category : extinct languages language death language revival language teaching lists of endangered languages globalization list of modern literature translated into dead languages . references . bibliography . adelaar , willem f . h . ; & muysken , pieter c . ( 2004 ) . the languages of the andes . cambridge language surveys . cambridge : cambridge university press . brenzinger , matthias ( ed . ) ( 1992 ) language death : factual and theoretical explorations with special reference to east africa . berlin/new york : mouton de gruyter . campbell , lyle ; & mithun , marianne ( eds . ) . ( 1979 ) . the languages of native america : historical and comparative assessment . austin : university of texas press . davis , wade . ( 2009 ) . the wayfinders : why ancient wisdom matters in the modern world . house of anansi press . nancy dorian ( 1978 ) . 'fate of morphological complexity in language death : evidence from east sutherland gaelic . ' language , 54 ( 3 ) , 590-609 . dorian , nancy c . ( 1981 ) . language death : the life cycle of a scottish gaelic dialect . philadelphia : university of pennsylvania press . dressler , wolfgand & wodak-leodolter , ruth ( eds . ) ( 1977 ) 'language death ' ( international journal of the sociology of language vol . 12 ) . the hague : mouton . gordon , raymond g . , jr . ( ed . ) . ( 2005 ) . ethnologue : languages of the world ( 15th ed . ) . dallas , tx : sil international . ( online version : harrison , k . david . ( 2007 ) when languages die : the extinction of the world 's languages and the erosion of human knowledge . new york and london : oxford university press . mithun , marianne . ( 1999 ) . the languages of native north america . cambridge : cambridge university press . ( hbk ) ; . mohan , peggy ; & zador , paul . ( 1986 ) . 'discontinuity in a life cycle : the death of trinidad bhojpuri . ' language , 62 ( 2 ) , 291-319 . sasse , hans-jürgen ( 1992 ) 'theory of language death ' , in brenzinger ( ed . ) language death , pp . & nbsp ; 7–30 . schilling-estes , natalie ; & wolfram , walt . ( 1999 ) . 'alternative models of dialect death : dissipation vs . concentration . ' language , 75 ( 3 ) , 486-521 . sebeok , thomas a . ( ed . ) . ( 1973 ) . linguistics in north america ( parts 1 & 2 ) . current trends in linguistics ( vol . 10 ) . the hauge : mouton . ( reprinted as sebeok 1976 ) . sharp , joanne . ( 2008 ) . chapter 6 : 'can the subaltern speak ? ' , in geographies of postcolonialism . glasgow , uk : sage publications ltd . tove skutnabb-kangas . ( 2000 ) . linguistic genocide in education or worldwide diversity and human rights ? mahwah , new jersey : lawrence erlbaum associates . thomason , sarah grey & kaufman , terrence . ( 1991 ) . language contact , creolization , and genetic linguistics . university of california press . timmons roberts , j . & hite , amy . ( 2000 ) . from modernization to globalization : perspectives on development and social change . wiley-blackwell . external links . the dodo 's fate : how languages become extinct the foundation of endangered languages endangered languages photos of letters/characters from ancient and living languages featured on exterior walls of library of alexandria