Nenets people

name . the literal morphs samo and yed in russian convey the meaning '' self-eater '' , which is considered derogatory . therefore , the name samoyed quickly went out of usage in the 20th century . the people are known as the nenets , which means '' people '' . in old russian , the term samoyed was often applied indiscriminately to different peoples of northern russia who speak related uralic languages : nenets , nganasans , enets , selkups ( speakers of samoyedic languages ) . currently , the term '' samoyedic peoples '' applies to the whole group of these different peoples . it is the general term that includes the nenets , enets , selkup , and nganasan peoples . language . the nenets language is on the samoyedic branch of the uralic language family , with two major dialects , forest nenets and tundra nenets . ethnologue says that in siberia , most young people are still fluent in nenets , whereas in european russia , they tend to speak russian . overall , the majority of native speakers are from older generations . unesco classifies nenets as an endangered language . some believe that the use of russian and komi is due to inter-ethnic marriages . . history and way of life . there are two distinct groups of nenets sensu stricto , based on their economy : the tundra nenets ( living far to the north ) and the khandeyar or forest nenets . a distinct third group of nenets ( yaran people ) has emerged as a result of intermarriages between nenets and izhma komi people . the samoyedic languages form a branch of the uralic languages . they moved from farther south in siberia to the northernmost part of what later became russia sometime before the 12th century . they ended up between the kanin and taymyr peninsulas , around the ob and yenisey rivers , with only a few of them settling into small communities like kolva . their main subsistence comes from hunting and reindeer herding . using reindeer as a draft animal throughout the year enables them to cover great distances . large-scale reindeer herding emerged in the 18th century . they bred the samoyed dog to help herd their reindeer and pull their sleds , and european explorers later used these dogs for polar expeditions , because they were well adapted to the arctic conditions . tundra wolf can cause considerable economic loss , as they prey on the reindeer herds which are the livelihood of some nenets families . heptner , v . g . & naumov , n . , p . ( editors ) mammals of the soviet union vol.ii part 1a , sirenia and carnivora ( sea cows ; wolves and bears ) , science publishers , inc . usa . 1998 . along with reindeer meat , fish is a major component in the nenets ' diet . nenets housing is conical yurt ( mya ) . they have a shamanistic and animistic belief system which stresses respect for the land and its resources . during migrations , the nenets placed sacred items like bear skins , religious figures , coins and more on a holy sleigh . the contents of this sacred sleigh are only unpacked during special occasions or for religious rituals ( like sacrifices ) . however , only esteemed elders are allowed to unpack the sacred sleigh . they had a clan-based social structure . the nenets shaman is called a tadibya . after the russian revolution , the nenets culture suffered due to the soviet collectivisation policy . the government of the soviet union tried to force the nomadic samoyeds to settle down permanently . they were forced to settle in villages and their children were educated in state boarding schools , which resulted in erosion of their cultural identity . one significant way in which the nenets culture was affected was in the change of the male 's societal role . previously , in the tundra , the male had the very important task of herding the reindeer . however , once the nenets had to transition to a life away from the tundra , men found that they had lost their role . much of the responsibility that awaited them in the village was considered , from the traditional point of view , to be women 's work . this erasure in the male identity was further enhanced by the soviet government . in taiga villages occupations such as market gardening , fur farming , cattle breeding , trade , medicine , etc were emphasized and these happened to be the ones that were marketed towards women . lastly , the jobs offered by the soviet government were often occupied by women and not men as many of the men had taken up the habit of hard drinking . consequently , the once traditional culture of the nenets people was swiftly upended . many , especially in the nenets autonomous okrug , lost their mother tongue and became assimilated . one repercussion from the collectivization policy was reindeer ownership . due to the collectivization policy , many herders moved north while many of those that remained were '' deprived of their reindeer '' . nenets people once owned many reindeer but after the war , many nenets had to transition to small-scale herding . although the nenets herders were greatly affected , their lifestyle was not at threat for too long . while in the rest of russia , the collectivization policy lasted for a very long time , it was only invoked onto the yamal area for a decade . this was because after stalin 's death in 1953 , traditional economies were saved . 1950 to 1960 saw a 50 % increase of reindeer and this number had almost doubled by 1980 . the next few decades saw the slow progress of the nenets people regaining and preserving their traditional nomadic lifestyle . the accomplishment of appeasing officials while maintaining their culture was achieved through a series of stratagems . for example , herders would often mix up the herds so that inspectors would find it impossible to see the true ratio of private to collective deer . another method was for young herders to get a job as official workers of the state and pasture their own collective reindeer herd along with the private herd of one of their relatives . once these herds were together and migration commenced , officials would not be able to know which of the reindeer were privately owned . since the 1930s , a few nenets have expressed themselves professionally through cultural media . for instance , tyko vylka and konstantin pankov became well-known painters . anna nerkagi is one of the most celebrated nenets writers . yuri vella , though living as a reindeer herder , has become the first writer in the forest nenets language . environment . although the nenets people were able to remain resilient in the face of continuous change and maltreatment , a new challenge now awaits them . environmental damage to the nenets ' is significant due to industrialisation of their land , colonization and climate change . the nenet people depend heavily on fishing and reindeer herding to support their lifestyle . however , these practices are very reliant on the environment which is under threat from the oil industry . specifically , the nomadic lifestyle the nenet people have been accustomed to for generations is in danger as the oil industries encroach on reindeer pasture and territory . approximately half of the 10,000 nenets people in the yamal peninsula are nomadic and herd reindeer . with oil industries continuing to expand , the impact on the nenets people is expected to increase . oil drilling in the peninsula . since the 1980s , the arctic circle has gained the interest of those in the energy and mining industry . although expansion halted briefly in the 1990s post-ussr disintegration , development picked up in 2004 . as oil and gas companies continue to expand , along with it has come an expansion of infrastructure coming in the form of roads , power lines as well as human and vehicle traffic . a big milestone was in 2008 , when gazprom , the largest natural gas company in the world , entered the yamal peninsula in their efforts to launch the yamal megaproject . gazprom 's arrival to the yamal peninsula has brought about significant change to the area . according to the company 's website , they operate a total of 32 fields . these fields bring in up to 360 billion cubic meters of gas per year and in 2019 , gazprom alone produced 96.3 billion cubic meters of gas . another milestone was when yamal lng project : novatek , another russian owned company , partnered with two other international corporations to build a plant on the yamal peninsula in july 2013 . . the impact on the nenets people . the impact of large energy corporations in the yamal peninsula can be felt in numerous ways . the largest of these can be seen in the effects on migration routes . with the nenets people being nomadic and reliant on reindeer husbandry , the migratory routes for the reindeer are very important to them . these migratory routes are very specific and a lot of consideration goes into planning them . additionally , the herders believe that it is necessary for the reindeer to migrate in order for them to maintain their good health . the herders claim that this is because the vegetation found on the coast are good for reindeer as they are richer in salt and minerals . also , by reaching the coast with the migrations , the reindeer are able to find relief from insects such as mosquito and botfly by avoiding infestation periods . these migratory routes that the herders and reindeer use are made of rugged terrain as they provide a good space to herd the reindeer . however , the companies that enter the yamal peninsula also prefer this rugged terrain to build their infrastructure upon , causing a direct overlap in land of interest . for example , in the bovanenko core area , a research study was conducted that found that industrial development targeted '' rugged , elevated drier land '' which is the type of land used by the reindeer herders . thus , as the nenets people rely on reindeer that , in turn , rely on the migratory routes , the expansion of industrial development has had a large impact on the nenets people . although not directly related to migration routes , another impact is the effect on nenets peoples ' sacred spots . the nenets people have a tradition of designating a scared spot where they make a request of the spirits for a successful migration . nenets sacred spots are made into a major sand/quarry pit and marked by wooden pegs . in one case , a sacred spot of the nenets people was fenced in during the industrial development , dissolving it of its traditional significance . many of the workers believed that their construction did not actually intrude on the sacred spot , however many of the herders believed that the spot had been '' desecrated '' . this difference in perceptions highlights how many non-indigenous people are only able to view land as something to be owned . meanwhile , for indigenous people , such a viewpoint is non-existent . herders have a spiritual relationship with the land and do not view it as simply owned vs not-owned . another smaller effect of the industrial development has been its impact on fish . due to the industrial development , there has been a degradation of freshwater sources which has led to a decrease in the population . additionally , the industrial development has spilled over to occupy much of the fishing grounds necessary for the nenets people . as the nenets people depend on the fish as their source of food in the summer , the depletion of fish has directly impacted the nenets people . lastly , an impact that is loosely related with the migration routes is accessibility to health care clinics by the nenets people . since the arrival of large oil and gas companies in the 1990 's , climate in the region has been impacted . in fact , since 1991 temperature anomalies in the kanin have increased an estimated 1.4 degrees celsius per decade . within this same period , researchers found a trend of delayed herder arrivals to their local health clinic . researchers cite the lengthening of the migrations as the reason for the delay . as the herders need open water to freeze to make crossings of reindeer and herders possible , there is a specific window in which herders can visit their local health clinics . since 1991 , the arrival of herders at one health clinic can be observed shifting from october to december , marking an evident postponement in arrival . . a matter of rights and the rise of nenets activism . there are some nenets people , activists , and researchers who are nervous about the current situation in the yamal peninsula . this is because there is concern that authorities of the nenets people will make a deal to merge with another region . nenets people worry that the deal will lead to a passing in their autonomy as well as their language and traditions . as of november 2020 , the nenets people have not merged with other regions . in a similar vain , nenets people also face danger from industrial companies . although the industrial companies have paid compensations and made efforts to assist the nenets people , some experts say that the current process does not allow for participation from the nenets people . this sort of relationship is described by some as '' paternalistic '' as it does not aid in allowing the nenets people to make their own decisions . the nenets people have previously attempted to organize and protest against these oil and gas companies . however , it is difficult for the nomadic people to gather as a collective unit as they live so far apart from each other . an individual effort that was notable was yuri vella 's protests . vella was a nenets writer and having lived near a lake that was licensed over to an oil company , protested often . most notably , he is remembered for having stood up against a bulldozer alone with an axe . vella , however , is not alone in his activism . there exists a rural protest community called voice of the tundra that currently speaks on topics such as the rights of the nenets people . as aforementioned , it is difficult to gather collectively and so this community relies on vkontakte , a russian online service , to mobilize and communicate . additionally , rather than being led by lawyers or journalists or scholars , the community has a young reindeer herder from the tundra as their leaders . the voice of the tundra focuses its attention on three main issues : a shortage of land for the reindeer due to oil and gas companies expanding use of the territories , the uncertainty surrounding the future of nomadic reindeer herding , and the lack of indigenous leadership and organization . the voice of the tundra project is being celebrated as it symbolizes a return of politics to russia 's indigenous peoples . specifically , a reindeer herder by the name of eiko serotetto is being heralded as the main activist generating the change . serotetto is not someone who has had a traditional background or education . however , in 2016 , he demonstrated that this would not weigh him down when he began to take action in the aftermath of the anthrax epidemic . serotetto posted a petition on social media that asked for attention to be brought to the indigenous peoples and their reindeers . serotetto requested protection of indigenous habitats , reindeer , and rights . this petition brought attention to the russian officials who were not addressing the '' real life of the tundra and indigenous people '' . later , serotetto 's most impactful petition was made when he advocated for the boycott of russian oil and gas . although there are many nenets people who are against the industrial development going on in the yamal peninsula such as the activists aforementioned , there are also many who are in support of the developments . those who are in favour of the developments highlight the economic benefits that they are able to receive . in a research study conducted in the area , one villager reported that they were able to coexist with the industries through social agreements , voluntary giving , and compensation for damages . some argue that this variance in support for the industrial companies from the nenets people lies in factors such as active leadership from community leaders . this reasoning can be seen as falling similarly in line with what the voice of the tundra was fighting for , as it can be seen that proper indigenous leadership and involvement can lead to higher satisfaction among the nenets people . notable nenets . tyko vylka ( 1886–1960 ) , painter konstantin pankov ( 1910–1942 ) , painter ( mansi mother ) anastasia lapsui ( b . 1944 ) , film director , screenwriter yuri vella ( 1948–2013 ) , writer , poet , environmentalist , social activist anna nerkagi ( b . 1952 ) , writer , novelist , social activist