Christopher Cockerell

early life and education . cockerell was born in cambridge , where his father , sir sydney cockerell , was curator of the fitzwilliam museum , having previously been the secretary of william morris . his mother was the illustrator and designer florence kingsford cockerell . christopher attended the preparatory school of st faith's . christopher was educated at gresham 's school . lidell , charles lawrence scruton & douglas , a . b . , the history and register of gresham 's school , 1555–1954 ( ipswich , 1955 ) he matriculated at peterhouse , cambridge to read mechanical engineering and was tutored by william dobson womersley . he was later to return to cambridge to study radio and electronics . early career . he began his career working for w . h . allen & sons of bedford . after returning to the university of cambridge in 1934 to study radio and electronics , he went to work at the radio research company . in 1935 he went to work at the marconi company , and soon afterwards he married margaret elinor belsham ( 4 september 1913 – september 1996 ) . accessed 4 january 2012 they lived at the now grade ii listed gay bowers cottage in danbury , essex from 1940 to 1951 . accessed 9 november 2015 during his time in chelmsford , he led a research team in the famous marconi hut at writtle and worked on many systems , including radar . '' cockerell , christopher '' , in oxford dictionary of national biography ( oxford university press , 2004 ) after the war he contributed to the development of several very sophisticated pieces of equipment , including radio location technology , and the first equipment used by the bbc in alexandra palace . the hovercraft . after he left the marconi company , he bought ripplecraft ltd . , a small norfolk boat and caravan hire company , with a legacy left by his father-in-law . the firm made little money , and cockerell began to think how the craft could be made to go faster . he was led to earlier work by the thornycroft company , in which a small vessel had been partially raised out of the water by a small engine . cockerell 's greatest invention , the hovercraft , grew out of this work . it occurred to him that if the entire craft were lifted from the water , the craft would effectively have no drag . this , he conjectured , would give the craft the ability to attain a much higher maximum speed than could be achieved by the boats of the time . cockerell 's theory was that instead of just pumping air under the craft , as thornycroft had , if the air were to be instead channelled to form a narrow jet around the perimeter of the craft , the moving air would form a momentum curtain , a wall of moving air that would limit the amount of air that would leak out . this meant that the same cushion of high pressure air could be maintained by a very much smaller engine ; and for the first time , a craft could be lifted completely out of the water . cockrell tested his designs in the broadland village of somerleyton , suffolk he tested his theories using a vacuum cleaner and two tin cans . his hypothesis was found to have potential , but the idea took some years to develop , and he was forced to sell personal possessions to finance his research . by 1955 , he had built a working model from balsa wood and had filed his first patent for the hovercraft , no . cockerell had found it impossible to interest the private sector in developing his idea , as both the aircraft and the shipbuilding industries saw it as lying outside their core business . he therefore approached the british government with a view to interesting them in possible defence applications . the leaders of the defence groups were not interested in providing funding and put the idea of the hovercraft on the government 's secret list . being on the secret list stopped cockerell from making his design public . it remained classified until 1958 , upon news of similar developments on the continent , it was declassified , and cockerell was introduced to the nrdc ( national research development corporation ) . in the autumn of 1958 , the nrdc placed an order with saunders-roe for the first full-scale hovercraft . this prototype craft was designated the sr-n1 ( saunders-roe – nautical one ) and was manufactured under licence from the nrdc . on 11 june 1959 , the sr-n1 was first shown to the public , which was capable of carrying four men at a speed of 28 miles per hour . weeks later , it was shipped over to france . it successfully crossed the english channel between calais and dover on 25 july 1959 , evans , eric , british history ( bath , parragon books , 2002 ) p . 305 50 years to the day after the historic crossing by bleriot . in january 1959 , the nrdc formed a subsidiary called hovercraft development ltd . cockerell was the technical director and the company controlled the patents which it used to license several private sector firms to manufacture craft under the registered trademark of hovercraft . cockerell received an honorary degree from heriot-watt university in 1971 . . later life . in later life , cockerell developed many other improvements to the hovercraft , and invented various other applications for the air cushion principle , such as the hovertrain . he attended many hovercraft related events , such as the unveiling of many hoverports across the united kingdom . after a short illness , christopher cockerell died at hythe , hampshire on 1 june 1999 . cockerell was awarded £5,000 by the british government of the 1960s , the only practical official recognition of the value of his work , though he was given a knighthood . the financial award would be worth perhaps £50,000 to £100,000 in the money of 2020 . other work . in later life cockerell developed the cockerell raft , a wave power hydraulic device which may have implications in the future for electricity generation . awards . 1965 awarded the howard n . potts medal 1966 made a cbe 1967 elected a fellow of the royal society 1968 awarded elmer a . sperry award for his development of the hovercraft 1969 knighted for his services to engineering . commemoration . in his life , the sr.n4 hovercraft gh2008 sir christopher was named after its inventor . it was operated by hoverlloyd ( later hoverspeed ) across the channel from 1972 to 1991 . a plaque in cockerell rise , east cowes , isle of wight , marks the location of white cottage , where cockerell lived and worked . the cottage has been demolished , but the garage still stands . the plaque was erected by friends of east cowes with financial support from the big lottery fund . cockerell 's workshop , including his left-handed lathe , was gifted to the lowestoft maritime museum on his death in 1999 where it was reassembled and is now on show to the public . references . external links . information about sir christopher at the hovercraft museum website