Guerrilla marketing

etymology and origin . the term '' guerrilla marketing '' is traced to guerrilla warfare , which employs atypical tactics to achieve an objective . in 1984 , the term guerrilla marketing was introduced by leo burnett 's creative director jay conrad levinson in his book guerrilla marketing . the term itself was from the inspiration of guerrilla warfare which was unconventional warfare using different techniques from usual and small tactic strategies used by armed civilians . it involves high imagination and energy to execute a guerrilla marketing campaign . this kind of marketing is purely focusing on taking the consumer by surprise , creating a greater impression and eventually leading to buzz through word-of-mouth or social media platforms . guerrilla marketing is perfect for any small or medium size businesses to bring their product or services to its consumers without investing more money on advertisements . this has also been used by large companies to show the difference from its competitors and to make use of social media marketing . lately , individuals use unconventional methods of job hunting or to work more . marcel bernard cova & marcel saucet , '' the secret lives of unconventional campaigns : street marketing on the fringe '' , journal of marketing communications , 2014 as a result , the concept of street marketing was born . it has evolved from being only the application of activities on the streets , to be the development of innovative practices of promotion . jay conrad levinson , 1984 for example , one method used by many enterprises to promote their products or services on the streets is the distribution of fliers . this activity does not focus on creativity , but on making publicity on the streets . however , with the passage of time , companies have developed more unconventional techniques to catch the attention of the clients . . types . ambient marketing . ambient communication is advertising presented on elements of the environment , including nearly every available physical surface . it is a compilation of intelligence , flexibility , and effective use of the atmosphere . these kinds of ads can be found anywhere and everywhere from hand dryers in public bathrooms and petrol pumps through to bus hand straps and golf-hole cups . solomon , m . , marshall , g . , stuart , e . ( 2008 ) . marketing , real people , real choices . upper saddle river , new jersey , united states of america : pearson education . . ambush marketing . ambush marketing is a form of associative marketing , used by an organization to capitalize upon the awareness , attention , goodwill , and other benefits , generated by having an association with an event or property , without that organization having an official or direct connection to that event or property . it is typically seen at major events where rivals of official sponsors attempt to build an association with the event and increase awareness for their brands , sometimes covertly . for example , nike during the 2012 summer olympics created 'find your greatness ' spots where they featured athletes from several locations called london ( but without showing the real london or referring to the olympic games ) which was intended to build a strong association between london olympics and nike . . stealth marketing . stealth marketing is a deliberate act of entering , operating in , or exiting a market in a furtive , secretive or imperceptible manner , or an attempt to do so . . viral/buzz marketing . viral marketing describes any strategy that encourages individuals to pass on a marketing message to others , creating the potential for exponential growth in the message 's exposure and influence . like viruses , such strategies take advantage of rapid multiplication to explode the message to thousands , to millions . off the internet , viral marketing has been referred to as '' word-of-mouth '' , '' creating a buzz '' , '' leveraging the media '' , '' network marketing '' , but on the internet , for better or worse , it 's called '' viral marketing '' . similarly , marketing buzz uses high-profile media to encourage the public to discuss the brand or product . buzz marketing works best when consumer 's responses to a product or service and subsequent endorsements are genuine , without the company paying them . buzz generated from buzz marketing campaigns is referred to as '' amplified wom '' ( word-of-mouth ) , and '' organic wom '' is when buzz occurs naturally by the consumer . . grassroots marketing . grassroots aim to win customers over on an individual basis . a successful grassroots campaign is not about the dissemination of the marketing message in the hope that possible consumers are paying attention , but rather highlights a personal connection between the consumer and the brand , and builds a lasting relationship with the brand . baker , m . & hart , s . ( 2008 ) . the marketing book . ( 6th ed . ) . oxford , england : butterworth-heinemann . . astroturfing . astroturfing is among the most controversial guerrilla marketing strategies , and has a high risk factor for the company marketing the product or service . jacobs , j . ( 2012 ) . faking it – how to kill a business through astroturfing on social media . professional updates management , 64 ( 9 ) , 567-570 . astroturfing derives from artificial “ sod ” , often used in stadiums or tennis courts – also known as fake grass . hence , fake endorsements , testimonials and recommendations are all products of astroturfing in the public relations sector . astroturfing involves generating an artificial hype around a particular product or company through a review or discussion on online blogs or forums by an individual who is paid to convey a positive view . this can have a negative and detrimental effect on a company , should the consumer suspect that the review or opinion is not authentic , damaging the company 's reputation or even worse , resulting in litigation . . street marketing . street marketing uses unconventional means of advertising or promoting products and brands in public areas . the main goal is to encourage consumers to remember and recall the brand or product marketed . as a division of guerrilla marketing , street marketing is specific to all marketing activities carried out in streets and public areas such as parks , streets , events etc . street marketing also encompasses advertising outdoors , such as on shopping cart ( shopping carts , in the us ) , public toilets , sides of cars or public transport , manhole covers , footpaths , rubbish bins , etc . berman m . ( c2007 ) . street-smart advertising : how to win the battle of the buzz . plymouth , united kingdom : rowman & littlefield publishers , inc . street marketing is n't confined to fixed advertisements . it is common practice for organisations to use brand ambassadors who distribute product samples or discount vouchers , and answer queries about the product while emphasizing the brand . the brand ambassadors may be accompanied by a kiosk which contains the product samples or demonstration materials , or they may be wearing a '' walking billboard '' . the physical interaction with consumers has a greater influencing power than traditional passive advertising . street marketing is understood as mobilizing not only the space of the streets but also the imagination of the street : that of street culture and street art . the y-generation broadly consisting of young urbanites ( 15 – 30 years old ) , is often put forth as the most susceptible target for the campaigns due to its associations with the culture of the street . according to marcel saucet and bernard cova , bernard cova & marcel saucet , '' the secret lives of unconventional campaigns : street marketing on the fringe '' , journal of marketing communications , 2014 street marketing can be used as a general term encompassing six principal types of activities : distribution of flyers or products this activity is more traditional , and is the most common form of street marketing employed by brands . product animations this consists of personalizing a high-traffic space using brand imagery . the idea is to create a micro-universe in order to promote a new product or service . human animations the goal of such actions is to create a space in which the brand 's message is communicated through human activity . road shows this form of mobile presentation is based on the development of means of transport : taxi , bike , segway , etc . uncovered actions these activities involve the customization of street elements . event actions these activities take the form of spectacles , such as flash mobs or contests . the idea is to promote a product , service , or brand value through organization of a public event . typical procedure . first , enterprises identify the public places where the campaign can be developed such as beaches , cultural events , close to schools , sporting events and recreation areas for children . marcel saucet & bernard cova , 2014 next , companies have to develop a plan to get close to different media and the target market . in order to attract attention , street marketing events not only involve unusual activities , but use technology as part of the events . the purpose is to increase the value of the campaigns and get potential consumers ' attention . besides , the plans that companies develop take into account that guerrilla or street marketing involves global communication and interaction not only with the customers or the media . they are also developed to identify opportunities and collect enough information about products , markets and competitors . for example , for business it is important that customers stay with them , instead of choosing the competitors ’ offers . they implement innovative strategies with which they will not lose position in the market , and they consider supplementation with other advertisement through other mediums , such as radio and television , when using street marketing . jay conrad levinson , 1984 ; marcel saucet & bernard cova , 2014 there are various examples of strategies that are used in guerrilla marketing . one of them is to provide offers to increase sales . in many cases , businesses do not only supply their products or services to be recognized , but they also offer other things for free . another instance is to present a fundraiser offer . the point of this strategy is to help other organizations , such as schools , by offering them money . most companies implement this method not only to increase their sales , but to improve their reputation and image among the community . finally , there is a strategy called '' team selling '' that consists of conforming groups of people , the majority of them young , who go knocking the doors of different houses in a neighborhood . they do this in order to help companies promoting and selling their products or services . when doing guerrilla marketing or street marketing , organizations also consider focusing on the psychological approach . for many companies , this implies if they are having success or not . street marketing focuses on some psychological aspects to know customers ' behavior and preferences . for example , certain psychological areas study how people 's brains are divided : 45 % of people are left-brained , 45 % are right brained , and 10 % are balanced . left-brained persons tend to be logical , right-brained ones tend to be emotional , and the rest are a combination the two . then , according to the product or service that enterprises provide , and also the kind of customer , businesses decides the way they are going to manage their street marketing campaigns . besides , almost all the enterprises base their street marketing campaigns on repeating the messages they spread among their customers . repetition is related to the unconscious part of the mind . this is the one in charge of making decisions . it lets people know what they are going to choose , as well as what they are going to buy . businesses follow the principle that establishes that , the more people paying attention to the campaign , the more possibilities that campaign has for being remembered . when a company decides to do a guerrilla marketing campaign which could be anything out of viral , ambient , ambush , street or stealth , the focus for them is to meet the objectives . the main objectives for them are : to create enough buzz to serve in word-of-mouth , helping the brand to establish well with its products . to touch most of the five sensory identities of the customer/consumer enhancing personal experience with the brand and building good reputation . to reach the target successfully by taking the brand to them in their daily routine . through the experience and the ephemeral feelings shared between the company and the target , advertisers and agencies generate a feeling of intimacy that resonates beyond the encounter . this feeling of nearness becomes all the more lasting as the affected individuals relive this encounter on the internet through social media . bernard cova and marcel saucet , unconventional marketing : from guerrilla to consumer made , '' in routledge companion on the future of marketing , routledge , september 2013 . . strategy . the guerrilla marketing promotion strategy was first identified by jay conrad levinson in his book guerrilla marketing ( 1984 ) . the book describes hundreds of '' guerrilla marketing weapons '' in use at the time . guerrilla marketers need to be creative in devising unconventional methods of promotion to maintain the public 's interest in a product or service . levinson writes that when implementing guerrilla marketing tactics , smaller organizations and entrepreneurs are actually at an advantage . ultimately , however , guerrilla marketers must '' deliver the goods . '' in the guerrilla marketing handbook , the authors write : '' . in order to sell a product or a service , a company must establish a relationship with the customer . it must build trust and support the customer 's needs , and it must provide a product that delivers the promised benefits . '' the guerrilla marketing handbook ; levinson , jay conrad ; godin , seth ; mariner books ; november 1994 ; ; accessed march 2014 . . online guerrilla marketing . the web is rife with examples of guerrilla marketing , to the extent that many of us do n't notice its presence - until a particularly successful campaign arises . the desire for instant gratification of internet users provides an avenue for guerrilla marketing by allowing businesses to combine wait marketing with guerrilla tactics . simple examples consist of using 'loading ' pages or image alt texts to display an entertaining or informative message to users waiting to access the content they were trying to get to . as users dislike waiting with no occupation on the web , it is essential , and easy , to capture their attention this way . other website methods include interesting web features such as engaging landing pages . many online marketing strategies also use social media such as facebook and linkedin to begin campaigns , share-able features and event host events . other companies run competitions or discounts based on encouraging users to share or create content related to their product . viral videos are an incredibly popular form of guerrilla marketing in which companies film entertaining or surprising videos that internet users are likely to share and enjoy , that subtly advertise their service or product . some companies such as google even create interactive elements like the themed google logo games to spark interest and engagement . these dynamic guerrilla marketing tactics can become news globally and give businesses considerable publicity . examples . there are various organizations who have implemented the guerrilla and street marketing strategies . the majority of them are small companies , but there are also big companies that have involved in the guerrilla and street marketing environment . bernard cova and marcel saucet , unconventional marketing : from guerrilla to consumer made , '' in routledge companion on the future of marketing , routledge , september 2013 most of the examples of the strategies that both small and big enterprises have put into action include costumed persons , the distribution of tickets , people providing samples , among others . as stated before , one guerrilla marketing conventional method that is used by many businesses is to provide fliers . the goal is to create awareness on the customers about what the enterprise is doing . one example of this took place in montpelier , vermont , where the new england culinary institute ( neci ) sent a group of students to a movie theatre to hand out 400 fliers . those fliers had coupons in which neci was inviting people to go to its monthly theme dinners . another company , boston 's kung-fu tai chi club , chose the option of disseminating fliers instead of placing its advertisements on the newspapers . the purpose of the fliers was to promote the company 's self-defence classes for women . other businesses apply the technique of sending disguised people to promote things on the streets . for example , match.com organized a street marketing activity in the “ feria del libro ” ( “ book fair ” ) in madrid . it consisted of a man dressed like a prince who was walking among the crowd looking for his “ real love ” . he had a glass slipper and even got to try the shoe on some people . a woman behind him was giving bookmarks to the people which contained messages such as “ times have changed ; the way to find love , too ” or “ you have been reading love stories all your life ; experience yours on match.com ” . also , in madrid and barcelona , nokia developed a campaign called “ avestruz ” ( “ ostrich ” ) to promote the 5500 and 5700 mobiles . in the campaign , a group of real-size ostrich puppets tried to interact with young people in order to let them know these mobiles provide a high-quality mp3 playback . the puppets were holding their own telephones and listening to the music . when a young person appeared , the puppet tried to catch his/her attention to show him/her the quality of the mobile . the reason why nokia decided to use ostriches was that they are big animals , so people could easily look at them . there are enterprises that disseminate passes or tickets to different events . for example , sony invests on joining promoters and tells them that they have to infiltrate in public meetings . what they have to do is to distribute free tickets to concerts and other musical events sponsored by the company . another instance is the spanish company clickair ( an extension of iberia airlines ) , that developed a campaign in which a group of five people had to walk through barcelona streets dressed as euros . the group was supplying approximately 3,000 tickets to promote different clickair destinations . the people who first sent a text message with the required information would get free tickets to go on a trip . in the end , the company received a total of 3,390 messages . along with these examples , there are other street marketing techniques that are even more unusual . lee jeans , a french company dedicated to the selling of jeans , promoted the opening of their new store in rue des rosiers in paris . the method they applied consisted of distributing denims , as well as denim accessories , on the different streets of the neighborhood . furthermore , in italy , the members of the company nintendo put into action a campaign in which they used post-it 's to promote the wii console . they pasted several post-it with the shapes of some characters from different video games . those images were placed as if they were billboards on the streets . “ wii not forget ” , the name of the campaign , and a brief explanation of it , were the words written on the post-its . in some cases , some street marketing may incite the ire of local authorities ; such was the case in houston , texas , when bmw 's ad agency ( street factory media in minneapolis ) attached a replication , made from styrofoam , of a mini-cooper to the side of a downtown building . for the cost of a small city-issued fine , the company received front page advertising on the houston chronicle . sony ericsson used an undercover campaign in 2002 when they hired 60 actors in ten major cities and had them accost strangers and ask them : '' would you mind taking my picture ? '' the actor then handed the target a brand new picture phone while talking about how cool the new device was . '' and thus an act of civility was converted into a branding event . the hidden ( in plain sight ) persuaders ; walker , rob ; '' the new york times magazine ; '' december 5 , 2004 ; pg . 68 guerrilla marketing is not just exclusive to small companies . for big companies it is a high risk , high reward strategy . when successful it can capture even more market share , but if it fails it can damage the company ’ s brand image . one successful guerrilla marketing campaign is the coca-cola ‘ happiness machine ” . in january 2010 , coca-cola , with the help of definition 6 , filmed a reaction video of a coke vending machine dispensing ‘ doses ’ of happiness to unsuspecting students in st . john 's university . a seemingly normal vending machine surprised students by dispensing items that were more than they bargained for . the students received goodies ranging from extra coke , pizza , flowers , to even a twelve-foot hero sub . “ coke ’ s goal to inspire consumers through small , surprise moments of happiness ” said paul iannacchino jr . , creative director , definition 6 . with a budget of only 60,000 , the video generated 500,000 views in the first week . it now has over 7 million views to date . the campaign was so popular that a 30-second edit of the footage was featured during american idol 's season finale . the coca-cola “ happiness machine ” also went on to receive the clio 's prestigious gold interactive award at the 51st annual awards dinner held in new york city . after the campaign 's success , coca-cola decided to continue with the ‘ happiness ’ theme and has released similar videos since then . . strategic risk . because of the nature of guerrilla marketing , the message and objective must be clearly defined in order to avoid being misunderstood . misinterpretation by the targeted audience of the message intended to be promoted is a risk . word-of-mouth advertising does not always stay focused enough to present the intended message . the rumor-like spread of word-of-mouth marketing is uncontrollable once released , and can result in a misrepresentation of the message or confusion about a brand . another risk involves wrongly timed ( or wrongly placed ) events , which may actually be perceived to be against the interests of the consumer . for instance , in an ill-conceived promotion which took place on january 31 , 2007 , several magnetic circuit boards—each with an flashing led cartoon figure—were attached to metal surfaces in and around boston , massachusetts to promote the animated series , aqua teen hunger force . the circuit boards were mistakenly taken for explosive devices . several subway stations ; bridges ; and a portion of interstate 93 were closed as police examined , removed , and ( in some cases ) destroyed the devices . boston bomb scare ; article ; cnn news online ; retrieved march 2014 . some guerrilla marketing may incite the ire of local authorities . then risks are assessed and may still be considered worthwhile . such was the case in houston , texas , when bmw 's ad agency , street factory media , attached a replica of a mini-cooper ( made of styrofoam ) , to the side of a downtown building in january 2013 . for the small cost of a city-issued fine , the company received front page advertising in the houston chronicle . another problem presents itself if marketers fail to properly execute an undercover campaign . they run considerable risk of backlash . an example of this can be found in sony entertainment 's on-line debacle with zipatoni . the company attempted to promote zipatoni through a stealth marketing campaign , which was quickly detected by the internet community , resulting in sony immediately experiencing a backlash from video game enthusiasts . street art is thus a subversive activity , hijacking public places and inventing rather paradoxical forms of expression that reformulate ways of communicating , all of which inform street marketing practices . thus marketing in the street , given that it is inspired by the work of such artists , brings with it constraints and statutory risks for which agencies and advertisers are generally not prepared . douglas west , john ford , ( 2001 ) , advertising agency philosophies and employee risk taking , journal of advertising 30 , no . 1 : 77–91 the main problem is that , by definition , street mobilization campaigns require the use of public space , and that use must be authorized by government authorities to be legal . this is just as true for simple operations like distributing flyers as it is for mobilizing products or people and , of course , for a disguised campaign . the authorizations necessary to carry out such a campaign are often very difficult to obtain within the time allotted for bringing the plan to fruition . numerous potential operations have failed to obtain authorization for safety reasons , and in certain urban areas it is even expressly forbidden to undertake a guerrilla marketing campaign . in such cases , many agencies and advertisers will simply go ahead with the operation , meaning that they choose to act without authorization . how is such a choice reached , and on what bases ? how is it justified ? what impact does this choice have on the performance and costs of the operation ? what transformations does this choice bring to the agency–advertiser relationship ? these are the main questions posed in the development of street marketing operations today . . inexpensive costs . in a declining economy , guerrilla marketing is an increasing solution to giving companies the comparative edge over others . during times where companies are downsizing and cutting costs , companies look to guerrilla marketing as a cheaper strategy than conventional marketing . instead of investing money in the marketing process , guerrillas invest energy , time and creativity . if done successfully , companies will be able to reach conventional goals for profits and growth with a smaller marketing budget . one such example is the blair witch project . a group of film students filmed an amateur horror movie . by setting up an internet campaign devoted to spreading rumors about the fictitious 'blair witch ' , it created a lot of interest for the film . with a budget of 50,000 , the movie grossed 250 million worldwide . according to jay levinson , guerrilla marketing emphasizes strongly on customer follow-up rather than ignoring customers after their purchase . focusing on customer follow-up is a cheaper strategy because the cost of selling to a new customer is six times higher than selling to an existing customer . during a tough economy , it is important to focus on building relationships rather than sales , and aiming at individuals instead of groups . this promotes repeat sales , referrals and increased size of purchase . the use of telephone as a follow-up tool is helpful in improving customer relationships . email is also another inexpensive tool for maintaining relationships . emails can be used to direct people to the company website . the site can be then used to provide information and to advance sales . honesty is an important attribute when marketing to customers during tough times . when companies show that they are fully aware of the economic situation and why they have priced their products accordingly , this earns the customer 's respect . explaining the current situation and the risks and the steps the company is taking to the customers will give the customers assurance and also maintains their trust . one example is the las vegas tourism board . during the 2008 recession , las vegas was one of the cities hit the hardest . they released an ad campaign showing people they were fully aware of the recession , yet , in a dramatic way , showing 'that regular people are coming here and having a blast ' . this piqued a lot of interest which led to an increase of tourism in las vegas during the recession . . see also . customer experience management earned media mobile marketing . references . sources . . external links . gotcha ! ads push the envelope ; cnn/money article