Beta blocker

congestive heart failure . although beta blockers were once contraindicated in congestive heart failure , as they have the potential to worsen the condition due to their effect of decreasing cardiac contractility , studies in the late 1990s showed their efficacy at reducing morbidity and mortality . bisoprolol , carvedilol , and sustained-release metoprolol are specifically indicated as adjuncts to standard ace inhibitor and diuretic therapy in congestive heart failure , although at doses typically much lower than those indicated for other conditions . beta-blockers are only indicated in cases of compensated , stable congestive heart failure ; in cases of acute decompensated heart failure , beta-blockers will cause a further decrease in ejection fraction , worsening the patient 's current symptoms . beta-blockers are known primarily for their reductive effect on heart rate , although this is not the only mechanism of action of importance in congestive heart failure . beta-blockers , in addition to their sympatholytic β1 activity in the heart , influence the renin–angiotensin system at the kidneys . beta-blockers cause a decrease in renin secretion , which in turn reduces the heart oxygen demand by lowering the extracellular volume and increasing the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood . heart failure characteristically involves increased catecholamine activity on the heart , which is responsible for several deleterious effects , including increased oxygen demand , propagation of inflammatory mediators , and abnormal cardiac tissue remodeling , all of which decrease the efficiency of cardiac contraction and contribute to the low ejection fraction . beta-blockers counter this inappropriately high sympathetic activity , eventually leading to an improved ejection fraction , despite an initial reduction in ejection fraction . trials have shown beta blockers reduce the absolute risk of death by 4.5 % over a 13-month period . in addition to reducing the risk of mortality , the numbers of hospital visits and hospitalizations were also reduced in the trials . therapeutic administration of beta-blockers for congestive heart failure ought to begin at very low doses ( 1/8 of target ) with a gradual escalation of the dose . the heart of the patient must adjust to decreasing stimulation by catecholamines and find a new equilibrium at a lower adrenergic drive . . anxiety . officially , beta blockers are not approved for anxiolytic use by the u.s . food and drug administration . however , many controlled trials in the past 25 years indicate beta blockers are effective in anxiety disorders , though the mechanism of action is not known . the physiological symptoms of the fight-or-flight response ( pounding heart , cold/clammy hands , increased respiration , sweating , etc . ) are significantly reduced , thus enabling anxious individuals to concentrate on the task at hand . musicians , public speakers , actors , and professional dancers have been known to use beta-blockers to avoid performance anxiety , stage fright , and tremor during both auditions and public performances . the application to stage fright was first recognized in the lancet in 1976 , and by 1987 , a survey conducted by the international conference of symphony orchestra musicians , representing the 51 largest orchestras in the united states , revealed 27 % of its musicians had used beta-blockers and 70 % obtained them from friends , not physicians . beta-blockers are inexpensive , said to be relatively safe , and on one hand , seem to improve musicians ' performances on a technical level , while some , such as barry green , the author of '' the inner game of music '' and don greene , a former olympic diving coach who teaches juilliard students to overcome their stage fright naturally , say the performances may be perceived as '' soulless and inauthentic '' . . cardiac surgery . the use of beta blockers around the time of cardiac surgery decreases the risk of heart dysrhythmias . starting them around the time of other types of surgery , however , may worsen outcomes . performance-enhancing use . because they promote lower heart rates and reduce tremors , beta blockers have been used in professional sports where high accuracy is required , including archery , shooting , golf and snooker . beta blockers are banned by the international olympic committee . in the 2008 summer olympics , 50-metre pistol silver medalist and 10-metre air pistol bronze medalist kim jong-su tested positive for propranolol and was stripped of his medals . for similar reasons , beta blockers have also been used by surgeons . . adverse effects . adverse drug reactions associated with the use of beta blockers include : nausea , diarrhea , bronchospasm , dyspnea , cold extremities , exacerbation of raynaud 's syndrome , bradycardia , hypotension , heart failure , heart block , fatigue , dizziness , alopecia ( hair loss ) , abnormal vision , hallucinations , insomnia , nightmares , sexual dysfunction , erectile dysfunction and/or alteration of glucose and lipid metabolism . mixed α 1 /β-antagonist therapy is also commonly associated with orthostatic hypotension . carvedilol therapy is commonly associated with edema . due to the high penetration across the blood–brain barrier , lipophilic beta blockers , such as propranolol and metoprolol , are more likely than other less lipophilic beta blockers to cause sleep disturbances , such as insomnia , vivid dreams and nightmares . adverse effects associated with β 2 -adrenergic receptor antagonist activity ( bronchospasm , peripheral vasoconstriction , alteration of glucose and lipid metabolism ) are less common with β 1 -selective ( often termed '' cardioselective '' ) agents , but receptor selectivity diminishes at higher doses . beta blockade , especially of the beta-1 receptor at the macula densa , inhibits renin release , thus decreasing the release of aldosterone . this causes hyponatremia and hyperkalemia . hypoglycemia can occur with beta blockade because β2-adrenoceptors normally stimulate glycogen breakdown ( glycogenolysis ) in the liver and pancreatic release of the hormone glucagon , which work together to increase plasma glucose . therefore , blocking β2-adrenoceptors lowers plasma glucose . β1-blockers have fewer metabolic side effects in diabetic patients ; however , the fast heart rate that serves as a warning sign for insulin-induced low blood sugar may be masked , resulting in hypoglycemia unawareness . this is termed diabetic hypoglycemia beta blockers . therefore , beta blockers are to be used cautiously in diabetics . beta-adrenoceptor antagonists ( beta-blockers ) ; a 2007 study revealed diuretics and beta blockers used for hypertension increase a patient 's risk of developing diabetes mellitus , while ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor antagonists ( angiotensin receptor blockers ) actually decrease the risk of diabetes . clinical guidelines in great britain , but not in the united states , call for avoiding diuretics and beta blockers as first-line treatment of hypertension due to the risk of diabetes . beta blockers must not be used in the treatment of selective alpha-adrenergic agonist overdose . the blockade of only beta receptors increases hypertension , reduces coronary blood flow , left ventricular function , and cardiac output and tissue perfusion by means of leaving the alpha-adrenergic system stimulation unopposed . beta blockers with lipophilic properties and cns penetration such as metoprolol and labetalol may be useful for treating cns and cardiovascular toxicity from a methamphetamine overdose . the mixed alpha- and beta blocker labetalol is especially useful for treatment of concomitant tachycardia and hypertension induced by methamphetamine . the phenomenon of '' unopposed alpha stimulation '' has not been reported with the use of beta blockers for treatment of methamphetamine toxicity . other appropriate antihypertensive drugs to administer during hypertensive crisis resulting from stimulant overdose are vasodilators such as nitroglycerin , diuretics such as furosemide , and alpha blockers such as phentolamine . . contraindications . contraindications for beta-blockers include : abrupt discontinuations bronchospasm heart failure asthma av block bradycardia bronchitis cardiogenic shock cerebrovascular disease chronic obstructive pulmonary disease diabetes emphysema hypersensitivity to beta blockers hypotension kidney failure liver disease myopathy pheochromocytoma psoriasis stroke vasospastic angina wolff–parkinson–white syndrome . asthma . the 2007 national heart , lung , and blood institute ( nhlbi ) asthma guidelines recommend against the use of non-selective beta blockers in asthmatics , while allowing for the use of cardioselective beta blockers . cardioselective beta-blocker ( β1 blockers ) , if really required , can be prescribed at the least possible dose to those with mild to moderate respiratory symptoms . β2-agonists can somewhat mitigate β-blocker-induced bronchospasm where it exerts greater efficacy on reversing selective β-blocker-induced bronchospasm than the nonselective β-blocker-induced worsening asthma and/or copd . . diabetes mellitus . epinephrine signals early warning of the upcoming hypoglycemia . beta-blockers ' inhibition on epinephrine 's effect can somewhat exacerbate hypoglycemia by interfering with glycogenesis and mask signs of hypoglycemia such as tachycardia , palpitations , diaphoresis , and tremors . diligent blood glucose level monitoring is necessary for a patient with diabetes mellitus on beta-blocker . hyperthyroidism . abrupt withdrawal can result in a thyroid storm . . bradycardia or av block . unless a pacemaker is present , beta-blockers can severely depress conduction in the av node , resulting in a reduction of heart rate and cardiac output . usage of beta-blockers in tachycardic patients with wolff-parkinson-white syndrome can result in severe bradycardia , necessitating treatment with a pacemaker . toxicity . glucagon , used in the treatment of overdose , increases the strength of heart contractions , increases intracellular camp , and decreases renal vascular resistance . it is , therefore , useful in patients with beta blocker cardiotoxicity . usmle world 2009 step1 , pharmacology , q85 cardiac pacing is usually reserved for patients unresponsive to pharmacological therapy . people experiencing bronchospasm due to the β 2 receptor-blocking effects of nonselective beta blockers may be treated with anticholinergic drugs , such as ipratropium , which are safer than beta agonists in patients with cardiovascular disease . other antidotes for beta blocker poisoning are salbutamol and isoprenaline . β-receptor antagonism . stimulation of β 1 receptors by epinephrine and norepinephrine induces a positive chronotropic and inotropic effect on the heart and increases cardiac conduction velocity and automaticity . stimulation of β 1 receptors on the kidney causes renin release . stimulation of β 2 receptors induces smooth muscle relaxation , induces tremor in skeletal muscle , and increases glycogenolysis in the liver and skeletal muscle . stimulation of β 3 receptors induces lipolysis . beta blockers inhibit these normal epinephrine- and norepinephrine-mediated sympathetic actions , but have minimal effect on resting subjects . that is , they reduce the effect of excitement or physical exertion on heart rate and force of contraction , and also tremor , and breakdown of glycogen . beta blockers can have a constricting effect on the bronchi of the lungs , possibly worsening or causing asthma symptoms . since β 2 adrenergic receptors can cause vascular smooth muscle dilation , beta blockers may cause some vasoconstriction . however , this effect tends to be small because the activity of β 2 receptors is overshadowed by the more dominant vasoconstricting α 1 receptors . by far the greatest effect of beta blockers remains in the heart . newer , third-generation beta blockers can cause vasodilation through blockade of alpha-adrenergic receptors . accordingly , nonselective beta blockers are expected to have antihypertensive effects . the primary antihypertensive mechanism of beta blockers is unclear , but may involve reduction in cardiac output ( due to negative chronotropic and inotropic effects ) . it may also be due to reduction in renin release from the kidneys , and a central nervous system effect to reduce sympathetic activity ( for those beta blockers that do cross the blood–brain barrier , e.g . propranolol ) . antianginal effects result from negative chronotropic and inotropic effects , which decrease cardiac workload and oxygen demand . negative chronotropic properties of beta-blockers allow the lifesaving property of heart rate control . beta-blockers are readily titrated to optimal rate control in many pathologic states . the antiarrhythmic effects of beta blockers arise from sympathetic nervous system blockade—resulting in depression of sinus node function and atrioventricular node conduction , and prolonged atrial refractory periods . sotalol , in particular , has additional antiarrhythmic properties and prolongs action potential duration through potassium channel blockade . blockade of the sympathetic nervous system on renin release leads to reduced aldosterone via the renin–angiotensin system , with a resultant decrease in blood pressure due to decreased sodium and water retention . intrinsic sympathomimetic activity . also referred to as intrinsic sympathomimetic effect , this term is used particularly with beta-blockers that can show both agonism and antagonism at a given beta receptor , depending on the concentration of the agent ( beta-blocker ) and the concentration of the antagonized agent ( usually an endogenous compound , such as norepinephrine ) . see partial agonist for a more general description . some beta blockers ( e.g . oxprenolol , pindolol , penbutolol , labetalol and acebutolol ) exhibit intrinsic sympathomimetic activity ( isa ) . these agents are capable of exerting low-level agonist activity at the β-adrenergic receptor while simultaneously acting as a receptor site antagonist . these agents , therefore , may be useful in individuals exhibiting excessive bradycardia with sustained beta blocker therapy . agents with isa are not used after myocardial infarctions , as they have not been demonstrated to be beneficial . they may also be less effective than other beta-blockers in the management of angina and tachyarrhythmia . . α 1 -receptor antagonism . some beta blockers ( e.g . , labetalol and carvedilol ) exhibit mixed antagonism of both β- and α 1 -adrenergic receptors , which provides additional arteriole vasodilating action . examples . image : dichloroisoprenaline.svg thumb dichloroisoprenaline , the first beta blocker . nonselective agents . nonselective beta blockers display both β 1 and β 2 antagonism . propranolol bucindolol ( has additional α 1 -blocking activity ) carteolol carvedilol ( has additional α 1 -blocking activity ) labetalol ( has additional α 1 -blocking activity ) nadolol oxprenolol ( has intrinsic sympathomimetic activity ) penbutolol ( has intrinsic sympathomimetic activity ) pindolol ( has intrinsic sympathomimetic activity ) sotalol ( not considered a '' typical beta blocker '' ) timolol . β 1 -selective agents . β 1 -selective beta blockers are also known as cardioselective beta blockers . acebutolol ( has intrinsic sympathomimetic activity , isa ) atenolol betaxolol bisoprolol celiprolol ( has intrinsic sympathomimetic activity ) metoprolol nebivolol esmolol . β 2 -selective agents . butaxamine ici-118,551 . β 3 -selective agents . sr 59230a . β 1 selective antagonist and β 3 agonist agents . nebivolol . comparative information . pharmacological differences . agents with intrinsic sympathomimetic action ( isa ) acebutolol , pindolol , labetalol , mepindolol , oxprenolol , celiprolol , penbutolol agents organized by lipid solubility ( lipophilicity ) high lipophilicity : propranolol , labetalol intermediate lipophilicity : metoprolol , bisoprolol , carvedilol , acebutolol , timolol , pindolol low lipophilicity ( also known as hydrophilic beta-blockers ) : atenolol , nadolol , and sotalol agents with membrane stabilizing effect carvedilol , propranolol > oxprenolol > labetalol , metoprolol , timolol . indication differences . agents specifically labeled for cardiac arrhythmia esmolol , sotalol , landiolol ( japan ) agents specifically labeled for congestive heart failure bisoprolol , carvedilol , metoprolol agents specifically labeled for glaucoma betaxolol , carteolol , levobunolol , timolol , metipranolol agents specifically labeled for myocardial infarction atenolol , metoprolol ( immediate release ) , propranolol ( immediate release ) , timolol , carvedilol ( after left ventricular dysfunction ) , bisoprolol ( preventive treatment before and primary treatment after heart attacks ) agents specifically labeled for migraine prophylaxis timolol , propranolol propranolol is the only agent indicated for the control of tremor , portal hypertension , and esophageal variceal bleeding , and used in conjunction with α-blocker therapy in phaeochromocytoma . . other effects . beta blockers , due to their antagonism at beta-1 adrenergic receptors , inhibit both the synthesis of new melatonin and its secretion by the pineal gland . the neuropsychiatric side effects of some beta blockers ( e.g . sleep disruption , insomnia ) may be due to this effect . some pre-clinical and clinical research suggests that some beta blockers may be beneficial for cancer treatment . however , other studies do not show a correlation between cancer survival and beta blocker usage . also , a 2017 meta-analysis failed to show any benefit for the use of beta blockers in breast cancer . beta blockers have also been used for the treatment of schizoid personality disorder . sonny joseph ( 1997 ) . '' chapter 3 , schizoid personality disorder '' . personality disorders : new symptom-focused drug therapy . psychology press . pp . 45–56 . however , there is limited evidence supporting the efficacy of supplemental beta-blocker use in addition to antipsychotic drugs for treating schizophrenia . contrast media are not contraindicated in patients receiving beta blockers .