Bamber Gascoigne

family background and early life . gascoigne is the elder son of lieutenant-colonel derek ernest frederick orby gascoigne ( himself the son of brigadier-general sir ernest frederick orby gascoigne and laura cicely , daughter of general edward henry clive , of that family of styche hall , shropshire from which also came the famous soldier and administrator of india robert clive ) burke 's peerage , baronetage and knightage , 107th edition , burke 's peerage ltd , 2003 , vol . 1 , p . 362 , vol . 3 , p . 3205 by his marriage in 1934 to mary ( '' midi '' ) james lees-milne- the life , michael bloch , hachette , 2010 , pp . 71-72 louisa hermione o'neill , a daughter of captain the hon . arthur edward bruce o'neill and lady annabel hungerford crewe-milnes . his great-grandfathers include robert crewe-milnes , 1st marquess of crewe , and edward o'neill , 2nd baron o'neill . he is a nephew of julian gascoigne , who was in charge of the household division during the coronation of queen elizabeth ii , and of terence o'neill , prime minister of northern ireland 1963–1969 . he is a direct descendant of the 18th-century lord mayor of london sir crisp gascoyne and the tory politicians bamber gascoyne ( the elder ) and isaac gascoyne . isaac 's son general ernest frederick gascoyne , of raby hall ( 1796–1867 ) , was his great-great-great-grandfather . gascoigne was born in london and educated at sunningdale school in berkshire before winning scholarships to both eton college and magdalene college , cambridge ( 1955 ) , where he read english literature . while at magdalene he wrote a musical , share my lettuce , which was produced in london in 1957 by michael codron , and performed by maggie smith and kenneth williams ( with music by keith statham and patrick gowers ) . he then spent a year as a commonwealth fund scholar at yale university ( 1958–59 ) . after national service in the grenadier guards , he became a theatre critic . he met his wife , christina , at cambridge , and they married in 1965 . . university challenge . gascoigne was the original presenter ( from 1962 ) of the television quiz show university challenge , based on the us series college bowl . he held the position for 25 years , until the end of the initial run in 1987 . his questioning manner was regarded as firm yet polite . phrases he often used which became catchphrases include : '' your starter for ten '' , '' fingers on buzzers ” and '' i 'll have to hurry you . '' . television and books . gascoigne is the author of murgatroyd 's empire , a 1972 satirical novel concerning an entrepreneur who finds an island of pygmies , and trades them arms for treasure , recreating the development of european medieval weaponry and armour . in 1977 , gascoigne wrote and presented the christians , a 13-hour television documentary series on the history of christianity , produced by granada television and broadcast on itv . he wrote a companion book , under the same title , with photography by his wife , christina gascoigne , published by jonathan cape . gascoigne wrote quest for the golden hare , a 1983 account of the internationally publicised treasure hunt associated with the publication in 1979 of kit williams ' book , masquerade . on 8 august 1979 , gascoigne was witness to the burial by williams of a unique jewelled , solid gold hare pendant in an earthenware jar '' somewhere in britain '' . the book documents the search and a scandal associated with finding it . in 1987 , gascoigne presented a documentary series of six 30-minute programmes on victorian era , victorian values , which looked at how victorian society put in place the infrastructure of the modern welfare state , also produced by granada television . gascoigne was the writer and presenter for the tv series the great moghuls ( 1990 ) , a study of the mughal empire of india . the series was based on gascoigne 's 1971 book of the same name , which features photographs by his wife . . current activities . gascoigne has established an online history encyclopaedia , historyworld , and timesearch which presents multiple searchable timelines collected from various websites . start the week , bbc radio 4 , 12 march 2007 in august 2014 , gascoigne was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to the guardian opposing scottish independence in the run-up to september 's referendum on that issue . on the death of his grand-aunt mary innes-ker , duchess of roxburghe , in 2014 , he inherited an estate at west horsley , surrey , including west horsley place , a large country house dating from the 16th century . gascoigne has been selling some of the late duchess ' possessions in order to invest in restoring the house . an original pencil and chalk study for the well-known painting flaming june by sir frederic leighton was found on the back of a bedroom door . art historians had known a sketch existed as it had been included in an art magazine in 1895 but did not know who owned it ; it was probably bought by the duchess ' paternal grandfather after leighton 's death . gascoigne was appointed commander of the order of the british empire ( cbe ) in the 2018 birthday honours for services to the arts . . external interests . gascoigne is a fellow of the royal society of literature ( elected 1976 ) . he has served as a trustee of the national gallery , a trustee of the tate gallery , a member of the council of the national trust , and as a member of the board of directors of the royal opera house , covent garden . he is a patron of the museum of richmond . . personal life . gascoigne is married to christina ( née ditchburn ) , daughter of civil servant alfred henry ditchburn whom he met at cambridge . they have lived in richmond , london , since the late 1960s . . selected publications . 1962 : twentieth century drama , london : hutchinson ( publisher ) 1968 : world theatre : an illustrated history , ebury press 1971 : the great moghuls ( with photographs by christina gascoigne ) , london : jonathan cape ; new york : harper & row 1973 : the treasures and dynasties of china ( with photographs by christina gascoigne and derrick witty ) , jonathan cape . republished 2003 as a brief history of the dynasties of china 1973 : the heyday ( novel ) , jonathan cape 1974 : ticker khan : a fable , jonathan cape 1975 : castles of great britain ( introduction ; with christina gascoigne ) , thames and hudson , 1977 : the christians ( with photographs by christina gascoigne ) , london : jonathan cape ; new york : william morrow & co . revised and republished 2003 as a brief history of christianity , robinson publishing 1981 : why the rope went tight ( children 's stories , with pictures by christina gascoigne ) , london : methuen ; new york : lothrop , lee & shepard books 1982 : fearless freddy 's sunken treasure ( children 's stories , with pictures by christina gascoigne ) , london : methuen 1982 : fearless freddy 's magic wish ( children 's stories , with pictures by christina gascoigne ) , london : methuen 1983 : quest for the golden hare , jonathan cape 1986 : cod streuth , jonathan cape 1986 : how to identify prints : a complete guide to manual and mechanical processes from woodcut to inkjet , thames & hudson ; revised 2nd edition 2004 1988 : ( with j wright ) : bamber gascoigne 's book of amazing facts , london : walker books ; 1993 : encyclopaedia of britain : the a-z of britain 's past and present , macmillan publishers 1997 : milestones in colour printing 1457–1859 : with a bibliography of nelson prints ( the sandars lectures in bibliography ) , cambridge university press 1998 : a brief history of the great moghuls : india 's most flamboyant rulers , running press 2007 : bamber gascoigne 's challenging quiz book , london : penguin books 2010 : a brief history of the second world war , historyworld 2011 : a brief history of the first world war , historyworld , 2011 : the maya , aztecs , incas and conquistadors : a brief history , historyworld 2014 : the dynasties of china , the folio society . references . external links . historyworld website timesearch website gascoigne at the magdalene college alumni website