Humphry Repton

biography . early life . repton was born in bury st edmunds , the son of a collector of excise , john repton , and martha ( née fitch ) . in 1762 his father set up a transport business in norwich , where humphry attended norwich grammar school . at age twelve he was sent to the netherlands to learn dutch and prepare for a career as a merchant . however , repton was befriended by a wealthy dutch family and the trip may have done more to stimulate his interest in 'polite ' pursuits such as sketching and gardening . returning to norwich , repton was apprenticed to a textile merchant , then , after marriage to mary clarke in 1773 , set up in the business himself . he was not successful , and when his parents died in 1778 used his modest legacy to move to a small country estate at sustead , near cromer in norfolk . repton tried his hand as a journalist , dramatist , artist , political agent , and as confidential secretary to his neighbour william windham of felbrigg hall during windham 's very brief stint as secretary to the lord lieutenant of ireland . repton also joined john palmer in a venture to reform the mail-coach system , but while the scheme ultimately made palmer 's fortune , repton again lost money . repton 's childhood friend was james edward smith , who encouraged him to study botany and gardening ; smith reproduces a long letter from repton in his letter and correspondence . he was given access to the library of windham to read its works on botany . . landscape gardener . image : thomas medland01.jpg thumb left business card for humphry repton by thomas medland his capital dwindling , repton moved to a modest cottage at hare street near romford in essex . in 1788 , aged 36 and with four children and no secure income , he hit on the idea of combining his sketching skills with his limited experience of laying out grounds at sustead to become a 'landscape gardener ' ( a term he himself coined ) . since the death of capability brown in 1783 , no one figure dominated english garden design ; repton was ambitious to fill this gap and sent circulars round his contacts in the upper classes advertising his services . he was at first an avid defender of brown 's views , contrasted with those of richard payne knight and uvedale price , but later adopted a moderate position . his first paid commission was catton park , to the north of norwich , in 1788 . that repton , with no real experience of practical horticulture , became an overnight success , is a tribute to his undeniable talent , but also to the unique way he presented his work . to help clients visualise his designs , repton produced 'red books ' ( so called for their binding ) with explanatory text and watercolours with a system of overlays to show 'before ' and 'after ' views . in this he differed from capability brown , who worked almost exclusively with plans and rarely illustrated or wrote about his work . repton 's overlays were soon copied by the philadelphian bernard mcmahon in his 1806 american gardener 's calendar . library company of philadelphia to understand what was unique about repton it is useful to examine how he differed from brown in more detail . brown worked for many of the wealthiest aristocrats in britain , carving huge landscape parks out of old formal gardens and agricultural land . while repton worked for equally important clients , such as the duke of bedford and portland , he was usually fine-tuning earlier work , often that of brown himself . where repton got the chance to lay out grounds from scratch it was generally on a much more modest scale . on these smaller estates , where brown would have surrounded the park with a continuous perimeter belt , repton cut vistas through to 'borrowed ' items such as church towers , making them seem part of the designed landscape . he contrived approach drives and lodges to enhance impressions of size and importance , and even introduced monogrammed milestones on the roads around some estates , for which he was satirised by thomas love peacock as 'marmaduke milestone , esquire , a picturesque landscape gardener ' in headlong hall . around 1787 , richard page ( 1748-1803 ) , landowner of sudbury , to the west of wembley decided to convert the page family home 'wellers ' into a country seat and turn the fields around it into a private estate . in 1792 page employed humphry repton , by then famous as a landscape architect , to convert the previous farmland into wooded parkland and to make improvements to the house . repton often called the areas he landscaped 'parks ' , and so it is to repton that wembley park owes its name . the original site that repton so transformed was later built on in the construction of the short-lived watkin 's tower . the area landscaped by repton was larger than the current wembley park . it included the southern slopes of barn hill to the north , where repton planted trees and started building a 'prospect house ' – a gothic tower offering a view over the parkland . repton may also have designed the thatched lodge that survives on wembley hill road , to the west of wembley park . it is in the cottage orné style frequently used by repton . regrettably , repton 's red book for wembley park , which would give a definitive answer , has not survived . image : humphry repton00.jpg thumb site at wentworth , south yorkshire before proposed landscaping image : humphry repton01.jpg thumb site at wentworth , south yorkshire after proposed landscaping capability brown was a large-scale contractor , who not only designed , but also arranged the realisation of his work . by contrast , repton acted as a consultant , charging for his red books and sometimes staking out the ground , but leaving his client to arrange the actual execution . thus many of repton 's 400 or so designs remained wholly or partially unexecuted and , while brown became very wealthy , repton 's income was never more than comfortable . early in his career , repton defended brown 's reputation during the 'picturesque controversy ' . in 1794 richard payne knight and uvedale price simultaneously published vicious attacks on the 'meagre genius of the bare and bald ' , criticising his smooth , serpentine curves as bland and unnatural and championing rugged and intricate designs , composed according to 'picturesque ' principles of landscape painting . repton 's defence of brown rested partly on the impracticality of many picturesque ideas ; as a professional , repton had to produce practical and useful designs for his clients . paradoxically , however , as his career progressed repton drew more and more on picturesque ideas . one major criticism of brown 's landscapes was the lack of a formal setting for the house , with rolling lawns sweeping right up to the front door . repton re-introduced formal terraces , balustrades , trellis work and flower gardens around the house in a way that became common practice in the nineteenth century . he also designed one of the most famous 'picturesque ' landscapes in britain at blaise castle , near bristol . at woburn abbey , repton foreshadowed another nineteenth-century development , creating themed garden areas including a chinese garden , american garden , arboretum and forcing garden . at stoneleigh abbey in 1808 , repton foreshadowed another nineteenth-century development , creating a perfect cricket pitch called 'home lawn ' in front of the west wing , and a bowling green lawn between the gatehouse and the house . success at woburn earned him a further commission from the duke of bedford . he designed the central gardens in russell square , the centrepiece of the bloomsbury development . the gardens were restored with the additional help of archaeological investigation and archive photographs , to the original plans and are now listed as grade ii by historic england . the square was to be a flagship commission for repton and was only one of three within the central london . buildings played an important part in many of repton 's landscapes . in the 1790s he often worked with the relatively unknown architect john nash , whose loose compositions suited repton 's style . nash benefited greatly from the exposure , while repton received a commission on building work . around 1800 , however , the two fell out , probably over nash 's refusal to credit the work of repton 's architect son john adey repton . thereafter john adey and repton 's younger son george stanley repton often worked with their father , although george continued to work in nash 's office as well . it must have been particularly painful for repton when nash secured the prestigious work to remodel the royal pavilion at brighton for the prince regent , for which repton himself submitted innovative proposals in an indian style . on 29 november 1811 repton suffered a serious carriage accident which often left him needing to use a wheelchair for mobility . he died in 1818 and is buried in the graveyard of the church of st michael , aylsham , norfolk . '' second humphry repton memorial lecture at aylsham church '' , north norfolk news , 26 april 2019 . three roads close to the vicinity of his cottage at hare street ( now renamed main road ) in the gidea park area of romford were named after him ; repton avenue , repton gardens and repton drive , respectively . a plaque was unveiled on the former site of his cottage on 19 april 1969 . the cottage was long since demolished and a branch of lloyds tsb is situated on the junction of hare street and balgores lane . . publications . repton published three major books on garden design : sketches and hints on landscape gardening ( 1795 ) , observations on the theory and practice of landscape gardening ( 1803 ) , and fragments on the theory and practice of landscape gardening ( 1816 ) . these drew on material and techniques used in the red books . several lesser works were also published , including a posthumous collection edited by john claudius loudon , despite having severely criticised his approach to gardens . his published titles were : hundreds of north and south erpingham , a part of the history of norfolk , 1781 , vol . iii . i variety , a collection of essays anon . by repton and a few friends , 1788 . the bee : a critique on paintings at somerset house , 1788 . the bee ; or a companion to the shakespeare gallery , 1789 . letter to uvedale price , 1794 . sketches and hints on landscape gardening , 1794 . this volume contained details , with numerous illustrations , of the different gardens and plantations which he had formed . he defends himself in chap . vii . and in an appendix from the criticisms of knight and price , and reprints his letter to uvedale price . only 250 copies were printed , and the work has fetched more than four times the original price . observations on the theory and practice of landscape gardening , ’ 1803 . odd whims and miscellanies , 1804 , 2 vols . they were dedicated to windham . some of the essays in variety were reprinted in this collection , and in the second volume is a comedy of odd whims , which was played at ipswich . an inquiry into the changes of taste in landscape gardening , with some observations on its theory and practice , 1806 ; it also included his letter to price . designs for the pavilion at brighton , 1808 . he was assisted in this by his sons , john adey and george stanley repton . the plans were approved by the prince of wales , but , through want of funds , were not carried out . on the introduction of indian architecture and gardening , 1808 . fragments on landscape gardening , with some remarks on grecian and gothic architecture , 1816 . in this work his son , j . a . repton , gave him assistance . repton contributed to the transactions of the linnean society , xi . 27 , a paper '' on the supposed effect of ivy upon trees . '' . list of gardens . repton produced designs for the grounds of many of the foremost country houses in england , scotland and wales : antony house ashridge house ashton court attingham park babworth hall bayham abbey blaise castle bolwick hall broke hall brondesbury park buckhurst park burley-on-the-hill cassiobury park catton park , old catton , norwich clumber park cobham hall corsham court courteenhall crewe hall culford hall , now culford school dagnam park , essex dyrham park east india company college now haileybury endsleigh house finedon hall gosfield place retrieved 3 august 2011 grovelands park gunton hall hanslope park harewood house hatchlands park honing hall highams park , woodford hylands house , chelmsford kenwood house kensington gardens , alterations kidbrooke park , now michael hall school leigh court longleat house moggerhanger park oldbury court estate plas newydd pentillie rode hall royal pavilion at brighton royal fort , bristol rudding park , harrogate russell square , bloomsbury saling grove , great saling , essex sarsden scrivelsby shardeloes sheringham park silwood park stanage park stanmer park st . john 's park , ryde , isle of wight stoke park , buckinghamshire stoneleigh abbey stubbers sufton court , herefordshire sundridge park retrieved 12 august 2011 tatton park thoresby park trent park trewarthenick , cornwall uppark valleyfield , fife wanstead park waresley warley woods warren house , loughton wembley park west wycombe park wingerworth hall woburn abbey . literature . mansfield park by jane austen reference to repton , chapter 6 . arcadia by tom stoppard reference to repton and his 'red books ' , act 1 , scene 1 ( stage directions ) . exhibitions . permanent repton exhibit including facsimile of his red book at sheringham park . repton bicentenary exhibition at woburn abbey during 2018 . '' repton revealed : the art of landscape gardening '' at the garden museum , london showing 23 of repton 's red books . 24 october 2018 until 3 february 2019 . bicentenary celebrations in 2018 . the garden trust was awarded a heritage lottery fund grant to run a ‘ sharing repton ’ project in 2018–19 , working with volunteers to deliver five projects aimed at including participation from local communities , based around five repton sites across the country . the project took place at kenwood , london , with london parks and gardens trust and english heritage ; wicksteed park , kettering , with northamptonshire gardens trust ; catton park , with norfolk gardens trust and broadland district council ; blaise castle , bristol , with avon gardens trust , and warley woods in the black country . a record of the project and the resources developed to make garden history more publicly accessible were published in 2020 . historic england have added humphry repton 's landscapes to their interactive map of aerial photography of designed landscapes and commissioned hardy plants and plantings for repton and late georgian gardens ( 1780-1820 ) which draws on research carried out on plants and planting schemes for late georgian gardens ( 1780–1820 ) and conservation projects , intended to provide a plant list as a starting point for researchers and those restoring gardens of this period . . references . britain express . '' humphry repton '' guthrie , melva b . '' humphrey repton '' humphry repton – a gardens guide biography perry , jason . '' humphry repton '' . further reading . bate , sally , savage , rachel and williamson , tom ( eds ) . ( 2018 ) humphry repton in norfolk , norfolk gardens trust . eyres , patrick and lynch , karen ( 2018 ) . on the spot : the yorkshire red books of humphry repton , landscape gardener . new arcadian press . flood , susan and williamson , tom ( 2018 ) . humphry repton in hertfordshire . 945 pages publisher : hacker art books ; facsimile edition ( june 1972 ) ; . gothein , marie . geschichte der gartenkunst . münchen : diederichs , 1988 . london parks & gardens trust ( 2018 ) . repton in london : the gardens and landscapes of humphry repton ( 1752-1818 ) in the london boroughs . rutherford , sarah ( 2018 ) . hardy plants and plantings for repton and late georgian gardens ( 1780-1820 ) historic england rutherford , sarah ( ed . ) ( 2018 ) humphry repton in buckinghamshire and beyond . buckinghamshire gardens trust rafael , chevalier de weryha-wysoczański ( 2004 ) . strategien des privaten . zum landschaftspark von humphry repton und fürst pückler . berlin . . external links . about britain . '' bayham abbey '' great british gardens . '' clumber park , worksop '' grewe , armin homepage . '' longleat house '' randolph caldecott society . '' rode hall '' '' stoneleigh abbey '' landscape architecture university of oregon . '' humphrey repton '' hdl:10020/cifa850834 finding aid of collection at the getty research institute