Dreadlocks

origins . some of the earliest depictions of dreadlocks date back as far as 1500 bce in the minoan civilization , one of europe 's earliest civilizations , centered in crete ( now part of greece ) . frescoes discovered on the aegean island of thera ( modern santorini , greece ) depict individuals with long braided hair or long dreadlocks . in ancient egypt , examples of egyptians wearing locked hairstyles and wigs have appeared on bas-reliefs , statuary and other artifacts . mummified remains of egyptians with locked wigs have also been recovered from archaeological sites . egyptian museum - '' return of the mummy . toronto life - 2002 . '' retrieved 01-26-2007 . during the bronze age and iron age many peoples in the near east , asia minor , caucasus , east mediterranean and north africa such as the sumerians , elamites , and ancient egyptians were depicted in art with braided or plaited hair and beards . however , braids are not dreadlocks , and it is not always possible to tell from these images which are being depicted . . etymology . the history of the name '' dreadlocks '' is unclear . some authors have speculated that the '' dread '' component could refer to the reaction of british soldiers upon encountering mau mau fighters who had this hairstyle . dreadlocks are also worn by some rastafari , who believe they represent a biblical hair style worn as a symbol of devotion by the nazirites , as described in . . history . in ancient greece , kouros sculptures from the archaic greece depict men wearing dreadlocks while spartan hoplites wore formal locks as part of their battle dress . spartan magistrates known as ephors also wore their hair braided in long locks , an archaic greek tradition that was steadily abandoned in other greek kingdoms . the style was worn by ancient ascetical theology in the middle east and mediterranean , and the dervishes of islam , among others . some of the very earliest adherents of christianity in the middle east may have worn this hairstyle ; there are descriptions of james the just , first bishop of jerusalem , who is said to have worn them to his ankles . stephen d . glazier , encyclopedia of african and african-american religions , taylor & francis , 2001 , , , p . 279 . pre-columbian aztec priests were described in aztec codices ( including the durán codex , the codex tudela and the codex mendoza ) as wearing their hair untouched , allowing it to grow long and curl around itself . berdán , frances f . and rieff anawalt , patricia ( 1997 ) . the essential codex mendoza . london , england : university of california press . pp 149 . bernal diaz del castillo records : here were priests with long robes of black cloth & nbsp ; . the hair of these priests was very long and so knotted that it could not be separated or disentangled , and most of them had their ears scarified , and their hair was clotted with blood . when young and dreadlocks when old . larry wolff in his book inventing eastern europe : the map of civilization on the mind of enlightenment mentions that in poland , for about a thousand years , some people wore a knotted hairstyle similar to that of some scythians . zygmunt gloger in his encyklopedia staropolska mentions that the polish plait ( plica polonica ) hairstyle was worn by some people of both genders in the pinsk region and the masovia region at the beginning of the 19th century . the polish plait can vary between one large plait and multiple plaits that resemble dreadlocks . . by culture . locks have been worn for various reasons in each culture . their use has also been raised in debates about cultural appropriation . . africa . maasai warriors are known for their long , thin , red dreadlocks , dyed with red root extracts or red ochre . in nigeria , some children are born with naturally locked hair and are called by the yoruba word dada in nigerian english . . australia . some indigenous australians of north west and north central australia have historically worn their hair in a locked style , sometimes also having long beards that are fully or partially locked . traditionally , some wear the dreadlocks loose , while others wrap the dreadlocks around their heads , or bind them at the back of the head . in north central australia , the tradition is for the dreadlocks to be greased with fat and coated with red ochre , which assists in their formation . . buddhism . within tibetan buddhism and other more esoteric forms of buddhism , locks have occasionally been substituted for the more traditional shaved head . the most recognizable of these groups are known as the ngagpas of tibet . for buddhists of these particular sects and degrees of initiation , their locked hair is not only a symbol of their vows but an embodiment of the particular powers they are sworn to carry . the dreadlocks treatise : on tantric hairstyles in tibetan buddhism . 1.4.15 of the hevajra tantra states that the practitioner of particular ceremonies '' should arrange his piled up hair '' as part of the ceremonial protocol . snellgrove , david . the hevajra tantra : a critical study . vol 1 . oxford university press . 1959 . . europe . the polish plait was so endemic in the polish–lithuanian commonwealth that it inspired the latin name for it . hinduism . the practice of jaṭā ( dreadlocks ) is practiced in modern day hinduism , most notably by sadhu who follow śiva . the kapalika , first commonly referenced in the 6th century , were known to wear jaṭā as a form of deity imitation of the deva bhairava-shiva shiva is often depicted with dreadlocks . rastafari . rastafari movement dreadlocks are symbolic of the lion of judah which is sometimes centered on the ethiopian flag . rastafari hold that haile selassie is a direct descendant of king solomon and the queen of sheba , through their son menelik i . their dreadlocks were inspired by the nazarites of the bible . pool , h . ( 2003 , august 22 ) . dare to dread . retrieved from haile selassie was crowned emperor of ethiopia in 1930 . many jamaican christian claimed that selassie 's coronation was evidence that he was the black messiah that they believed was prophesied in the book of revelation . some street preachers such as leonard howell , archibald dunkley , robert hinds , and joseph hibbert began to claim the doctrine that '' haile selassie was the returned jesus '' . barrett , leonard e . ( 1988 ) . the rastafarians . beacon press . during 1930s great depression was coming , and the rastafari message spread from kingston to all jamaica , especially among poor communities where jamaican people lived . the cultivation of dreadlocks in the later rastafari movement established a closer connection between with people . charet , m . ( 2010 ) . root of david : the symbolic origins of rastafari ( no . 2 ) . ispck . when reggae music espousing rastafarian ideals gained popularity and mainstream acceptance in the 1970s thanks to bob marley 's music and cultural influence , the dreadlocks ( often called '' dreads '' ) became a notable fashion statement worldwide ; they have been worn by prominent authors , actors , athletes and rappers . . in sports . dreadlocks have become a popular hairstyle among professional athletes . in professional american football , the number of players with dreadlocks has increased ever since al harris and ricky williams first wore the style during the 1990s . in 2012 , about 180 national football league players wore dreadlocks . a significant number of these players are defensive backs , who are less likely to be tackled than offensive players . in the nba there has been controversy over the brooklyn nets guard jeremy lin , an asian-american who garnered mild controversy over his choice of dreadlocks . former nba player kenyon martin accused lin of appropriating african-american culture in a since-deleted social media post , after which lin pointed out that martin has multiple chinese letters tattooed on his body . . in western fashion . on july 3 , 2019 , california became the first us state to prohibit discrimination over natural hair . governor gavin newsom signed the crown act into law , banning employers and schools from discriminating against hairstyles such as dreadlocks , braids , afros , and twists . likewise , later in 2019 assembly bill 07797 became law in new york state ; it '' prohibits race discrimination based on natural hair or hairstyles . '' . methods of making dreadlocks . a variety of other starter methods have been developed to offer greater control over the general appearance of dreadlocks . they can be formed through a technique called '' twist and rip '' , as well as backcombing interlocking and palm rolling . together , these alternative techniques are more commonly referred to as '' salon '' or '' manicured '' dreadlocks . using beeswax to make dreads can cause problems because it does not wash out , due to the high melting point of natural wax . because wax is a hydrocarbon , water alone , no matter how hot , will not be able to remove wax . this is often where problems like mold and dread rot come from , the wax clogs inside the length of the dread meaning water ca n't run out easily . having wet dreads for long periods of time helps mildew set in , this combined with the wax and every dirt/dust/fluff particle that has stuck to the wax can result in moldy , slimy dreads . as with the organic and freeform method , the salon methods rely on hair naturally knotting over a period of months to gradually form locs . the difference is in the initial technique by which loose hair is encouraged to form a rope-like shape . whereas freeform locs can be created by simply refraining from combing or brushing hair and occasionally separating knotted sections , salon dreadlocks use tool techniques to form the basis of the starter , immature set of dreadlocks . a '' matured '' set of salon dreadlocks wo n't look the same as a set of dreadlocks that have been started with neglect or freeform . for african hair types , salon dreadlocks can be formed by evenly sectioning and styling the loose hair into braids , coils , twists , or using a procedure called dread perming specifically used for straight hair . for european , indigenous american , east asian , and indian hair types , backcombing and twist and rip are some of the more popular methods of achieving starter dreadlocks . regardless of hair type or texture and starter method used , dreadlocks require time before they are fully matured . the process hair goes through as it develops into matured dreadlocks is continuous . there is also the ability to adopt different types of fake dreadlocks that may make the hair look as real as possible . this process is called synthetic dreadlocks . there are two different types of synthetic dreadlocks . the first is dread extensions , in which other hair can be infused with the wearer 's own hair . the second is dreadfalls , in which one dread is tied into another with either elastic or lace . both of these methods are used to make dreads look better and more appealing , and to achieve the desired effect of longer hair . guinness book of world records . on december 10 , 2010 , the guinness book of world records rested its '' longest dreadlocks '' category after investigation of its first and only female title holder , asha mandela , with this official statement : following a review of our guidelines for the longest dreadlock , we have taken expert advice and made the decision to rest this category . the reason for this is that it is difficult , and in many cases impossible , to measure the authenticity of the locks due to expert methods employed in the attachment of hair extensions/re-attachment of broken off dreadlocks . effectively the dreadlock can become an extension and therefore impossible to adjudicate accurately . it is for this reason guinness world records has decided to rest the category and will no longer be monitoring the category for longest dreadlock .