Minamoto no Yoritomo

early life . yoritomo was the third son of minamoto no yoshitomo , heir of the minamoto ( seiwa genji ) clan , and his official wife , urahime , was a daughter of fujiwara no suenori , who was a member of the illustrious fujiwara clan . yoritomo was born in the family villa in atsuta in nagoya , owari province '' 系図纂要 ( keizusanyo ) '' '' 尾張名所図会 ( owarimeishozue ) '' '' 尾張志 ( owarishi ) '' ( present-day seigan-ji ) . at that time yoritomo 's grandfather minamoto no tameyoshi was the head of the minamoto . like benkei , his childhood name was oniwakamaru ( 鬼武丸 ) . he was a descendant of emperor seiwa . in 1156 , factional divisions in the court erupted into open warfare within the capital . the cloistered emperor toba and his son emperor go-shirakawa sided with the son of fujiwara regent fujiwara no tadazane , fujiwara no tadamichi as well as taira no kiyomori ( heir of the taira clan at the time ) , while emperor sutoku sided with tadazane 's younger son , fujiwara no yorinaga . this is known as the hōgen rebellion . the minamoto clan were split . the head of the clan , tameyoshi , sided with sutoku . however , his son , yoshitomo ( father of yoritomo ) , sided with toba and go-shirakawa , as well as kiyomori . in the end , the supporters of go-shirakawa won the civil war , thus ensuring victory for yoshitomo and kiyomori . sutoku was placed under house arrest , and yorinaga was fatally wounded in battle . tameyoshi was executed by the forces of yoshitomo . nonetheless , go-shirakawa and kiyomori were ruthless , and yoshitomo found himself as the head of the minamoto clan , while yoritomo became the heir . yoritomo and the minamoto clan descended from the imperial family on his father 's side . nonetheless , in kyoto , the taira clan , now under the leadership of kiyomori , and the minamoto clan , under the leadership of yoshitomo , began to factionalize again . four years later , kiyomori supported fujiwara no michinori . however , yoshitomo supported fujiwara no nobuyori . this was known as the heiji rebellion . the ex-emperor mansion were burned , while shinzei was captured and decapitated . nonetheless , the minamoto were not well prepared , and the taira took control of kyoto . yoshitomo fled the capital but was later betrayed and executed by a retainer . in the aftermath , harsh terms were imposed on the minamoto and their allies . only yoshitomo 's three young boys remained alive , so that kiyomori and the taira clan were now the undisputed leaders of japan . yoritomo , the new head of the minamoto , was exiled . yoritomo was not executed by kiyomori because of pleas from kiyomori 's stepmother . yoritomo 's brothers , minamoto no noriyori and minamoto no yoshitsune were also allowed to live . yoritomo grew up in exile . he married into the hōjō clan , led by hōjō tokimasa , marrying tokimasa 's daughter , hōjō masako . meanwhile , he was notified of events in kyoto . . family . father : minamoto no yoshitomo mother : yura gozen ( d . 1159 ) children : minamoto no yoriie minamoto no sanetomo shimazu tadahisa . call to arms and the genpei war ( 1180–1185 ) . in 1180 , prince mochihito , a son of cloistered emperor go-shirakawa , made a national call to arms of the minamoto clan all over japan to rebel against the taira . yoritomo took part in this , especially after things escalated between the taira and minamoto after the death of minamoto no yorimasa and prince mochihito himself . yoritomo set himself up as the rightful heir of the minamoto clan , and he set up a capital in kamakura to the east . not all minamoto thought of yoritomo as rightful heir . his uncle , minamoto no yukiie , and his cousin minamoto no yoshinaka , conspired against him . in september 1180 , yoritomo was defeated at the battle of ishibashiyama , his first major battle , when ōba kagechika led a rapid night attack . after his defeat in mt . ishibashiyama , minamoto no yoritomo fled into the hakone mountains , stayed in yugawara , then escaped from manazuru-iwa to awa ( south of present-day chiba ) . yoritomo spent the next six months raising a new army . in 1181 , taira no kiyomori died , and the taira clan was now led by taira no munemori . munemori took a much more aggressive policy against the minamoto , and attacked minamoto bases from kyoto in the genpei war . nonetheless , yoritomo was well protected in kamakura . his brothers minamoto no yoshitsune and minamoto no noriyori defeated the taira in several battles , but they could not stop minamoto no yoshinaka , yoritomo 's rival , from entering kyoto in 1183 and chasing the taira south . the taira took emperor antoku with them . in 1184 , antoku was displaced by the minamoto with emperor go-toba as the new emperor . from 1181 to 1184 , a de facto truce with the taira dominated court allowed yoritomo the time to build an administration of his own , centered on his military headquarters in kamakura . in the end he triumphed over his rival cousins , who sought to steal from him control of the clan , and over the taira , who suffered a terrible defeat at the battle of dan-no-ura in 1185 . yoritomo thus established the supremacy of the warrior samurai caste and the first bakufu ( shogunate ) at kamakura , beginning the feudal age in japan which lasted until the mid-19th century . yoritomo practiced shudō with yoshinao , a member of the imperial guard . homosexuality & civilization by louis crompton . published by the belknap press of harvard university in 2003 . page 420 . . legacy . image : seated portrait of minamoto no yoritomo ( presumed ) 1.jpg thumb seated portrait of minamoto no yoritomo , kamakura period , tokyo national museum . in december 1185 , go-shirakawa granted yoritomo the authority to collect the commissariat tax ( the hyoro-mai or levy contribution of rice ) and to appoint stewards ( jito ) and constables ( shugo ) . thus the throne '' handed to the leader of the military class effective jurisdiction in matters of land tenure and the income derived from agriculture '' . in the summer of 1189 , yoritomo invaded and subjugated mutsu province and dewa province . in december 1190 yoritomo took up residence in his rokuhara mansion at the capital , the former headquarters of the taira clan . upon the death of go-shirakawa in the spring of 1192 , go-toba commissioned yoritomo sei-i tai shōgun ( generalissimo ) . thus a feudal state was now organized in kamakura while kyoto was relegated to the role of '' national ceremony and ritual '' . in the words of george bailey sansom , '' yoritomo was a truly great man & nbsp ; … his foresight was remarkable , but so was his practical good sense in setting up machinery to match his own expanding power . '' yoritomo 's wife 's family , the hōjō , took control after his death at kamakura , maintaining power over the shogunate until 1333 , under the title of shikken ( regent to the shōgun ) . one of his brothers-in-law was ashikaga yoshikane . nussbaum , '' ashikaga yoshikane '' at the gorintō ( stone pagoda ) traditionally believed to be his grave ( see article tomb of minamoto no yoritomo ) is still maintained today , adjacent to shirahata shrine , a short distance from the spot believed to be the site of the so-called ōkura bakufu , his shogunate 's administrative-governmental offices . in 1199 , he ordained as a buddhist monk . he died two days later . image : grave of minamoto no yoritomo.jpg thumb grave of yoritomo in kamakura . cultural references . he appears as a hero unit in the scenario editor for age of empires ii , and as a hero unit in total war : shogun 2 a character named '' yoritomo '' appears in book 6 : '' the lords of the rising sun '' in the fabled lands adventure gamebook series , where yoritomo is the self-proclaimed shōgun and on the verge of war with '' lord kiyomori '' . eras of yoritomo 's bakufu . the years in which yoritomo was shōgun are more specifically identified by more than one era name or nengō . kenkyū ( 1190–1199 ) shōji ( 1199–1201 ) . see also . seiwa genji eiji yoshikawa , historical fiction writer battle of hojuji . notes . references . jeffrey mass ( 1999 ) . yoritomo and the founding of the first bakufu : the origins of dual government in japan . stanford : stanford university press . ; oclc 41712279 nagahara keiji 永原慶二 . minamoto no yoritomo 源頼朝 . tokyo : iwanami-shoten , 1995 . naramoto tatsuya 奈良本辰也 , et al . minamoto no yoritomo 源頼朝 . tokyo : shisakusha , 1972 . nussbaum , louis-frédéric and käthe roth . ( 2005 ) . japan encyclopedia . cambridge : harvard university press . ; oclc 58053128 isaac titsingh ( 1834 ) . nihon ōdai ichiran ; ou , annales des empereurs du japon . paris : royal asiatic society , oriental translation fund of great britain and ireland . oclc 5850691 . yamaji aizan 山路愛山 . minamoto no yoritomo : jidai daihyō nihon eiyūden 源頼朝 : 時代代表日本英雄伝 . tokyo : heibonsha , 1987 . yoshikawa eiji . ( 1989 ) yoshikawa eiji rekishi jidai bunko ( eiji yoshikawa 's historical fiction ) , vols . 41–42 : minamoto yoritomo ( 源頼朝 ) . tokyo : kodansha . external links . ōmachi , by the kamakura citizen 's net , accessed on september 30 , 2008 atsuta history course , ( include '' seigan-ji temple '' birthplace of minamoto-no yoritomo )