Slick Rick

career . initial fame . his career began in 1985 ; walters first gained success in the rap industry after joining doug e . fresh 's get fresh crew , using the stage name mc ricky d . he was featured on the single '' the show '' and its even more popular b-side , '' la di da di '' , which featured walters ' rapping over doug e . fresh 's beatbox . both tracks gained some mainstream attention , they appeared on top of the pops and soul train with the get fresh crew . reflecting on the double-sided gem in rolling stone magazine , roots drummer and tonight show bandleader ahmir '' questlove '' thompson said , '' point blank : slick rick 's voice was the most beautiful thing to happen to hip-hop culture . rick is full of punchlines , wit , melody , cool cadence , confidence and style . he is the blueprint . '' in 1986 , slick rick joined russell simmons 's rush artist management and became the third artist signed to def jam records , the leading rap/hip-hop label at the time . collaborating with his friend , dj vance wright , walters produced his solo debut , the great adventures of slick rick , which came out in 1988 on def jam . the album was very successful , reaching the no . & nbsp ; 1 spot on billboards r & b/hip-hop chart . it also featured three charting singles : '' children 's story '' , '' hey young world '' , and '' teenage love '' . the release is known for its storytelling and vocal characterizations . '' with the combination of rick 's dick van dyke-on-dope accent and his unique narrative style , the record was an instant classic , '' wrote critic matt weiner . '' each of rick 's songs was an amusing , enthralling story that lasted from the first groove to the last . '' . incarceration and subsequent albums . in 1989 , walters ' mother , veronica , hired his first cousin , mark plummer , as his bodyguard . by 1990 , plummer had become a liability , having tried numerous times to extort money from the artist . plummer was fired and , unsatisfied with his severance package , tried to rob walters on numerous occasions and also threatened to kill the rapper and his mother . when walters found bullet holes in his front door , he bought guns for protection . on july 3 , 1990 , walters spotted plummer in his neighborhood , and fired at least four shots . one bullet hit plummer ; another caught a passerby in the foot . neither suffered life-threatening injuries . he eventually pleaded guilty to two counts of attempted murder and other charges , including assault , use of a firearm , and criminal possession of a weapon . the rapper called it an act of self-defense . he spent five years in prison , two for the then-second-degree attempted-murder charges he received for the shooting , and three for his struggle with the immigration and naturalization services over his residency in the u.s . he was released from prison in 1997 . sewell chan , '' governor pardons hip-hop pioneer , '' the new york times , may 23 , 2008 . after being bailed out by russell simmons , walters recorded his second album , the ruler 's back , released in 1991 . despite peaking at no . & nbsp ; 29 on the billboard 100 , the album received mixed reviews and was n't as commercially successful as his debut . in the documentary film , the show , russell simmons interviewed walters while he was imprisoned on rikers island . walters ' third studio album ( the fourth for def jam ) behind bars was released in 1994 , while he was still incarcerated . it was met with lukewarm sales and reviews . behind bars peaked at no . & nbsp ; 11 on the billboard top r & b/hip-hop albums chart , and no . & nbsp ; 51 on the billboard 200 . walters remained with the def jam label , and on may 25 , 1999 , released a fourth album , the art of storytelling . generally considered the authentic follow-up to his 1988 debut , the art of storytelling was an artistically successful comeback-album that paired him with prolific mcs like nas , outkast , raekwon , and snoop dogg . the los angeles times announced it as the '' triumphant return of rap 's premier yarn-spinner , '' calling the song '' 2 way street '' '' a much-needed alternative to rap 's misogynistic slant . '' it charted higher than any of slick rick 's prior releases : no . & nbsp ; 8 on the billboard 200 ; no . & nbsp ; 1 on the top r & b/hip-hop albums chart . after performing on a caribbean cruise ship in june 2001 , walters was arrested by the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) as he re-entered the united states through florida . he was promptly told that he was being deported under a law allowing deportation of foreigners convicted of felonies . rick was continuously refused bail , but after 17 months in prison he was released on november 7 , 2003 . in october 2006 , the department of homeland security began a new attempt to deport walters back to the united kingdom , moving the case from the united states court of appeals for the second circuit based in new york to the more conservative eleventh circuit . the court is based in atlanta , georgia but the trial was expected to proceed in florida , where immigration agents originally arrested walters . on may 23 , 2008 , new york governor david paterson granted slick rick a full and unconditional pardon on the attempted murder charges . the governor was pleased with his behavior since the attempted murders . slick rick has volunteered his time to mentor kids about violence . . later career and life . walters married his wife mandy aragones in april 1997 , four years after the couple met at a manhattan nightclub . the performer has two children , ricky martin lloyd santiago and lateisha walters , from a previous relationship . he and his wife have donated about a dozen items from his collection to the national museum of african american history and culture . slick rick and the soul rebels brass band collaborated on june 21 , 2012 in washington , d.c . at the historic howard theatre which re-opened in april 2012 . in 2014 , rick participated in will.i.am 's '' trans4m '' concert , which raised more than 2.4 & nbsp ; million for the music producer 's i.am.angel foundation . in addition , rick recently was a mixx cares humanitarian award recipient . on april 15 , 2016 , rick was granted u.s . citizenship , remarking , '' i am so proud of this moment—and so honored to finally become an american citizen . '' he will also retain his uk citizenship . on november 2 , 2018 , rick released the single '' snakes of the world today '' . in 2020 , rick features on westside gunn 's album who made the sunshine . honors . on october 6 , 2008 , rick was honored on the vh1 hip hop honors show . rapping style . slick rick 's style is commended by music critics . music journalist peter shapiro wrote , '' & thinsp ; 'children 's story ' was important because of its narrative structure and rick 's understanding of how crucial little sonic details—such as his use of a female voice and his yawning rap—were to hip hop style . '' shapiro , peter . the rough guide to hip-hop , 2nd edition , penguin , 2005 , p.336 . he is largely known for his story raps , such as '' children 's story '' and '' la di da di '' . shapiro writes that he '' largely introduced the art of narrative into hip hop . none of the spinners of picaresque rhymes who followed did it with the same grace or humor . '' shapiro , peter , 2005 , the rough guide to hip-hop , 2nd edition , penguin , p . 337 . allmusic states that he has the '' reputation as hip hop 's greatest storyteller . '' in the book check the technique , slick rick says , '' i was never the type to say freestyle raps , i usually tell a story , and to do that well i 've always had to work things out beforehand . '' coleman , brian . check the technique : liner notes for hip-hop junkies . new york : villard/random house , 2007 , p . 319 . kool moe dee comments , '' slick rick raised the lost art of hip hop storytelling to a level never seen again . '' kool moe dee . there 's a god on the mic : the true 50 greatest mcs , thunder 's mouth press , 2003 , p.63 . devin the dude notes that slick rick 's '' indian girl '' is a good example of the type of humor that existed in hip hop 's golden era , edwards , paul . how to rap : the art & science of the hip-hop mc , chicago review press , 2009 , p . 39 . and peter shapiro says that '' he was funnier than rudy ray moore or redd foxx . '' slick rick uses very clear enunciation and retains some english pronunciations , which led shapiro to say that he raps in the '' british english '' . o.c . states : '' the great adventures of slick rick is one of the greatest albums ever . the stuff he was just saying on there , it was so clear . the clear syllable dude was slick rick for me '' . edwards , paul , how to rap : the art & science of the hip-hop mc , chicago review press , 2009 , p . 244 . he is also renowned for his unique '' smooth , british-tinged flow '' which contains distinct structures . in the book how to rap , it is noted that on the song '' i own america '' , he '' puts a rest on almost every other 1-beat so that each set of two lines begins with a rest . '' edwards , paul , how to rap : the art & science of the hip-hop mc , chicago review press , 2009 , p . 129 . kool moe dee stated that , '' rick accomplished being totally original at a time when most mcs were using very similar cadences . '' kool moe dee . there 's a god on the mic : the true 50 greatest mcs , thunder 's mouth press , 2003 , p.64 . he has what is described as '' singsong cadences '' ; andy cat of ugly duckling mentions that slick rick uses a melodic delivery on the track '' hey young world '' . edwards , paul . how to rap : the art & science of the hip-hop mc , chicago review press , 2009 , p . 253 . slick rick is also known to extensively use punch ins , especially in his story rhymes as different characters ; edwards , paul . how to rap : the art & science of the hip-hop mc , chicago review press , 2009 , p . 276 . kool moe dee says rick used '' multi-voices to portray multiple characters . '' . discography . the great adventures of slick rick ( 1988 ) the ruler 's back ( 1991 ) behind bars ( 1994 ) the art of storytelling ( 1999 ) . references . external links .