Calisthenics

origin and etymology . the word calisthenics comes from the ancient greek words kállos ( κάλλος ) , which means '' beautiful '' ( to emphasize the aesthetic pleasure that derives from the perfection of the human body ) , and ( σθένος ) , meaning '' strength '' ( great mental strength , courage , strength , and determination ) . it is the art of using one 's bodyweight exercise in order to develop physique . the practice was recorded in use in ancient greece , including the armies of alexander the great and the spartans at the battle of thermopylae . . history . catharine esther beecher ( 1800–1878 ) , was an american educator and author who popularized and shaped a conservative ideological movement to both elevate and entrench women ’ s place in the domestic sphere of american culture . she introduced calisthenics in a course of physical education and promoted it . disciples of friedrich ludwig jahn brought their version of gymnastics to the united states , while catharine beecher and dio lewis set up physical education programs for women in the 19th century . organized systems of calisthenics in america took a back seat to competitive sports after the battle of the systems , when the states mandated physical education systems . the royal canadian air force exercise plans published in the 1960s helped to launch modern fitness culture . calisthenics is associated with the rapidly growing international sport called street workout . the street workout consists of athletes performing calisthenics routines in timed sessions in front of a panel of judges . the world street workout & calisthenics federation ( wswcf ) based in riga , latvia orchestrates the annual national championships and hosts the world championships for all the national champions to compete at one competition . the world calisthenics organization ( wco ) based in los angeles , ca . promotes a series of competitions known globally as the battle of the bars . the wco created the first-ever set of rules for formal competitions , including weight classes , timed round system , original judging criteria and a 10-point must system - giving an increasing number of athletes worldwide an opportunity to compete in these global competitions . street workout competitions have also popularised 'freestyle calisthenics ' , which is a style of calisthenics where the athlete uses their power and momentum to perform dynamic skills and tricks on the bar , often as part of a routine where each trick is linked together in a consistent flow . freestyle calisthenics requires great skill to control your momentum and understanding the mechanics of the body and the bar . . common exercises . the more commonly performed calisthenic exercises include : most common push-ups : performed face down on the floor , palms against floor under the shoulders , toes curled upwards against the floor . the arms are used to lift the body while maintaining a straight line from head to heel . the arms go from fully extended in the high position to nearly fully flexed in the low position while avoiding resting on the floor . chest , shoulders , and triceps are trained with this exercise . an easier version of this exercise consists of placing the hands on a wall and then bending and straightening the arms . sit-ups : a person lies on their back with their legs bent . they bend at the waist and move their head and torso towards their legs . they then lower themselves back down to the start position . for people who find it difficult to get down onto the ground , a similar range of motion can be achieved by standing with the legs slightly bent , and then bowing slightly and straightening up again . squats : standing with feet shoulder-width apart , the subject squats down until their thighs are parallel with the floor ; during this action , they move their arms forwards in front of them . they then return to a standing position whilst moving their arms back to their sides . squats train the quadriceps , hamstrings , calves , gluteal muscles , and core . the height of the squat can be adjusted to be deeper or shallower depending on the fitness level of the individual i.e . if someone struggles with exercise they can do half or quarter squats . they are among the most versatile calisthenic exercises because they can be performed easily in most environments and with a limited amount of space . common burpees : a full body calisthenics workout that works abdominal muscles , chest , arms , legs , and some parts of the back . chin-ups and pull-ups : chin-ups and pull-ups are similar exercises but use opposite facing grips . : for a chin-up , the palms of the hands are facing the person as they pull up their body using the chin-up bar . the chin-up focuses on the biceps muscles , rather than the latissimus dorsi muscle which is the focus of the pull-up . : for a pull-up , the bar is grasped using a shoulder-width grip . the subject lifts their body up , chin level with the bar , and keeping the back straight throughout . the bar remains in front of the subject at all times . the subject then slowly returns to starting position in a slow controlled manner . this primarily trains the lats or upper back muscles , as well as the forearms . dips : done between parallel bars or facing either direction of trapezoid bars found in some gyms . feet are crossed with either foot in front and the body is lowered until the elbows are in line with the shoulders . the subject then pushes up until the arms are fully extended , but without locking the elbows . dips focus primarily on the chest , triceps , and deltoids , especially the anterior portion . front lever and back lever : a front lever is performed by performing a lat pulldown of the bar with straight arms until the body is parallel to the ground , with the front of the body facing upwards . may be done on rings or pull-up bar . : a back lever is performed by lowering from an inverted hang from rings or bar , until the gymnast 's body is parallel to the ground and facing towards the floor . handstand : a handstand is the act of supporting the body in a stable , inverted vertical position by balancing on the hands . in a basic handstand , the body is held straight with arms and legs fully extended , with hands spaced approximately shoulder-width apart . hyperextensions : performed in a prone position on the ground , the individual raises the legs , arms and upper body off the ground . leg raises : lying on the back , hands in fists under buttocks , move feet up and down . l-sit : the l-sit is an acrobatic body position in which all body weight rests on the hands , with the torso held in a slightly forward-leaning orientation , with legs held horizontally so that each leg forms a nominal right-angle with the torso . the right-angle causes the body to have a notable '' l '' shape , hence the name '' l-sit '' . the l sit requires you to keep your core tensed and hold your legs horizontal so your body sits in a perfect ' l ' position . this requires significant abdominal strength and a high level of hamstring flexibility . muscle-ups : an intermediate calisthenics exercise . performed by a combination routine of a pull-up followed by a dip . may be done on pullup bars or rings . planche : one of the most advanced exercises , which may be achieved after years of training . the planche requires a decent amount of strength and some balance . planks : this is the name for holding the 'top ' position of a push-up for extended periods of time . the primary muscle involved in this exercise is the rectus abdominis , especially if a posterior pelvic tilt is maintained . shuttle runs : this is running back and forth between two points ( or cones ) typically separated by 5-40 meters , as fast as possible , with a touchdown . the emphasis should be on stopping , turning back and accelerate back to a sprint as quickly as possible . squat jumps : a variant of the squat . performed by entering a squatting position , then using a plyometric jumping movement to jump as high as possible . calf raises without weight . co-operative calisthenics . co-operative calisthenics refers to calisthenic exercises that involve two or more participants helping each other to perform the exercise . such exercises are also known as partner exercises or bodyweight exercises with a partner . usually , one person performs the exercise and the other person adds resistance . for example , a person performing squats with someone on their back . some exercises also involve the use of equipment . two people may hold onto different ends of a rope and pull in different directions . one person would deliberately provide a lesser amount of resistance , which adds resistance to the exercise whilst also allowing the other person to move through a full range of motion as their superior level of force application pulls the rope along . a disadvantage such exercises have is that it can be hard to measure how much resistance is being added by the partner when considered in comparison to free weights or machines . the advantage they have is that they allow for relatively high levels of resistance to be added with equipment being optional . on this basis , co-operative calisthenics can be just as easily performed on a playing field as in a gym . kraemer , w.j . & fleck s.j . , 'partner exercises ' in strength training for young athletes , leeds : human kinetics , pp.83-86 they are also versatile enough to allow them to be used for training goals other than simply strength . for example , a squat with a partner can be turned into a power-focused exercise by jumping or hopping with the partner instead , or even lifting them up on one knee . calisthenics parks . an increasing number of outdoor fitness training areas and outdoor gym are being built around the world . some are designed especially for calisthenics training and most are free to use by the public . calisthenics parks have equipment like pull-up bars , monkey bars , parallel bars , and box jumps at one location . freely accessible online maps exist that show the location and sample photos of calisthenics parks around the world . the leading global production company for calisthenics parks is kenguru pro . . see also . alexander technique ballistic training bodyweight exercise circuit training complex training crossfit fitness trail gymnastics muscle-up parkour pilates plyometrics power training pull-up ( exercise ) sport street workout strength training weight training . references .