Eternal Champion (character)

general overview . a significant number of moorcock 's novels and short stories take place in one shared multiverse : a wide array of interconnected parallel universes , many-layered dimensions , spheres , and alternative worlds , which spans from the big bang to the end of time and from earth to faraway galaxies . all these regions of spaces and parallel timelines are given shape by two metaphysical forces which are perpetually opposed to each other : law and chaos , which represent perpetual stasis and ever-changing disorder . since a clear-cut prevalence of either law or chaos would erase all life from the multiverse , a third force known as the cosmic balance enforces certain limits on the powers of law and chaos , which in turn ensure the continued existence of the multiverse . law , chaos , and the balance are implied to be non-sentient , but they do manifest through god-like beings who express one facet or another of the three cosmic principles , and in turn , these deities can empower mortal creatures as their heralds and representatives . the eternal champion is , as a matter of fact , an appointed paladin of balance who is bound to exist in each and every world and age of the multiverse , so that law and chaos are perpetually kept in check ; however , he often does not know of his role , or , even worse , he struggles against it , never to succeed . since he must intervene whenever either law or chaos has gained an excess of power , requiring him to tip the scales accordingly , he is always doomed to be surrounded by strife and destruction , although he may go through long periods of relative quiet . all the different eternal champions are implied to be different facets or '' incarnations '' of one semi-conscious being ( a platonic archetype of a sort ) : most of them are peerless fighters and generals and have an unbreakable bond with a sentient chaos-aligned weapon , the black sword , which in turns takes on a different form for each champion . likewise , many champions are aided by an eternal companion and an eternal consort : a sidekick and a love interest who are themselves aspects of two semi-divine figures . this recursivity through the multiverse is further underlined by the number of champions , companions , and mentor-figures to the champions moorcock has given the j and c initials , as a form of naming fil rouge ; in the same vein , many champions and companions belong to one branch or another of the extensive von bek dynasty . space- and time-travels through the multiverse are in fact possible , to the point that one humanoid species called the eldrens is spread among many different worlds and ages and interacts with many different champions ; however , cosmic laws establish that no two eternal champions can coexist in the same situation , or the very fabric of reality would be severely damaged . the only exceptions are cataclysmic events such as the end of a cycle of cycles of the multiverse 's progression , or an invasion by hostile entities from an entirely separate multiverse : in these cases , different incarnations of the champion may join forces to thwart the impending threat , possibly by temporarily merging their individual bodies into a true demigod of immense power . incarnations . the following list presents all known champions in alphabetical order , mentions their respective swords , companions , and consorts , and briefly summarizes their individual plotlines and publishing history . alerik alivale konrad arflane : the hero of the postapocalyptic novel the ice schooner ( 1969 ) , arflane lives during a new ice age that has engulfed most of earth and forced the surviving humans to revert to a hunter-gatherer ; he sets sails on the eponymous ice schooner to reach the fabled settlement of new york and scavenge all ancestral knowledge that could help restore human civilization . artos the celt asquiol of pompeii : the main character of the science-fiction novella '' the blood red game '' ( 1963 ) , asquiol is leading a human colonizing force into a parallel universe and has to fight for supremacy against a hostile native species . '' the blood red game '' was eventually combined with the earlier novella '' the sundered worlds '' ( 1962 ) into the full-length novel the sundered worlds ( 1965 ) , making asquiol somehow of a guest character into the von bek saga . aubec , earl of malador : aubec debuted in a 1964 short story titled either '' the dream of earl aubec '' or '' master of chaos '' depending on the collection : he lives in the same world as elric of melniboné many generations before that character 's birth , serves as a national champion of the human kingdom of lormyria and is the paramour of the lormyrian monarch , queen eloarde . moorcock planned a whole series about aubec 's wars against melniboné in order to ensure human independence , eventually reconnecting to elric 's saga as a direct prequel , but the project was eventually aborted ; consequently , '' the dream of earl aubec '' was reincorporated into elric 's series as a prologue . captain oswald bastable : the main character and narrator of the nomad of time trilogy ( 1971-1981 ) , captain bastable is an officer of the british imperial army stationed in the raj in the early 20th century , until a series of time-travel incidents transports him into three different uchronia : a 1973 where the world wars have not been fought and the british empire is now encroached by decolonizing movements ; a 1904 where europe has been left in tatters by a precocious and even more devastating great war ; a 1941 where the british and german empires are firmly allied . bastable 's misadventures in these alternative timelines are constructed as a biography and literary historians regard them as the prototypes of the steampunk subgenre . brian jherek carnelian : one of the last humans to be alive on earth as the multiverse is nearing the end of time , carnelian is a creature of semi-divine power , hedonistic interests , and obnoxious morality ( not unlike his fellow end-timers ) , but his lifestyle changes forever once he falls in love with mrs . amelia underwood , a time traveler from the nineteenth century ; the couple 's courtship , relationship and shared adventures across time and space are the subject of a trilogy called the dancers at the end of time ( 1972-1976 ) ; this series is complemented by the legends at the end of time : five semi-autonomous short stories and novelettes taking place at the end of time , themselves composed in the late seventies ( with an additional sixth one being published in 2008 ) . this series is characterized by a high number of cameos from other leading and supporting characters of the eternal champion mythos . jerry cornelius : an adventurer and dimensional traveler moorcock created in the mid-sixties and developed for the following forty years , resulting in an early tetralogy of novels , the cornelius quartet ( 1968-1977 ) , a ponderous collection of short fiction , the lives and times of jerry cornelius ( 1976 ) , and a later hexalogy of novels , the cornelius calendar ( composed in two stages , 1976-1981 and 2002-2008 ) , with more tales in the working . cornelius ' saga consists of a wide array of surreal situations kept together by the character 's uniquely fluid identity and it represents an influential form of experimental literature in the wider context of psychedelia . this series also includes two spin-off works , a doctor who licensed novel titled the coming of the terraphiles ( 2010 ) , whose captain cornelius is , in fact , jerry 's incarnation in the whoniverse ; and the distant suns ( 1975 ) , a late example of pulp space opera moorcock co-authored with james cawthorn , depicting jerry as an air force colonel and a space explorer . moreover , it is implied that lord jagged of canaria from jherek carnelian 's series , jaspar colinadous from one of elric 's adventures , dorian hawkmoon 's jehamia cohnahlias , corum 's jhary-a-conel , and john daker 's jermays the crooked are jerry 's counterparts in their respective dimensions . jerry 's version of the black sword is a needle gun ( later morphed into a vibragun ) , his consort is his own sister catherine ( depicted as his wife in the distant suns , to avoid any incestuous undertones ) , and he has a conflictual bond with fellow dimensional adventurer una persson . jerry cornell : in 1966 moorcock edited ( and in fact ghost-wrote ) a sizeable section of the spy novel the lsd dossier by roger harris and eventually authored two novels starring harris 's original main character , secret agent nick allard ; later on moorcock revised his solo works into a stand-alone series centered upon agent jerry cornell ( 1970-1980 ) , an overt parody of character tropes and clichés from ian fleming 's james bond series . john daker : a human implied to come from 20th century earth , he is forced by balance to reincarnate into various aspects of the champion while staying fully aware of all his identities after every transmigration . through his own series , he takes on four different personas : lord erekosë : a warrior from an unspecified age of earth 's history and the only human capable of holding the radioactive sword kunajana . at the beginning of the novella '' the eternal champion '' ( 1962 ; expanded into a novel of the same title in 1970 ) erekosë has been dead for generations , but a necromantic ritual resurrects him as a new existence for john daker ; the reborn erekosë consequently gets entangled into a world war between humans and eldrens and into a love triangle between the two factions ' princesses , eldren ermizhad and human iolinda . count ulrik skarlsol : once his missions as erekosë are resolved , daker is forcibly transferred into count ulrik skarlsol , lord of the frozen keep , a hybernated hero native to an ice-bound planet . during the novel phoenix in obsidian ( 1970 ) count ulrik embarks on a quest for the mysterious '' chalice '' ( possibly a counterpart of the holy grail ) and is forced to wield the cold sword , an extremely powerful and malevolent form of the black sword . clen of clen-gar : daker assumes this identity during the swords of heaven , the flowers of hell ( 1979 ) , a graphic novel co-authored by moorcock and howard chaykin which bridges the time gap between the second and third prose novel . clen is a human lord of a prosperous bucolic territory called '' heaven '' , whose '' angel '' denizens are responsible for the abysmal state of their neighboring land of '' hell '' ; as the two country clashes in war , clen gets romantically involved with lady gradesmor from heaven . prince flamadin : flamadin is the ruler of a dimension called draachenheem and owns both the dragon sword ( a black sword comparable in power to ulrik skarlson 's cold sword ) and the actoris stone , an enchanted gem that would later become elric of melniboné 's family heirloom . in the dragon in the sword ( 1986 ) daker as flamadin and his companion from 20th century germany , ulrich von bek , travel across many interconnected dimensions to prevent a major cataclysm . elric of melniboné : moorcock 's breakthrough character , elric lives in a prehistorical age of earth and is the sorcerer-emperor of the melnibonéans , a pre-human species of chaos-aligned feys ( later retconned into being a branch of the eldren ) ; he wields the soul-eating sword stormbringer , on which he is co-dependent due to its frail health , and spends his life trying to thwart the chaos god arioch , who is also his undesired personal patron due to an ancestral melnibonéan tradition ; the first and last novels in this series also feature mournblade , stormbringer 's twin sword , which is wielded by elric 's kinsmen . in the early stages of his saga , elric is enamored of his cousin princess cymoril and gets one-time help from oone the dreamthief , an enchantress , and count smiorgan , a well-known reaver ; later on , he falls in love with the human aristocrat zarozinia and casts his lot with moonglum of elwher , a sybaritic sellsword , and rackhir the red archer , a powerful paladin of balance . elric 's series represents a major milestone in sword & sorcery fiction and , unlike moorcock 's later works , was composed anachronically : it originally consisted of seven short stories and a stormbringer ( novel ) written from 1961 to 1967 , but it was later expanded with an origin story , a prequel and a midquel in the early seventies , a third prequel and a second midquel in the early nineties , and some more peripheral contents during the early 21st century . franik professor faustaff : the leading character in the wrecks of time ( 1965 ) , he is a physicist fighting the space-faring marauders known as the d-squads in order to protect a cluster of fifteen different earths that exist in parallel to faustaff 's own planet . the 1996 revision of the wrecks of time renamed faustaff 's ally gordon ogg into '' gordon begg '' , in order to retcon him into a von bek and underline those character 's respective status as an eternal champion and companion , but this change was eventually dropped in the 2014 reprint . goldberg duke dorian hawkmoon : a german soldier in a post-nuclear europe where dying earth genre , duke hawkmoon embarks on a quest together with his retainer oladahn to recover the fabled runestaff ( a magical talisman akin to the holy grail ) and protect the world from the warmongering dark empire of granbretan , which is ruled by the ruthless half-human half-machine king huon ; as this enterprise progresses , hawkmoon is forced to bear the enchanted black jewel , a manifestation of the black sword , and falls in love with yisselda brass , heiress of a fiefdom in the land of kamarg . dorian 's war against granbretan is central in the runestaff tetralogy ( 1967-1969 ) while his family life with yisselda serves as a backdrop to the chronicles of castle brass/count brass trilogy ( 1973-1975 ) , which culminates into a crossover with elric 's , daker 's , and corum 's respective series . ilanth queen ilian of garathorm : one of the very few female championesses , she teams up with duke hawkmoon once he travels to her own world during his sixth novel , the champion of garathorm . karl glogauer : a hedonist and a hippie with a countercultural background , glogauer debuts in the novella '' behold the mand '' ( 1966 ; expanded into a novel of the same title in 1969 ) , in which he time-travels to roman palestine so that he can meet jesus ; the later novel breakfast in the ruins ( 1972 ) details the character 's homosexual romances and hallucinatory experiences in contemporary london . he also cameos in jerry cornelius 's adventures . corum jhaelen irsei : a prince of the vadhagh , a law-aligned branch of the eldren people , corum effectively becomes the last of his kin after a disastrous war against the mabden , a species created by chaos of which homo sapiens is the terran variant . after a period of thralldom , the mutilation of his left hand and right eye , and their replacement with magical prosthetics ( hence his alias as corum llaw ereint , '' corum of the silver hand '' ) , the former prince rises in rebellion against his captors and wages a veritable crusade against chaos , which takes place both in corum 's own age during the swords trilogy ( 1971 ) and in a distant future during the silver hand trilogy ( 1973-1974 ) . as his vendetta unfolds , corum pursues troubled romances with two human women , rhalina and medhbh , and is reliably backed by jhary-a-conel , a well-versed dimensional traveler who occasionally supports hawkmoon as well . notice that corum 's name is an anagram of '' jeremiah cornelius '' . jack karaquazian : a leading character in the second ether trilogy ( 1995-1996 ) , which depicts the power struggles between god-like beings ( such as karaquazian himself ) of lawful , chaotic and neutral affiliation to take control of balance and swing it their own respective way . jack is involved in an entangled love affair with his consort colinda dovero , his companion sam oakenhurst and sam 's other love interest rose von bek . michael kane of old mars : the hero of a 1965 trilogy of novels , michael kane is a human scientist from earth transported to a fictional version of mars , where he gets embroiled in swashbuckling adventures and court intrigues , including a romance with martian queen shizala . kane is constructed as an explicit homage and throwback to the planetary romance subgenre and , more specifically , to john carter of mars by edgar rice burroughs ; in turn , the biographical style of the trilogy represents a direct antecedent to oswald bastable 's saga . clovis marca : the leading character in the shores of death ( 1966 ) , marca is one of the last human denizens of a future earth which stopped rotating and is now split between a daily and a nightly hemisphere ; he embarks on a quest to cure humankind 's severe sterility and grant his species a future . the 1996 revision of the shores of death renamed marca into '' clovis becker '' in order to retcon him into a distant von bek , but this change was eventually dropped in the 2014 reprint . mejink-la-kos m ' v okom sebpt o'riley , gunholder of the qui lors ventures : another female championess , she wields the black sword under the guise of a soul-eating pistol , the banning gun . she acts as a mentor to eric beck in elric : the balance lost . oshbek-uy pournachas alan powys : the leading character in the fireclown ( 1965 ) , powys is a state functionary in a distant future where humankind has retreated underground under the stewardship of a despotic government ; he strives to protect his home country from a space terrorist known as '' the fireclown '' . the 1996 revision of the winds of limbo renamed powys into '' alain von bek '' in order to retcon him into a distant von bek , but this change was eventually dropped in the 2014 reprint . pyat quartet : possibly the only champion whose adventures are fully mimetic rather than fantastical , colonel pyat is a long-lived russian aristocrat and military man born on the 1st of january 1900 . he spends his life traveling across the globe and getting entangled into all sorts of high-level political intrigues , effectively shaping the fates of europe before , during , and after the world wars ; the love of his turbulent and opportunistic life is honoria cornelius , jerry 's mother . moorcock composed the pyat quartet at a relatively slow pace between 1981 and 2006 and structured it as a self-celebratory four-volume autobiography by the colonel himself , with moorcock acting as an editor . ryan : the lead character of the black corridor ( 1969 ) , ryan lives in a dystopian future of rampaging xenophobia , nuclear warfare and societal collapse ; he commandeers the interstellar travel hope dempsy and tries to bring a rag-tag group of refugees to safety . the '' scar-faced brooder '' or '' cronarch '' : a character from moorcock 's juvenile novelettes the time dweller ( 1964 ) and escape from evening ( 1965 ) , dealing with the state of human society in a dying earth scenario . shaleen sojan the swordsman : moorcock 's first original character and a prototype to the eternal champion concept , sojan is a deceased terran who reincarnates on the planet zylor and embarks on a series of picaresque adventures ; interestingly , while he does wield a sword and a pneumatic gun , his actual signature weapon is a shield ( hence the moniker of '' sojan shieldbearer '' ) . sojan 's adventures first appeared around 1955 as a twenty-three parts serial on the burroughsania fanzine , which moorcock had been contributing to , were reprinted for profit in tarzan adventures between 1957 and 1958 , and they were eventually fixed-up in book form in 1977 ; finally , the 2013 edition combined this serial together with other sword-and-planet novelettes focusing on dek of noothar , klan the spoiler , and rens karto of bersnol . umpata ghardas valabasian , conqueror of the distant suns graf ulrich von bek : a german soldier fighting in the thirty years ' war , graf ulrich is the leading character of the historical fantasy novel the war hound and the world 's pain ( 1981 ) , in which he strikes a deal with the devil and takes upon his family the duty of locating and guarding the holy grail ; his companion and consort in this adventure are gurni gurnisson and sabrina . graf ulrich 's actions reverberate through space and time by making the von beks aware of the multiverse , the designated owners of the sword ravenbrand ( which is , in fact , mournblade from elric 's series ) and uniquely attuned to magic and dimensional travel , so that different members of the bloodline are involved in many other sagas and stand-alone episodes of the eternal champion mythos . other noteworthy von beks across the cycle are : manfred von bek : the main character of the city in the autumn stars ( 1986 ) , a direct sequel to the war hound and the world 's pain , manfred carries on graf ulrich 's quest for the grail as europe is engulfed by the french revolution ; he is aided by the duchess of crete , libussa cartagena y mendoza-chilperic . due to their shared main plotline , the war hound and the world 's pain and the city in the autumn stars are usually collected together as the core of the von bek saga . renark von bek : a citizen of humankind 's stellar empire established in the aftermath of world war three , renark is tasked with traveling to a secluded dimension known as the sundered worlds so that he can stabilize the multiverse and prevent its untimely collapse . he is the lead character in the novella '' the sundered worlds '' ( 1962 ) , which was eventually combined with '' the blood red game '' ( 1963 ) into the full-length novel the sundered worlds ( 1965 ) . rose von bek : the last survivor of a militant order devoted to balance , she was originally known as '' the rose '' , but married into the von bek family and kept the surname after her divorce . she is the titular coprotagonist in elric 's novel the revenge of the rose ( 1991 ) and a leading character in the second ether trilogy . while no championess herself , her cosmic power is comparable to that of the various champions . her signature weapons are the sword swift thorn and the dagger little thorn . ulrich von bek : a direct descendant of graf ulrich , he rebels against adolf hitler and escapes death by serving as an eternal companion to john daker once the latter incarnates into prince flamadin during the dragon in the sword . ulric von bek : a distinct character from the former ( notice the h-less spelling of his name ) , he too opposes the third reich together with his wife oona von bek , a half-human half-melnibonéan hybrid who has relocated to 20th century germany . ulric and oona are the leading characters of the moonbeam roads trilogy ( 2001-2005 ) , an explicit crossover between elric 's saga and the von beks ' . count ulrich rudric renark otto von bek-krasny , also known as '' zenith the albino '' : an eternal champion existing on 20th century earth and most likely a reincarnated elric of melniboné , since his black sword is stormbringer itself ; he is a criminal mastermind and is perpetually engaged into a cat-and-mouse game against his distant cousin sir seaton begg , a british '' metatemporal detective '' belonging to the english branch of the dynasty . zenith and begg 's shared adventure were composed anachronically and collected for the first time in the metatemporal detective ( 2007 ) , while some of them had already appeared in the second volume of the second ether series , fabulous harbours ( 1995 ) . eric beck : the main character of the graphic novel elric : the balance lost ( 2011-2012 ) , he is an eternal champion living on 21st century earth and gets dragged into an ensemble adventure together with elric , hawkmoon , corum , oswald bastable , and the cast of the second ether series . his black sword is a japanese katana named murakamo-no-tsurugi ( '' sword of the gathering clouds '' ) . he is likely a collateral member of the von bek dynasty through the begg lineage . in addition to moorcock 's own creations , a number of references through his works have stated that ulysses and roland have been earth 's eternal champions as well . publishing history . the tale of the eternal champion . between 1992 and 1993 moorcock partnered with british publisher millenium ( later absorbed into the orion publishing group ) to print a multi-volume collection of all novels and short stories belonging to the eternal champion sequence , under the moniker of '' the tale of the eternal champion '' ; starting from 1994 and up to 2000 , a parallel project simply called '' the eternal champion '' was undertaken by white wolf publishing for the north american market , but each of the two series ended up including some contents left out of its counterpart due to licensing issues , while certain works could not make into the collection whatsoever . this publishing operation , anyway , represented moorcock 's first attempt to systematize his magnum opus both in terms of editorial uniformity and textual revisions . the following table and paragraph list the full contents of both the european and north american versions of the collection . it should be noticed that the orion collection was arranged according to moorcock 's then-preferred reading order , which was altered in the white wolf version . the collection was further complemented by five e-book-only releases : jerry cornell 's series : the chinese agent ( 1970 ) the russian intelligence ( 1980 ) the golden barge ( 1979 , but originally composed in 1958 ) sojan the swordsman ( 1977 , but originally composed in 1954-1958 ) the distant suns ( 1975 , but originally composed in 1969 ) as of 2021 , gollancz has not yet acquired the rights for the pyat quartet , consisting of : byzantium endures ( 1981 ) the laughter of carthage ( 1984 ) jerusalem commands ( 1992 ) the vengeance of rome ( 2006 ) . see also . the hero with a thousand faces : an anthropological essay on the narrative structures of myths by influential scholar joseph campbell and a prominent source of literary inspiration for moorcock 's generation . notes . references . darren harris-fain , '' british fantasy and science-fiction writers since 1960 '' , gale group , 2002 , , p . & nbsp ; 293 carter kaplan , '' fractal fantasies of transformation : william blake , michael moorcock and the utilities of mythographic shamanism '' in '' new boundaries in political science fiction '' , ( edd donald m . hassler , clyde wilcox ) univ of south carolina press , 2008 , , pp . & nbsp ; 35–52 frank northern magill , '' survey of modern fantasy literature , volume 1 '' , salem press , 1983 , , p . & nbsp ; 489