Sales

relationships with marketing . marketing and sales differ greatly , but they generally have the same goal . selling is the final stage in marketing which puts the plan into effect . a marketing plan includes pricing , promotion , place , and product ( the 4 p 's ) . a marketing department in an organization has the goals of increasing the desirability and value of the products and services to the customer and increasing the number and engagement of successful interactions between potential customers and the organization . achieving this goal may involve the sales team using promotional techniques such as advertising , sales promotion , publicity , and public relations , creating new sales channels , or creating new products . it can also include encouraging the potential customer to visit the organization 's website , contact the organization for more information , or interact with the organization via social media channels such as twitter , facebook and blogs . social values play a major role in consumer decision processes . marketing is the whole of the work on persuasion made for the whole of the target people . sales is the process of persuasion and effort from one person to one person ( b2c ) , or one person to a corporation ( b2b ) , in order to make a living resource enter the company . this may occur in person , over the phone or digitally . the field of sales process engineering views '' sales '' as the output of a larger system , not just as the output of one department . the larger system includes many functional areas within an organization . from this perspective , the labels '' sales '' and '' marketing '' cover several processes whose inputs and outputs supply one another . in this context , improving an '' output '' ( such as sales ) involves studying and improving the broader sales process , since the component functional areas interact and are interdependent . many large corporations structure their marketing departments , so they are integrated with all areas of the business . they create multiple teams with a singular focus , and the managers of these teams must coordinate efforts to drive profits and business success . for example , an '' inbound '' campaign seeks to drive more customers '' through the door '' , giving the sales department a better chance of selling their product to the consumer . a good marketing program would address any potential downsides as well . the sales department would aim to improve the interaction between the customer and the sales channel or salesperson . as sales is the forefront of any organization , this would always need to take place before any other business process may begin . sales management involves breaking down the selling process and increasing the effectiveness of the discrete processes , as well as improving the interactions between processes . for example , in an outbound sales environment , the typical process includes outbound calling , the sales pitch , handling objections , opportunity identification , and the close . each step of the process has sales-related issues , skills , and training needs , as well as marketing solutions to improve each discrete step . one further common complication of marketing is the difficulty in measuring results for some marketing initiatives . some marketing and advertising executives focus on creativity and innovation without concern for the top or bottom lines – a fundamental pitfall of marketing for marketing 's sake . many companies find it challenging to get their marketing and sales teams to agree . the two departments , although different in nature , handle very similar concepts and have to work together to achieve the business ' goals . building a good relationship between the two teams that encourages communication can be the key to success . industrial marketing . the idea that marketing can potentially eliminate the need for salespeople depends entirely on context . for example , this may be possible in some b2c situations ; however , for many b2b transactions ( for example , those involving industrial organizations ) this is mostly impossible . another dimension is the value of the goods being sold . fast moving consumer goods ( fmcg ) require no salespeople at the point of sale to get them to jump off the supermarket shelf and into the customer 's trolley . however , the purchase of large mining equipment worth millions of dollars will require a salesperson to manage the sales process – particularly in the face of competitors . small and medium businesses selling such large ticket items to a geographically-dispersed client base use manufacturers ' representatives to provide this highly personal service while avoiding the large expense of a captive sales force . sales and marketing alignment and integration . another area of discussion involves the need for alignment and integration of corporate sales and marketing functions . according to a report from the chief marketing officer ( cmo ) council , only 40 percent of companies have formal programs , systems or processes in place to align and integrate the two critical functions . sales , digital marketing and automated marketing campaigns with the rise of the use of the internet today , sales functions of several enterprises are finding traditional methods of marketing quite old fashioned and less efficient . so the use of automated marketing applications is on the rise ranging from customer relationship management to sales force management . traditionally , these two functions , as referenced above , have operated separately , left in siloed areas of tactical responsibility . glen petersen 's book the profit maximization paradox sees the changes in the competitive landscape between the 1950s and the time of writing as so dramatic that the complexity of choice , price , and opportunities for the customer forced this seemingly simple and integrated relationship between sales and marketing to change forever . petersen goes on to highlight that salespeople spend approximately 40 percent of their time preparing customer-facing deliverables while leveraging less than 50 percent of the materials created by marketing , adding to perceptions that marketing is out of touch with the customer and that sales is resistant to messaging and strategy . methods . a sale can take place through : agency-based sales complex sales consignment consultant retail or consumer sales agents ( for example in real estate or in manufacturing ) sales outsourcing through direct branded representation telemarketing or telesales transaction sales business-to-business – business-to-business ( '' b2b '' ) sales are likely to be larger in terms of volume , economic value and complexity than business-to-consumer ( '' b2c '' ) sales . often the complexity involves one business working closely with the other to define problems , to finding solutions , to supporting after-sale operation . because of this complexity , there is a need to manage the relationships between the buying and selling organizations , for example using peter cheverton 's relationship models and the stakeholder map by anderson , bryson and crosby channel sales , an indirect sales model , which differs from direct sales . channel selling is a way for sellers to reach the '' b2b '' and '' b2c '' markets through distributors , re-sellers or value added re-sellers vars . direct sales , involving person to person contact electronic electronic data interchange web – business-to-business ( '' b2b '' ) and business-to-consumer ( '' b2c '' ) indirect , human-mediated but with indirect contact mail-order vending machine pro forma sales request for proposal – an invitation for suppliers , through a bidding process , to submit a proposal on a specific product or service ; an rfp usually represents part of a complex sales process , also known as '' enterprise sales '' selling technique : action selling auctions challenger sales cold calling conceptual selling consultative selling cross-selling guaranteed sale hard selling inbound sales needs-based selling paint-the-picture personal selling persuasive selling price based selling professional selling skills relationship selling reverse selling sales enablement sales habits sales negotiation sales outsourcing sandler selling system social selling solution selling strategic selling take-out or take away target account selling transactional selling upselling traveling salesman door-to-door methods hawking e selling ( selling on e commerce portals ) . sales agents . agents in the sales process can represent either of two parties in the sales process ; for example : buyers broker or buyer brokerage : this is where the salesman represents the consumer making the purchase . this is most often applied in large transactions . disclosed dual agent : this is where the salesman represents both parties in the sale and acts as a mediator for the transaction . the role of the salesman here is to oversee that both parties receive an honest and fair deal . internet sales professionals : these people are primarily responsible for ensuring immediate response to the leads generated via social media , website or email campaigns . sales broker , seller agency , seller agent , seller representative : this is a traditional role where the salesman represents a person or company on the selling end of a deal . sales managers aim to implement various sales strategies and management techniques in order to facilitate improved profits and increased sales volume . they are also responsible for coordinating the sales and marketing department as well as oversight concerning the fair and honest execution of the sales process by their agents . sales outsourcing involves direct branded representation where the sales representatives are recruited , hired , and managed by an external entity but hold quotas , represent themselves as the brand of the client , and report all activities ( through their own sales management channels ) back to the client . it is akin to a virtual extension of a sales force ( see sales outsourcing ) . salesperson : the primary function of salespeople is to generate and close business resulting in profit . the salesperson will accomplish their primary function through a variety of means including phone calls , email , social media , networking , and cold calling . the primary objective of the successful salesperson is to find the consumers to sell to . sales are often referred to as a '' numbers game '' because a general law of averages and pattern of successful closing of business will emerge through heightened sales activity . these activities include but are not limited to : locating prospects , fostering relationships with prospects , building trust with future clients , identifying and filling needs of consumers , and therefore turning prospective customers into actual ones . many tools are used by successful salespeople , the most important of which is questioning which can be defined as a series of questions and resulting answers allowing the salesperson to understand a customer 's goals and requirements relevant to the product they are selling . the creation of value or perceived value is the result of taking the information gathered , analyzing the goals and needs of the prospective customer and leveraging the products or services the salesperson 's firm represents or sells in a way that most effectively achieves the prospective client 's goals or suits their needs . effective salespeople will package their offering and present their proposed solution in a way that leads the prospective customer to the conclusion that they acquire the solution , resulting in revenue and profit for the salesperson and the organization they represent . transaction broker : this is where the salesperson represents neither party but handles the transaction only . the seller owes no responsibility to either party getting a fair or honest deal , just that all papers are handled properly . vs . in the united states , the fair labor standards act defines outside sales representatives as '' employees who sell their employer 's products , services , or facilities to customers away from their employer 's place ( s ) of business , in general , either at the customer 's place of business or by selling door-to-door at the customer 's home '' while defining those who work '' from the employer 's location '' as inside sales . inside sales generally involves attempting to close business primarily over the phone via telemarketing , while outside sales ( or '' field '' sales ) will usually involve initial phone work to book sales calls at the potential buyer 's location to attempt to close the deal in person . some companies have an inside sales department that works with outside representatives and book their appointments for them . inside sales sometimes refers to upselling to existing customers . . see also . buzzword choice architecture demand chain financial transaction personal selling sales ( accounting ) sales contest sales effectiveness sales incentive plan sales territory sales variance scale of sales levels ( shop , distributors , brokers , industry , etc ) trade vendor . references . external links .