Aladdin

sources . known along with ali baba as one of the '' orphan tales '' , the story was not part of the original nights collection and has no authentic arabic textual source , but was incorporated into the book les mille et une nuits by its french translator , antoine galland . allen ( 2005 ) pp.280– john payne quotes passages from galland 's unpublished diary : recording galland 's encounter with a maronite storyteller from aleppo , hanna diyab . according to galland 's diary , he met with hanna , who had travelled from aleppo to paris with celebrated french traveller paul lucas , on march 25 , 1709 . galland 's diary further reports that his transcription of '' aladdin '' for publication occurred in the winter of 1709–10 . it was included in his volumes ix and x of the nights , published in 1710 , without any mention or published acknowledgment of hanna 's contribution . paulo lemos horta , in the introduction to his translation of aladdin , speculates that diyab might even be the original author of at least some of the '' orphan '' tales , including aladdin . horta ( 2018 ) pp . 8-10 payne also records the discovery in the bibliothèque nationale in paris of two arabic language containing aladdin ( with two more of the '' interpolated '' tales ) . one was written by a syrian christian priest living in paris , named dionysios shawish , alias dom denis chavis . the other is supposed to be a copy mikhail sabbagh made of a manuscript written in baghdad in 1703 . it was purchased by the bibliothèque nationale at the end of the nineteenth century . payne ( 1901 ) pp . 13-15 as part of his work on the first critical edition of the nights , iraq 's muhsin mahdi has shown irwin ( 1994 ) pp . 57-58 that both these manuscripts are '' back-translations '' of galland 's text into arabic . mahdi ( 1994 ) pp . 51-71 dobie ( 2008 ) p.36 . plot summary . the story is often retold with variations . the following is a précis of the burton translation of 1885 . burton ( 2009 ) pp . 1 ff aladdin is an impoverished young ne'er-do-well , dwelling in '' one of the cities of china '' . he is recruited by a sorcerer from the maghreb , who passes himself off as the brother of aladdin 's late father , mustapha the tailor , convincing aladdin and his mother of his good will by pretending to set up the lad as a wealthy merchant . the sorcerer 's real motive is to persuade young aladdin to retrieve a wonderful oil lamp from a booby trap magic cave . after the sorcerer attempts to double-cross him , aladdin finds himself trapped in the cave . aladdin is still wearing a magic ring the sorcerer has lent him . when he rubs his hands in despair , he inadvertently rubs the ring and a jinnī ( or '' genie '' ) appears and releases him from the cave , allowing him to return to his mother while in possession of the lamp . when his mother tries to clean the lamp , so they can sell it to buy food for their supper , a second far more powerful genie appears who is bound to do the bidding of the person holding the lamp . with the aid of the genie of the lamp , aladdin becomes rich and powerful and marries princess badroulbadour , the sultan 's daughter ( after magically foiling her marriage to the vizier 's son ) . the genie builds aladdin and his bride a wonderful palace , far more magnificent than the sultan 's . the sorcerer hears of aladdin 's good fortune , and returns ; he gets his hands on the lamp by tricking aladdin 's wife ( who is unaware of the lamp 's importance ) by offering to exchange '' new lamps for old '' . he orders the genie of the lamp to take the palace , along with all its contents , to his home in the maghreb . aladdin still has the magic ring and is able to summon the lesser genie . the genie of the ring can not directly undo any of the magic of the genie of the lamp , but he is able to transport aladdin to the maghreb where , with the help of the '' woman 's wiles '' of the princess , he recovers the lamp and slays the sorcerer , returning the palace to its proper place . the sorcerer 's more powerful and evil brother plots to destroy aladdin for killing his brother by disguising himself as an old woman known for her healing powers . badroulbadour falls for his disguise and commands the '' woman '' to stay in her palace in case of any illnesses . aladdin is warned of this danger by the genie of the lamp and slays the impostor . aladdin eventually succeeds to his father-in-law 's throne . setting . the opening sentences of the story , in both the galland and the burton versions , set it in '' one of the cities of china '' . plotz ( 2001 ) p . 148–149 on the other hand , there is practically nothing in the rest of the story that is inconsistent with a middle eastern setting . for instance , the ruler is referred to as '' sultan '' rather than being called the '' emperor '' , as in some retellings , and the people in the story are muslims and their conversation is filled with parables from islam . a jews merchant buys aladdin 's wares , but there is no mention of buddhism or confucians . notably , ethnic groups in chinese history have long included muslim groups , including large populations of uighurs , and the hui people whose origins go back to silk road travelers . islamic communities have been known to exist in the region since the tang dynasty . some have suggested that the intended setting may be turkestan ( encompassing central asia and the modern chinese province of xinjiang in western china ) . moon ( 2005 ) p . 23 for all this , speculation about a '' real '' chinese setting depends on a knowledge of china that the teller of a folk tale ( as opposed to a geographic expert ) might well not possess . honour ( 1973 ) - section i '' the imaginary continent '' in early arabic usage , china is known to have been used in an abstract sense to designate an exotic , faraway land . . motifs and variants . the story of aladdin is classified in the aarne-thompson-uther index as tale type atu 561 , '' aladdin '' , after the character . in the index , the aladdin story is situated next to two similar tale types : atu 560 , the magic ring , and atu 562 , the spirit in the blue light . all stories deal with a down-on-his-luck and impoverished boy or soldier , who finds a magical item ( ring , lamp , tinderbox ) that grants his wishes . the magical item is stolen , but eventually recovered thanks to the use of another magical object . thompson , stith . the folktale . university of california press . 1977 . pp . 70-73 . a south asian variant has been attested , titled the magic lamp and collected among the santal people . campbell , a . , of the santal mission . santal folk-tales . pokhuria , india : santal mission press . 1891 . pp . 1-5 . brown , w . norman . '' the pañcatantra in modern indian folklore . '' journal of the american oriental society 39 ( 1919 ) : 1-54 . accessed may 9 , 2020 . doi:10.2307/592712 . western variants of the aladdin tale replace the lamp with a tinderbox . adaptations . adaptations vary in their faithfulness to the original story . in particular , difficulties with the chinese setting are sometimes resolved by giving the story a more typical arabian nights background . books . one of the many literary retellings of the tale appears in a book of wizards ( 1966 ) and a choice of magic ( 1971 ) , by ruth manning-sanders . '' the nobility of faith '' by jonathan clements in the anthology doctor who short trips : the ghosts of christmas ( 2007 ) is a retelling of the aladdin story in the style of the arabian nights , but featuring the doctor in the role of the genie . comics . . western comics . in 1962 the italian branch of the walt disney company published the story paperino e la grotta di aladino ( donald and aladdin 's cave ) , written by osvaldo pavese and drawn by pier lorenzo de vita . as in many pantomimes , the plot is combined with elements of the ali baba story : uncle scrooge leads donald duck and their nephews on an expedition to find the treasure of aladdin and they encounter the middle eastern counterparts of the beagle boys . scrooge describes aladdin as a outlaw who used the legend of the lamp to cover the origins of his ill-gotten gains . they find the cave holding the treasure—blocked by a huge rock requiring a magic password ( '' open sesame '' ) to open . the original version of the comic book character green lantern was partly inspired by the aladdin myth ; the protagonist discovers a '' lantern-shaped power source and a 'power ring which gives him power to create and control matter . adam robert , the history of science fiction , palgrave histories of literature , , 2016 , p . 224 . manga . the japanese manga series magi : the labyrinth of magic is not a direct adaptation , but features aladdin ( voiced by kaori ishihara ) as the main character of the story and includes many characters from other one thousand and one nights stories . an adaptation of this comic to an anime television series was made in october 2012 . pantomimes . in the united kingdom , the story of aladdin was dramatised in 1788 by john o'keefe for the the royal opera . witchard ( 2017 ) it has been a popular subject for pantomime for over 200 years . the traditional aladdin pantomime is the source of the well-known pantomime character widow twankey ( aladdin 's mother ) . in pantomime versions , changes in the setting and story are often made to fit it better into '' china '' ( albeit a china situated in the east end of london rather than medieval baghdad ) , and elements of other arabian nights tales ( in particular ali baba ) are often introduced into the plot . one version of the '' pantomime aladdin '' is sandy wilson 's musical aladdin , from 1979 . since the early 1990s , aladdin pantomimes have tended to be influenced by the disney animation . for instance , the 2007/8 production at the birmingham hippodrome starring john barrowman featured songs from the disney movies aladdin and mulan . other musical theatre . the new aladdin was a successful edwardian musical comedy in 1906 . adam oehlenschläger wrote his verse drama aladdin in 1805 . carl nielsen wrote incidental music for this play in 1918–19 . ferruccio busoni set some verses from the last scene of oehlenschläger 's aladdin in the last movement of his piano concerto , op . 39 . in 1958 , aladdin ( tv special ) was written especially for us television with a book by s . j . perelman and music and lyrics by cole porter . a london stage production followed in 1959 in which a 30-year-old bob monkhouse played the part of aladdin at the london coliseum . broadway junior has released aladdin jr . , a children 's musical based on the music and screenplay of the disney animation . the disney 's aladdin : a musical spectacular musical stage show ran in disney california adventure from january 2003 to january 10 , 2016 . starkid productions released the musical '' twisted '' on youtube in 2013 , an aladdin spin-off that is told from the royal vizier 's point of view . a disney theatrical production of aladdin opened in 2011 in seattle , in toronto in 2013 , and on broadway at the new amsterdam theatre on march 20 , 2014 . aladdin ; prince street players version ; book by jim eiler ; music by jim eiler and jeanne bargy ; lyrics by jim eiler . . theatrical films . . animation - europe & asia . the 1926 animated film the adventures of prince achmed ( the earliest surviving animated feature film ) combined the story of aladdin with that of the prince . in this version the princess aladdin pursues is achmed 's sister and the sorcerer is his rival for her hand . the sorcerer steals the castle and the princess through his own magic and then sets a monster to attack aladdin , from which achmed rescues him . achmed then informs aladdin he requires the lamp to rescue his own intended wife , princess pari banou , from the demons of the island of wak wak . they convince the witch of the fiery mountain to defeat the sorcerer , and then all three heroes join forces to battle the demons . the animated feature aladdin et la lampe merveilleuse by film jean image was released in 1970 in france . the story contains many of the original elements of the story as compared to the disney version . a thousand and one nights is a 1969 japanese adult anime feature film directed by eiichi yamamoto , conceived by osamu tezuka . the film is a first part of mushi production 's animerama , a series of films aimed at an adult audience . aladdin and the magic lamp was a rendition in japanese directed by yoshikatsu kasai , produced in japan by toei animation and released in the united states by the samuel goldwyn company in 1982 . aladdin film released on 2019 . animation - usa . in the 1938 animated film have you got any castles ? , aladdin makes a brief appearance asking for help but gets punched by one of the three musketeers . aladdin and his wonderful lamp is a 1939 popeye cartoon . the 1959 animated film 1001 arabian nights starring mr . magoo as aladdin 's uncle and produced by upa aladdin is a 48-minute animated film based on the classic arabian nights story '' aladdin and the magic lamp '' , translated by antoine galland . aladdin was produced by golden films and the american film investment corporation . like all other golden films productions , the film featured a single theme song , '' rub the lamp '' , written and composed by richard hurwitz and john arrias . it was released directly to video on april 27 , 1992 by goodtimes home video ( months before disney ’ s version was released ) and was reissued on dvd in 2002 as part of the distributor 's collectible classics line of products . aladdin , the 1992 animated feature by walt disney feature animation ( possibly currently the best-known retelling of the story ) . in this version several characters are renamed or amalgamated . for instance the sorcerer and the sultan 's vizier become one character named jafar while the princess is renamed jasmine . they have new motivations for their actions . the genie ( disney ) only grants three wishes and desires freedom from his role . a sentient magic carpet replaces the ring 's genie while jafar uses a royal magic ring to find aladdin . the names '' jafar '' and '' abu '' , the sultan 's delight in toys , and their physical appearances are borrowed from the 1940 film the thief of bagdad . the setting is moved from china to the fictional arabian city of agrabah , and the structure of the plot is simplified . the return of jafar ( 1994 ) , direct-to-video sequel to the 1992 walt disney movie . aladdin and the king of thieves ( 1996 ) , direct-to-video second and final sequel to the 1992 walt disney movie . live-action english-language films . aladdin and the wonderful lamp ( 1917 ) , directed by chester m . franklin and sidney a . franklin and released by the fox film corporation , told the story using child actors . it is the earliest known filmed adaptation of the story . the 1940 british movie the thief of bagdad borrows elements of the aladdin story , although it also departs from the original story fairly freely : for instance the genie grants only three wishes and the minor character of the emperor 's vizier is renamed ja'far and becomes the main villain , replacing the sorcerer from the original plot . arabian nights is a 1942 adventure film directed by john rawlins and starring sabu , maria montez , jon hall and leif erickson . the film is derived from the book of one thousand and one nights but owes more to the imagination of universal pictures than the original arabian stories . unlike other films in the genre ( the thief of bagdad ) , it features no monsters or supernatural elements . article on arabian nights at turner classic movies accessed 10 january 2014 a thousand and one nights ( 1945 ) is a tongue-in-cheek technicolor fantasy film set in the baghdad of the one thousand and one nights , starring cornel wilde as aladdin , evelyn keyes as the genie of the magic lamp , phil silvers as aladdin 's larcenous sidekick , and adele jergens as the princess aladdin loves . the wonders of aladdin is a 1961 film directed by mario bava and henry levin and starring donald o ’ connor as aladdin . a 1998 movie a kid in aladdin 's palace directed by robert l . levy . direct-to-video film adventures of aladdin ( 2019 ) , a mockbuster produced by the asylum . aladdin , a disney live-action remake of the 1992 animated film , released in 2019 . it stars mena massoud as the title character , naomi scott as jasmine , marwan kenzari as jafar , and will smith as the genie . live-action foreign-language films . in 1957 , the story of aladdin was produced as a movie in telugu entitled allauddin adhbhuta deepam , tamil allavudeenum arputha vilakkum and hindi alladdin ka chirag . they were directed by t . r . raghunath and produced by t . s . balaiah . in the 1960s bollywood produced aladdin and sinbad , very loosely based on the original , in which the two named heroes get to meet and share in each other 's adventures . in this version , the lamp 's jinni ( genie ) is female and aladdin marries her rather than the princess ( she becomes a mortal woman for his sake ) . a soviet film volshebnaia lampa aladdina ( '' aladdin 's magic lamp '' ) was released in 1966 . a mexican production , pepito y la lampara maravillosa was made en 1972 , where comedian chabelo plays the role of the genie who grant wishes to a young kid called pepito in 1970s mexico city . adventures of aladdin ( 1978 ) , a bollywood film . a malayalam film allauddinum albhutha vilakkum was made in 1979 . this film was remade in tamil as allaudinaum arputha vilakkum the same year . in 1986 , an italian production ( under supervision of golan-globus ) of a modern-day aladdin was filmed in miami under the title superfantagenio , starring actor bud spencer as the genie and his daughter diamante as the daughter of a police sergeant . 'aladin is a 2009 indian hindi-language fantasy action film directed by sujoy ghosh . the film stars ritesh deshmukh , amitabh bachchan , jacqueline fernandez ( in her film debut ) and sanjay dutt . 2009 saw the release of the hindi bollywood retelling in the film aladin . the new adventures of aladdin , france modern retelling of the tale of aladdin . alad ’ 2 , second sequel to the french movie the new adventures of aladdin ( 2018 ) . ashchorjyo prodeep , a 2013 bengali film based on the same story of a middle class man ( played by saswata chatterjee ) who accidentally finds a magic lamp containing a jinn ( played by rajatava dutta ) . this anik dutta film is based on a shirshendu mukhopadhyay novel of the same name and deals with the issues of consumerism . aladin saha puduma pahana was released in 2018 in sri lanka in sinhala language . . television . . animation - english language . aladdin is a 1958 musical fantasy written especially for television with a book by s.j . perelman and music and lyrics by cole porter , telecast in color on the dupont show of the month by cbs . '' aladdin and the magic lamp '' , an episode of rabbit ears productions ' we all have tales series , televised on pbs in 1991 , featuring john hurt as narrator , with illustrations by greg couch and music by mickey hart . this version is set in isfahan , persia , and closely follows the original plot , including the origin of the sorcerer . the audiobook version was nominated for a grammy award for best spoken word album for children in 1994 . aladdin , an animated series produced by walt disney based on their movie adaptation that ran from 1994-1995 . aladdin featured in an episode of happily ever after : fairy tales for every child . the story was set in '' ancient china '' , but otherwise had a tenuous connection with the original plot . live-action - english language . aladdin appeared in episode 297 of sesame street performed by frank oz . this version was made from a large lavender live-hand list of muppets . a segment of the marty feldman episode of the muppet show retells the story of aladdin with gonzo ( muppet ) in the role of aladdin and marty feldman playing the genie of the lamp . a 1967 tv movie was based on the prince street players stage musical . in 1986 , the program faerie tale theatre based an episode on the story called '' aladdin and his wonderful lamp '' , directed by tim burton and starring robert carradine as aladdin and james earl jones as both the ring genie and the lamp genie . a 1990 tv movie was based on the prince street players stage musical . aladdin features as one of five stories in the sonar entertainment tv miniseries arabian nights in 2000 , featuring jason scott lee as aladdin and john leguizamo as both of the genies . the characters of aladdin , jasmine , jafar and the sultan , along with agrabah as the setting and the genie ( jinn ) of the lamp were adapted into the sixth season of tv series once upon a time , with aladdin portrayed by deniz akdeniz , jasmine portrayed by karen david , and jafar portrayed by oded fehr . jafar also appeared in the spin-off once upon a time in wonderland , portrayed by naveen andrews . both were produced by abc television studios and based on the disney version of the story . syfy released a made-for-tv horror adaptation called aladdin and the death lamp on september 15 , 2012 . live-action - foreign language . aladdin - naam toh suna hoga , a live-action indian television show on sab tv starring siddharth nigam as aladdin and avneet kaur . in kyōryū sentai zyuranger , the sixteenth installment of the long-running super sentai metaseries , the djinn ( voiced by eisuke yoda ) that appears in the eleventh episode ( '' my master ! '' transcription : '' goshujin-sama ! '' ( japanese : ご主人さま ! ) ) reveals that he was the genie from the tale of '' aladdin and the magic lamp '' , which did take place . the story of aladdin was featured in alif laila , a tv series directed by ramanand sagar in 1994 and telecasted on dd national . video games . a number of video games were based on the disney movie : the genesis version ( also on amiga , ms-dos , nes , game boy , and game boy color ) by virgin games . the snes version ( also on game boy advance ) by capcom . the master system version ( also on game gear ) by sims . nasira 's revenge for the playstation and windows by argonaut games . the disney version of aladdin appears throughout the disney/square enix crossover series kingdom hearts , with agrabah being a visitable world . the video game sonic and the secret rings is heavily based on the story of aladdin , and both genies appear in the story . the genie of the lamp is the main antagonist , known in the game as the erazor djinn , and the genie of the ring , known in the game as shahra , appears as sonic 's sidekick and guide through the game . furthermore , the ring genie is notably lesser than the lamp genie in the story . in 2010 , anuman interactive launched aladin and the enchanted lamp , a puzzle video game on pc and mac . in pachinko sales revenue . gallery . file : robida aladin illustration page4.jpeg aladdin trades the silver plates to a jew for a piece of gold file : robida aladin illustration page11.jpeg the sorcerer tricks a handmaiden and offers '' new lamps for old lamps '' . file : aladdinlookingup.jpg aladdin in disney 's stage show . . see also . 54521 aladdin , asteroid arabian mythology genie in popular culture the bronze ring jack and his golden snuff-box the tinder box the blue light three wishes joke . references . bibliography . . further reading . gaál , e . '' aladdin and the wonderful lamp . '' in : acta orientalia academiae scientiarum hungaricae 27 , no . 3 ( 1973 ) : 291-300 . accessed may 9 , 2020 . www.jstor.org/stable/23657287 . gogiashvili , elene ( 2018 ) . '' the tale of aladdin in georgian oral tradition '' . in : folklore , 129:2 , pp . & nbsp ; 148–160 . doi : 10.1080/0015587x.2017.1397392 huet , g . '' les origines du conte de aladdin et la lampe merveilleuse . '' in : revue de l'histoire des religions 77 ( 1918 ) : 1-50 . accessed may 9 , 2020 . www.jstor.org/stable/23663317 . larzul , sylvette . '' further considerations on galland 's '' mille et une nuits '' : a study of the tales told by hanna . '' in : marvels & tales 18 , no . 2 ( 2004 ) : pp . 258-71 . accessed may 9 , 2020 . www.jstor.org/stable/41388712 . marzolph , ulrich . '' aladdin almighty : middle eastern magic in the service of western consumer culture . '' the journal of american folklore 132 , no . 525 ( 2019 ) : 275-90 . accessed may 9 , 2020 . www.jstor.org/stable/10.5406/jamerfolk.132.525.0275 . . external links . aladdin , or , the wonderful lamp , by adam gottlob oehlenschläger , william blackwood & sons , 1863 '' alaeddin and the enchanted lamp '' , in john payne , oriental tales vol . 13 alaeddin , by sir richard francis burton . ( in html and annotated ) the thousand nights and a night in several classic translations , with additional material , including payne 's introduction and quotes from galland 's diary .