The College of New Jersey

men 's sports . baseball basketball cross country football soccer swimming and diving tennis track and field wrestling . women 's sports . basketball cross country field hockey lacrosse soccer softball swimming and diving tennis track and field . club sports . baseball basketball ( women ) bowling crew cheerleading dance team ice hockey lacrosse ( men and women ) rugby ( men and women ) soccer ( men and women ) softball swimming tennis ultimate frisbee ( men and women ) unified sports ( special olympics and tcnj students ) volleyball ( men and women ) . notable alumni . file : jamesflorio.jpg james florio , the 49th governor of new jersey , graduated from tcnj in 1962 . image : chris smith , official 109th congress photo.jpg chris smith , u.s . representative for . image : joseph mussomeli dos.jpg joseph a . mussomeli , the u.s . ambassador to the republic of slovenia . image : holly black 2010.jpg holly black , author of spiderwick , a series of children 's fantasy books . image : sheila callaghan in 2007.jpg sheila callaghan , playwright and screenwriter . image : steve_d_guitar.jpg stephen dadaian , is an electric and classical guitarist . . politics and government . christopher j . brown , republican party politician who served in the new jersey general assembly from 2012 to 2016 , representing the 8th legislative district . jim florio ( b.a . , 1962 ) , governor of new jersey , 1990–1994 . joe howarth ( b.s . ) , politician who has represented the 8th legislative district in the new jersey general assembly since 2016 . assemblyman joe howarth , new jersey legislature . accessed august 19 , 2016 . dick larossa , republican party politician who served two terms in the new jersey senate , from 1994 to 2000 , where he represented the 15th legislative district . gerald luongo ( b.a . , m.a . ) , republican party politician who has served in the new jersey general assembly from 1998 to 2000 . assemblyman gerald j . luongo , new jersey legislature , backed up by the internet archive as of february 25 , 1998 . accessed june 10 , 2010 . joseph r . malone , republican party politician who served in the new jersey general assembly from 1993 until 2012 , representing the 30th legislative district . joseph a . mussomeli ( b.a . , 1975 ) , is an american diplomat . current ambassador to slovenia as well as former ambassador to cambodia and the philippines . verlina reynolds-jackson , politician who represents the 15th legislative district in the new jersey general assembly . johnson , brent . '' meet n.j . 's newest assembly member '' , nj advance media for nj.com , february 15 , 2018 . accessed february 15 , 2018 . '' reynolds-jackson is a graduate of trenton central high school and has a bachelor 's degree in sociology from trenton state college -- now the college of new jersey -- and a master 's degree in administration from central michigan university . '' christopher smith ( b.s . , 1975 ) , united states congressman representing new jersey 's 4th congressional district . william a . stevens , jurist and republican party politician who served as president of the new jersey senate and new jersey attorney general . connie wagner , politician who served in the new jersey general assembly from 2008 to 2013 , where she represented the 38th legislative district . madaline a . williams , first african american woman elected to the new jersey legislature . . arts and entertainment . holly black ( b.a . in english , 1994 ) , author of the spiderwick chronicles series : valiant : a modern tale of faerie ; tithe : a modern faerie tale ; and ironside : a modern faery 's tale , among others . jay black , stand-up comic and screenwriter , sheila callaghan ( b.a . in english , 1995 ) , award-winning playwright and screenwriter . stephen dadaian , electric and classical guitarist . jeff feuerzeig , film director and screenwriter best known for the devil and daniel johnston . tom kraeutler , home improvement broadcast journalist and author . closing up for the summer – new york times trudy krisher , author geraldine clinton little , poet the lucas bros ( b.a . in philosophy , 2007 ) comedians , writers , actors best known for 22 jump street , arrested development and lucas bros moving co . adam mamawala , stand-up comic james queally , punchlines punch mamawala 's ticket to atlantic city , the signal ( college of new jersey newspaper ) , november 29 , 2006 may 01 , 2009 , lisa rich , trenton times article quote mamawala , a senior at the college of new jersey ( tcnj ) . accessed nov 7 , 2012 tom scharpling , producer and radio host . richard sterban ( born 1943 ) , member of the oak ridge boys . lloyd , jack . '' sturdy oaks and a country boy from phila . '' , the philadelphia inquirer , february 22 , 1991 . accessed november 13 , 2013 . '' the remaining member of the oaks , richard sterban , is a native of camden who graduated from collingswood high school and attended trenton state college . '' ty treadway , one life to live soap star and host of soap talk on soapnet cable channel . michael vega , actor . sports . terry bradway , general manager of the new york jets from 2001 to 2006 . melanie balcomb , head women 's basketball coach at vanderbilt university . greg grant , former nba player . eric hamilton , american football coach . gene hart ( b.a . , 1952 ) , hockey hall of fame broadcaster and former play-by-play voice of the philadelphia flyers . panaccio , tim ( july 15 , 1999 ) . '' gene hart , longtime voice of flyers , dies '' . the philadelphia inquirer : p . a1 . tom mccarthy , radio play-by-play voice of the philadelphia phillies . tom mccarthy , wfan . accessed august 26 , 2007 . . others . lori alhadeff , activist david l . richards , associate professor of political science and human rights at the university of connecticut . richard a . swanson , organizational theorist and distinguished research professor of human resource development and the sam lindsey chair at the university of texas at tyler , known for his synthesis work on the financial research related to human resource development . geralyn wolf ( m.a . , 1971 ) , bishop of the episcopal diocese of rhode island . julianna white , holds the title of miss new jersey usa 2011 . andrew rausa , ( b.s.a . ) , works for the advertising & privacy counsel for facebook and was named in forbes 30 under 30 for law & policy in 2017 . kevin gabauer , co-founder of fat shack , a late-night food company that was featured on shark tank . tom armenti , co-founder of fat shack , a late-night food company that was featured on shark tank . margaret '' peggy '' savidge ( nee mackenzie ) ( 1938-1994 ) elementary educator in new jersey and pennsylvania including liberty bell elementary school in coopersburg , pennsylvania . notable faculty . juda bennett – english celia chazelle – history roy a . clouser – philosophy ellen g . friedman – english and women 's & gender studies james a . graham – psychology jean graham – english nancy hingston – mathematics xinru liu – history catie rosemurgy – creative writing jess row – english donna shaw – journalism . see also . list of american state universities trenton computer festival . notes . . references . external links . tcnj athletics website