Ornette Coleman

biography . early life . coleman was born on 9 march 1930 , in fort worth , texas , where he was raised . he attended i.m . terrell high school , where he participated in band until he was dismissed for improvising during '' the washington post '' march . he began performing r & b and bebop on tenor saxophone and started the jam jivers with prince lasha and charles moffett . eager to leave town , he accepted a job in 1949 with a silas green from new orleans traveling show and then with touring rhythm and blues shows . after a show in baton rouge , louisiana , he was assaulted and his saxophone was destroyed . he switched to alto saxophone , which remained his primary instrument , first playing it in new orleans after the baton rouge incident . he then joined the band of pee wee crayton and traveled with them to los angeles . he worked at various jobs , including as an elevator operator , while pursuing his music career . in california he found like-minded musicians such as ed blackwell , bobby bradford , don cherry , charlie haden , billy higgins , and charles moffett . he recorded his debut album , something else ! ! ! ! ( 1958 ) with cherry , higgins , walter norris , and don payne . during the same year he belonged briefly to a quintet led by paul bley that performed at a club in new york city . by the time tomorrow is the question ! was recorded soon after with cherry , higgins , and haden , the jazz world had been shaken up by coleman 's alien music . some jazz musicians called him a fraud , while conductor leonard bernstein praised him . . 1959 : the shape of jazz to come . in 1959 atlantic released the shape of jazz to come . according to music critic steve huey , the album '' was a watershed event in the genesis of avant-garde jazz , profoundly steering its future course and throwing down a gauntlet that some still have n't come to grips with . '' jazzwise listed it no . 3 on their list of the 100 best jazz albums of all time . coleman 's quartet received a long – and sometimes controversial – engagement at five spot jazz club in new york city . leonard bernstein , lionel hampton , and modern jazz quartet were impressed and offered encouragement . hampton asked to perform with the quartet ; bernstein helped haden obtain a composition grant from the john simon guggenheim memorial foundation . but trumpeter miles davis said coleman was '' all screwed up inside '' , miles davis , quoted in john litwiler , ornette coleman : a harmolodic life ( ny : w . morrow , 1992 ) , 82 . , 9780688072124 although he recanted this comment and became a proponent of coleman 's innovations . coleman 's early sound was due in part to his use of a grafton saxophone . he bought a plastic horn in los angeles in 1954 because he was unable to afford a metal saxophone , though he did n't like the sound of the plastic instrument at first . on the atlantic recordings , coleman 's sidemen in the quartet are cherry on cornet or pocket trumpet ; charlie haden , scott lafaro , and then jimmy garrison on bass ; and higgins or his replacement ed blackwell on drums . the complete recordings for the label were collected on the box set beauty is a rare thing . . 1960s : free jazz and blue note . in 1960 , coleman recorded free jazz : a collective improvisation , which featured a double quartet , including don cherry and freddie hubbard on trumpet , eric dolphy on bass clarinet , haden and lafaro on bass , and both higgins and blackwell on drums . the album was recorded in stereo with a reed/brass/bass/drums quartet isolated in each stereo channel . free jazz was , at nearly 40 minutes , the longest recorded continuous jazz performance to date and was one of coleman 's most controversial albums . the music features a regular but complex pulse , one drummer playing '' straight '' while the other played double-time ; the thematic material is a series of brief , dissonant fanfares . a series of solo features for each member of the band , but the other soloists are free to chime in as they wish . in the january 18 , 1962 issue of down beat magazine , in a review titled '' double view of a double quartet , '' pete welding gave the album five stars while john a . tynan rated it zero stars . time has been kinder to the album , though , with allmusic listing it as one of '' 20 essential free jazz albums . '' coleman intended '' free jazz '' as simply an album title . but his growing reputation placed him at the forefront of jazz innovation , and free jazz was soon considered a new genre , though coleman has expressed discomfort with the term . among the reasons he may have disapproved of the term is that his music contains composition . his melodic material , although skeletal , recalls melodies that charlie parker wrote over standard harmonies . the music is closer to the bebop that came before it than is sometimes popularly imagined . after the atlantic period and into the early part of the 1960s , coleman 's music became more angular and engaged with the avant-garde jazz which had developed in part around his innovations . after his quartet disbanded , he formed a trio with david izenzon on bass and charles moffett on drums . he extended the sound of his music , introducing string players and playing trumpet and violin , which he played left-handed . he had little conventional musical technique and used the instruments to make large , unrestrained gestures . his friendship with albert ayler influenced his development on trumpet and violin . charlie haden sometimes joined this trio to form a two-bass quartet . coleman signed with blue note and recorded at the golden circle stockholm . in 1966 , he recorded the empty foxhole with his son , denardo coleman , who was ten years old . freddie hubbard and shelly manne regarded this as an ill-advised piece of publicity on coleman 's part . despite his youth , denardo coleman had studied drumming for several years . his technique was unrefined but enthusiastic , owing more to pulse-oriented free jazz drummers like sunny murray than to bebop drummers . he became his father 's primary drummer in the late 1970s . coleman formed another quartet . haden , garrison , and elvin jones appeared , and dewey redman joined the group , usually on tenor saxophone . on february 29 , 1968 in a group with haden , ed blackwell , and david izenzon coleman performed live with yoko ono at albert hall . one song was included on the album yoko ono/plastic ono band ( 1970 ) he continued to explore his interest in string textures – from town hall , 1962 , culminating with the skies of america album in 1972 . ( sometimes this had a practical value , as it facilitated his group 's appearance in the uk in 1965 , where jazz musicians were under a quota arrangement but classical performers were exempt . ) . 1970s-1990s : harmolodic funk and prime time . coleman , like miles davis before him , took to playing with electric instrument . the 1976 funk album dancing in your head , coleman 's first recording with the group which later became known as prime time , prominently featured electric guitars . while this marked a stylistic departure for coleman , the music maintained certain similarities to his earlier work . these performances had the same angular melodies and simultaneous group improvisations – what joe zawinul referred to as '' nobody solos , everybody solos '' and what coleman called harmolodics – and although the nature of the pulse was altered , coleman 's rhythmic approach was not . in the 1980s , albums such as virgin beauty and of human feelings continued to use rock and funk rhythms , sometimes called free funk . jerry garcia played guitar on three tracks from coleman 's 1988 album virgin beauty : '' three wishes '' , '' singing in the shower '' , and '' desert players '' . coleman joined the grateful dead on stage in 1993 during '' space '' and stayed for '' the other one '' , '' stella blue '' , bobby bland 's '' turn on your lovelight '' , and the encore '' brokedown palace '' . another collaboration was with guitarist pat metheny , with whom coleman recorded song x ( 1985 ) ; though the album was released under metheny 's name , coleman was essentially co-leader ( contributing all the compositions ) . in 1990 , the city of reggio emilia in italy held a three-day '' portrait of the artist '' featuring a coleman quartet with cherry , haden , and higgins . the festival also presented performances of his chamber music and the symphonic skies of america . in 1991 , coleman played on the soundtrack for david cronenberg 's film naked lunch ; the orchestra was conducted by howard shore . it is notable among other things for including a rare sighting of coleman playing a jazz standard : thelonious monk 's '' misterioso '' . two 1972 ( pre-electric ) coleman recordings , '' happy house '' and '' foreigner in a free land '' , were used in gus van sant 's 2000 finding forrester . coleman released four records in 1995 and 1996 , and for the first time in many years worked regularly with piano players ( either geri allen or joachim kühn ) . 2000s . in september 2006 he released a live album titled sound grammar with his son , denardo coleman , and two bassists , greg cohen , and tony falanga . this was his first album of new material in ten years and was recorded in germany in 2005 . it won the 2007 pulitzer prize for music , coleman being only the second jazz musician to win the prize . jazz pianist joanne brackeen stated in an interview with marian mcpartland that coleman mentored her and gave her music lessons . . personal life , death , and subsequent material loss . coleman married poet jayne cortez in 1954 . the couple divorced in 1964 . they had one son , denardo , born in 1956 . coleman died of a cardiac arrest at the age of 85 in new york city on june 11 , 2015 . his funeral was a three-hour event with performances and speeches by several of his collaborators and contemporaries . on june 25 , 2019 , the new york times magazine listed ornette coleman among hundreds of artists whose material was reportedly destroyed in the 2008 universal fire . coleman was dyslexic . . awards and honors . down beat jazz hall of fame , 1969 macarthur fellowship , 1994 praemium imperiale , 2001 dorothy and lillian gish prize , 2004 the dorothy and lillian gish prize , official website . honorary doctorate of music , berklee college of music , 2006 grammy lifetime achievement award , 2007 pulitzer prize for music , 2007 miles davis award , festival international de jazz de montréal , 2009 montreal jazz festival official page honorary doctorate by the graduate center , cuny , 2008 honorary doctorate of music , university of michigan , 2010 . discography . in popular culture . mcclintic sphere , a fictional character in thomas pynchon 's debut novel v . ( 1963 ) , is an innovative saxophonist modeled on ornette coleman . . notes .