Scattering

single and multiple scattering . when radiation is only scattered by one localized scattering center , this is called single scattering . it is very common that scattering centers are grouped together ; in such cases , radiation may scatter many times , in what is known as multiple scattering . the main difference between the effects of single and multiple scattering is that single scattering can usually be treated as a random phenomenon , whereas multiple scattering , somewhat counterintuitively , can be modeled as a more deterministic process because the combined results of a large number of scattering events tend to average out . multiple scattering can thus often be modeled well with diffusion theory . because the location of a single scattering center is not usually well known relative to the path of the radiation , the outcome , which tends to depend strongly on the exact incoming trajectory , appears random to an observer . this type of scattering would be exemplified by an electron being fired at an atomic nucleus . in this case , the atom 's exact position relative to the path of the electron is unknown and would be unmeasurable , so the exact trajectory of the electron after the collision can not be predicted . single scattering is therefore often described by probability distributions . with multiple scattering , the randomness of the interaction tends to be averaged out by a large number of scattering events , so that the final path of the radiation appears to be a deterministic distribution of intensity . this is exemplified by a light beam passing through thick fog . multiple scattering is highly analogous to diffusion , and the terms multiple scattering and diffusion are interchangeable in many contexts . optical elements designed to produce multiple scattering are thus known as diffusers . coherent backscattering , an enhancement of backscattering that occurs when coherent radiation is multiply scattered by a random medium , is usually attributed to weak localization . not all single scattering is random , however . a well-controlled laser beam can be exactly positioned to scatter off a microscopic particle with a deterministic outcome , for instance . such situations are encountered in radar scattering as well , where the targets tend to be macroscopic objects such as people or aircraft . similarly , multiple scattering can sometimes have somewhat random outcomes , particularly with coherent radiation . the random fluctuations in the multiply scattered intensity of coherent radiation are called speckles . speckle also occurs if multiple parts of a coherent wave scatter from different centers . in certain rare circumstances , multiple scattering may only involve a small number of interactions such that the randomness is not completely averaged out . these systems are considered to be some of the most difficult to model accurately . the description of scattering and the distinction between single and multiple scattering are tightly related to wave–particle duality . theory . scattering theory is a framework for studying and understanding the scattering of waves and particles . prosaically , wave scattering corresponds to the collision and scattering of a wave with some material object , for instance ( sunlight ) scattered by rain drops to form a rainbow . scattering also includes the interaction of billiard balls on a table , the rutherford scattering ( or angle change ) of alpha particles by gold nuclei , the bragg scattering ( or diffraction ) of electrons and x-rays by a cluster of atoms , and the inelastic scattering of a fission fragment as it traverses a thin foil . more precisely , scattering consists of the study of how solutions of partial differential equations , propagating freely '' in the distant past '' , come together and interact with one another or with a boundary condition , and then propagate away '' to the distant future '' . electromagnetics . image : electron-scattering.png thumb 220px a feynman diagram of scattering between two electrons by emission of a virtual photon . electromagnetic waves are one of the best known and most commonly encountered forms of radiation that undergo scattering . scattering of light and radio waves ( especially in radar ) is particularly important . several different aspects of electromagnetic scattering are distinct enough to have conventional names . major forms of elastic light scattering ( involving negligible energy transfer ) are rayleigh scattering and mie theory . inelastic scattering includes brillouin scattering , raman scattering , inelastic x-ray scattering and compton scattering . light scattering is one of the two major physical processes that contribute to the visible appearance of most objects , the other being absorption . surfaces described as white owe their appearance to multiple scattering of light by internal or surface inhomogeneities in the object , for example by the boundaries of transparent microscopic crystals that make up a stone or by the microscopic fibers in a sheet of paper . more generally , the gloss ( or lustre or sheen ) of the surface is determined by scattering . highly scattering surfaces are described as being dull or having a matte finish , while the absence of surface scattering leads to a glossy appearance , as with polished metal or stone . spectral absorption , the selective absorption of certain colors , determines the color of most objects with some modification by elastic scattering . the apparent blue color of veins in skin is a common example where both spectral absorption and scattering play important and complex roles in the coloration . light scattering can also create color without absorption , often shades of blue , as with the sky ( rayleigh scattering ) , the human blue iris , and the feathers of some birds ( prum et al . 1998 ) . however , resonant light scattering in nanoparticles can produce many different highly saturated and vibrant hues , especially when surface plasmon resonance is involved ( roqué et al . 2006 ) . models of light scattering can be divided into three domains based on a dimensionless size parameter , α which is defined as : : \alpha \pi d_\text / \lambda , where πd p is the circumference of a particle and λ is the wavelength of incident radiation in the medium . based on the value of α , these domains are : : α ≪ 1 : rayleigh scattering ( small particle compared to wavelength of light ) ; : α ≈ 1 : mie scattering ( particle about the same size as wavelength of light , valid only for spheres ) ; : α ≫ 1 : geometric scattering ( particle much larger than wavelength of light ) . rayleigh scattering is a process in which electromagnetic radiation ( including light ) is scattered by a small spherical volume of variant refractive indexes , such as a particle , bubble , droplet , or even a density fluctuation . this effect was first modeled successfully by lord rayleigh , from whom it gets its name . in order for rayleigh 's model to apply , the sphere must be much smaller in diameter than the wavelength ( λ ) of the scattered wave ; typically the upper limit is taken to be about 1/10 the wavelength . in this size regime , the exact shape of the scattering center is usually not very significant and can often be treated as a sphere of equivalent volume . the inherent scattering that radiation undergoes passing through a pure gas is due to microscopic density fluctuations as the gas molecules move around , which are normally small enough in scale for rayleigh 's model to apply . this scattering mechanism is the primary cause of the blue color of the earth 's sky on a clear day , as the shorter blue wavelengths of sunlight passing overhead are more strongly scattered than the longer red wavelengths according to rayleigh 's famous 1/λ 4 relation . along with absorption , such scattering is a major cause of the attenuation of radiation by the atmosphere . seinfeld , john h . ; pandis , spyros n . ( 2006 ) . atmospheric chemistry and physics - from air pollution to climate change ( 2nd ed . ) . john wiley and sons , inc . the degree of scattering varies as a function of the ratio of the particle diameter to the wavelength of the radiation , along with many other factors including polarization , angle , and coherence . for larger diameters , the problem of electromagnetic scattering by spheres was first solved by gustav mie , and scattering by spheres larger than the rayleigh range is therefore usually known as mie theory . in the mie regime , the shape of the scattering center becomes much more significant and the theory only applies well to spheres and , with some modification , spheroids and ellipsoids . closed-form solutions for scattering by certain other simple shapes exist , but no general closed-form solution is known for arbitrary shapes . both mie and rayleigh scattering are considered elastic scattering processes , in which the energy ( and thus wavelength and frequency ) of the light is not substantially changed . however , electromagnetic radiation scattered by moving scattering centers does undergo a doppler shift , which can be detected and used to measure the velocity of the scattering center/s in forms of techniques such as lidar and radar . this shift involves a slight change in energy . at values of the ratio of particle diameter to wavelength more than about 10 , the laws of geometric optics are mostly sufficient to describe the interaction of light with the particle . mie theory can still be used for these larger spheres , but the solution often becomes numerically unwieldy . for modeling of scattering in cases where the rayleigh and mie models do not apply such as larger , irregularly shaped particles , there are many numerical methods that can be used . the most common are finite element method which solve maxwell 's equations to find the distribution of the scattered electromagnetic field . sophisticated software packages exist which allow the user to specify the refractive index or indices of the scattering feature in space , creating a 2- or sometimes 3-dimensional model of the structure . for relatively large and complex structures , these models usually require substantial execution times on a computer . electrophoresis involves the migration of macromolecule under the influence of an electric field . electrophoretic light scattering involves passing an electric field through a liquid which makes particles move . the bigger the charge is on the particles , the faster they are able to move .