Vegetable oil

uses of triglyceride vegetable oil . uses in antiquity . oils extracted from plants have been used since ancient times and in many cultures . as an example , in a 4,000-year-old kitchen unearthed in indiana 's charlestown state park , archaeologist bob mccullough of indiana university-purdue university fort wayne found evidence that large slabs of rock were used to crush hickory nuts and the oil was then extracted with boiling water . archaeological evidence shows that olives were turned into olive oil by 6000 bce ruth schuster ( december 17 , 2014 ) . '' 8,000-year old olive oil found in galilee , earliest known in world '' , haaretz . retrieved december 17 , 2014 . and 4500 bce in present-day israel and palestine . ehud galili et al . , '' evidence for earliest olive-oil production in submerged settlements off the carmel coast , israel '' , journal of archaeological science 24:1141–1150 ( 1997 ) ; pagnol , p . 19 , says the 6th millennium in jericho , but cites no source . in addition to use as food , fats and oils ( both vegetable and mineral ) have long been used as fuel , typically in lamps which were a principal source of illumination in ancient times . oils may have been used for lubrication , but there is no evidence for this . vegetable oils were probably more valuable as food and lamp-oil ; babylonian mineral oil was known to be used as fuel , but there are no references to lubrication . pliny the elder reported that fats such as lard were used to lubricate the axles of carts . . culinary uses . many vegetable oils are consumed directly , or indirectly as ingredients in food – a role that they share with some fat , including butter , ghee , lard , and schmaltz . the oils serve a number of purposes in this role : shortening – to give pastry a crumbly texture . texture – oils can serve to make other ingredients stick together less . flavor – while less flavorful oils command premium prices , some oils , such as olive , sesame , or almond oil , may be chosen specifically for the flavor they impart . flavor base – oils can also '' carry '' flavors of other ingredients , since many flavors are due to chemicals that are soluble in oil . oils can be heated to temperatures significantly higher than the boiling point of water , , and used to cook foods ( frying ) . oils for this purpose must have a high flash point . such oils include the major cooking oils – soybean , rapeseed , canola , sunflower , safflower , peanut , cottonseed , etc . tropical oils , such as coconut , palm , and rice bran oils , are particularly valued in asian cultures for high-temperature cooking , because of their unusually high flash points . hydrogenated oils . unsaturated vegetable oils can be transformed through partial or complete '' hydrogenation '' into oils of higher melting point . the hydrogenation process involves '' sparging '' the oil at high temperature and pressure with hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst , typically a powdered nickel compound . as each carbon-carbon double-bond is chemically reduced to a single bond , two hydrogen atoms each form single bonds with the two carbon atoms . the elimination of double bonds by adding hydrogen atoms is called saturation ; as the degree of saturation increases , the oil progresses toward being fully hydrogenated . an oil may be hydrogenated to increase resistance to rancidity ( oxidation ) or to change its physical characteristics . as the degree of saturation increases , the oil 's viscosity and melting point increase . the use of hydrogenated oils in foods has never been completely satisfactory . because the center arm of the triglyceride is shielded somewhat by the end fatty acids , most of the hydrogenation occurs on the end fatty acids , thus making the resulting fat more brittle . a margarine made from naturally more saturated oils will be more plastic ( more '' spreadable '' ) than a margarine made from hydrogenated soy oil . while full hydrogenation produces largely saturated fatty acids , partial hydrogenation results in the transformation of unsaturated cis fatty acids to trans fats in the oil mixture due to the heat used in hydrogenation . partially hydrogenated oils and their trans fats have been linked to an increased risk of mortality from coronary heart disease , ( consultation on the health implications of alternatives to trans fatty acids : summary of responses from experts ) among other increased health risks . in the us , the standard of identity for a product labeled as '' vegetable oil margarine '' specifies only canola , safflower , sunflower , corn , soybean , or peanut oil may be used . products not labeled '' vegetable oil margarine '' do not have that restriction . industrial uses . vegetable oils are used as an ingredient or component in many manufactured products . many vegetable oils are used to make soaps , skin products , candles , perfumes and other personal care and cosmetic products . some oils are particularly suitable as drying oils , and are used in making paints and other wood treatment products . dammar oil ( a mixture of linseed oil and dammar resin ) , for example , is used almost exclusively in treating the hulls of wooden boats . vegetable oils are increasingly being used in the electrical industry as insulators as vegetable oils are not toxic to the environment , biodegradable if spilled and have high flash and fire points . however , vegetable oils are less stable chemically , so they are generally used in systems where they are not exposed to oxygen , and they are more expensive than crude oil distillate . synthetic tetraesters , which are similar to vegetable oils but with four fatty acid chains compared to the normal three found in a natural ester , are manufactured by fischer esterification . tetraesters generally have high stability to oxidation and have found use as engine lubricants . vegetable oil is being used to produce biodegradable hydraulic fluid and lubricant . one limiting factor in industrial uses of vegetable oils is that all such oils are susceptible to becoming rancid . oils that are more stable , such as ben oil or mineral oil , are thus preferred for industrial uses . castor oil has numerous industrial uses , owing to the presence of hydroxyl group on the fatty acid . castor oil is a precursor to nylon 11 . pet food additive . vegetable oil is used in the production of some pet foods . aafco defines vegetable oil , in this context , as the product of vegetable origin obtained by extracting the oil from seeds or fruits which are processed for edible purposes . fuel . vegetable oils are also used to make biodiesel , which can be used like conventional diesel . some vegetable oil blends are used in unmodified vehicles but straight vegetable oil , also known as pure plant oil , needs specially prepared vehicles which have a method of heating the oil to reduce its viscosity . the use of vegetable oils as alternative energy is growing and the availability of biodiesel by region is increasing . the nnfcc estimates that the total net greenhouse gas savings when using vegetable oils in place of fossil fuel-based alternatives for fuel production , range from 18 to 100 % . national non-food crops centre . ghg benefits from use of vegetable oils for electricity , heat , transport , and industrial purposes , nnfcc 10-016 . production . the production process of vegetable oil involves the removal of oil from plant components , typically seeds . this can be done via mechanical extraction using an oil mill or chemical extraction using a solvent . the extracted oil can then be purified and , if required , refined or chemically altered . mechanical extraction . oils can be removed via mechanical extraction , termed '' crushing '' or '' pressing . '' this method is typically used to produce the more traditional oils ( e.g . , olive , coconut etc . ) , and it is preferred by most '' health-food '' customers in the united states and in europe . there are several different types of mechanical extraction . expeller-pressing extraction is common , though the screw press , ram press , and ghani ( powered mortar and pestle ) are also used . oilseed presses are commonly used in developing countries , among people for whom other extraction methods would be prohibitively expensive ; the ghani is primarily used in india . the amount of oil extracted using these methods varies widely , as shown in the following table for extracting mowrah butter in india : note that these figures include industrial and animal feed use . the majority of european rapeseed oil production is used to produce biodiesel , or used directly as fuel in diesel cars which may require modification to heat the oil to reduce its higher viscosity . the suitability of the fuel should come as little surprise , as rudolf diesel 's original engine to ran on peanut oil as well as mineral oil . other significant triglyceride oils include : corn oil , one of the most common cooking oils . as of 2006 , the us produced about 1.09 million metric tons corn refiners association . corn oil 5th edition . 2006 of corn oil , which is used for cooking oil , salad dressing , margarine , mayonnaise , prepared goods like spaghetti sauce and baking mixes , and to fry prepared foods like potato chips and french fries . grape seed oil , used in cooking and cosmetics hazelnut oil and other nut oils linseed oil , from flax seeds rice bran oil , from rice grains safflower oil , a flavorless and colorless cooking oil sesame oil , used as a cooking oil , and as a massage oil , particularly in india açaí palm oil , used in culinary and cosmetics jambú oil , is extracted from the flowers , leaves and stem from jambu ( acmella oleracea ) , contains spilanthol graviola oil , derived from annona muricata tucumã oil , from astrocaryum aculeatum is used to manufacture soap . brazil nut oil , culinary and cosmetics use carapa oil , pharmaceutical use and anti-mosquito candle buriti oil , from mauritia flexuosa , used in cosmetics ( skin and hair care ) passion fruit oil , derived from passiflora edulis , has varied applications in cosmetics manufacturing and for uses as a human or animal food . pracaxi oil , obtained from pentaclethra macroloba , cosmetics use solarium oil , derived from chloroplasts , various applications in cooking . composition of fats . . history . such oils have been part of human culture for millennia . poppy seed , rapeseed , linseed , almond oil , sesame seed , safflower , and cottonseed were used since at least the bronze age throughout the middle east , africa and central asia . vegetable oils have been used for lighting fuel , cooking , medicine and lubrication . the chinese started to use vegetable oil for stir-frying instead of animal fats during the song dynasty ( 960–1279 ) . palm oil has long been recognized in west and central african countries , and european merchants trading with west africa occasionally purchased palm oil for use as a cooking oil in europe and it became highly sought-after commodity by british traders for use as an industrial lubricant for machinery during britain 's industrial revolution . palm oil formed the basis of soap products , such as lever brothers ' ( now unilever ) '' sunlight '' soap , and the american palmolive brand . , and by around 1870 , palm oil constituted the primary export of some west african countries . commercial agriculture , the slave trade and slavery in atlantic africa p . 22 in 1780 , carl wilhelm scheele demonstrated that fats were derived from glycerol . thirty years later michel eugène chevreul deduced that these fats were esters of fatty acids and glycerol . wilhelm normann , a german chemist introduced the hydrogenation of liquid fats in 1901 , creating what later became known as trans fats , leading to the development of the global production of margarine and vegetable shortening . in the usa cottonseed oil was marketed by procter & gamble as a creamed shortening in 1911 . ginning mills were happy to have someone haul away the cotton seeds . the extracted oil was refined and partially hydrogenated to give a solid at room temperature and thus mimic natural lard , and canned under nitrogen gas . compared to the rendered lard procter & gamble was already selling to consumers , crisco was cheaper , easier to stir into a recipe , and could be stored at room temperature for two years without turning rancid . soybean oil has been used in china since before historical records . it arrived in the usa in the 1930s . soy was protein-rich , and the medium viscosity oil was high in polyunsaturates . henry ford established a soybean research laboratory , developed soybean plastics and a soy-based synthetic wool , and built a car '' almost entirely '' out of soybeans . roger drackett had a successful new product with windex , but he invested heavily in soybean research , seeing it as a smart investment . by the 1950s and 1960s , soybean oil had become the most popular vegetable oil in the us , now mying only behind palm oil . in 2018-2019 , world production was at 57.4 mt with the leading producers including china ( 16.6 mt ) , us ( 10.9 mt ) , argentina ( 8.4 mt ) , brazil ( 8.2 mt ) , and eu ( 3.2 mt ) . the early 20th century also saw the start of the use of vegetable oil fuel in diesel engines and in heating oil burners . rudolf diesel designed his engine to run on vegetable oil . the idea , he hoped , would make his engines more attractive to farmers having a source of fuel readily available . diesel 's first engine ran on its own power for the first time in augsburg , germany , on 10 august 1893 on nothing but peanut oil . in remembrance of this event , 10 august has been declared '' international biodiesel day '' . the first patent on biodiesel was granted in 1937 . periodic petroleum shortages spurred research into vegetable oil as a diesel substitute during the 1930s and 1940s , and again in the 1970s and early 1980s when straight vegetable oil enjoyed its highest level of scientific interest . the 1970s also saw the formation of the first commercial enterprise to allow consumers to run straight vegetable oil in their vehicles . however , biodiesel , produced from oils or fats using transesterification is more widely used . it is led by brazil , many countries built biodiesel plants during the 1990s , and it is now widely available for use in motor vehicles , and is the most common biofuel in europe today . in france , biodiesel is incorporated at a rate of 8 % in the fuel used by all french diesel vehicles . in the mid-1970s , canadian researchers developed a low-erucic-acid rapeseed cultivar . because the word '' rape '' was not considered optimal for marketing , they coined the name '' canola '' ( from '' canada oil low acid '' ) . the u.s . food and drug administration approved use of the canola name in january 1985 , and u.s . farmers started planting large areas that spring . canola oil is lower in saturated fats , and higher in monounsaturates . canola is very thin ( unlike corn oil ) and flavorless ( unlike olive oil ) , so it largely succeeds by displacing soy oil , just as soy oil largely succeeded by displacing cottonseed oil . used oil . a large quantity of used vegetable oil is produced and recycled , mainly from industrial deep fryers in potato processing plants , snack food factories and fast food restaurants . recycled oil has numerous uses , including use as a direct fuel , as well as in the production of biodiesel , soap , animal feed , pet food , detergent , and cosmetics . it is traded as the commodity , yellow grease . since 2002 , an increasing number of european union countries have prohibited the inclusion of recycled vegetable oil from catering in animal feed . used cooking oils from food manufacturing , however , as well as fresh or unused cooking oil , continue to be used in animal feed . . shelf life . due to their susceptibility to oxidation from the exposure to oxygen , heat and light , resulting in the formation of redox products , such as peroxides and hydroperoxides , plant oils rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids have a limited shelf-life . . product labeling . in canada , palm oil is one of five vegetable oils , along with palm kernel oil , coconut oil , peanut oil , and cocoa butter , which must be specifically named in the list of ingredients for a food product . also , oils in canadian food products which have been modified or hydrogenated must contain the word '' modified '' or '' hydrogenated '' when listed as an ingredient . a mix of oils other than the aforementioned exceptions may simply be listed as '' vegetable oil '' in canada ; however , if the food product is a cooking oil , salad oil or table oil , the type of oil must be specified and listing '' vegetable oil '' as an ingredient is not acceptable . from december 2014 , all food products produced in the european union were legally required to indicate the specific vegetable oil used in their manufacture , following the introduction of the food information to consumers regulation . . see also . algae culture cholesterol decorticator deodoriser essential oils fatty acid food extrusion fragrance oil lipid list of macerated oils list of vegetable oils neem non-food crops oleochemistry soap vernonia oil vegetable oil recycling . notes and references . further reading .