Mark Hoppus

beginnings of music career . after moving to san diego in the summer of 1992 , hoppus was reunited with his sister anne hoppus , to whom he expressed his desire to be in a band . anne attended rancho bernardo high school , and had become friends with new student tom delonge over the summer . in august 1992 , anne introduced the two , and hoppus and delonge immediately began performing music in delonge 's garage . to impress delonge , hoppus climbed to the top of a streetlight outside of delonge 's home – however , he broke both ankles on the way down , resulting in being in crutches for the next few weeks . hoppus , 2001 . pp . 8–9 delonge recalled the meeting in 2000 : '' when i first met mark , we were running around naked , doing weird stuff . we were up skateboarding until late hours of the morning , antagonizing security guards , and we were just always having fun . '' delonge recruited old friend scott raynor from his days at poway to become the drummer for the new band , named blink . hoppus and his girlfriend at this time lived in a basement apartment , barely scraping together funds to pay rent . with money in savings , hoppus went out and bought his first professional equipment : a new amp and bass cabinet . he came home and his girlfriend proceeded to argue with him , angry that he spent money on something they did not need . '' i just kept telling her that this was what mattered to me , this was my life , '' hoppus recalled . she demanded he make a choice between the band and her , which resulted in hoppus leaving the band shortly after formation . hoppus , 2001 . pp . 13–15 shortly thereafter , delonge told hoppus he had borrowed a four track recorder from a friend and was preparing to record a demo tape , which prompted hoppus to break up with his girlfriend and return to the band . flyswatter—a combination of original songs and punk covers—was recorded in raynor 's bedroom and landed the band their first shows . hoppus , 2001 . p . 16 three more demos were recorded over the course of 1993 and the band began performing its irreverent live show at local all-ages venue soma , which alerted local independent label cargo music . hoppus , 2001 . p . & nbsp ; 24–25 cargo signed the band on a trial basis , and hoppus was the only member to sign the contract , as delonge was at work at the time and raynor was still a minor . hoppus , 2001 . p . 30 during this time , hoppus lived at home in san diego at his mother 's , where the band would prepare cassette demos and the entire family would fold cassette inserts . raynor , whose parents moved to reno , nevada , stayed with hoppus in summer 1994 . hoppus , 2001 . p . 28 blink 's first album , cheshire cat ( 1995 ) , was a strong seller for the independent band and would come to be regarded as iconic within the skate punk scene . in 1995 , the band signed on for their first national tour , which extended as far as the east coast . the band purchased their own tour van and embarked on the goodtimes tour with unwritten law , sprung monkey and 7 seconds . hoppus , 2001 . p . 44 the band slowly built a young , devoted following with indie recordings and an endless series of performances and various clubs and festivals . romanowski , patricia . george-warren , holly . pareles , jon . ( 2001 ) . the rolling stone encyclopedia of rock & roll ( revised and updated for the 21st century ) . new york : touchstone , 1136 pp . first edition , 2001 . mca records signed the band in 1996 and would co-distribute their next release , the sophomore effort dude ranch . hoppus penned the record 's lead single , '' dammit '' , which became a nationwide rock radio hit single as the band toured on the vans warped tour . hoppus , 2001 . p . 70 . multiplatinum success . hoppus grew increasingly lonely on these tours , having no significant other while other band members did . the exhaustive schedule created tensions within the band , who would fire raynor in the summer of 1998 in mysterious circumstances never fully explained . hoppus , 2001 . p . 81 with new drummer travis barker behind the kit , the trio hit the studio with producer jerry finn and recorded enema of the state , which launched the band 's career , catapulting them into the '' stratosphere of pop music '' and solidifying them as the biggest pop punk act of the era . three singles were released from the record— '' what 's my age again ? '' , '' all the small things '' , and '' adam 's song '' —that crossed over into top 40 radio format and experienced major commercial success . hoppus , 2001 . p . 96 hoppus got married in 2000 ( see personal life ) just before the band prepared to record their highly anticipated follow-up , take off your pants and jacket ( 2001 ) . hoppus felt complacent creatively but delonge felt otherwise , creating post-hardcore side project box car racer to experiment with ideas he deemed unsuitable for blink . shooman , 2010 . p . 92 hoppus felt betrayed ( barker was also in box car racer ) and a rift developed between hoppus and delonge that would carry on into the band 's future . when the band regrouped to record their next record in 2003 , all of the members had become fathers ( or , in the case of barker , becoming one ) and the trio took a darker , more '' mature '' direction with their blink-182 ( album ) , infusing experimentalist elements into their usual pop punk sound partially inspired by box car racer . unresolved feelings from that project would arise in late 2004 when the band began to argue regarding their future and recording process . the february 2005 break-up of blink-182 affected hoppus greatly : '' i had no idea what to do . after blink broke up i had such a loss of identity and purpose . i just had a giant sense of void . '' hoppus then began to work on even darker , electronic demos with barker in his kitchen . he also turned to producing , hitting the studio with motion city soundtrack to record commit this to memory ( 2005 ) . in october 2005 , hoppus and barker purchased a studio together ( named opra music ) , where they would bring together a full band to expand upon those electronic demos , creating +44 's when your heart stops beating ( 2006 ) . the record , by all accounts , sold poorly and received mixed reviews in the music press . hoppus and barker continued touring on the honda civic tour and commenced work on a second +44 album . the august 2008 death of friend and producer jerry finn deeply affected hoppus , who referred to finn as a lifelong friend and mentor . the following month , barker and collaborator adam goldstein ( aka dj am ) , were involved in a plane crash that killed four people , leaving barker and goldstein the only survivors . hoppus immediately boarded a plane to the burn unit , and delonge reconnected with the duo under the tragic circumstances . when the band regrouped in the studio for a day , past acrimony vanished with near immediacy . regarding these experiences , hoppus wrote , '' the events of the past two months supersede everything that happened before . life is too short . '' in february 2009 , the band 's official website was updated with a statement : '' to put it simply , we 're back . we mean , really back . picking up where we left off and then some . in the studio writing and recording a new album . preparing to tour the world yet again . friendships reformed . 17 years deep in our legacy . '' . reuniting and recent events . the band reconnected musically and emotionally on the reunion tour , but were still '' on eggshells '' throughout the recording of their comeback album . the recording 's delay was due to the way the band chose to work – in bits and pieces , alone and together , in a pair of california studios – in addition to each member 's busy schedules . the band struggled to record juggling individual priorities ; in the case of hoppus , his new television show hoppus on music required him flying to new york once a week . hoppus moved to london with his family late in the recording process , also complicating matters . the band 's comeback album , neighborhoods ( 2011 ) , debuted high but undersold label expectations , and blink-182 parted with interscope records in 2012 , going independent for their next release , the ep dogs eating dogs . the band toured australia in february 2013 without barker , who did not attend due to his fear of flying ( brooks wackerman of bad religion filled in for him ) . the band toured the united states in september 2013 , where they planned to begin writing songs for their seventh studio album . '' we 're hoping to head into the studio next year and to have the album out in late spring/early summer , '' hoppus told kerrang ! . in the interim , hoppus began recording songs with frequent engineer and producer chris holmes that the duo plan to release by the end of the year . '' we probably have seven or eight songs in various stages of completion , '' hoppus remarked in august 2013 . '' i still have n't chosen a name for the project yet ; we still have to figure that out . it 's like guitar mixed with electronics… . at this point . '' hoppus will share lead vocals with holmes on the tracks . on april 25 , 2014 , hoppus announced , via twitter , the name of the band as nothing and nobody . their first album is expected to be released in the '' not-too-distant future '' . in 2015 , blink-182 played three shows in california . with the departure of tom delonge from the band , matt skiba of alkaline trio , filled in . it was the first time hoppus performed under the name '' blink-182 '' without tom delonge by his side . the shows were on march 18 , march 20 , and march 22 . hoppus later hired skiba full-time , and blink-182 have since recorded two albums with him , 2016 's california and 2019 's nine . hoppus has also performed dj sets at emo nite in los angeles on several occasions from 2015 to 2017 . in non-musical endeavors , hoppus launched his own clothing line , hi my name is mark ( stylized as '' himynameismark '' ) , in july 2013 . . simple creatures ( 2019-present ) . on 24 january 2019 , mark announced he was forming a new group with alex gaskarth of all time low called simple creatures . a debut song called '' drug '' was released in january , followed by their first ep , strange love , on march 29 , 2019 . their second ep , everything opposite , was released on october 11 , 2019 . . musical style and equipment . hoppus primarily writes most of his songs on an acoustic guitar . hoppus is self-taught , '' and consequently i do n't have the best technique , '' he remarked in 2004 . '' i think you would learn how to paint by painting , rather than reading books about painters or painting and i think it 's the same with music . you learn by doing and getting influences from other artists . '' hoppus used three different bass guitars while recording enema of the state : a fender precision bass , fender jazz bass and a music man stingray . after primarily recording with the two fender basses , he merged the two together for the fender mark hoppus signature jazz bass , which debuted in 2000 . '' i took a jazz bass body because i thought it looked really cool and gives a good tone and then i put a p-bass neck on it because it 's a wider neck and it 's easier to play—especially for my style , which is n't so much finger work , '' he said . as of 2015 , hoppus has switched to customized fender jaguar basses when performing on stage with blink-182 , although he still occasionally uses his original signature model . for live sound , hoppus originally plugged his basses into three ampeg svt classic bass heads running into two ampeg 8x10 svt bass cabs . prior to the use of the all-tube svt classic heads , hoppus used two ampeg svt-4 pro heads which only feature a tube preamp . after the neighborhoods album release , hoppus used new vintage amplifiers and cabinets , specifically the undertow 300 amplifier and nw 8x10 bass cabinets . in 2016 , he began using kemper profiler amps in concert . . non-musical endeavors . hoppus and tom delonge co-owned two companies , atticus and macbeth footwear , hoppus has since sold his share in both companies ; as well as loserkids.com . mark hoppus has made several acting appearances in films and television , often as part of blink-182 . he first appeared as a member of a garage band in the hugely successful teen film american pie ( 1999 ) with bandmates tom delonge and travis barker , ( though the film 's credits list barker as scott raynor . ) he appeared again with delonge , singing a cover of jan and dean 's '' dead man 's curve '' in the cbs television movie shake , rattle and roll : an american love story ( 1999 ) . hoppus and delonge hosted the mtv show you idiot ! in 1999 . the band appeared in the two guys and a girl episode '' au revoir , pizza place '' in 1999 , as well as an animated cameo in the simpsons episode '' barting over '' in 2003 . the band made a guest appearance on madtv in 2002 , in a segment titled '' leave it to beaver '' , spoofing 1950s-era sitcoms . hoppus was a guest actor on an episode of the show haunted in 2002 . in 2011 , he appeared in the documentary film the other f word . hoppus was featured as a panelist on the comedy show never mind the buzzcocks in 2012 . he also wrote columns for risen magazine 's march/april and may/june 2005 issues entitled '' beyond us '' . risen magazine volume 4 , issue 2 , pg . 76 ; volume 4 , issue 3 , pg . 70 mark hoppus has been confirmed to be a part of a documentary about modern punk music entitled one nine nine four . the film was due to be released in 2009 but has been delayed . in 2010 , he joined the 9th annual independent music awards judging panel to assist independent musicians ' careers . mark hoppus worked to help relief efforts in japan after the devastating earthquake and tsunami tōhoku . he announced that his group blink-182 , will be auctioning off items to benefit the american red cross on ebay . '' so sad for what 's happening in japan . gon na dig in the bins & find some old blink-182 items to auction for the red cross '' said mark . the items auctioned off included the original lyrics sheet to the group 's hits '' the rock show '' and '' adam 's song '' , bad religion autographed cymbal , hand-painted 1.5 ft tall bunny , blink-182 tour backstage pass , stickers , postcard/magnets , trading cards , the band 's dressing room sign from the 2000 vmas , and hoppus orange sweater from the '' dammit '' music video . among the 33 items auctioned off for charity he totaled 4,318 dollars . . himynameismark ( 2005 , 2012–present ) . '' himynameismark '' is a podcast that was set up in the wake of the blink-182 hiatus by hoppus , and can be found at himynameismark.com . every few weeks he released a show of songs by underground bands , interviews with band members and/or friends , and reminisces about happenings in his life . he is often joined on the show by his friends chris holmes ( +44 's engineer ) and james ingram ( +44 's assistant engineer ) . hoppus has also created various side projects including '' hopp on popp '' where he reviews one of his favorite up and coming artists , some of which have been matt & kim , fun . , and japandroids . in late 2014 , the podcast returned from a hiatus . hoppus on music ( 2010–2012 ) . on june 22 , 2010 , fuse announced that hoppus would be hosting his own weekly , one-hour television series entitled a different spin with mark hoppus . in relation to the press release , hoppus stated '' i am stoked to join the fuse family and have a show where i can talk about a topic that i 'm passionate about , music . more importantly , i 'm excited to force millions of people to watch me on a weekly basis on national television . '' according to fuse senior vice president of programming and development sal locurto , '' a different spin with mark hoppus was developed to complement the wide variety of music programming on fuse – including live concerts , festival coverage and in-depth interview series with the biggest names in music . on august 5 , hoppus revealed the co-host of the show would be comedian amy schumer . '' the show focuses on music news , fun panel discussions and special reports from the show 's correspondents . the show also features musical performances by both mainstream and emerging bands . the show officially premiered on september 16 , 2010 on fuse . the show 's second season premiered in march 2011 and the show was re-titled hoppus on music . personal life . hoppus married skye everly on december 2 , 2000 . hoppus met everly at a rehearsal for the music video of '' all the small things '' . according to a 2004 interview , everly , who was then an mtv talent executive , initially refused to date hoppus : '' tom delonge always used to embarrass me . any girl he 'd talk to , he 'd say , 'hey , you wan na go on a date with mark ? ' he asked skye , my wife , who looked at me and said 'no . ' that 's how it all started . '' two years after marrying hoppus , everly gave birth to a son , jack , in 2002 . in 2004 , hoppus told risen that he was a registered libertarian . '' to me , it means to respect other people and let them do their own thing . the government is there to help people but not control them , '' he remarked . a 2000 rolling stone profile notes that hoppus '' prays every night '' . he elaborated on his religious views in a 2005 interview : '' it 's amazing to me that anyone can say that one thing is right . to draw lines over something that none of us on earth could possibly comprehend seems like a waste of time . '' throughout 2016 - 2020 , hoppus was openly vocal about his criticism of the trump administration . during the 2020 u.s . presidential election , hoppus posted a picture on his instagram account sporting a biden-harris t-shirt . in 2011 , hoppus and his family relocated to mayfair , as blink-182 were in the process of completing their sixth album , neighborhoods . they would remain in london for another three years before moving to beverly hills , california , in 2014 . as a resident of london , he enjoyed jogging in the city 's parks and became a fan of chelsea fc . hoppus is a vegetarian and does not strictly follow a vegan diet like bandmates travis barker and matt skiba . hoppus is currently the only member of blink-182 not to have any body piercings or clearly visible tattoos ( the only ones he has are hidden on his wrists , dedicated to his wife and son ) . . discography . ; with blink-182 buddha ( 1993 ) cheshire cat ( 1995 ) dude ranch ( 1997 ) enema of the state ( 1999 ) take off your pants and jacket ( 2001 ) blink-182 ( album ) ( 2003 ) neighborhoods ( 2011 ) dogs eating dogs ep ( 2012 ) california ( 2016 ) nine ( 2019 ) ; with +44 when your heart stops beating ( 2006 ) ; with simple creatures strange love ep ( 2019 ) everything opposite ep ( 2019 ) ; guest appearances '' my so called life '' and '' that special girl '' on look forward to failure by the ataris ( 1998 ) . '' i 'd do anything '' on no pads , no helmets.just balls by simple plan ( 2002 ) . '' elevator '' on box car racer by box car racer ( 2002 ) . '' hangman '' on commit this to memory by motion city soundtrack ( 2005 ) . '' wrecking hotel rooms '' on panic by mxpx ( 2005 ) . '' paper doll '' on '' white heat '' by renee renee ( 2006 ) . '' thank you & goodnight '' on what are you so scared of ? by tonight alive ( 2011 ) . '' dementia '' on the midsummer station by owl city ( 2012 ) . '' hate your guts '' on mcbusted by mcbusted ( 2014 ) . '' tidal waves '' on future hearts by all time low ( 2015 ) . '' ready and willing ii '' on resurrection : ascension by new found glory ( 2015 ) . '' december ( again ) '' on december ep by neck deep ( 2016 ) . '' impermanent '' on '' no grace '' by paws ( 2016 ) . '' see you around '' on the knife by goldfinger ( 2017 ) . '' time machine '' on living proof by state champs ( 2018 ) . '' psycho '' on love monster by amy shark ( 2018 ) . '' the lighthouse '' on heartwork by the used ( 2020 ) '' growing up '' on young dumb thrills by mcfly ( 2020 ) . references . bibliography . . external links . hoppus on music fuse