Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran

biography . lecoq de boisbaudran was a member of a noble family of huguenots from the french provinces of poitou and angoumois . the huguenots were french protestants , a population that was devastated during the french wars of religion ( 1561-1598 ) . the edict of nantes ( 1598 ) granted substantial civil rights to the huguenots even though it maintained catholicism 's position as the established religion of france . the edict of nantes was overturned by the edict of fontainebleau ( 1685 ) , which officially sanctioned persecution of protestants . the lecoq de boisbaudran family was of considerable fortune until the revocation of the edict of nantes , after which much of their property was confiscated and sold . paul-émile ( francois ) lecoq de boisbaudran was a son of paul lecoq de boisbaudran ( 1801-1870 ) and his wife anne louise . paul lecoq de boisbaudran established a successful wine business in cognac , benefiting from the hard work of the entire family including young paul-émile . anne louise lecoq de boisbaudran was well educated and taught her son paul-émile history and foreign languages , including english . he obtained the syllabus of the école polytechnique , and he studied the books assigned in its courses . in this way , he was self-taught as a scientist . as such , de boisbaudran is an example of an autodidact . with the support of his family , he assembled a modest chemical laboratory on the second floor of their home on the rue de lusignan . in this laboratory , he repeated the experiments that he had studied in books . through these experiments , he developed his theories of spectroscopy and made most of his discoveries , including the isolation of gallium . lecoq de boisbaudran married jeannette nadault-valette ( 1852-1926 ) on 27 december 1897 . they had no children . he developed ankylosis of the joints , and failing health hindered his work after 1895 . he died in 1912 , at the age of 74 . . research . lecoq de boisbaudran 's early investigations focused on understanding the phenomenon of supersaturation , in which substances can exist in solution in higher concentrations than is possible under normal conditions . he showed that contact of supersaturated solutions with crystals of an isomorphous salt causes the substance to precipitate from solution . he further showed that many anhydrous salts can be dissolved to create a supersaturated solution . these investigations were carried out from 1866 to 1869 . in 1874 lecoq de boisbaudran found that certain crystal faces dissolve more rapidly than other crystal faces . specifically , he found that octahedral faces are less readily soluble than cubic faces in the case of ammonium alum crystals . lecoq de boisbaudran made major contributions to the then-new science of spectroscopy , which relates to the interaction of light and matter . he applied spectroscopy to characterize elements , particularly the rare-earth elements . he developed a theoretical framework of spectroscopy , based on molecular vibrations . theorizing that spectral frequencies relate to the atomic weight of an element , he recognized spectral trends based upon atomic masses . boisbaudran developed new experimental apparatus and used these to carry out spectral analyses of various chemical elements . through systematic experimentation , he analysed spectra of 35 elements , using the bunsen burner , electric spark or both to induce luminescence of samples of the elements . the results of his early investigations were published in his spectres lumineux : spectres prismatiques et en longueurs d'ondes destinés aux recherches de chimie minérale ( 1874 ) . to observe spark spectra in his experimental protocols , he typically placed a solution of a salt in a sealed glass tube , with a platinum wire in the solution as a negative pole , and another platinum wire above the surface of the liquid as a positive pole . in 1885 , he experimented with reversing the polarity of the electric current . in this way , he obtained phosphorescent bands in the spectra providing further insight into the spectral characteristics of various chemical elements . using this apparatus , he discovered the lanthanides samarium ( 1880 ) , dysprosium ( 1886 ) and europium ( 1890 ) . in 1885 , he also spectroscopically characterized gadolinium in 1885 , an element previously discovered in 1880 by j . c . galissard de marignac . . samarium . lecoq de boisbaudran discovered samarium in 1879 after first isolating samarium oxide . he identified the presence of a new element by using spectroscopy to observe its characteristic sharp optical absorption lines . he named his new element '' samaria '' after the mineral samarskite from which it was isolated . the mineral itself was earlier named for a russian mine official , colonel vassili samarsky-bykhovets . the name was eventually standardized to '' samarium '' to match other element names , and '' samaria '' now refers to the oxide of samarium , not the pure element . . gallium . a significant achievement of lecoq de boisbaudran was his discovery of the element gallium in 1875 . beginning in 1874 , lecoq de boisbaudran investigated a sample of 52 & nbsp ; kg of the mineral ore sphalerite obtained from the pierrefitte mine in the pyrenees . from it , he extracted several milligrams of gallium chloride . using spectroscopic methods , he observed what appeared to be two previously unreported lines in the sample 's spectrum , at wavelengths of 4170 and 4031 angstroms . he continued his experiments using several hundred kilograms of a crude zinc ore and in the same year isolated more than one gram of a near-pure metal by electrolysis of a solution of the metal in its form as a hydroxide compound , dissolved in potassium hydroxide solution . later he prepared 75 & nbsp ; grams of gallium using more than 4 tonnes of the crude ore . he confirmed its spectral characteristics , consisting of two spectral lines in the violet portion of the spectrum of the mineral sphalerite . in this way , he ruled out the possibility that the spectral characteristics were an accident of the extraction process , rather than being an indication of a new element . he named his discovery '' gallia '' , from the latin gallia meaning gaul , in honor of his native land of france . it was later suggested that lecoq de boisbaudran had named the element after himself , since gallus is the latin translation of the french le coq . lecoq de boisbaudran denied this suggestion in an article in 1877 . he published an account of his investigations on the new element in sur un nouveau metal , le gallium ( 1877 ) . de boisbaudran calculated the atomic mass of gallium as 69.86 , close to the currently accepted value of 69.723 . unknown to lecoq de boisbaudran , the existence of gallium had been predicted during 1871 by dmitri mendeleev , who gave it the name eka-aluminium . de boisbaudran 's discovery of gallium was significant support for mendeleev 's theory of the periodicity of the elements . . dysprosium . lecoq de boisbaudran experimented with precipitation of rare earth compounds from water solution using potassium sulphate to induce precipitation . he then measured the spectra of solutions in which the liquid served as a positive pole . lecoq de boisbaudran noted a spectral band in the yellow-green portion of the spectrum , indicative of a new element . in 1886 he succeeded in isolating a purified sample of the source of the new spectral band . he named the element dysprosium , meaning '' difficult to obtain '' in the greek language . . periodic classification of elements . lecoq de boisbaudran contributed to the development of the periodic classification of elements . this contribution occurred when he proposed that the newly discovered element argon was a member of a new , previously unrecognized , chemical series of elements that came to be known as the noble gases . . awards and honors . for his accomplishments , lecoq de boisbaudran was awarded the cross of the legion of honour ( 1876 ) , the bordin prize from the french academy of sciencies ( 1872 ) , the davy medal ( 1879 ) and the prix lacaze of 10,000 francs ( 1879 ) . in 1888 he was elected a foreign member of the british royal society . . references . sources .