Centre Point

construction and history . the building was designed by george marsh of the architects richard seifert , with engineers pell frischmann , and was constructed by george wimpey from 1963 to 1966 for £5.5 million . almacantar . the precast segments were formed of fine concrete , utilising crushed portland stone ; they were made by portcrete limited at portland , isle of portland , dorset , and transported to london by lorry . stuart morris , portland ; an illustrated history , the dovecote press . centre point was built as speculative office space by property tycoon harry hyams , who had leased the site at £18,500 a year for 150 years . hyams intended that the whole building be occupied by a single tenant , and negotiated fiercely for its approval . on completion , the building remained vacant for many years , leading to its being referred to as '' london 's empty skyscraper '' . centre point tower , london : an architectural icon from the 1960s , london landmarks , urban75 , april 2012 . with property prices rising and most business tenancies taken for set periods of 10 or 15 years , hyams could afford to keep it empty and wait for his single tenant at the asking price of £1,250,000 ; he was challenged to allow tenants to rent single floors , but consistently refused . at that time skyscrapers were rare in london , and centre point 's prominence led to its becoming a rallying symbol for opponents . the homeless charity centrepoint was founded in 1969 as a homeless shelter in nearby soho , named centrepoint in response to the building centre point being seen as an '' affront to the homeless '' for being left empty to make money for the property developer . in 1974 an umbrella group of direct action housing campaigners , including jim radford , ron bailey and jack dromey , organised a weekend squatting of centre point from 18 january to 20 january to draw attention to its being deliberately left empty during a housing crisis in london . ( two of the occupiers had obtained jobs with the burns security company , which was guarding the building . ) edward platt , '' hot air over an office block : it 's 25 years since the protests over centre point . not much has changed '' , the independent , 16 january 1999 . from july 1980 to march 2014 , centre point was the headquarters of the confederation of british industry ( cbi ) which became , at 33 years and seven months , the building 's longest-standing tenant . in october 2005 , centre point was bought from the previous owners , blackmoor lp , by commercial property firm targetfollow for £85 million . the building was extensively refurbished . occupants included us talent agency william morris ; the state-owned national oil company of saudi arabia , aramco ; chinese oil company petrochina ; and electronic gaming company ea games . it has since been purchased by almacantar . almacantar approached conran and partners for the refurbishment of the tower including change of use from office to residential , whilst mica , formerly rick mather architects , lead the refurbishment of the lower rise buildings and the new affordable housing block . in 2015 work began on conversion of the building to residential flats . hilary osborne , '' work begins on luxury flat conversion of london landmark centre point '' , the guardian , 26 january 2015 . the restoration and conversion of the tower to a residential building was finished in march 2018 . . transport . the promised transport interchange and highways improvements were not delivered following the original plan . the pedestrian subway attracted anti-social activities . on 19 june 2006 , the cabe pointed to the building as an example of bad design , where badly-designed pavements force pedestrians into the bus lane and account for the highest level of pedestrian injuries in central london . with the planned redevelopment of tottenham court road underground station , a framework has been adopted to redevelop the traffic island beneath centre point as an open space . '' work starts on public plaza beneath richard seifert 's centre point '' , de zeen , 27 january 2015 . the site of the plaza and fountains will be a work site for the crossrail and station expansion works . the plaza is being demolished and the fountains have been removed . architectural reception . architecture critic nikolaus pevsner described centre point as '' coarse in the extreme '' . in 1995 it became a grade ii listed building . in 2009 , it won the concrete society 's mature structures award . 43rd concrete society awards . . cultural references . centre point is featured in the 1977 horror film the medusa touch . a boeing 747 aircraft is seen to hit the top of the tower and destroy it . the resulting collapse engulfs the nearby dominion theatre . centre point is one of the locations jim ( cillian murphy ) walks past in the '' deserted london '' scenes of uk horror film 28 days later ( 2002 ) . director danny boyle also references it ( as '' 'centre point , ' the famous empty/partially empty building in this busy section of london '' ) on the dvd commentary . the character '' old bailey '' camps on top of centre point at one point in neil gaiman 's novel neverwhere . he describes it as an '' ugly and distinctive sixties skyscraper '' and goes on to remark that '' the view from the top was without compare , and , furthermore , the top of centre point was one of the few places in the west end of london where you did not have to look at centre point itself '' . the building is mentioned in the sixth episode of the bbc comedy series the thick of it . during an inquiry into the uk government 's routine news leak , stuart pearson , a conservative spin doctor , is asked about an analogy he has made between government transparency and the pompidou centre . a member of the inquiry suggests that rather than creating a '' political pompidou centre , '' pearson has created '' the opposite , centre point – i mean everyone sees it looming over them but nobody has the faintest idea what happens in there . '' to which pearson replies , '' i think there 's some kind of club on the top floor . '' in an episode of captain kremmen , the titular character is forced to fire a '' thron '' ray into london by his krell captors , but avoids any deaths by aiming it at centre point , which was empty . . see also . tall buildings in london list of skyscrapers . references . external links . targetfollow.co.uk – owner of centre point targetspace.co.uk – office services in centre point bbc news : hunt for uk 's 'failed ' buildings concrete society : certificate of excellence for centre point centre point by richard seifert centre point building information & photos