Berserker

etymology . the old norse form of the word was ( plural . it likely means '' bear-shirt '' ( compare the middle english word serk , meaning shirt ) , '' someone who wears a coat made out of a bear 's skin '' . thirteenth-century historian snorri sturluson interpreted the meaning as '' bare-shirt '' , that is to say that the warriors went into battle without armour , but that view has largely been abandoned . . early beginnings . it is proposed by some authors that the northern warrior tradition originated from hunting magic . three main animal cults appeared : the bear , the wolf , and the wild boar . the bas relief carvings on trajan 's column in rome depict scenes of trajan 's conquest of dacia in 101–106 ad . the scenes show his roman soldiers plus auxiliaries and allies from rome 's border regions , including tribal warriors from both sides of the rhine . there are warriors depicted as barefoot , bare-chested , bearing weapons and helmets that are associated with the germani . scene 36 on the column shows some of these warriors standing together , with some wearing bearhoods and some wearing wolfhoods . nowhere else in history are germanic bear-warriors and wolf-warriors fighting together recorded until 872 ad with thórbiörn hornklofi 's description of the battle of hafrsfjord when they fought together for king harald fairhair of norway . in the spring of 1870 , four cast-bronze dies , the torslunda plates , were found by erik gustaf pettersson and anders petter nilsson in a cairn on the lands of the farm no 5 björnhovda in torslunda parish , öland , sweden . two relevant images are depicted below , along with two associated woodcuts made two years later in 1872 . file : bronsplåt 2 fr torslunda sn , öland ( stjerna , hjälmar och svärd i beovulf ( 1903 ) sid 103 ) . jpg torslunda helmet : odin followed by a berserker file : bronsplåt 1 fr torslunda sn , öland ( stjerna , hjälmar och svärd i beovulf ( 1903 ) sid 103 ) . jpg torslunda helmet : two warriors with boars upon their helmets file : bronsplåt fr torslunda sn , öland ( antiqvitets akademiens månadsblad 1872 s090 fig39 ) . jpg woodcut image from 1872 file : bronsplåt fr torslunda sn , öland ( antiqvitets akademiens månadsblad 1872 s090 fig38 ) . jpg woodcut image from 1872 . berserkers – bear warriors . it is proposed by some authors that the berserkers drew their power from the bear and were devoted to the bear cult , which was once widespread across the northern hemisphere . the berserkers maintained their religious observances despite their fighting prowess , as the svarfdæla saga tells of a challenge to single-combat that was postponed by a berserker until three days after yule . the bodies of dead berserkers were laid out in bearskins prior to their funeral rites . the bear-warrior symbolism survives to this day in the form of the bearskin worn by the guards of the danish monarchs . in battle , the berserkers were subject to fits of frenzy . they would howl like wild beasts , foam at the mouth , and gnaw the iron rim of their shields . according to belief , during these fits they were immune to steel and fire , and made great havoc in the ranks of the enemy . when the fever abated they were weak and tame . accounts can be found in the sagas . to '' go berserk '' was to '' hamask '' , which translates as '' change form '' , in this case , as with the sense '' enter a state of wild fury '' . some scholars have interpreted those who could transform as a berserker was typically as '' hamrammr '' or '' shapestrong '' – literally able to shapeshift into a bear 's form . for example , the band of men who go with skallagrim in egil 's saga to see king harald about his brother thorolf 's murder are described as '' the hardest of men , with a touch of the uncanny about a number of them . they were built and shaped more like trolls than human beings . '' this has sometimes been interpreted as the band of men being '' hamrammr '' , though there is no major consensus . another example of '' hamrammr '' comes from the hrólfs saga kraka . one tale within tells the story of bödvar bjarki , a berserker who is able to shapeshift into a bear and uses this ability to fight for king hrólfr kraki . '' men saw that a great bear went before king hrolf 's men , keeping always near the king . he slew more men with his fore paws than any five of the king 's champions . '' . úlfhéðnar – wolf warriors . wolf warriors appear among the legends of the indo-europeans , turks , mongols , and native american cultures . the germanic wolf-warriors have left their trace through shields and standards that were captured by the romans and displayed in the armilustrium in rome . the frenzy warriors wearing the skins of wolves were called úlfhéðnar ( '' wolf coat '' ; singular úlfheðinn ) , another term associated with berserkers , mentioned in the vatnsdæla saga , the haraldskvæði and the völsunga saga . they were said to wear the pelt of a wolf when they entered battle . úlfhéðnar are sometimes described as odin 's special warriors : '' odin 's men went without their mailcoats and were mad as hounds or wolves , bit their shields.they slew men , but neither fire nor iron had effect upon them . this is called 'going berserk ' . '' in addition , the helm-plate press from torslunda depicts a scene of odin with a berserker with a wolf pelt and a spear as distinguishing features : “ a wolf skinned warrior with the apparently one-eyed dancer in the bird-horned helm , which is generally interpreted as showing a scene indicative of a relationship between berserkgang . and the god odin ” . . jöfurr – purposed boar warriors . in norse mythology , the wild boar was an animal sacred to the vanir . the powerful god freyr owned the boar gullinbursti and the goddess freyja owned hildisvíni ( '' battle swine '' ) , and these boars can be found depicted on swedish and anglo-saxon ceremonial items . similar to the berserker and the ulfhednar , the boar-warriors used the strength of their animal , the boar , as the foundation of their martial arts . beck , h . 1965 das ebersignum im germanischen . ein beitrag zur germanischen tiersymbolik . berlin : w . de gruyter . . attestations . berserkers appear prominently in a multitude of other sagas and poems . many earlier sagas portrayed berserkers as bodyguards , elite soldiers , and champions of kings . this image would change as time passed and sagas would begin to describe berserkers as boasters rather than heroes , and as ravenous men who loot , plunder , and kill indiscriminately . within the sagas , berserkers can be narrowed down to four different types . the king 's berserkr , the hall-challenging berserkr , the hólmgangumaðr , and the viking berserkr . later , by christian interpreters , the berserker was viewed as a '' heathen devil '' . the earliest surviving reference to the term '' berserker '' is in haraldskvæði , a skaldic poem composed by thórbiörn hornklofi in the late 9th century in honor of king harald fairhair , as ulfheðnar ( '' men clad in wolf skins '' ) . this translation from the haraldskvæði saga describes harald 's berserkers : the '' tasters of blood '' in this passage are thought to be ravens , which feasted on the slain . the icelandic historian and poet snorri sturluson ( 1179–1241 ) wrote the following description of berserkers in his ynglinga saga : king harald fairhair 's use of berserkers as '' shock troops '' broadened his sphere of influence . other scandinavian kings used berserkers as part of their army of hirdmen and sometimes ranked them as equivalent to a royal housecarl . it may be that some of those warriors only adopted the organization or rituals of berserk männerbünde , or used the name as a deterrent or claim of their ferocity . emphasis has been placed on the frenzied nature of the berserkers , hence the modern sense of the word '' berserk '' . however , the sources describe several other characteristics that have been ignored or neglected by modern commentators . snorri 's assertion that '' neither fire nor iron told upon them '' is reiterated time after time . the sources frequently state that neither edged weapons nor fire affected the berserks , although they were not immune to clubs or other blunt instruments . for example : similarly , hrolf kraki 's champions refuse to retreat '' from fire or iron '' . another frequent motif refers to berserkers blunting their enemy 's blades with spells or a glance from their evil eyes . this appears as early as beowulf where it is a characteristic attributed to grendel . both the fire eating and the immunity to edged weapons are reminiscent of tricks popularly ascribed to fakirs . in 1015 , earl eiríkr hákonarson of norway outlawed berserkers . grágás , the medieval icelandic law code , sentenced berserker warriors to outlawry . by the 12th century , organised berserker war-bands had disappeared . the lewis chessmen , found on the isle of lewis ( outer hebrides , scotland ) but thought to be of norse manufacture , include berserkers depicted biting their shields . theories . scholar hilda ellis-davidson draws a parallel between berserkers and the mention by the byzantine emperor constantine vii ( ad 905–959 ) in his book de ceremoniis ( '' book of ceremonies of the byzantine court '' ) of a '' goths dance '' performed by members of his varangian guard ( norse warriors in the service of the byzantine empire ) , who took part wearing animal skins and masks : she believes this may have been connected with berserker rites . hilda ellis davidson ( 1967 ) pagan scandinavia , p . 100 . frederick a . praeger publishers asin b0000cnq6i the rage the berserker experienced was referred to as berserkergang ( berserk fit/frenzy or the berserk movement ) . this condition has been described as follows : . bibliography . . external links . vandle helmet with bronze plates depicting wild boar warriors , the svinfylking 8th century ce . valsgarde , sweden berserkene – hva gikk det av dem ? ( jon geir høyersten : journal of the norwegian medical association ) berserkergang ( viking answer lady ) berserkers-wolf-people