BattleBots

history . battlebots is an offshoot of the original version robot wars , the brainchild of marc thorpe . robot wars had financial backing from e communications , a new york record company . the thorpe partnership broke up in 1997 , starting many years of legal wrangling between thorpe and profile records ( the former sm : ) e-communications ) . profile licensed robot wars to a uk production company and robot wars ran for seven years as a popular television program in the uk , before being revived for 2016 . the robot builders left behind in san francisco formed battlebots , inc . and began a series of competitions . the first was held in long beach , california in august 1999 and webcast , attracting 40,000 streams . lenny stucker , a television producer known for his work on telecasts of professional boxing , was in attendance and showed interest in being involved with battlebots—believing the concept of robot combat was '' hip '' and have shown an interest in technology . stucker made changes to the competition 's format and presentation to make it more suitable for television , including elements reminiscent of boxing ( such as a red and blue corner ) and shifting to a single-elimination format . the creators tried selling the competition as a television series to networks such as cbs , nbc , hbo , and showtime—but they failed to understand the concept of the program or take it seriously . a second event was held as a pay-per-view in las vegas in 1999 , the ppv was in turn , used as a pilot to pitch the show again , with a higher rate of success . among the networks interested was comedy central , who would ultimately pick up the program . debbie liebling , the network 's senior vice president of original programming and development , felt that the concept would appeal to the network 's young adult demographic , explaining that '' it was really funny and really nerdy . the internet was not a big thing yet , so the nerd culture was n't so celebrated . it was sports for the nerdy person , i guess . '' co-creator greg munson viewed the deal as a double-edged sword ; it gave battlebots an outlet and a larger budget , but the network insisted on the addition of comedic aspects to battlebots as a program , such as sketches involving contestants . however , the competition itself was not affected by this mandate ; liebling described the final product as being '' a parody of a sports show without being a parody '' . munson lamented that the network had also ignored his suggestion for the co-host role to be filled by '' attractive geek girls '' with sufficient knowledge to speak with builders , having elected to '' keep throwing bigger and better hot babes at it '' , such as carmen electra . despite this , viewership and awareness of battlebots grew progressively over time ; contestants christian carlberg and lisa winter would be invited to appear on the tonight show with jay leno , battlebots beat south park as comedy central 's highest-rated program for a period during season 3 , competitor interest grew and licensing deals also emerged . the success of battlebots , however , resulted in competition from other broadcasters ; tlc introduced a competing program , robotica , while other channels imported episodes of the british robot wars series . by 2002 , the program had begun to face further difficulties ; munson felt that the bouts had become '' homogenized '' because the participants had '' perfected '' the sport of robot fighting , leading to a lack of innovation in robot designs and strategies . furthermore , battlebots had sued anheuser-busch and its advertising agency for producing and airing a commercial during super bowl xxxvii that parodied the program and featured a robot greatly resembling one from battlebots ( this lawsuit , however , would be dismissed in 2004 , after a judge ruled that the ad was a parody protected by fair use ) . in september 2002 , comedy central cancelled battlebots after its fifth season , battlebots 5.0 . viacom would acquire full control of the network in april 2003 ; stucker believed that comedy central had become '' tired '' of the program , and roski stated that viacom had wanted to shift comedy central back towards traditional comedy programming . in december 2014 , abc announced that it had picked up a six-episode revival of battlebots , produced by whalerock industries , to premiere in june 2015 . roski and munson served as executive producers , joined by lloyd braun . the revival drew an average viewership of 5.4 million in its sunday-night timeslot , with a 1.9 share in the 18-49 demographic . in november 2015 , abc announced that it had renewed the battlebots revival for a second season , which expanded the competition to a 56-team field . after abc declined to renew the revival for a third season , the series was picked up by discovery channel and sister network science . on april 18 , 2018 , discovery and science channel announced that a new season would begin on friday , may 11 , 2018 , at 8:00 & nbsp ; p.m . et/pt on discovery channel and wednesday , may 16 , 2018 , at 9:00 & nbsp ; p.m . et/pt on science channel . the announcement reported that amongst the bots would be returning favorites tombstone , minotaur , chomp , witch doctor , bronco , bombshell , bite force , and yeti . chris rose and kenny florian return to call the action , provide background information about the bots and teams , and offer commentary . jessica chobot served again as the sideline reporter . faruq tauheed returned as the ring announcer . battlebots was then brought back for another season on june 5 , 2019 , on discovery and science channel . chris rose and kenny florian returned as hosts with a new sideline reporter , jenny taft , interviewing all of the battlebots competitors in the workshop . a tenth season was set to premiere on discovery on may 15 , 2020 ; however , due to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic , it was pushed to december 3 , 2020 . filming began on october 10th and ended on october 21st . . personalities . for the first five seasons , battlebots was hosted by bil dwyer , sean salisbury , and tim green . correspondents included former baywatch actresses donna d'errico , carmen electra , and traci bingham , former playboy playmate heidi mark , comedian arj barker and identical twins randy and jason sklar . bill nye was the show 's '' technical expert '' . the show 's match announcer was longtime boxing ring announcer mark beiro . the 2015 edition was hosted by molly mcgrath , with chris rose and former ufc fighter kenny florian as commentators . the battle arena announcer was faruq tauheed , and alison haislip conducted interviews on the sidelines and behind the scenes . the judges were engineer and nasa astronaut leland melvin , nerdist news anchor jessica chobot and visual effects artist fon davis . for the 2016 season , samantha ponder was added as host , replacing molly mcgrath . the returning judges were fon davis , jessica chobot , and leland melvin , as well as celebrity guest judges actor clark gregg , mythbusters host and former battlebots builder adam savage , nfl tightend vernon davis , and youtube star michael stevens a.k.a . vsauce . for the 2018 season , rose , florian , and tauheed all returned in their roles , with rose and florian taking over as the primary hosts of the show . chobot and haislip switched their roles , with chobot becoming the new sideline reporter and haislip one of the rotating judges . other judges include former battlebots competitors lisa winter , derek young , grant imahara and mark setrakian . for the 2019 season , chobot was replaced with jenny taft as a sideline reporter , and the judging panel was fixed to winter , young , and former competitor jason bardis instead of rotating as it had done in previous seasons . for the 2020 season , former builder peter abrahamson was added as a ringside '' bot whisperer '' who would provide technical details and in-depth analysis of matchups , robots , and damage . jamie hyneman and adam savage ( creators of heavyweight blendo ) , and grant imahara ( creator of middleweight deadblow ) of discovery channel 's mythbusters are former competitors . deadblow sometimes appeared as a '' guest mythbuster '' , assisting grant with various experiments including '' driving in the dark '' . will wright , the creator of simcity and other sim games , as well as spore , was a long-time contestant . he competed with middleweight chiabot in seasons 1 - 5 , multibot racc along with mike winter in long beach 1999 , and lightweight the aggressive polygon in season 1 . his daughter cassidy competed with middleweight misty the wonderbot in seasons 4 - 5 . michael loren mauldin , founder of lycos , entered multiple bots over the series , competing with team toad . one of the founders of battlebots , trey roski , is the son of edward p . roski , one of the owners of the staples center sports arena in los angeles . jay leno appeared with a novelty battlebot , chinkilla – a lift type robot , chinkilla did not comply with the competition rules and only competed in special exhibition matches at battlebots events . mark setrakian , builder/creator of the fighting robots and control suits used on robot combat league , is known for his visually appealing robots such as mechadon and snake . he has also worked on control technology used for films like men in black , the grinch , and hellboy . whilst setrakian did not compete in the abc revival series , he built axis , a claw-like podium that would rotate the giant nut on top of it while it was on display . gary coleman , in promotion with ugo.com , joined jim smentowski on team nightmare for battlebots season 5 . in that season , he competed with middleweight psyche . dan barry , retired nasa astronaut and survivor : panama contestant , competed in battlebots season 7 with black ice . andrew norton worked on the show from its first event until season 4 as a member of the technical and arena safety crew , while simultaneously holding the uk robot wars middleweight title . format . weight classes . robots at battlebots tournaments were separated into four weight classes in seasons 1–5 . the weight limits increased slightly over time . at the final tournaments the classes were : lightweight – 60 pounds ( 27 kilograms ) middleweight – 120 pounds ( 54 kilograms ) heavyweight – 220 pounds ( 100 kilograms ) superheavyweight – 340 pounds ( 154 kilograms ) '' walking '' robots ( '' stompbots '' ) propelled by means other than wheels were initially given a 50 % weight bonus . the rules changed following the victory of a heavyweight stompbot ( son of whyachi ) at battlebots 3.0 . for battlebots 4.0 and beyond only a 20 % weight bonus was given to walkers and the technical rules specified that walking mechanisms do not use cam operated walking mechanisms as they were functionally too similar to wheel operation . since the rules change , walking robots have entered the competition , but none has achieved any success beyond preliminary rounds . as of 2020 , true walkers are given a 100 % weight bonus ( like in the case of chomp , which weights 500 pounds ) . starting in season 6 , there were no longer separate weight classes while the weight limit for heavyweights was increased from 220 to 250 pounds . matches . matches are three minutes long . during a match , two robots do their best to destroy or disable each other using whatever means available . the match begins with a series of lights that flash from yellow to green . the original comedy central version used a standard christmas tree as seen in the sport of drag racing ; the abc revival uses just one box of lights that flash yellow three times , and then flash green . there are only two events that cause the match to be paused resulting in people entering the battlebox . one is the event that the robots are stuck together and can not separate or that both have simultaneously become immobilized . the other scenario is that one or both 'bots have caught on fire . in that case , the people entering the battlebox are equipped with fire extinguishers . if a robot is unable to move for ten seconds , because it is too badly damaged or it is stuck in some manner ( e.g . ensnared in an arena-trap ) , it is declared knocked out . in the comedy central version , the driver could also call a '' tap-out '' to forfeit the match if his or her robot is about to be destroyed . this ends the match ten seconds later ; the opposing driver is '' asked '' ( but not instructed ) not to attack during the ten-second count . if both robots survive the three minutes , three judges distribute a total of 45 points ( 15 points a judge , 5 points per judge per category ) over three categories . the robot with the higher score wins . the judging categories are aggression , strategy , and damage . in season 6 ( june/july 2015 ) , the judging categories were aggression , damage , strategy , and control . a robot who hangs back safely from its opponent will not get many aggression points ; one in there fighting the whole time , however , will . the strategy category is about how well a robot exploits its opponent 's weaknesses , protects its own , and handles the hazards . a robot driving over the kill saws will lose points here unless it had good reason to do so , while a robot that is able to attack its opponent 's weak areas will gain points . the damage category is for how much damage the bot can deal to its opponent while remaining intact itself . at the end of the tournament , a series of 'rumbles ' or 'melee rounds ' is typically held in each weight class , allowing robots that survived the main tournament to fight in a 'free for all ' in a 5-minute match . occasionally there are too many robots for one rumble , and multiple rumbles are held with the top surviving bots competing in a final event . during the season 5 heavyweight rumble ( the first rumble of that competition ) , a sheared-off robot part went through the lexan arena roof and fell ( harmlessly ) into the audience . because of this , the rest of the rumbles were canceled due to safety concerns . robotcombat.com . arena . the battlebox is a 48 ' x 48 ' square arena designed to protect the drivers , officials , and audience from flying debris and charging bots . it was originally designed by pete lampertson . as of the 2015 season , pete was still overseeing the box with the help of matt neubauer . it has a steel floor and steel-framed walls and roof paneled with thick , bulletproof polycarbonate plastic . the teams bring their robots in through doorways , which are sealed after all humans have exited . the drivers control their machines from outside the sealed arena . arena booby-traps are intended to make fights more interesting and unpredictable and to reward drivers who can avoid the traps while pushing or carrying their opponent into them . traps from the first five seasons include ( and where noted , omitted for the later abc/discovery/science channel-shown seasons ) : pulverizers : originally pneumatic powered standard sledgehammers that did minimal damage , the pulverizers were first upgraded to 50-pound aluminum mallets for season 2 , and were again upgraded to 150-pound mallets for season 3 and beyond , now with one near each corner . the pulverizers were capable of causing serious damage to the lighter weight class robots . spike strips : the lower walls of the arena are lined with inward-pointing 6-inch long sharpened steel spikes . pushing an opponent hard into a wall can sometimes lodge it in the spikes , immobilizing it . spinners : large , rapidly spinning discs embedded in the arena floor , not intended to damage a robot , but rather to interfere with navigation . the spinners could fling lighter class robots across the arena , but the impact on heavier robots was minimal . omitted for the abc/discovery/science channel-shown seasons . kill saws : spinning circular saw saw-blades comprising eight twin-blade hazards , that rise out of slots in the arena floor that was originally under the control of '' pulverizer pete '' . these carbide-tipped saw blades can damage a robot 's tires or chassis . in later seasons , red 'throwing blades ' were added to increase the chance of a bot being thrown across the arena . pistons : introduced in season 3 , the pistons are steel columns that raise and lower from the floor without warning . they can stop a charging robot or tip a slow-moving robot onto its side . the pistons were removed for seasons 4 and 5 , and likewise omitted for the abc/discovery/science channel-shown seasons . ramrods : sharpened steel spikes that rise up out of the arena floor in groups of six , serving either to lift a robot off the ground or damage vulnerable portions of the undercarriage . omitted for the abc/discovery/science channel-shown seasons . hell raisers : a pneumatic ram that can tilt up specific sections of the arena floor . the 15-degree tilt may become a launching ramp , or may abruptly block passage . the hell raisers were removed for season 5 onwards , to allow more uncluttered room for the robots . screws : introduced for season 3 , these devices were a modification to the static spike strips . the screws were continually rotating augers placed horizontally along the edges of the arena floor . the screws were intended to scrape up a bot , and possibly drag it closer to the pulverizers due to the corkscrew design . much like the spinners , the screws had a greater effect on the lighter weight classes—although their impact on all weight classes was small . for season 5 onwards , the screws were upgraded with biting 'teeth ' to better catch onto robots . their rotation was also modified so that instead of 'pushing ' in one direction , they converged in the center of themselves from opposite directions and created a ' v ' that could damage or turn over robots . episodes . battlebots : bounty hunters . on december 3 , 2020 , it was announced that a spin-off titled battlebots : bounty hunters was released . the streaming series premiered on january 4 , 2021 on discovery+ . . format . battlebots : bounty hunters features veteran bots who have dominated all past challengers . for the first time ever , the series places a '' bounty '' on some of the heads of the 'most lethal , most destructive , and the most ruthless bots ' . a group of the best builders step forward to defend their title . with six elite tournaments and 25,000 on the line , the newcomers only have one shot to take down a legendary bot . season 1 ( 2021 ) . . see also . robot fighting league survival research laboratories robogames robot wars ( tv series ) . notes . references . external links . ( comedy central version ) ( abc version ) ( science channel version ) full results of major robotic competitions including robot wars , battlebots and robotica