Melange (fictional drug)

description . melange is a drug able to prolong life , bestow heightened vitality and awareness , and unlock prescience in some humans . this prescience-enhancing property makes safe and accurate interstellar travel possible , as it enables spacing guild navigators to see safe paths through space-time and navigate the gigantic guild heighliners safely between planets . the massive amount of melange needed to achieve this requires that navigators be contained in a large tank within a cloud of spice gas . this intense and extended exposure alters their bodies over time . in larger quantities , the spice possesses intense psychotropic effects and is used as a powerful entheogen by both the bene gesserit and fremen to initiate clairvoyant and precognitive trances , access genetic memory , and heighten other abilities . the fremen also use the spice to make , among other things , paper , plastics , and chemical explosives , and the existence of '' spice-cloth '' and '' spice-fiber '' rugs are noted in dune messiah ( 1969 ) and children of dune ( 1976 ) . melange can be mixed with food , and it is used to make beverages such as spice coffee , spice beer , and spice liquor . by the events of dune , the spice is used all over the universe and is a sign of wealth . duke leto atreides notes that of every valuable commodity known to mankind , '' all fades before melange . a handful of spice will buy a home on tupile . '' jon michaud of the new yorker wrote : '' imagine a substance with the combined worldwide value of cocaine and petroleum , and you will have some idea of the power of melange . '' due to the rarity and value of melange and its necessity as a catalyst for interstellar travel , the padishah emperor 's power at the outset of dune is secured by his control of arrakis , which puts him on equal footing with both the assembly of noble families called the landsraad and the spacing guild , which monopoly interstellar travel . seizing control of the planet , paul atreides intensifies this form of hydraulic empire by asserting control over both the landsraad and spacing guild , as well as other factions in the universe . herbert wrote : herbert is vague in describing the appearance of the spice . he hints at its color in dune messiah when he notes that guild navigator edric '' swam in a container of orange gas . his tank 's vents emitted a pale orange cloud rich with the smell of the geriatric spice , melange . '' later in heretics of dune ( 1984 ) , a discovered hoard of melange appears as '' mounds of dark reddish brown '' . herbert also indicates fluorescence in god emperor of dune ( 1981 ) when the character moneo notes : '' great bins of melange lay all around in a gigantic room cut from native rock and illuminated by glowglobes . the spice had glowed radiant blue in the dim silver light . and the smell—bitter cinnamon , unmistakable . '' herbert writes repeatedly , starting in dune ( 1965 ) , that melange smells like cinnamon . in dune , lady jessica notes that her first taste of spice '' tasted like cinnamon '' . dr . yueh adds that the flavor is '' never twice the same . it 's like life—it presents a different face each time you take it . some hold that the spice produces a learned-flavor reaction . the body , learning a thing is good for it , interprets the flavor as pleasurable—slightly euphoric . and , like life , never to be truly synthesized . '' . physiological side effects . extensive use of the drug tints the sclera , cornea , and iris of the user to a dark shade of blue , called '' blue-in-blue '' or '' the eyes of ibad '' , which is something of a source of pride among the fremen and a symbol of their tribal bond . in dune , paul initially has green eyes , but after several years on arrakis they begin to take on the deep , uniform blue of the fremen . on other planets , the addicted often use tinted contact lenses to hide this discoloration . in heretics of dune ( 1984 ) , the bene gesserit schwangyu notes that '' blue-in-blue eyes uncorrected by any lens gave lucilla a piercing expression that went with her long oval face . '' herbert later writes of duncan idaho that '' his first glimpse of schwangyu had confronted him with eyes concealed behind contact lenses that simulated non-addict pupils and slightly bloodshot whites . '' in dune , padishah emperor shaddam iv notes of two guildsmen : melange is also highly addictive , and withdrawal means certain death , though the exact method of death is unmentioned . paul atreides notes in dune that the spice is '' a poison—so subtle , so insidious . so irreversible . it wo n't even kill you unless you stop taking it . '' when aerosolized and used as an inhalant in extremely high dosages—the standard practice for guild navigators—the drug alters the physiology of its user . in the first chapter of dune messiah , guild navigator edric is described in his tank of spice gas as '' an elongated figure , vaguely humanoid with finned feet and hugely fanned membranous hands—a fish in a strange sea . '' in children of dune , the term '' spice trance '' is used to describe the effects of an overdose of spice . alia had previously subjected herself to such an overdose late in dune messiah , hoping to enhance her prescient visions . she achieves some success , but in children of dune , leto ii and ghanima blame the trance for alia 's descent into abomination . fearful of the same fate , they resist alia 's urgings to undergo the spice trance themselves . the trial is later forced upon leto at jacurutu when it is suspected that he too is an abomination . leto survives the challenge and escapes , but is left changed . unlike alia , however , he remains in control , and the spice trance opens his eyes to the golden path that will ultimately save humanity . . sources . in dune , there is only one source of melange : the sands of the planet arrakis , colloquially known as dune , and millennia later called simply '' rakis '' . herbert notes in dune that a pre-spice mass is '' the stage of fungusoid wild growth achieved when water is flooded into the excretions of little makers '' , the '' half-plant–half-animal deep-sand vector of the arrakis sandworm '' . gases are produced which result in '' a characteristic 'blow ' , exchanging the material from deep underground for the matter on the surface above it . '' this blow is explosive in nature , erupting with enough force to kill anyone in the vicinity of it . frank herbert describes such a spice blow in the following passage from dune : herbert writes that the pre-spice mass , '' after exposure to sun and air , becomes melange '' . he later indicates its color in children of dune , when leto ii passes '' the leprous blotches of violet sand where a spiceblow had erupted '' . collecting the melange is hazardous in the extreme , since rhythmic activity on the desert surface of arrakis attracts the worms , which can be up to 400 meters ( 1,300 feet ) in length and are capable of swallowing a mining crawler whole . thus , the mining operation essentially consists of vacuuming it from the surface with a vehicle called a harvester until a worm comes , at which time an aircraft known as a carryall lifts the mining vehicle to safety . the fremen , who have learned to co-exist with the sandworms in the desert , harvest the spice manually for their own use and for smuggling off-planet . within the 1500 years between the events of god emperor of dune ( 1981 ) and heretics of dune ( 1984 ) , the tleilaxu discover an artificial method of producing the spice in their axlotl tanks , previously only used to create gholas . it is noted in heretics of dune that '' for every milligram of melange produced on rakis , the bene tleilax tanks produced long tons '' . the technology '' had broken the rakian monopoly on the spice '' but is not fully successful in pushing natural melange out of the marketplace . prequels and sequels . project amal . in the prelude to dune prequel trilogy by brian herbert and kevin j . anderson ( 1999–2001 ) , project amal is an early attempt by the bene tleilax to create synthetic melange in order to eliminate dependence upon arrakis . upon presenting their idea to the padishah emperor elrood corrino ix , in 10,154 a.g . the tleilaxu are granted the right to occupy the planet ix by force ( with the help of elrood 's sardaukar army ) and remake it into a laboratory station for the project . the old emperor wants to remove the spice monopoly by making sure that he has the only access to it , thus controlling the spacing guild . the tleilaxu subsequently rename ix '' xuttuh '' after their founder . in the year 10,156 a.g . , elrood ix is assassinated by count fenring at the behest of shaddam iv . shaddam , now under the name of padishah emperor shaddam iv , gives fenring the title of imperial spice minister and orders him to supervise the project . although tleilaxu master hidar fen ajidica manages to create an artificial melange ( called '' ajidamal '' , or '' amal '' ) that seems to have the original 's properties , it does not work properly . test-sandtrout explode when exposed to it , and fenring 's test of its use by guild navigators ends in catastrophe as one heighliner and its passengers are destroyed and the navigator of a second heighliner dies . when leto i atreides invades xuttuh in 10,175 a.g . and reestablishes prince rhombur of house vernius as ruler of ix , all the records of project amal are destroyed by fenring . when the news hits the landsraad , shaddam denies all participation , claiming never to have heard of it . he maintains that it had probably been something his senile father elrood had done in his last days . the tleilaxu masters involved are ultimately executed . ajidica himself dies from the side effects of ajidamal : his body literally falls apart as the synthetic melange had eaten it away from the inside out . . ultraspice . in sandworms of dune , brian herbert and anderson 's 2007 conclusion to the original series , the spacing guild is manipulated into replacing its navigators with ixian navigation devices and cutting off the navigators ' supply of melange . sure to die should they be without the spice , a group of navigators commission waff , an imperfectly awakened tleilaxu ghola , to create '' advanced '' sandworms able to produce the melange they so desperately require . he accomplishes this by altering the dna of the worm 's sandtrout stage and creating an aquatic form of the worms , which are then released into the oceans of buzzell . adapting to their new environment , these '' seaworms '' quickly flourish , eventually producing a highly concentrated form of spice , dubbed ultraspice . this new form of spice is so powerful that a relatively small dose causes a potential kwisatz haderach to descend into a complete and unbreakable coma through perfect prescience . . analysis . in mycelium running , mycologist paul stamets argues without sources that herbert 's creation of melange was related in part to his own personal experiences with psilocybin mushrooms . carol hart analyzes the concept of the drug in the essay '' melange '' in the science of dune ( 2008 ) . . see also . nootropic synthetic cannabinoids n , n-dimethyltryptamine . references and notes .