Flag of North Korea

design . the north korea national flag is officially defined in article 170 of chapter vii of the north korean constitution . according to it : . symbolism . the north korean flag 's prominent motif is a red star , which is a universal communist symbolism and socialism , although since the flag 's adoption the application of the marxist-leninist-natured philosophy of juche has replaced communist authority as the state 's guiding ideology , and references to communism have been systematically removed from the country 's constitution and legal documents . however , the constitution is still stated to be socialist in nature . despite the many changes to the constitution , the description of the flag has always remained the same . the website of the korean friendship association indicates that , on the contrary , the red star represents revolutionary traditions and the red panel is indicative of the patriotism and determination of the korean people . the white stripes symbolize the unity of the korean nation and its culture . the blue stripes represent the desire to fight for independence , peace , friendship , and international unity . according to a typical north korean official text published in rodong sinmun , kim il-sung gave the following significance to the flag 's elements : it is possible that the original designer of the flag had a vertical design in mind . in the vertically hoisted flag the blue stripes would symbolize the yellow sea and sea of japan surrounding the red korean peninsula that is illuminated by the communist star . the colors of the north korean flag – red , white , and blue – are considered national colors and symbolize respectively : revolutionary traditions ; purity , strength , and dignity ; and sovereignty , peace , and friendship . . treatment . according to korea expert and scholar brian reynolds myers , in north korea the flag of the workers ' party of korea and the kpa supreme commander 's personal standard are treated with more reverence than the north korean national flag , with the supreme commander 's flag ranking highest among the three in terms of reverence . . history . background . in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the korean peninsula was ruled by a monarchy known as the korean empire . during this time , the korean monarchy used a flag now known as the taegukgi as its national flag . it featured a yin-yang symbol surrounded by four trigrams . the taegukgi flag remained as the symbol of korea after imperial japan occupied and annexed the korean peninsula in 1910 . in 1945 , world war ii ended with an allied victory and japan was defeated . per allied terms , japan relinquished its control over the korean peninsula , with the soviet union occupying the northern half of korea and the u.s . occupying the southern half of it . the northern portion of the korean peninsula became a socialist republic supported by the soviet union following the korean independence movement in 1945 , the taegukgi was re-adopted there . . inception . in 1947 the soviets communicated via major general to discuss whether the taegukgi flag should be kept for newly founded north korea . vice chairman of the provisional people 's committee for north korea kim tu-bong was in favor of keeping the taegukgi . however , for lebedev , the concept of chinese philosophy , which the design of the taegukgi is based on , appear to him as medieval superstition , so he wanted to change to a new flag . kim yielded and a few months later the design for the new flag was dictated from moscow , although it is not known who the soviet official was that designed the flag . before its formal adoption , the taegukgi remained in official use . north korea : a guide to economic and political developments by ian jeffries the design of the flag was disclosed , along with a draft constitution , on 1 may 1948 . on 10 july 1948 the new flag was approved by the provisional people 's assembly of north korea . the following month kim , who formerly supported the traditional design , wrote a reasoned text on the establishing of the new national flag and the abolition of taegukgi . thereby he explained the decision to adopt a new flag against the wishes of those who favored the old one . in terms of north korean official texts , kim 's account is unequivocally frank in acknowledging dissenting public opinion . in 1957 , kim tu-bong was purged by kim il-sung who by that time had erected a cult of personality . any mention of the use of taegukgi was removed from texts and it was doctored out of photographs on the orders of kim il-sung who sought to monopolize north korean history to serve him and his regime . contemporary official north korean accounts now posit that the new flag of north korea as personally designed by kim il-sung . . use in propaganda . a north korean national flag flies from a tall flagpole , which is located at kijong-dong , on the north korean side of the military demarcation line within the korean demilitarized zone . the flag-pole is tall . potts , rolf . korea 's no-man's-land . salon , february 3 , 1999 . historical and other flags . there are several other known flags to be in use in north korea by its regime . there are flags for the korean people 's army ( kpa ) , and its two subdivisions the korean people 's air force and korean people 's navy , which follow a common design but with different colors ( blue and white for the north korean navy and dark blue and light blue for the north korean air force ) . there is also a flag of the ruling workers ' party of korea that is modeled on similar communist party flags , and a flag for the supreme commander of the kpa used by kim jong-un , which has the supreme commander 's arms on a red field . kpa guards units use the same common design but with the national arms in the center of the obverse field . file : flag of the king of joseon.svg ( 1882-1907 ) file : 朝鮮國王王旗.png ( 1882-1907 ) file : 朴泳孝作 朝鮮國旗.jpg ( september 1882 ) file:1882년 11월작 태극기.jpg taegukgi ( november 1882 ) file : flag of korea ( 1893 ) . png taegukgi ( 1910 ) file : korean flag 1944 united states stamp detail.jpg older version of the taegukgi on a u.s . postage stamp ( 1944 ) file : flag of japan ( 1870–1999 ) . svg the flag of japanese korea used during the japanese occupation of korea ( 1911-1945 ) . file : flag of the people 's committee of korea.svg the flag of the people 's republic of korea from august 1945 to february 1946 . file : flag of the soviet union ( 1936-1955 ) . svg the flag of the soviet union , used in northern korea during the soviet civil administration from october 1945 to september 1948 . file : provisional people 's committee for north korea flag.svg the flag of the provisional people 's committee for north korea ( february 1946 & ndash ; july 1948 ) file : flag of north korea.svg north korean flag from 1948 to present file : flag of the workers ' party of korea.svg the flag of the workers ' party of korea file : flag of the workers ' party of korea vertical display.svg the proper way to vertically display the korean workers ' party flag file : standard of the supreme commander of the korean people 's army.svg the personal standard of the kpa supreme commander file : flag of the korean people 's army -v.svg the flag of the korean people 's army ( 1992 & ndash ; 1993 ) file : flag of the korean people 's army ground force.svg the flag of the north korean army file : flag of the korean people 's navy.svg the flag of the north korean navy file : guards ensign of north korea.svg the north korean guards ensign file : naval ensign of north korea -vector.svg the north korean naval ensign file : nkaf flag.svg the flag of the north korean air force file : unification flag of korea.svg the unification flag of north and south korea . see also . list of north korean flags korean unification flag flag of south korea . references . works cited . . further reading . . external links .