Test card

technical details . test cards typically contain a set of patterns to enable television cameras and receivers to be adjusted to show the picture correctly ( see smpte color bars ) . most modern test cards include a set of calibrated colour bars which will produce a characteristic pattern of '' dot landings '' on a vectorscope , allowing chroma and tint to be precisely adjusted between generations of videotape or network feeds . smpte bars—and several other test cards—include analog black ( a flat waveform at 7.5 ire , or the ntsc setup level ) , full white ( 100 ire ) , and a '' sub-black '' , or '' blacker-than-black '' ( at 0 ire ) , which represents the lowest low-frequency transmission voltage permissible in ntsc broadcasts ( though the negative excursions of the colourburst signal may go below 0 ire ) . between the colour bars and proper adjustment of brightness and contrast controls to the limits of perception of the first sub-black bar , an analogue receiver ( or other equipment such as vtrs ) can be adjusted to provide impressive fidelity . they are also used in the broader context of video displays for concerts and live events . there are a variety of different test patterns , each testing a specific technical parameter : gradient monotone bars for testing brightness and colour ; a crosshatch pattern for aspect ratio , alignment , focus , and convergence ; and a single-pixel border for overscan and dimensions . . history . image : indian head test pattern labeled.png thumb 260px the famous rca indian-head test pattern used mainly in north america from 1940 to the 1970s with its elements labeled , describing the use of each element in aligning a black & white analog tv receiver . formerly a common sight , test cards are now only rarely seen outside of television studios , post-production , and distribution facilities . in particular , they are no longer intended to assist viewers in calibration of television sets . several factors have led to their demise for this purpose : modern microcontroller-controlled analogue televisions rarely if ever need adjustment , so test cards are much less important than previously . likewise , modern cameras and camcorders seldom need adjustment for technical accuracy , though they are often adjusted to compensate for scene light levels , and for various artistic effects . use of digital interconnect standards , such as ccir 601 and smpte 292m , which operate without the non-linearities and other issues inherent to analogue broadcasting , do not introduce colour shifts or brightness changes ; thus the requirement to detect and compensate for them using this reference signal has been virtually eliminated . ( compare with the obsolescence of stroboscopes as used to adjust the speed of record players . ) on the other hand , digital test signal generators do include test signals which are intended to stress the digital interface , and many sophisticated generators allow the insertion of jitter , bit errors , and other pathological conditions that can cause a digital interface to fail . likewise , use of digital broadcasting standards such as the dvb and atsc eliminates the issues introduced by modulation and demodulation of analogue signals . test cards including large circles were used to confirm the linearity of the set 's deflection systems . as solid-state components replaced vacuum tubes in receiver deflection circuits , linearity adjustments were less frequently required ( few newer sets have user-adjustable '' vert size '' and '' vert lin '' controls , for example ) . in lcd and other deflectionless displays , the linearity is a function of the display panel 's manufacturing quality ; for the display to work , the tolerances will already be far tighter than human perception . in developed country such as australia , canada , the united kingdom , and the united states , the financial imperatives of commercial television broadcasting mean that air-time is now typically filled with programmes and commercials ( such as infomercials ) 24 hours a day , and non-commercial broadcasters have to match this . in north america , most test cards such as the famous indian-head test pattern of the 1950s and 1960s have long been relegated to history . the smpte color bars occasionally turn up , but with most north american broadcasters now following a 24-hour schedule , these too have become a rare sight . for custom-designed video installations , such as led displays in buildings or at live events , some test images are custom-made to fit the specific size and shape of the setup in question . these custom test images can also be an opportunity for the technicians to hide inside jokes for the crew to see while installing equipment for a show . . monoscope . rather than physical test cards , which had to be televised using a camera , television stations often used a special purpose camera tube which had the test pattern painted on the inside screen of the tube . each tube was only capable of generating the one test image , hence it was called a monoscope . monoscopes were similar in construction to an ordinary cathode ray tube ( crt ) , only instead of displaying an image on its screen it scanned a built-in image . the monoscope contained a formed metal target in place of the phosphor coating at its '' screen '' end and as the electron beam scanned the target , rather than displaying an image , a varying electrical signal was produced generating a video signal from the etched pattern . monoscope tubes had the advantage over test cards that a full tv camera was not needed , and the image was always properly framed and in focus . they fell out of use in the 1960s as they were not able to produce colour images . file : monoscope.jpg a monoscope . file : monoscopecu.jpg close-up of the test-card image from a monoscope . test patterns for photocopiers . a lesser-known kind of test pattern is used for the calibration of photocopiers . photocopier test patterns are physical sheets that are photocopied , with the difference in the resulting photocopy revealing any telltale deviations or defects in the machine 's ability to copy . in numismatics . television has had such an impact in today 's life that it has been the main motif for numerous collectors ' coins and medals . one of the most recent examples is the 50 years of television commemorative coin minted on 9 march 2005 , in austria . the obverse of the coin shows a '' test pattern '' , while the reverse shows several milestones in the history of television . in popular culture . the philips pm5544 is widely recognized as one of the iconic popular culture symbols of the 1980s and 1990s . numerous novelty and collectible items has been patterned after the famous test card , including wall clocks , bedsheets , wristwatches , and clothing . the test card f features throughout 2006-07 tv sci-fi detective series life on mars . . test card music . until september 1955 the bbc used live playing 78 rpm lps as an audio background to the test cards . after that date they switched to using recorded music on tape . the following year the bbc began to build up its own library of specially produced music for the half hour tapes - initially three tunes in similar style followed by an identification sign ( the three notes b-b-c played on celesta ) . itv ( which began its first trade transmissions in 1957 ) continued to use commercially available recordings until the late 1960s , when it also began to make specially produced tapes . neville , robert . a history of test card music for copyright reasons much of the music was recorded by light music orchestras in france and germany , though sometimes by british musicians or top international session players using pseudonyms such as the oscar brandenburg orchestra ( an amalgamation of neil richardson , alan moorhouse and johnny pearson ) or the stuttgart studio orchestra . 'royal daffodil ' by gordon langford performed by the stuttgart studio orchestra , conducted by ralph elman other composers and bandleaders commissioned for this type of work included gordon langford , ernest tomlinson , roger roger , heinz kiessling , werner tautz , frank chacksfield and syd dale . later , channel 4 used uk library lps from publishers like kpm , joseph weinberger and ready music . currie , tony . 'the girl , the doll , the music ' ( 1998 ) , essay included as the notes for test card classics , chandos cd fbcd 2000 . see also . blue only mode color chart list of bbc test cards test card f webdriver torso , youtube account used for automated performance testing . references . external links . the test card circle details of the uk 's trade test transmissions including the history of the bbc and ita test cards , a look at the music used and full details about the trade test colour films shown from the late fifties to 1973 . mire.project – street art work about television test patterns tv testbild – very informative , but in german language only testvid test card video sequences – synthetic video test card sequences with moving elements burosch audiovideo technology – advanced hdtv test patterns the test card gallery television test cards , tuning signals , idents and clocks barney wol 's website has details of the development of uk testcards f , j and w 625.uk.com flash files – high quality adobe flash examples of almost all british test cards and station idents ( the test cards are at the bottom of the page and include c , d , f , j , w and etp-1 ) russian test cards nostalgia-tv : television testikuva – test cards in finland , in finnish language only maximum testcardosity test cards ' resources , history and galleries pembers ' ponderings – features detailed technical information of various test cards from the 30-line era to the present day , inclusive of a collection of various european test cards from 1967 to 1976 . japanese monochrome test cards – picture gallery of monochrome test cards used in japan in the 1950s , in japanese language only . dnp electronics standard test charts – features test charts from eia and other manufacturers a few of which were also broadcast on tv in various countries . history of one monoscope crt from ita crystal palace ( s . london ) cs : monoskop