Brutus of Troy

historia brittonum . some have suggested that attributing the origin of 'britain ' to the latin 'brutus ' may be ultimately derived from isidore of seville 's popular 7th-century work etymologiae , in which it was speculated that the name of britain comes from bruti , on the basis that the britons were , in the eyes of that author , brutes , or savages . a more detailed story , set before the foundation of rome , follows , in which brutus is the grandson or great grandson of aeneas — a legend that was perhaps inspired by isidore 's spurious etymology and blends it with the christian , pseudo-historical , '' frankish table of nations '' tradition that emerged in the early medieval european scholarly world ( actually of 6th century ad byzantine origin , and not frankish , according to historian walter goffart ) goffart , walter , '' the supposedly 'frankish ' table of nations : an edition and study , frühmittelalterliche studies 17 , 1983 , pp . 98–130 . and attempted to trace the peoples of the known world ( as well as legendary figures , such as the trojan house of aeneas ) back to biblical ancestors . summerfield , thea , '' filling the gap : brutus in the historia brittonum , anglo-saxon chronicle ms f , and geoffrey of monmouth '' , in : dresvina , juliana and sparks , nicholas ( eds . ) , the medieval chronicle vii , rodopi , amsterdam/new york , 2011 , p . 85-102 charles-edwards , t . m . , wales and the britons , 350-1064 , oxford , 2013 , p . 439 ; 441 ; 454 . wadden , patrick , '' the frankish table of nations in insular historiography '' , cambrian medieval celtic studies 72 ( winter 2016 ) , pp . 1–31 . josephus and modern scholarship ( 1937–1980 ) by louis h . feldman 1984 , page 893 supposedly following roman sources such as livy and virgil , the historia tells how aeneas settled in italy after the trojan war , and how his son ascanius founded alba longa , one of the precursors of rome . ascanius married , and his wife became pregnant . in a variant version , the father is silvius , who is identified as either the second son of aeneas , previously mentioned in the historia , or as the son of ascanius . a magician , asked to predict the child 's future , said it would be a boy and that he would be the bravest and most beloved in italy . enraged , ascanius had the magician put to death . the mother died in childbirth . the boy , named brutus , later accidentally killed his father with an arrow and was banished from italy . after wandering among the islands of the tyrrhenian sea and through gaul , where he founded the city of tours , brutus eventually came to britain , named it after himself , and filled it with his descendants . his reign is synchronised to the time the high priest eli was judge in israel , and when the ark of the covenant was taken by the philistines . historia brittonum 7 , 10-11 a variant version of the historia brittonum makes brutus the son of ascanius 's son silvius , and traces his genealogy back to ham , son of noah . morris 1980 , p . 19 . another chapter traces brutus 's genealogy differently , making him the great-grandson of the legendary roman king numa pompilius , who was himself a son of ascanius , and tracing his descent from noah 's son japheth . historia brittonum 18 these christianising traditions conflict with the classical trojan genealogies , relating the trojan royal family to greek gods . yet another brutus , son of hisicion , son of alanus the first european , also traced back across many generations to japheth , is referred to in the historia brittonum . this brutus 's brothers were francus , alamanus and romanus , also ancestors of significant european nations . historia brittonum 17-18 . historia regum britanniae . geoffrey of monmouth 's account tells much the same story , but in greater detail . geoffrey of monmouth , historia regum britanniae 1.3–18 , 2.1 in this version , brutus is explicitly the grandson , rather than son , of ascanius ; his father is ascanius ' son silvius . the magician who predicts great things for the unborn brutus also foretells he will kill both his parents . he does so , in the same manner described in the historia brittonum , and is banished . travelling to greece , he discovers a group of trojans enslaved there . he becomes their leader , and after a series of battles they defeat the greek king pandrasus by attacking his camp at night after capturing the guards . he takes him hostage and forces him to let his people go . he is given pandrasus 's daughter ignoge in marriage , and ships and provisions for the voyage , and sets sail . the trojans land on a deserted island and discover an abandoned temple to diana . after performing the appropriate ritual , brutus falls asleep in front of the goddess 's statue and is given a vision of the land where he is destined to settle , an island in the western ocean inhabited only by a few giants . after some adventures in north africa and a close encounter with the sirens , brutus discovers another group of exiled trojans living on the shores of the tyrrhenian sea , led by the prodigious warrior corineus . in gaul , corineus provokes a war with goffarius pictus , king of aquitaine , after hunting in the king 's forests without permission . brutus 's nephew turonus dies in the fighting , and the city of tours is founded where he is buried . the trojans win most of their battles but are conscious that the gauls have the advantage of numbers , so go back to their ships and sail for britain , then called albion . they land on '' '' — '' the sea-coast of totnes '' . they meet the giant descendants of albion and defeat them . brutus renames the island after himself and becomes its first king . corineus becomes ruler of cornwall , which is named after him . cornwall is given a distinct identity predating england , scotland or wales . cornishmen continued to regard themselves as descendants of corineus until well into the early modern period . they are harassed by the giants during a festival , but kill all of them but their leader , the largest giant goemagot , who is saved for a wrestling match against corineus . corineus throws him over a cliff to his death . brutus then founds a city on the banks of the river thames , which he calls troia nova , or new troy . the name is in time corrupted to trinovantum , and the city is later called london . the name trinovantum , supposedly derived from troia nova , is derived from the trinovantes , a people of british iron age . he creates laws for his people and rules for twenty-four years . after his death he is buried in trinovantum , and the island is divided between his three sons : locrinus ( england ) , albanactus ( scotland ) and kamber ( wales ) . legacy . image : brutusstonetotnes.jpg thumb the brutus stone in totnes early translations and adaptations of geoffrey 's historia , such as wace 's norman french roman de brut , layamon 's middle english brut , were named after brutus , and the word brut came to mean a chronicle of british history . '' a chronicle of british history from the mythical brutus downward . '' etymology : '' m.welsh brut , mod.w . brud , in the names of the welsh chronicles of british history '' one of several middle welsh adaptations was called the brut y brenhinedd ( '' chronicle of the kings '' ) . brut y tywysogion ( '' chronicle of the princes '' ) , a major chronicle for the welsh rulers from the 7th century to loss of independence , is a purely historical work containing no legendary material but the title reflects the influence of geoffrey 's work and , in one sense , can be seen as a '' sequel '' to it . early chroniclers of britain , such as alfred of beverley , nicholas trivet and giraldus cambrensis began their histories of britain with brutus . the foundation myth of brutus having settled in britain was still considered as genuine history during the early modern period , for example holinshed 's chronicles ( 1577 ) considers the brutus myth to be factual . the 18th-century english poet hildebrand jacob wrote an epic poem , brutus the trojan , founder of the british empire , about him , following in the tradition of the roman foundation epic the aeneid . brutus is an important character in the book series the troy game by sara douglass . geoffrey 's historia says that brutus and his followers landed at totnes in devon . a stone on fore street in totnes , known as the '' brutus stone '' , commemorates this . notes . references . translation of historia brittonum from j . a . giles , six old english chronicles , london : henry g . bohn 1848 . full text from fordham university . john morris ( ed ) , nennius : arthurian period sources vol 8 , phillimore , 1980 geoffrey of monmouth , the history of the kings of britain , translated by lewis thorpe , penguin , 1966 henry lewis ( ed . ) , brut dingestow ( university of wales press , 1942 ) . the best-known middle welsh adaptation . original text with introduction and notes , in welsh . the british history of geoffrey of monmouth , translated by aaron thompson , revised and corrected by j . a . giles , 1842 bulfinch 's mythology . external links .