T-symmetry

macroscopic phenomena . the second law of thermodynamics . image : teeter-totter.png frame a toy called the teeter-totter illustrates , in cross-section , the two aspects of time reversal invariance . when set into motion atop a pedestal ( rocking side to side , as in the image ) , the figure oscillates for a very long time . the toy is engineered to minimize friction and illustrate the reversibility of newton 's laws of motion . however , the mechanically stable state of the toy is when the figure falls down from the pedestal into one of arbitrarily many positions . this is an illustration of the law of increase of entropy through boltzmann 's identification of the logarithm of the number of states with the entropy . daily experience shows that t-symmetry does not hold for the behavior of bulk materials . of these macroscopic laws , most notable is the second law of thermodynamics . many other phenomena , such as the relative motion of bodies with friction , or viscous motion of fluids , reduce to this , because the underlying mechanism is the dissipation of usable energy ( for example , kinetic energy ) into heat . the question of whether this time-asymmetric dissipation is really inevitable has been considered by many physicists , often in the context of maxwell 's demon . the name comes from a thought experiment described by james clerk maxwell in which a microscopic demon guards a gate between two halves of a room . it only lets slow molecules into one half , only fast ones into the other . by eventually making one side of the room cooler than before and the other hotter , it seems to reduce the entropy of the room , and reverse the arrow of time . many analyses have been made of this ; all show that when the entropy of room and demon are taken together , this total entropy does increase . modern analyses of this problem have taken into account claude e . shannon 's relation between information entropy . many interesting results in modern computing are closely related to this problem & mdash ; reversible computing , quantum computing and physical limits to computing , are examples . these seemingly metaphysical questions are today , in these ways , slowly being converted into hypotheses of the physical sciences . the current consensus hinges upon the boltzmann-shannon identification of the logarithm of phase space volume with the negative of information theory , and hence to entropy . in this notion , a fixed initial state of a macroscopic system corresponds to relatively low entropy because the coordinates of the molecules of the body are constrained . as the system evolves in the presence of dissipation , the molecular coordinates can move into larger volumes of phase space , becoming more uncertain , and thus leading to increase in entropy . big bang . one resolution to irreversibility is to say that the constant increase of entropy we observe happens only because of the initial state of our universe . other possible states of the universe ( for example , a universe at heat death equilibrium ) would actually result in no increase of entropy . in this view , the apparent t-asymmetry of our universe is a problem in cosmology : why did the universe start with a low entropy ? this view , supported by cosmological observation ( such as the isotropy of the cosmic microwave background , connect this problem to the question of initial conditions of the universe . black holes . the laws of gravity seem to be time reversal invariant in classical mechanics ; however , specific solutions need not be . an object can cross through the event horizon of a black hole from the outside , and then fall rapidly to the central region where our understanding of physics breaks down . since within a black hole the forward light-cone is directed towards the center and the backward light-cone is directed outward , it is not even possible to define time-reversal in the usual manner . the only way anything can escape from a black hole is as hawking radiation . the time reversal of a black hole would be a hypothetical object known as a white hole . from the outside they appear similar . while a black hole has a beginning and is inescapable , a white hole has an ending and can not be entered . the forward light-cones of a white hole are directed outward ; and its backward light-cones are directed towards the center . the event horizon of a black hole may be thought of as a surface moving outward at the local speed of light and is just on the edge between escaping and falling back . the event horizon of a white hole is a surface moving inward at the local speed of light and is just on the edge between being swept outward and succeeding in reaching the center . they are two different kinds of horizons—the horizon of a white hole is like the horizon of a black hole turned inside-out . the modern view of black hole irreversibility is to relate it to the second law of thermodynamics , since black holes are viewed as thermodynamic objects . for example , according to the gauge–gravity duality conjecture , all microscopic processes in a black hole are reversible , and only the collective behavior is irreversible , as in any other macroscopic , thermal system . kinetic consequences : detailed balance and onsager reciprocal relations . in physical and chemical kinetics , t-symmetry of the mechanical microscopic equations implies two important laws : the principle of detailed balance and the onsager reciprocal relations . t-symmetry of the microscopic description together with its kinetic consequences are called microscopic reversibility . effect of time reversal on some variables of classical physics . . even . classical variables that do not change upon time reversal include : : \vec x , position of a particle in three-space : \vec a , acceleration of the particle : \vec f , force on the particle : e , energy of the particle : v , electric potential ( voltage ) : \vec e , electric field : \vec d , electric displacement : \rho , density of electric charge : \vec p , electric polarization : energy density of the electromagnetic field : t_ , are characterized by a multiplicative quantum number , sometimes called the t-parity . time reversal transformation for fermions in quantum field theories can be represented by an 8-component spinor in which the above-mentioned t-parity can be a complex number with unit radius . the cpt invariance is not a theorem but a better-to-have property in these class of theories . time reversal of the known dynamical laws . particle physics codified the basic laws of dynamics into the standard model . this is formulated as a quantum field theory that has cpt symmetry , i.e . , the laws are invariant under simultaneous operation of time reversal , parity and charge conjugation . however , time reversal itself is seen not to be a symmetry ( this is usually called cp violation ) . there are two possible origins of this asymmetry , one through the mixing of different flavours of quarks in their weak decays , the second through a direct cp violation in strong interactions . the first is seen in experiments , the second is strongly constrained by the non-observation of the edm of a neutron . time reversal violation is unrelated to the second law of thermodynamics , because due to the conservation of the cpt symmetry , the effect of time reversal is to rename particles as antiparticles and vice versa . thus the second law of thermodynamics is thought to originate in the initial conditions in the universe . time reversal of noninvasive measurements . strong measurements ( both classical and quantum ) are certainly disturbing , causing asymmetry due to the second law of thermodynamics . however , weak measurement should not disturb the evolution so they are expected to be time-symmetric . surprisingly , it is true only in classical physics but not quantum , even in a thermodynamically invariant equilibrium state . this type of asymmetry is independent of cpt symmetry but has not yet been confirmed experimentally due to extreme conditions of the checking proposal .