Victor Lewis-Smith

associated rediffusion productions limited . in 1990 lewis-smith founded a film , television and radio production company called associated rediffusion productions limited , having acquired the rights to the name and logo of the original company , associated-rediffusion . . as executive producer . on 1 january 2021 , the sky documentaries channel aired '' steve mcqueen : the lost movie '' , presented by david letterman . on 9 february 2020 , itv aired '' the itv food & drink awards '' presented by stephen fry . lewis-smith 's documentary , the undiscovered peter cook , was the first in a series transmitted on bbc four in november 2016 . in december 2018 , lewis-smith made three more documentaries in the style of the undiscovered peter cook for sky arts , this time concerning peter sellers , kenneth williams and tony hancock . lewis-smith was executive producer of a series of controversial documentaries presented by keith allen for channel 4 . this included biographies of nick griffin , then leader of the british national party , lottery winner michael carroll , the tv cook keith floyd ( who died 2 hours before the programme was transmitted ) , and the '' child prodigy '' lauren harries . lewis-smith is executive producer of a series of more than 60 tv programmes called 21st century bach - the complete organ works . the series started on bbc two in june 2003 , and has since aired on sky arts . from 2010 , lewis-smith was the executive producer of in confidence , a series of one-to-one interviews , featuring leading figures from the arts . presented by laurie taylor , this production for sky arts was well received by television reviewers , with the daily telegraph noting that “ in an age of soapy soundbites , sky art ’ s hour-long interview strand is a serious attempt to delve deeper into its subjects . ” guests included peter maxwell davies , lily allen , damien hirst , tracey emin , richard dawkins , cleo laine , christopher hitchens , peter hitchens , kathy burke , stephen fry , andre previn , jackie mason , and danny baker . 72 programmes over four series were transmitted . television . lewis-smith has appeared in a number of his productions for british television : in 1989 , he wrote and presented eighteen episodes of buy-gones for club x on channel 4 , and contributed sketch scripts for central 's spitting image up your arts ( compiled from his contributions to channel 4 show club x ; 1992 ) inside victor lewis-smith ( 1993 ) ( in which he is a virtually unseen character ) . this bbc2 series purported to be based within the frank bough memorial zip injury wing of st . reith 's , a bbc hospital for its fallen stars . the series takes place inside the head of a man completely saturated with television , and suffering from a hyperactive spleen . tv offal on channel 4 ( pilot 1997 ; series 1998 ) tv offal prime cuts on channel 4 ; 1999 ads infinitum for bbc two ( pilot 1996 ; two series , 1998 and 2000 ) z for fake for bbc two in 2001 ( 8 programmes ) the vicious circle for channel 5 ( uk ) in 2002 here 's a piano i prepared earlier for bbc four ( 2005 , narrator and producer ) jake on the box for bbc four ( 2006 , narrator and producer ) . radio and recordings . in 1989 he made his first programme for bbc radio 1 , with producer john walters , under the pseudonym steve nage , parodying the simon bates-style mid-atlantic nasal delivery of radio 1 disc jockeys of the time . lewis-smith 's company associated-rediffusion made two series of the comedy show victor lewis-smith for bbc radio 1 , for which he won a best comedy radio programme award in the 1990 british comedy awards . these programmes are noted for his prank calls which influenced kayvan novak and sacha baron cohen . lewis-smith 's prank calls attracted some controversy at the time of their first broadcast : in the sunday times on 15 april 1990 , paul donovan opined that lewis-smith 's hoaxes were '' repugnant '' . however , the guardians lucy mangan described some of the recordings as being '' touched with genius '' . writing about lewis-smith 's hoax phone calls in the times higher education , sally feldman observed that '' he chooses his victims carefully , pricking the pompous and the powerful in the very best traditions of satire . his favourite target is the media , his pranks intended to expose their smugness , their laziness and their gullibility . '' . writing . in the 1980s lewis-smith took over from julie burchill in writing weekly columns for time out magazine . he also wrote weekly columns during the same period for the short-lived sunday correspondent and the mail on sunday ( where he often substituted for burchill ) , as well as esquire magazine . he has also written as food critic for the independent , and was restaurant critic for harpers & queen magazine from 1995 to 1998 as well as the guardian , where he combined comedy writing and food criticism to help create the now commonplace modern genre of amusing food writing . in 1992 , lewis-smith began a long association with the london evening standard , contributing daily television reviews along with other writers , as well as occasional restaurant reviews and travel articles . it was announced in june 2007 that he would be retiring from his daily television column . since 1993 , he has been compiler of the '' funny old world '' column of bizarre news items in private eye , where he replaced christopher logue . in 2011 , he was living in cumbria and never visited the magazine 's london office . he wrote a weekly page for the daily mirror for some years until 2003 . from autumn 2004 to april 2005 he was the resident restaurant critic of the guardian 's saturday magazine supplement . his books include buy-gones and inside the magic rectangle , a collection of his early evening standard tv reviews and tv reviews , a collection of his evening standard tv reviews since 2000 ( published in 2011 ) . honorary doctorate . he received an honorary doctorate ( d.litt . ) from the university of westminster in november 2008 . . legal . in june 2006 , the television chef gordon ramsay , his production company and his producer accepted an out-of-court settlement of £75,000 from associated newspapers , after an article in london 's evening standard written by lewis-smith alleged that ramsay had faked television scenes and installed an incompetent chef . ramsay said at the time , '' we have never done anything in a cynical , fake way . '' however , a year later , channel 4 admitted that a scene in another of ramsay 's programmes had been faked , and apologised to viewers . on 28 july 2006 , hypnotist paul mckenna successfully sued the daily mirror for libel over articles written by lewis-smith from 1997 alleging that mckenna had deliberately misled the public with a fake phd , having obtained the qualification from the non-accredited , lasalle university , in the united states whose principal had since been imprisoned for making misleading claims about the status of degrees he handed out to candidates . he later accepted damages of £25,000 . . references .