River Mersey

environment . water quality in the mersey was severely affected by industrialisation , and in 1985 , the mersey basin campaign was established to improve water quality and encourage waterside regeneration . in 2002 , oxygen levels that could support fish along the entire length were recorded for the first time since industry began on the mersey . in 2009 it was announced that the river is '' cleaner than at any time since the industrial revolution '' and is '' now considered one of the cleanest rivers in the uk '' . . sediment pollution . persistent organic and mercury ( hg ) pollution contained within sediments of the mersey estuary have been evaluated by british geological survey . mersey river sediments from outer to inner estuary ( alfred dock to widnes ) contain a variety of common organic pollutants , including polyaromatic hydrocarbons ( pah ) with concentrations which fall in the middle of the range of similarly industrial-urban river-estuaries . the distribution of individual pah compounds suggests that the mersey has contaminants mainly derived from combustion sources such as vehicle exhaust as well as coal burning . the distribution of the toxic heavy metal mercury ( hg ) has been assessed by measuring 203 sediments taken from shallow cores ( 0.4 – 1.6 m ) extracted from both the main river and adjacent salt marshes . the average amount of hg in the mersey was found to be 2 & nbsp ; mg/kg with the highest amounts of 5 & nbsp ; mg/kg occurring below the surface at concentrations harmful to sediment dwelling biota . the vertical rise and fall in hg pollution observed at four mersey salt marshes indicated a decline in metal pollution since the 1980s . . fauna . salmon have returned to the river and have been seen jumping at woolston and howley weirs between september and november . salmon parr and smolt have been caught in the mersey 's tributaries , the river goyt and the river bollin . gray seal from liverpool bay occasionally venture into the estuary along with bottlenose dolphin and harbour porpoise . otter tracks have been observed near fiddlers ferry . other fish in the estuary include cod , whiting , dab , plaice and flounder . spiny dogfish , mackerel and tope feed on shrimp and whitebait in the estuary . for ducks , the estuary is important to common shelducks and eurasian teal . waders include redshank , black-tailed godwit , dunlin , pintail and turnstone . . navigation . capt . william gill of the isle of man steam packet company , charted a safe , navigable channel ( the victoria channel ) through the treacherous uncharted waters of the estuary in 1836 . since the construction of the manchester ship canal , large commercial vessels do not usually navigate the estuary beyond garston on the north bank , or the locks into the ship canal at eastham . deep-water channels are maintained to both . until the early 20th century , commercial traffic bound for further upstream carried cargo in large flat-bottomed sailing barges known as mersey flats to howley wharf in warrington and ( via the sankey canal ) to st helens . motor barges delivered to riverside factories at warrington until at least the 1970s , but nowadays only pleasure craft and yachts use the upper estuary and the tidal river where a number of sailing clubs are based . on most high tides , seagoing yachts with masts raised can navigate as far upstream as penketh – about downstream of warrington – where there is a small marina accessed via a river lock . although river craft can continue upstream to howley weir , there are no landing or mooring facilities . before construction of the ship canal , a lock bypassing howley weir allowed navigation further upstream via a straight '' cut '' avoiding a meander around woolston . recreation . the mersey valley countryside warden service manages local nature reserves such as chorlton ees and sale water park recreational sites and provides an educational service along the mersey from manchester to the manchester ship canal . it is possible to canoe on parts of the river between stockport and carrington . liverpool sailing club located at garston coastal park on the north bank of the estuary has a 1000 feet slipway giving access to river for water sports . the wooded suburban stretch of the river from above howley weir to woolston is also used for recreational and competitive rowing , operated from the warrington rowing club . angling has become popular on some stretches of the river as fish such as perch , barbel , grayling , carp , roach , chub , trout , pike , bream and dace have been caught . warrington anglers association have fishing rights on a large stretch of the river through most of warrington . prince albert angling society also have a small stretch near rixton . the river has also faced problems regarding the poaching of fish despite a strict 'catch and release ' policy imposed on anglers for ecological reasons which applies to most uk waterways . . in popular culture . the river gave its name to beat music , developed by bands from liverpool , notably the beatles . in 1965 it was the subject of the top-ten hit single '' ferry cross the mersey '' by gerry and the pacemakers , and a ferry cross the mersey ( film ) . the liverpool poets published an anthology of their work , the mersey sound , in 1967 . the river 's stretch through manchester is the main theme in the stone roses song '' mersey paradise '' , included on the b-side of the 12 '' version of their 1989 hit '' she bangs the drums '' , and on their 1992 compilation album turns into stone . the tall ships ' races has visited the mersey on four occasions , first in 1984 , then in 1992 , 2008 and 2012 . the traditional song “ leaving of liverpool ” mentions the river in it ’ s opening line . . religious significance . the mersey is considered sacred by british hindus , and worshipped in a similar way to the river ganges . ganesh chaturthi are held annually on the river , in which clay figures representing the hindu ganesha , the elephant deity riding a mouse , are submerged in the river from a ferry boat . followers throw flowers , pictures and coins into the river . . tributaries . from its lowest point , moving upstream , confluences and tributaries of the mersey catchment include : the birket river fender prenton brook arrowe brook greasby brook newton brook river dibbin clatter brook river gowy hornsmill brook river weaver river dane river wheelock river croco ram 's brook bowers brook sankey brook padgate brook morris brook spittle brook thelwall brook fishington brook river bollin river dean marsh brook red brook glaze brook/river glaze river irwell river medlock river roch river beal river spodden river irk river croal old eea brook stromford brook chorlton brook barrow brook gatley brook micker brook river tame river goyt river etherow river sett river kinder twigg brook . references . further reading . . external links . river mersey information howley lock '' salmon behaviour in the mersey catchment '' at environment-agency.gov.uk thorp , robert . mersey built : the role of merseyside in the american civil war . wilmington : vernon press , 2017 .