Atomic chess

history . in 1995 the german internet chess server ( gics ) introduced the game , based on rules one of its users collected from friends who played offline . it was soon after incorporated into the middle east wild internet server ( mewis ) and other smaller servers before being implemented at chess live and internet chess club in 2000 , free internet chess server in 2003 and lichess in 2015 . it was added to chess.com in late 2020 . rules and variations . rules of atomic chess are the same as standard chess with a few important differences concerning capturing , check , and winning conditions . capturing . in standard chess , the captured piece is removed from the board and the capturing piece takes its place . in atomic chess , a capture causes an '' explosion '' through which both pieces are removed from the board as well as all non-pawn pieces in the eight squares immediately surrounding the capture . pawns are removed only when capturing , captured directly , or promoted . in case of en passant , the capture is considered to take place on the sixth rank square where the capturing pawn would have landed . captures that result in the explosion of a player 's own king are illegal , and therefore a king can never capture any other piece . . check . threats to the king can be direct or indirect . putting a king in check is a direct attack and is sometimes called '' atomic check '' . an indirect threat occurs when a player threatens to explode the king by capturing an adjacent piece . in most variations of atomic chess , players must respond to being checked in a similar way they would in traditional chess—by moving the king out of check , blocking the check , or removing the checking piece—but an exception exists when the checked player can win the game by exploding the checking player 's king . as the king can not take another piece , it is possible to move the kings next to each other without a check occurring or to escape check . this possibility is often used by a losing player to defensively position his king next to his opponent 's at endgame , hoping for a draw . depending on the board setup , this strategy is sometimes optimal and the draw can be forced . at other times , a player can counter by forcing a win with a position such that a piece or pawn can be exploded next to their opponent 's king without blowing up their own king , or by forcing the opposing king away using their king and the remaining pieces on the board , which typically will result in a loss for the retreating king . the variant of atomic chess played at the internet chess club is one that does not enforce check at all , making legal any move , even one leaving the king to be captured directly in the next move . . winning conditions . in all variations of atomic chess , a player wins by exploding the king of the opposite color without exploding their own king . this is usually done by capturing a piece on a square adjacent to the opponent 's king or putting a queen next to the king which results in checkmate since a king can not take any piece . in variations that require a response to being checked , it is possible to checkmate an opponent to win the game , creating a situation in which a king is directly threatened and can not make a legal move . this is sometimes called '' atomic checkmate '' . it is likewise possible for the game to end in stalemate if a king is not directly threatened and no legal moves are possible . when typical rules of check are not enforced , victory is only attained via the explosion of the enemy king . in these variations without check , the king may be forced into check and thus capture through zugzwang . strategy . the first-move advantage enjoyed by white is much greater in this game than in standard chess . hence , it is a game imbalanced against black . although the advantage is significant , no attempts to prove a win for white have been successful . material sacrifices are more common in atomic chess than in chess . in the opening and middle-game it is common to offer a piece in order to seize an initiative enabled by the newly opened spaces captures create . . opening . white has the initiative in atomic chess , and many openings begin with a quick attempt to explode black 's d- , e- , or f-pawns in front of the black king . for this reason atomic openings are fraught with traps and black may have to respond precisely to defend . several common traps begin with 1.nf3 followed by ng5 or ne5 , forcing black to start with 1.f6 to maintain rough equality . games between experienced players follow more traditional opening principles such as piece , controlling , and winning . . endgame . as with atomic opening theory , a small amount of endgame theory and analyses have been published online by strong players . a common scenario in atomic endgames is to have two kings on adjacent squares . as a player can not intentionally blow up his or her own king , a king can never capture another piece , including another king . similarly , because a capture affects all adjacent squares , one king can not be captured directly if it means destruction of the other . moving one king towards the other is thus a strategy to achieve a draw . the player with the advantage must then maneuver into a position where a non-king piece can be captured that is adjacent to one king but not the other . if there is no piece that can be captured , the player with the advantage can promote two queens and force the opponent into zugzwang and therefore forcing the opponent 's king away from his king . creative use of zugzwang is a common tactic to force a win in these situations . the internet chess club variation of atomic chess ignores check completely , and thus leads to different outcomes in certain situations . for example , a king and rook vs . king endgame that would be a draw under normal circumstances can become a forced win on icc . see also . list of chess variants other chess variants based on explosions beirut chess stratomic . references . external links . vlasov 's atomic chess homepage - homepage created in the mid-1990s by a player involved with atomic 's earliest implementation at gics . its most prominent feature is its attempt an opening book that covers many of the most common openings and traps . however , several of the ideas have been improved upon or refuted in the years since publication . molten thinker atomic page - covers some tactical and endgame theory , including diagrams and puzzles . nick long 's atomic page - covers the game 's variations , its role on different chess servers , lists of strong players , and other historical information . leonard blackburn - several documents and videos on the rules of atomic , openings , sample games , and a detailed paper on endgames . the atomic rule page on lichess .