T-shirt

history . the t-shirt evolved from undergarments used in the 19th century . first , the one-piece union suit underwear was cut into separate top and bottom garments , with the top long enough to tuck under the waistband of the bottoms . with and without buttons , they were adopted by miners and stevedores during the late 19th century as a convenient covering for hot environments . as slip-on garments without buttons , the earliest t-shirt dates back to sometime between the 1898 spanish–american war and 1904 , when the cooper underwear company ran a magazine ad announcing a new product for bachelors . in the “ before ” photo , a man averts his eyes from the camera as if embarrassed ; he has lost all the buttons on his undershirt and has safety-pinned its flaps together . in the “ after ” photo , a virile gentleman sports a handlebar mustache , smokes a cigar and wears a “ bachelor undershirt ” stretchy enough to be pulled over the head . 'no safety pins — no buttons — no needle — no thread , ' ran the slogan aimed at men with no wives and no sewing skills . '' in 1913 , the u.s . navy first issued them as undergarments . these were a crew-necked , short-sleeved , white cotton undershirt to be worn under a uniform . it became common for sailors and marines in work parties , the early submarines , and tropical climates to remove their uniform jacket , wearing ( and soiling ) only the undershirt . harris , alice . the white t . harpercollins , 1996 . they soon became popular as a bottom layer of clothing for workers in various industries , including agriculture . the t-shirt was easily fitted , easily cleaned , and inexpensive , and for those reasons , it became the shirt of choice for young boys . boys ' shirts were made in various colors and patterns . the word t-shirt became part of american english by the 1920s , and appeared in the merriam-webster dictionary . by the great depression , the t-shirt was often the default garment to be worn when doing farm or ranch chores , as well as other times when modesty called for a torso covering but conditions called for lightweight fabrics . following world war ii , it was worn by navy men as undergarments and slowly became common to see veterans wearing their uniform trousers with their t-shirts as casual clothing . from marlon brando to kendall jenner , 27 of the best classic white t-shirts ever the shirts became even more popular in the 1950s after marlon brando wore one in a streetcar named desire , finally achieving status as fashionable , stand-alone , outerwear garments . often boys wore them while doing chores and playing outside , eventually opening up the idea of wearing them as general-purpose casual clothing . printed t-shirts were in limited use by 1942 when an air corps gunnery school t-shirt appeared on the cover of life magazine . in the 1960s , printed t-shirts gained popularity for self-expression as well for advertisements , protests , and souvenirs . current versions are available in many different designs and fabrics , and styles include crew-neck and v-neck shirts . t-shirts are among the most worn garments of clothing used today . t-shirts are especially popular with branding for companies or merchandise , as they are inexpensive to make and purchase . trends . t-shirts were originally worn as undershirts , but are now worn frequently as the only piece of clothing on the top half of the body , other than possibly a brassiere or , rarely , a waistcoat ( vest ) . t-shirts have also become a medium for self-expression and advertising , with any imaginable combination of words , art and photographs on display . sally larsen with neeli cherkovski , japlish , pomegranate art books , san francisco , 1993 , a t-shirt typically extends to the waist . variants of the t-shirt , such as the v-neck , have been developed . hip hop fashion calls for tall-t shirts which may extend down to the knees . a similar item is the t-shirt dress or t-dress , a dress t-shirt that can be worn without pants . long t-shirts are also sometimes worn by women as nightgowns . a 1990s trend in women 's clothing involved tight-fitting cropped t-shirt or crop tops short enough to reveal the midriff . another less popular trend is wearing a short-sleeved t-shirt of a contrasting color over a long-sleeved t-shirt , which is known as layering . t-shirts that are tight to the body are called fitted , tailored or baby doll t-shirts . the rise of online shopping in the early 2000s caused a proliferation of new t-shirt ideas and trends . while several brick-and-mortar chains included these items in their inventories , many of these shirts were pioneered by online start-ups . innovations included the flip-up t-shirt , which the wearer can lift and stretch over their head to display an interior print , and all-over print clothing . with the rise of social media and video sharing sites also came numerous tutorials on diy t-shirt projects . these videos typically provided instructions on how to modify an old shirt into a new , more fashionable form . expressive messages . since the 1960s , t-shirts have flourished as a form of personal expression . screen printed t-shirts have been a standard form of marketing for major american consumer products , such as coca-cola and mickey mouse , since the 1970s . it has also been commonly used to commemorate an event or to make a political or personal statement . since the 1990s , it has become common practice for companies of all sizes to produce t-shirts with their corporate logos or messages as part of their overall advertising campaigns . since the late 1980s and especially the 1990s , t-shirts with prominent designer-name logos have become popular , especially with teenagers and young adults . these garments allow consumers to flaunt their taste for designer brands in an inexpensive way , in addition to being decorative . examples of designer t-shirt branding include calvin klein , fubu , ralph lauren , american apparel , and the gap . these examples also include representations of rock bands , among other obscure pop-culture references . licensed t-shirts are also extremely popular . movie and tv t-shirts can have images of the actors , logos , and funny quotations from the movie or tv show . often , the most popular t-shirts are those that characters wore in the film itself ( e.g . , bubba gump from forrest gump and vote for pedro from napoleon dynamite ) . designer katharine hamnett , in the early 1980s , pioneered outsize t-shirts with large-print slogans . the early first decade of the 21st century saw the renewed popularity of t-shirts with slogans and designs with a strong inclination to the humorous and/or //upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/5/54/ironymens_01.jpg ironic . the trend has only increased later in this decade , embraced by celebrities , such as britney spears and paris hilton , and reflected back on them , too ( 'team aniston ' ) . the political and social statements that t-shirts often display have become , since the first decade of the 21st century , one of the reasons that they have so deeply permeated different levels of culture and society . the statements also may be found to be offensive , shocking , or pornographic to some . examples of t-shirt stores and designers known for using offensive and shocking messages include t-shirt hell and apollo braun . many different organizations have caught on to the statement-making trend , including chain and independent stores , websites , and schools . a popular phrase on the front of demonstrating the popularity of t-shirts among tourists is the humorous phrase '' i went to _____ and all i got was this lousy t-shirt . '' examples include '' my parents went to las vegas and all i got was this lousy t-shirt . '' t-shirt exchange is an activity where people trade the t-shirts that they are wearing . artists like bill beckley , glen baldridge and peter klashorst use t-shirts in their work . models such as victoria beckham and gisele bundchen wore t-shirts through the 2000s . paris fashion week 2014 featured a grunge style t-shirt . . decoration . in the early 1950s , several companies based in miami , florida , started to decorate t-shirts with different resort names and various characters . the first company was tropix togs , under founder sam kantor , in miami . they were the original licensee for walt disney characters in 1976 including mickey mouse and davy crockett . later , other companies expanded into the textile printing business , including sherry manufacturing company , also based in miami . sherry was founded in 1948 by its owner and founder quentin h . sandler as a screen printer of souvenir scarf 's to the souvenir resort market . shortly , the company evolved into one of the largest screen printed resort and licensed apparel companies in the united states . the company now ( 2018 ) runs automatic screen print presses and produces up to 10,000 to 20,000 t-shirts each day . in the 1960s , the ringer t-shirt appeared and became a staple fashion for youth and rock-n-rollers . the decade also saw the emergence of tie-dyeing and screen-printing on the basic t-shirt and the t-shirt became a medium for wearable art , commercial advertising , souvenir messages , and protest art messages . psychedelic art poster designer warren dayton pioneered several political , protest , and pop-culture art printed large and in color on t-shirts featuring images of cesar chavez , political cartoons , and other cultural icons in an article in the los angeles times magazine in late 1969 ( ironically , the clothing company quickly cancelled the experimental line , fearing there would not be a market ) . in the late 1960s , richard ellman , robert tree , bill kelly , and stanley mouse set up the monster company in mill valley , california , to produce fine art designs expressly for t-shirts . monster t-shirts often feature emblems and motifs associated with the grateful dead and marijuana culture . monster t-shirt art , monster corporation catalog 3 , mill valley 1974 additionally , one of the most popular symbols to emerge from the political turmoil of the 1960s were t-shirts bearing the face of marxist revolutionary che guevara . the most famous statement t-shirts by sojones asmara , september 10 , 2009 today , many notable and memorable t-shirts produced in the 1970s have become ensconced in pop culture . examples include the bright yellow happy face t-shirts , the rolling stones tops with their '' tongue and lips '' file : the rolling stones tongue logo.png logo , and milton glaser 's iconic '' i ♥ n y ” design . in the mid-1980s , the white t-shirt became fashionable after the actor don johnson wore it with an armani suit in miami vice . . v-neck . a v-neck t-shirt has a v-shaped neckline , as opposed to the round neckline of the more common crew neck shirt ( also called a u-neck ) . v-necks were introduced so that the neckline of the shirt does not show when worn beneath an outer shirt , as would that of a crew neck shirt . . screen printing . the most common form of commercial t-shirt decoration is screen printing . in screen printing , a design is separated into individual colors . plastisol or water based inks are applied to the shirt through mesh screens which limits the areas where ink is deposited . in most commercial t-shirt printing , the specific colors in the design are used . to achieve a wider color spectrum with a limited number of colors , process printing ( using only cmyk ink ) or simulated process ( using only white , black , red , green , blue , and gold ink ) is effective . process printing is best suited for light colored shirts . the simulated process is best suited for dark colored shirts . in 1959 , the invention of plastisol provided an ink more durable and stretchable than water-based ink , allowing much more variety in t-shirt designs . very few companies continue to use water-based inks on their shirts . the majority of companies that create shirts prefer plastisol due to the ability to print on varying colors without the need for color adjustment at the art level . specialty inks trend in and out of fashion and include shimmer , puff , discharge , and chino based inks . a metallic foil can be heat pressed and stamped onto any plastisol ink . when combined with shimmer ink , metallics give a mirror like effect wherever the previously screened plastisol ink was applied . specialty inks are more expensive to purchase as well as screen and tend to appear on garments in boutiques . other methods of decoration used on t-shirts include airbrush , applique , embroidery , impressing or embossing , and the ironing on of either flock lettering , heat transfers , or dye-sublimation transfers . laser printers are capable of printing on plain paper using a special toner containing sublimation dyes which can then be permanently heat-transferred to t-shirts . in the 1980s , thermochromatic dyes were used to produce t-shirts that changed color when subjected to heat . the hypercolor brand of these was a common sight on the streets of the uk for a few years but has since mostly disappeared . these were also very popular in the united states among teenagers in the late 1980s . a downside of color-change garments is that the dyes can easily be damaged , especially by laundry in warm water or dye other clothes during washing . tie dye . tie dye originated in india , japan , jamaica , and africa as early as the sixth century . some forms of tie dye are bandhani ( the oldest known technique ) used in indian cultures , and shibori primarily used in japanese cultures . it was not until the 1960s that tie dye was introduced to america during the hippie movement . . heat transfer vinyl ( htv ) . another form of t-shirt decoration is heat transfer vinyl , also called htv . htv is a polyurethane material that allows apparel designers to create unique layered designs using a specialized software program . once the design is created , it is then cut through the material using a vinyl cutter ( or cut n press ) machine . there are dozens of different colors available , as well as glitter , reflective , and now even unique patterns ( such as mermaid skin ) which come in rolls and sheets . after the design is cut , there is a process called “ weeding ” whereby the areas of the design that do not represent the design are picked away from the transfer sheet and removed so that the intended design remains . htv is typically smooth to the touch and does not feel rubbery or stiff . the edges are typically clean cut and produce high contrast . designers can also create multiple color designs , or multi-layered designs using htv . this process would be done in the design software before the design is sent to the cutter for the different materials . a heat press is then used to apply pressure and heat to the vinyl so that the material permanently adheres to the garment . the temperature and pressure vary according to the manufacturers specifications . dye-sublimation printing . dye-sublimation printing is a direct-to-garment digital printing technology using full color artwork to transfer images to polyester and polymer-coated substrate based t-shirts . dye-sublimation ( also commonly referred to as all-over printing ) came into widespread use in the 21st century , enabling some designs previously impossible . printing with unlimited colors using large cmyk printers with special paper and ink is possible , unlike screen printing which requires screens for each color of the design . all-over print t-shirts have solved the problem with color fading and the vibrancy is higher than most standard printing methods but requires synthetic fabrics for the ink to take hold . the key feature of dye-sublimated clothing is that the design is not printed on top of the garment , but permanently dyed into the threads of the shirt , ensuring that it will never fade . dye-sublimation is economically viable for small-quantity printing ; the unit cost is similar for short or long production runs . screen printing has higher setup costs , requiring large numbers to be produced to be cost-effective , and the unit cost is higher . solid ink phase transition without passing through a liquid phase ( sublimation ) , using heat and pressure . the design is first produced in a computer image file format such as jpg , gif , png , or any other . it is printed on a purpose-made computer printer most commonly epson or ricoh brands ) using large heat presses to vaporize the ink directly into the fabric . by mid-2012 , this method had become widely used for t-shirts . other methods . before the hippie movement rit dye was known as a hobby for older women . other methods of decorating shirts include using paints , markers , fabric transfer crayons , dyes , spray paint , and many more . some techniques that can be used include sponging , stenciling , daubing , stamping , screen printing , bleaching , and many more . taylor , carol . the great t-shirt book ! : make your own spectacular , one-of-a-kind designs . new york : sterling pub . , 1992 . print . as technology advances , it offers more experimentations and possibilities for designers and artists to seek for innovative techniques with their t-shirts . some new t-shirt creators have used designs with multiple advanced techniques , which includes using glow-in-the-dark inks , heat-sensitive fabrics , foil printing and all-over printing . other designers like robert geller , a german-born american fashion designer , has created unique t-shirt collections such as seconds which feature oversized graphic t-shirts made from super soft jersey materials . alexander wang , on the other hand , came out with variations of t-shirts from oversized scoop necks , tanks to striped , slouchy rayon jerseys . artists like terence koh , took a different approach , with t-shirts featuring an upside down portrait with a real bullet hole hand finished by him for the soho store opening ceremony .