F-number

notation . the f-number n is given by : : n \frac\right ) n , where n is the uncorrected f-number , na i is the image-space numerical aperture of the lens , m is the absolute value of the lens 's magnification for an object a particular distance away , and p is the pupil magnification . since the pupil magnification is seldom known it is often assumed to be 1 , which is the correct value for all symmetric lenses . in photography this means that as one focuses closer , the lens ' effective aperture becomes smaller , making the exposure darker . the working f-number is often described in photography as the f-number corrected for lens extensions by a bellows factor . this is of particular importance in macro photography . history . the system of f-numbers for specifying relative apertures evolved in the late nineteenth century , in competition with several other systems of aperture notation . origins of relative aperture . in 1867 , sutton and dawson defined '' apertal ratio '' as essentially the reciprocal of the modern f-number . in the following quote , an '' apertal ratio '' of '' '' is calculated as the ratio of to , corresponding to an f-stop : in every lens there is , corresponding to a given apertal ratio ( that is , the ratio of the diameter of the stop to the focal length ) , a certain distance of a near object from it , between which and infinity all objects are in equally good focus . for instance , in a single view lens of 6-inch focus , with a in . stop ( apertal ratio one-twenty-fourth ) , all objects situated at distances lying between 20 feet from the lens and an infinite distance from it ( a fixed star , for instance ) are in equally good focus . twenty feet is therefore called the 'focal range ' of the lens when this stop is used . the focal range is consequently the distance of the nearest object , which will be in good focus when the ground glass is adjusted for an extremely distant object . in the same lens , the focal range will depend upon the size of the diaphragm used , while in different lenses having the same apertal ratio the focal ranges will be greater as the focal length of the lens is increased . the terms 'apertal ratio ' and 'focal range ' have not come into general use , but it is very desirable that they should , in order to prevent ambiguity and circumlocution when treating of the properties of photographic lenses . thomas sutton and george dawson , a dictionary of photography , london : sampson low , son & marston , 1867 , ( p . 122 ) . in 1874 , john henry dallmeyer called the ratio 1/n the '' intensity ratio '' of a lens : the rapidity of a lens depends upon the relation or ratio of the aperture to the equivalent focus . to ascertain this , divide the equivalent focus by the diameter of the actual working aperture of the lens in question ; and note down the quotient as the denominator with 1 , or unity , for the numerator . thus to find the ratio of a lens of 2 inches diameter and 6 inches focus , divide the focus by the aperture , or 6 divided by 2 equals 3 ; i.e . , is the intensity ratio . john henry dallmeyer , photographic lenses : on their choice and use – special edition edited for american photographers , pamphlet , 1874 . although he did not yet have access to ernst abbe 's theory of stops and pupils , which was made widely available by siegfried czapski in 1893 , siegfried czapski , theorie der optischen instrumente , nach abbe , breslau : trewendt , 1893 . dallmeyer knew that his working aperture was not the same as the physical diameter of the aperture stop : it must be observed , however , that in order to find the real intensity ratio , the diameter of the actual working aperture must be ascertained . this is easily accomplished in the case of single lenses , or for double combination lenses used with the full opening , these merely requiring the application of a pair of compasses or rule ; but when double or triple-combination lenses are used , with stops inserted between the combinations , it is somewhat more troublesome ; for it is obvious that in this case the diameter of the stop employed is not the measure of the actual pencil of light transmitted by the front combination . to ascertain this , focus for a distant object , remove the focusing screen and replace it by the collodion slide , having previously inserted a piece of cardboard in place of the prepared plate . make a small round hole in the centre of the cardboard with a piercer , and now remove to a darkened room ; apply a candle close to the hole , and observe the illuminated patch visible upon the front combination ; the diameter of this circle , carefully measured , is the actual working aperture of the lens in question for the particular stop employed . this point is further emphasized by czapski in 1893 . according to an english review of his book , in 1894 , '' the necessity of clearly distinguishing between effective aperture and diameter of physical stop is strongly insisted upon . '' henry crew , '' theory of optical instruments by dr . czapski , '' in astronomy and astro-physics xiii pp . 241–243 , 1894 . j . h . dallmeyer 's son , thomas rudolphus dallmeyer , inventor of the telephoto lens , followed the intensity ratio terminology in 1899 . thomas r . dallmeyer , telephotography : an elementary treatise on the construction and application of the telephotographic lens , london : heinemann , 1899 . . aperture numbering systems . at the same time , there were a number of aperture numbering systems designed with the goal of making exposure times vary in direct or inverse proportion with the aperture , rather than with the square of the f-number or inverse square of the apertal ratio or intensity ratio . but these systems all involved some arbitrary constant , as opposed to the simple ratio of focal length and diameter . for example , the uniform system ( u.s . ) of apertures was adopted as a standard by the royal photographic society in the 1880s . bothamley in 1891 said '' the stops of all the best makers are now arranged according to this system . '' c . h . bothamley , ilford manual of photography , london : britannia works co . ltd . , 1891 . u.s . 16 is the same aperture as 16 , but apertures that are larger or smaller by a full stop use doubling or halving of the u.s . number , for example 11 is u.s . 8 and 8 is u.s . 4 . the exposure time required is directly proportional to the u.s . number . eastman kodak used u.s . stops on many of their cameras at least in the 1920s . by 1895 , hodges contradicts bothamley , saying that the f-number system has taken over : '' this is called the x system , and the diaphragms of all modern lenses of good construction are so marked . '' john a . hodges , photographic lenses : how to choose , and how to use , bradford : percy lund & co . , 1895 . here is the situation as seen in 1899 : piper in 1901 c . welborne piper , a first book of the lens : an elementary treatise on the action and use of the photographic lens , london : hazell , watson , and viney , ltd . , 1901 . discusses five different systems of aperture marking : the old and new zeiss systems based on actual intensity ( proportional to reciprocal square of the f-number ) ; and the u.s . , c.i . , and dallmeyer systems based on exposure ( proportional to square of the f-number ) . he calls the f-number the '' ratio number , '' '' aperture ratio number , '' and '' ratio aperture . '' he calls expressions like 8 the '' fractional diameter '' of the aperture , even though it is literally equal to the '' absolute diameter '' which he distinguishes as a different term . he also sometimes uses expressions like '' an aperture of f 8 '' without the division indicated by the slash . beck and andrews in 1902 talk about the royal photographic society standard of 4 , 5.6 , 8 , 11.3 , etc . conrad beck and herbert andrews , photographic lenses : a simple treatise , second edition , london : r . & j . beck ltd . , c . 1902 . the r.p.s . had changed their name and moved off of the u.s . system some time between 1895 and 1902 . typographical standardization . by 1920 , the term f-number appeared in books both as f number and f/number . in modern publications , the forms f-number and f number are more common , though the earlier forms , as well as f-number are still found in a few books ; not uncommonly , the initial lower-case f in f-number or f/number is set in a hooked italic form : f , or f . google search notations for f-numbers were also quite variable in the early part of the twentieth century . they were sometimes written with a capital f , sometimes with a dot ( period ) instead of a slash , and sometimes set as a vertical fraction . the 1961 asa standard ph2.12-1961 american standard general-purpose photographic exposure meters ( photoelectric type ) specifies that '' the symbol for relative apertures shall be f/ or f : followed by the effective f -number . '' they show the hooked italic f not only in the symbol , but also in the term f-number , which today is more commonly set in an ordinary non-italic face .