1969 in literature

events . february 8 – after 147 years , the last issue of the saturday evening post in its original form appears in the united states . march 23 – german-born writer assia wevill , a mistress of the english poet ted hughes and ex-wife of the canadian poet david wevill , gasses herself and their daughter at her london home . august – '' penelope ashe '' , purported author of a bestselling novel , naked came the stranger , is revealed as a group of newsday journalists . unknown dates the first man booker prize for fiction is awarded to p . h . newby for something to answer for . the times literary supplement begins using the abbreviation '' tls '' on its title page . . new books . fiction . eva alexanderson – kontradans ( counter-dance ) jorge amado – tenda dos milagres ( tent of miracles ) kingsley amis – the green man poul anderson – satan 's world william h . armstrong – sounder penelope ashe – naked came the stranger margaret atwood – the edible woman rené barjavel – les chemins de katmandou ray bradbury – i sing the body electric melvyn bragg – the hired man william s . burroughs – the last words of dutch schultz louis-ferdinand céline – rigadoon agatha christie – hallowe'en party michael crichton – the andromeda strain john cheever – bullet park a . j . cronin – a pocketful of rye henry de montherlant – les garçons ( the boys ) l . sprague de camp – the golden wind marion eames – y stafell ddirgel ( the secret room ) john fowles – the french lieutenant 's woman george macdonald fraser – flashman paul gallico – the poseidon adventure graham greene – travels with my aunt sam greenlee – the spook who sat by the door günter grass – local anaesthetic ( örtlich betäubt ) frank herbert – dune messiah raymond hitchcock – percy robert e . howard , l . sprague de camp and lin carter – conan of cimmeria b . s . johnson – the unfortunates david h . keller – the folsom flint and other curious tales derek lambert angels in the snow the kites of war ursula le guin – the left hand of darkness elmore leonard – the big bounce doris lessing – the four-gated city h . p . lovecraft and others – tales of the cthulhu mythos john d . macdonald – dress her in indigo félicien marceau – creezy yukio mishima ( 三島 由紀夫 ) – runaway horses michael moorcock – behold the man c . l . moore – jirel of joiry vladimir nabokov – ada or ardor : a family chronicle v . s . naipaul – a house for mr biswas m . t . vasudevan nair – kaalam ( '' time '' ) patrick o'brian – master and commander don pendleton – war against the mafia chaim potok – the promise manuel puig – little painted mouths mario puzo – the godfather ellery queen – the campus murders pauline réage – retour à roissy mordecai richler – the street harold robbins – the inheritors philip roth – portnoy 's complaint gabriel ruhumbika – village in uhuru giorgio scerbanenco i milanesi ammazzano al sabato milano calibro 9 irwin shaw – rich man , poor man dag solstad – irr ! grønt ! rex stout – death of a dude edward streeter – ham martin , class of '17 jacqueline susann – the love machine susan taubes – divorce theodore taylor – the cay colin thiele – blue fin jack vance the dirdir emphyrio servants of the wankh mario vargas llosa – conversation in the cathedral kurt vonnegut – slaughterhouse-five charity waciuma – daughter of mumbi irving wallace – the seven minutes keith waterhouse – everything must go colin wilson – the philosopher 's stone roger zelazny creatures of light and darkness damnation alley isle of the dead . children and young people . eric carle – the very hungry caterpillar frances carpenter – south american wonder tales penelope farmer – charlotte sometimes rumer godden – operation sippacik ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat on a rainy day gary paulsen – mr . tucket ( first in mr . tucket series ) bill peet – fly homer fly barbara sleigh – the snowball william steig – sylvester and the magic pebble john rowe townsend – the intruder elfrida vipont with raymond briggs – the elephant and the bad baby anne de vries – into the darkness ( first in the reis door de nacht series of five books ) . drama . leilah assunção – fala baixo senão eu grito ( speak quietly or i ’ ll scream ) aimé césaire – une tempête dario fo – mistero buffo athol fugard – boesman and lena joe orton – what the butler saw ( posthumously premiered and published ) dennis potter – son of man ( television ) dalmiro sáenz – quién yo ? ( who me ? ) david storey – in celebration paul zindel – let me hear you whisper . poetry . james schuyler – freely espousing . non-fiction . dean acheson – present at the creation : my years in the state department maya angelou – i know why the caged bird sings fernand braudel – ecrits sur l'histoire ( translated as on history , 1980 ) h . rap brown – die nigger die ! henri charrière – papillon l . sprague de camp and george h . scithers ( editors ) – the conan swordbook antonia fraser – mary queen of scots peter geach – god and the soul søren hansen and jesper jensen – the little red schoolbook ( den lille røde bog for skoleelever ) anton lavey – the satanic bible laurie lee – as i walked out one midsummer morning kate millett – sexual politics desmond morris – the human zoo harold perkin – the origins of modern english society 1780–1880 laurence j . peter and raymond hull – the peter principle : why things always go wrong david reuben – everything you always wanted to know about sex ( but were afraid to ask ) . births . january 12 – david mitchell , english novelist january 17 – michael moynihan , american journalist and publisher january 21 – m . k . hobson , american speculative fiction author march – jez butterworth , english dramatist and screenwriter may 6 – emmanuel larcenet , french comics author may 28 – muriel barbery , french novelist may 29 – qiu miaojin ( 邱妙津 ) , korean-born novelist ( suicide 1995 ) june 13 – virginie despentes , french writer july 5 – armin kõomägi , estonian author and screenwriter august 4 – jojo moyes , english journalist and romantic novelist october 24 – emma donoghue , irish-born canadian novelist , dramatist , and academic november 13 – john belluso , american dramatist ( died 2006 ) november 28 – hanne ørstavik , norwegian novelist november 30 – david auburn , american dramatist unknown dates adrian goldsworthy , welsh military historian and novelist john harris , english writer , journalist and critic tom mccarthy , english novelist . deaths . january 11 – richmal crompton , english children 's writer ( born 1890 ) january 21 – giovanni comisso , italian writer ( born 1895 ) march 11 – john wyndham , english science fiction novelist ( born 1903 ) march 24 – margery fish , english gardening writer ( born 1892 ) march 26 – john kennedy toole , american novelist ( suicide , born 1937 ) march 27 – b . traven , presumed german-born novelist ( unknown year of birth ) may 4 – osbert sitwell , english novelist and poet ( born 1892 ) july 24 – witold gombrowicz , polish playwright and novelist ( born 1904 ) july 27 – vivian de sola pinto , english poet and memoirist ( born 1895 ) august 14 – leonard woolf , english political theorist ( born 1880 ) august 27 – ivy compton-burnett , english novelist ( born 1884 ) september 6 – gavin maxwell , scottish naturalist and author ( cancer , born 1914 ) september 17 – greye la spina , american dramatist and short story writer ( born 1880 ) september 20 – elinor brent-dyer , english children 's writer ( born 1894 ) september 22 – rachel davis harris , african american librarian ( born 1869 ) october 21 – jack kerouac , american novelist and poet ( internal hemorrhage , born 1922 ) november 6 – susan taubes , hungarian american writer and jewish intellectual ( suicide , born 1928 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : samuel beckett . canada . see 1969 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : félicien marceau , creezy prix médicis : hélène cixous , dedans . united kingdom . booker prize : p . h . newby , something to answer for carnegie medal for children 's literature : k . m . peyton , the edge of the cloud cholmondeley award : derek walcott , tony harrison eric gregory award : gavin bantock , jeremy hooker , jenny king , neil powell , landeg e . white james tait black memorial prize for fiction : elizabeth bowen , eva trout james tait black memorial prize for biography : antonia fraser , mary queen of scots queen 's gold medal for poetry : stevie smith . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medals drama : tennessee williams hugo award : john brunner , stand on zanzibar nebula award : ursula k . le guin , the left hand of darkness newbery medal for children 's literature : lloyd alexander , the high king pulitzer prize for drama : howard sackler , the great white hope pulitzer prize for fiction : n . scott momaday – house made of dawn pulitzer prize for poetry : george oppen : of being numerous . elsewhere . miles franklin award : george johnston , clean straw for nothing premio nadal : francisco garcía pavón las hermanas coloradas viareggio prize : fulvio tomizza , l'albero dei sogni . references .