John Pym

biography . his father alexander pym ( 1547–1585 ) was a member of the minor gentry , from brymore school , who became a successful lawyer in london , where john was born in 1584 . alexander died seven months later and his mother , philippa colles ( died 1620 ) , married a wealthy cornish landowner , sir anthony rous . a close friend and executor of sir francis drake , sir anthony instilled in his stepson a dislike of spain , puritanism and a strong antipathy to both catholicism and the protestant ideology known as arminianism . the rous were a large and close-knit family , who often wed relatives and friends . in may 1604 , pym married anne hooke , a daughter of barbara rous and john hooke , and aunt of the scientist robert hooke . before her death in 1620 , they had seven children , of whom four survived into adulthood ; philippa ( 1604–1654 ) , charles ( 1615–1671 ) , dorothy ( 1617–1661 ) , and catherine . career . pym was educated at pembroke college , oxford , then known as broadgates and famous for 'advanced protestantism ' . since legal knowledge was considered part of an education , he subsequently attended the middle temple in 1602 ; while he does not appear to have formally graduated from either , he made a number of lifelong friends , the most important being william whitaker . in june 1605 , he was appointed collector of taxes for the exchequer in hampshire , gloucestershire , and wiltshire ; this gave him a broader range of connections than many contemporaries , who were often confined to family or county networks . whitaker 's father had been member of parliament for westbury , wiltshire , and in 1621 , pym was elected for the nearby seat of calne . forced loan and petition of right . pym 's diary shows he viewed parliamentary legislation as a whole , not just issues of interest to himself ; combined with an ability to explain them clearly , it led to his appointment to numerous committees . since direct criticism of the king was considered treason , the only way to express opposition was by attacking his advisors , using the process of impeachment . pym argued it was for the commons to decide guilt or innocence , leaving the lords only to determine the penalty ; this would become significant in his future parliamentary career . even in an era when it was common , he was notable for his anti-catholicism , and opposition to alleged arminianism in the church of england . one reason for this belief were the close links in the 17th-century between religion and politics , with alterations in one viewed as implying alterations in the other . many contemporaries fought in the thirty years war and were concerned at the apparent failure of james to defend his own son-in-law and protestantism as a whole . after the dissolution of parliament in 1621 , pym was arrested , and brought before the privy council , but released in august 1622 . in 1624 , he was elected for tavistock , a seat controlled by earl of bedford , which he retained for the rest of his career . he was one of the prime movers behind an attempt to impeach the duke of buckingham in 1626 , an action that led to parliament being dissolved . only buckingham 's assassination in august 1628 prevented a second attempt , while pym supported the presentation of the petition of right to charles i in 1628 . pym , his stepbrother francis rous , and john hampden , also led the parliamentary attack on roger maynwaring and robert sibthorpe , two clergymen who published sermons supporting the caroline precepts of the divine right of kings , and passive obedience . although censured by parliament for preaching against the established english constitution , charles pardoned them , and dissolved parliament , initiating the period of personal rule that continued until 1640 . pym became treasurer of the providence island company in 1630 , a role that increasingly consumed his time , and he relinquished his exchequer position in 1639 . participation in the colonial movement was common among puritan leaders , while company meetings later provided cover for co-ordinating political opposition . many of these became leaders of the parliamentary opposition in 1642 , among them hampden , rous , henry darley , lord saye , william waller , and lord brooke . leader of the opposition ; 1640 to 1641 . following defeat in the first of the bishops wars , charles recalled parliament in april 1640 ; when the short parliament refused to vote taxes without concessions , he dissolved it after only three weeks . however , the humiliating terms of the treaty of ripon imposed by the scots after a second defeat forced him to hold fresh elections in november ; pym became unofficial leader of the opposition . historians like tim harris argue that with the exception of a few extremists , by 1640 there was general consensus attempts to rule without parliament had gone too far . this changed after the grand remonstrance in november 1641 , when constitutional monarchy like clarendon switched sides , arguing parliament now wanted too much . where pym differed from clarendon , and many of his own colleagues , was understanding charles would not keep his commitments . even while negotiating with parliamentary moderates , he and henrietta maria openly told foreign ambassadors any concessions were temporary , and would be retrieved by force if needed . these suspicions were enhanced after october 1641 , when irish catholic rebels claimed his approval for their actions , an assertion given weight by previous attempts to use irish troops against his scottish opponents , and initial refusal to condemn the rebellion . however , pym was hampered by the fact charles was essential to a stable government and society . regardless of religion or political belief , in 1642 the vast majority believed a 'well-ordered ' monarchy was divinely mandated ; where they disagreed was what 'well-ordered ' meant , and who held ultimate authority in clerical affairs . cavalier generally supported a church of england governed by bishops , appointed by , and answerable to , the king ; roundhead believed he was answerable to the leaders of the church , appointed by their congregations . puritan was a term for anyone who wanted to reform , or 'purify ' , the church of england , and contained many different sects . presbyterians were the most prominent , and included leaders like pym and john hampden , but there were many others , such as congregationalists , often grouped together as independents . close links between religion and politics added further complexity ; one reason for opposition to bishops was their presence in the house of lords , where they often blocked parliamentary legislation . their removal by the clergy act 1640 was a major step along the road to war . most presbyterians were political conservatives , who believed in a limited electorate , and wanted to keep the church of england , but as a reformed , presbyterian body , similar to the church of scotland . 1640 england was a structured , socially conservative , and largely peaceful society ; the devastation caused by the thirty years war in europe meant many wanted to avoid war at any cost . road to war ; 1641 to 1643 . shortly after the long parliament assembled , it was presented with the root and branch petition ; signed by 15,000 londoners , it demanded england follow the scots , and expel bishops . this reflected widespread concerns about 'catholic practices ' , or arminianism in the church of england , given weight by charles ' apparent willingness to make war on the protestant scots , but not assist his nephew charles louis regain his hereditary lands . many feared charles was about to sign an alliance with spain , a view shared by experienced diplomatic observers like venice , and even france . this meant ending charles ' arbitrary rule was not only important for england , but the protestant cause in general . since respect for the institution of monarchy prevented direct attacks on charles , the traditional route was to prosecute his 'evil counsellors . ' doing so made it clear that although the king was above the law , his subordinates were not , and he could not protect them ; the intention was to make others think twice about their actions . archbishop william laud was impeached in december 1640 and held in the tower of london until his execution in 1645 ; strafford , former lord deputy of ireland and organiser of the 1640 bishops war , was attainder and executed in may 1641 . the commons also passed a series of constitutional reforms , including the triennial acts , abolition of the star chamber , and an end to levying taxes without parliament 's consent . voting as a block , the bishops ensured all these were rejected by the lords . in june 1641 , pym secured passage of the clergy act in the commons ; one of its key provisions was to remove bishops from the lords , which therefore rejected it . the growing political tension was brought to head in october with the outbreak of the irish rebellion . both charles and parliament supported raising troops to suppress it , but neither trusted the other with their control , fearing any army would be used against them first . pym helped draft the grand remonstrance , presented to charles on 1 december 1641 ; unrest culminated in 23 to 29 december with widespread riots in westminster , led by the london apprentices . suggestions pym and other parliamentary leaders helped organise these have not been proved , but as a result , bishops stopped attending the lords . on 30 december , john williams , archbishop of york and eleven other bishops , signed a complaint , disputing the legality of any laws passed by the lords during their exclusion . this was viewed by the commons as inviting the king to dissolve parliament and thus treason ; all twelve were arrested . charles left london in january , accompanied by many royalist mps and his supporters in the lords , which proved a major tactical mistake , as it gave pym majorities in both houses . when the first english civil war began in august , pym headed the committee of safety ; his reputation for integrity and ability to keep a diverse coalition of interests together was crucial to surviving the first 18 months of the conflict . he created the foundation for victory by ensuring parliament had sufficient financial and military resources , one of his last acts being to negotiate the solemn league and covenant that secured scottish support . pym died , probably of cancer , at derby house on 8 december 1643 ; parliament agreed to pay off the debts he incurred as a result of neglecting his private business interests , although they were still being disputed in 1665 . buried in westminster abbey , his remains were exhumed after the stuart restoration in 1660 and re-buried in a common pit at st margaret 's , westminster . his chief opponent , the earl of clarendon , a senior advisor to charles during the first english civil war , later wrote ; 'he had a very comely and grave way of expressing himself.and understood the temper and affections of the kingdom as well as any man ’ . pym 's reputation suffered in comparison to less complex figures like hampden and viscount falkland , especially during the victorian era which romanticised the royalist cause . one exception was the historian goldwin smith , who described him as '' the greatest member of parliament that ever lived '' . he is now generally viewed as an astute politician who laid the foundations of modern parliamentary democracy and effective speaker , whose ideas and language were adapted by patriot ( american revolution ) and 19th century american liberals . footnotes . references . sources . . bibliography .