Greatest Generation

etymology . the term the greatest generation was popularized by the title of a 1998 book by american journalist tom brokaw . in the book , brokaw profiled american members of this generation who came of age during the great depression and went on to fight in world war ii , as well as those who contributed to the war effort on the home front . brokaw wrote that these men and women fought not for fame or recognition , but because it was the '' right thing to do . '' this cohort is also referred to as the world war ii generation . authors william strauss and neil howe called this generation the g.i . generation in their 1991 book generations : the history of america 's future the initials g.i . refer to american soldiers in world war ii . date and age range definitions . pew research center defines this cohort as being born from 1901 to 1927 . strauss and howe use the birth years 1901–1924 . . characteristics . united states . . adolescence . in the united states , members of this generation came of age , were children , or were born during the roaring twenties , a time of economic prosperity with distinctive cultural transformations . they experienced much of their youth with rapid technological innovation ( e.g . , radio , telephone , automobile ) amidst growing levels of worldwide income inequality and a soaring economy . george h . soule , prosperity decade : from war to depression : 1917–1929 ( 1947 ) after the stock market crashed , this generation experienced profound economic and social turmoil . despite the hardships , historians note that literature , arts , music , and cinema of the period flourished . this generation experienced what is commonly referred to as the '' golden age of hollywood '' . a number of popular film genres , including gangster films , musical films , comedy films , and monster films attracted mass audiences . the great depression also greatly influenced literature and the advent of comic books were popular with members of this generation with such characters as doc savage , the shadow , superman and batman . next to jazz , blues , gospel music , and folk music ; swing jazz became immensely popular with members of this generation . the term '' swing generation '' has also been used to describe the cohort due to the popularity of the era 's music . the popularity of the radio also became a major influence in the lives of this generation , as millions tuned in to listen to president franklin d . roosevelt 's '' fireside chats '' and absorbed news in a way like never before . . world war ii . over 16 million americans served in world war ii , the majority being members of this generation . 38.8 % were volunteers , 61.2 % were draftees , average length of their service was 33 months , and total approximate casualties were 671,278 ( killed and wounded ) . while tom brokaw and others extol this generation for supporting and fighting world war ii , american historian and sociologist harvey j . kaye writes that in addition to ending isolationism , most americans of the greatest generation wanted '' to curb the power of capital , create economic growth and development , end poverty , and 'enable people to advance themselves . ' '' . post-war . following the war , this generation produced children at an unprecedented level , as over 76 million babies were born between 1946 and 1964 . subsidized by the g.i . bill , this generation moved their families into the suburbs and largely promoted a more conservative mindset as the country faced the threat of the cold war and mccarthyism while some were again called to service in the korean war . the first member of their generation to be elected president , john f . kennedy , began a space race against the soviet union , and his successor , lyndon b . johnson , further promoted a '' great society '' . research professor of sociology glen holl elder , jr . , a prominent figure in the development of life course theory , wrote children of the great depression ( 1974 ) , '' the first longitudinal study of a great depression cohort . '' elder followed 167 individuals born in california between 1920 and 1921 and '' traced the impact of depression and wartime experiences from the early years to middle age . most of these 'children of the great depression ' fared unusually well in their adult years '' . they came out of the hardships of the great depression '' with an ability to know how to survive and make do and solve problems . ” . culture clash . this generation would again be faced with turmoil in the form of the vietnam war , civil rights movement , watergate scandal , and an overall culture clash with their children . attitudes shaped during world war ii clashed with those of the vietnam era as many struggled to understand the general distrust of the government by their children , while some , understanding the horrors of war , supported anti-war protests . . later years and legacy . this generation remained active in american politics and according to a 2004 study done by aarp , '' there are 26 million people aged 70 or older in the united states . these people are largely conservative on economic ( 59 % ) and social ( 49 % ) issues , and about one-third of them say they have become more conservative on economic , social , foreign policy , moral , and legal issues as they have aged . over 9 in 10 ( 91 % ) of this age group are registered to vote and 90 % voted in the 2000 presidential election . the last member of this generation to be elected president was george h.w . bush ( 1989-1993 ) . in its latter years , this generation was introduced to continued technological advancements such as the internet . today , approximately 389,000 of the 16 million americans who served in world war ii remain alive . members of this generation , if still living , are either in their 90s or are centenarians . the lives of this generation are a common element of pop culture in the western world , as hollywood continues to produce films related to this generation 's wartime experiences , video games depict world war ii combat , and novels set during the period remain popular . the romanticizing of this generation has faced criticism by some . however , some also continue to praise the traits and actions of this generation and cite their sacrifices as a lesson for current generations . during the covid-19 pandemic , some further criticized the unwillingness of current generations to make sacrifices for the greater good as their greatest generation ancestors had . some have been more positive in their comparisons , such as , robert citino , the executive director of the institute for the study of war and democracy at the national world war ii museum in new orleans who stated , '' this current pandemic is a little bit different . the enemy is silent and microscopic and tasteless . there ’ s never been a big bang day . i ’ m 60 , and i hear from my age group about young people not taking this seriously . i think if the nation calls on them , young people will step up as they always have . you ’ ve probably seen this meme , about how in world war ii , to defend your country , you were charging out to omaha beach . and in 2020 to defend your country , and it shows a guy lying on the couch eating cookies . now , that ’ s a little unfair because if this is a war , a lot of people have already lost their jobs . so staying home isn ’ t fun if you just lost your job . when we say people aren ’ t taking this seriously , or are apathetic , many people have sacrificed a lot already , and that is their job . '' living members of this generation were also impacted by the pandemic , such as lee wooten , who was treated in the hospital for coronavirus and recovered just prior to his 104th birthday . . europe . . britain . in britain , this generation came of age , like most of the western world , during a period of economic hardship as a result of the great depression . when the war in europe began , millions of british citizens joined the war effort at home and abroad . 2.9 million members of this generation served in the war , and there were 384,000 casualties . at home , the blitz claimed the lives of thousands and destroyed entire british cities . the men and women of this generation continue to be honored in the u.k . , particularly on v-e day . in 2020 , british prime minister boris johnson compared this generation to current generations and indicated his desire for them to show the , “ same spirit of national endeavour ” , in relation to the covid-19 pandemic . queen elizabeth ii , a member of this generation who lived through world war ii , echoed much of the same . . soviet union . as children , members of this generation came of age during stalin 's rise to power . they endured the holodomor famine , which killed millions . the world war ii generation of the soviet union was further decimated by the war . stalin 's scorched earth policy left its western regions in a state of devastation worsened by the advancing german army . the ussr lost 14 % of its pre-war population during wwii , a demographic collapse that would have immense long-term consequences . mass , forced labor was often utilized and there were between 10 and 11 million soviet men returning to help rebuild along with 2 million soviet dissidents held prisoner in stalin ’ s gulags . then came the cold war and the space race . even in the mid-1980s , around 70 % of soviet industrial output was directed towards the military , one of the factors in its eventual economic collapse . members of this generation are known as '' great patriotic war '' veterans , such as poet yuri levitansky who wrote about the horrors of the war and vasily zaitsev , a war hero who would later fall victim to post-war paranoia resulting in his unlawful detention . today , former soviet states celebrate an annual victory day . the latest survey conducted by russia ’ s levada center suggests victory day is still one of the most important public holidays for russian citizens , with 65 % of those surveyed planning to celebrate it . but for nearly one third of people ( 31 % ) it is a “ state public event ” while for another 31 % it is a “ memorial day for all former soviet people ” . only 16 % of those asked recognize it in its original context as a “ veterans ’ memorial day ” . the predominant emotion the holiday provokes among russians ( 59 % of respondents ) is national pride , while 18 % said “ sorrow ” . 21 % said both . the soviet union collapsed large part due to the demographic and expenditure legacy of the war but for modern russians , the conflict continues to provide the population with a nationalistic rallying call . . germany . members of the world war ii generation in germany came of age following world war i and the german revolution of 1918–1919 . they faced economic hardships related to the great depression and treaty of versailles as unemployment rose to nearly 40 % . adolf hitler then rose to power , and many of this generation joined organizations such as the hitler youth . in 1935 , hitler instituted military conscription . during the war , nearly 12.5 million members of this generation served in the war and 4.3 million were killed or wounded . by the end of the war , 5 millions germans were dead , including civilians . german cities and towns were devastated by allied bombing campaigns . 12 million germans were refugees and many were forced to settle in the soviet union . in addition , the holocaust claimed the lives of millions of german jews and others . following the war , the allies began the denazification and demilitarization of a post-war germany . returning german veterans found their country carved up into four zones of occupation ; later becoming west germany and east germany . in the west , the marshall plan resulted in the '' wirtschaftswunder '' , an economic boom that caused 185 % growth between 1950 and 1963 . surviving members of the german world war ii generation would go on to experience the fall of the berlin wall and the creation of the european union . unlike the western allies and the soviet union , germany did not honor its veterans , as the association with nazism continues in contemporary germany today . . asia . . japan . the world war ii generation of japan came of age during a time of rapid imperialism . one member of this generation , hirohito , would become emperor in 1926 , when japan was already one of the great powers . nearly 18 million members of this generation would fight in world war ii and approximately 3 million , including civilians , would be killed or wounded . japanese cities , towns , and villages were devastated by allied bombing campaigns . in an effort to prepare for the operation downfall , the japanese government prepared to submit this generation to '' operation ketsugo '' , in which the japanese population would fight a war of attrition . this generation has the unique distinction of being one of the only generations thus far as having been killed by an atomic bomb ; as hundreds of thousands lost their lives when the united states dropped the bombs on hiroshima and nagasaki . returning veterans found their country occupied and received little support or respect . surviving members of this generation would see japan emerge as the world 's second-largest economy by 1989 . maddison , angus , contours of the world economy , 1–2030 ad . 2007 , p . 379 , table a.4 . surviving veterans visit the yasukunu shrine to pay tribute to their fallen comrades . . see also . generation gap the greatest generation toffs and toughs list of notable surviving veterans of world war ii . references .