Falafel

etymology . the word is of arabic origin and is the plural of 'pepper ' , borrowed from persian , from the sanskrit word 'long pepper ' ; or an earlier , from aramaic 'small round thing , peppercorn ' , derived from palpēl 'to be round , roll' . the name is used world-wide . in english , it is first attested in 1941 . has a 1951 quote . falafel is known as , in egypt and sudan . the word is derived from a diminutive form of the arabic word , '' food '' ) ; the particular form indicates '' a unit '' of the given root in this case , having to do with taste and food ) , thus meaning '' a little piece of food '' or '' small tasty thing '' . the word falafel can refer to the fritters themselves or to sandwiches filled with them . history . the origin of falafel is controversial . the dish most likely originated in egypt , possibly influenced by similar indian dishes . there is a legend that a fava bean version was eaten by copts as early as the 4th century during lent , but there is no documentary evidence for this . it has been speculated that its history may go back to pharaonic egypt . however , the earliest written references to falafel from egyptian sources date to the 19th century , and oil was probably too expensive to use for deep frying in ancient egypt . as alexandria is a port city , it was possible to export the dish and name to other areas in the middle east . the dish later migrated northwards to the levant , where chickpeas replaced the fava beans . . middle east . falafel grew to become a common form of street food or fast food in egypt as well as the levant . the croquettes are regularly eaten as part of meze . during ramadan , falafel balls are sometimes eaten as part of the iftar , the meal that breaks the daily fast after sunset . falafel became so popular that mcdonald 's for a time served a '' mcfalafel '' in its breakfast menu all over egypt . falafel is still popular with the copts , who cook large volumes during religious holidays . debates over the history of falafel have sometimes devolved into political discussions about the relationship between arabs and israelis . in modern times , falafel has been considered a national dish of egypt , palestine , and of israel . resentment exists amongst many palestinians for what they see as the appropriation of their dish by israelis . additionally , the lebanese industrialists ' association has raised assertions of copyright infringement against israel concerning falafel . falafel plays an iconic role in israeli cuisine and is widely considered to be the national dish of the country . while falafel is not a specifically jewish dish , it was eaten by mizrahi jews in their countries of origin . later , it was adopted by history of zionism to palestine . as it is plant-based , kashrut classify it as pareve and thus allow it to be eaten with both meat and dairy meals . in 2012 , one of the hotels in the capital of jordan , amman , prepared the world 's largest falafel disc weighing about 75 & nbsp ; kg – breaking the previous record set at a jewish food festival in the united states . . north america . in north america , prior to the 1970s , falafel was found only in middle eastern , mediterranean and jewish neighborhoods and restaurants . today , the dish is a common and popular street food in many cities throughout north america . . vegetarianism . falafel has become popular among vegetarians and vegans , as an alternative to meat-based street foods , and is now sold in packaged mixes in health-food stores . while traditionally thought of as being used to make veggie burgers , its use has expanded as more and more people have adopted it as a source of protein . in the united states , falafel 's versatility has allowed for the reformulating of recipes for meatloaf , sloppy joes and spaghetti and meatballs into vegetarian dishes . . preparation and variations . falafel is made from vicia faba or chickpeas , or a combination . chickpeas are common in most middle eastern countries . the dish is usually made with chickpeas in syria , lebanon , jordan , israel and palestine . this version is the most popular in the west . the egyptian variety uses only fava beans . when chickpeas are used , they are not cooked prior to use ( cooking the chickpeas will cause the falafel to fall apart , requiring adding some flour to use as a binder ) . instead they are soaked ( sometimes with baking soda ) overnight , then ground together with various ingredients such as parsley , scallions , and garlic . spices such as cumin and coriander are often added to the beans for added flavor . the dried fava beans are soaked in water and then stone ground with leek , parsley , green coriander , cumin and dry coriander . the mixture is shaped into balls or patties . this can be done by hand or with a tool called an aleb falafel ( falafel mould ) . the mixture is usually deep fried , or it can be oven baked . falafel is typically ball-shaped , but is sometimes made in other shapes , particularly doughnut-shaped . the inside of falafel may be green ( from green herbs such as parsley or green onion ) , or tan . when served as a sandwich , falafel is often wrapped with flatbread or stuffed in a hollow pita , or it can be served with flat or unleavened bread . tomatoes , lettuce , cucumbers , and other garnishes can be added . claudia roden , the book of jewish food : an odyssey from samarkand to new york , new york , knopf , 1997 , 688 p . ( ) , p . 273 . falafel is commonly accompanied by tahini sauce . pita falafel was popularized after israel 's independence and in the 1950s by jewish yemeni immigrants . yemeni jews are the first to introduce the concept of falafel served in a pita . israeli soul : easy , essential , delicious . michael solomonov , steven cook . page 23 an october 19 , 1939 palestine post article is the first mention of the concept of falafels served in a pita bread . encyclopedia of jewish food , gil marks , hmh , 2010 . nutrition . when made with chickpeas , falafel is high in protein , complex carbohydrates , and fiber . key nutrients are calcium , iron , magnesium , phosphorus , potassium , zinc , copper , manganese , vitamin c , thiamine , pantothenic acid , vitamin b , and folate . phytochemicals include beta-carotene . falafel is high in soluble fiber , which has been shown to be effective in lowering blood cholesterol . chickpeas are low in fat and contain no cholesterol , but a considerable amount of fat is absorbed during the frying process . falafel can be baked to reduce the high fat content associated with frying . . world records . largest falafel ball . the current record , , was set on 28 july 2012 in amman , jordan . the previous record was , in circumference and in diameter , set at the santa clarita valley jewish food and cultural festival ( us ) , at the college of the canyons in valencia , california , us , on 15 may 2011 . . largest serving of falafel . the record , 5,173 & nbsp ; kg ( 11,404 & nbsp ; lb 8 oz ) , was set by chef ramzi choueiri and the students of al-kafaat university ( lebanon ) in beirut on 9 may 2010 . . see also . vada ( food ) : parippu vada is a similar-tasting south indian preparation using lentils ( toor daal ) . references . external links . new york times recipe of the day for february 12 , 2008