James Brindley

early life . born into a well-to-do family of yeoman farmers and craftsmen in the peak district , which in those days was extremely isolated , brindley received little formal education , but was educated at home by his mother . at age 17 , encouraged by his mother , he was apprenticed to a millwright in sutton , macclesfield , and soon showed exceptional skill and ability . having completed his apprenticeship he set up business for himself as a wheelwright in leek , staffordshire . in 1750 he expanded his business by renting a millwright 's shop in burslem from the wedgwoods who became his lifelong friends . he soon established a reputation for ingenuity and skill at repairing many different kinds of machinery . in 1752 he designed and built an engine for draining a coal mine , the wet earth colliery at clifton in lancashire . three years later he built a machine for a silk mill at congleton . early canal engineering . brindley 's reputation brought him to the attention of the 3rd duke of bridgewater , who was looking for a way to improve the transport of coal from his coal mines at worsley to manchester . in 1759 the duke commissioned the construction of a canal to do just that . the resulting bridgewater canal , opened in 1761 , is often regarded as the first british canal of the modern era ( though the sankey canal has a good claim to that title ) , and was a major technical triumph . brindley was commissioned as the consulting engineer , however , although brindley has often been credited as the genius behind the construction of the canal , it is now thought that the main designers were the duke himself , who had some engineering training , and his land agent and engineer john gilbert . brindley was engaged , at the insistence of gilbert , to assist with particular problems such as the barton aqueduct . this most impressive feature of the canal carried the canal at an elevation of 12 metres ( 39 & nbsp ; ft ) over the river irwell at barton . brindley 's technique minimised the amount of earth moving by developing the principle of contouring . he preferred to use a circuitous route that avoided embankments , and tunnels rather than cuttings . though this recognised the primitive methods of earth-moving available at the time , it meant that his canals were often much longer than a more adventurous approach would have produced . but his greatest contribution was the technique of puddling clay to produce a watertight clay-based material , and its use in lining canals . puddle clay was used extensively in uk canal construction in the period starting shortly after his death . starting about 1840 puddle clay was used more widely as the water-retaining element ( or core ) within embankment dam , particularly in the pennines . george m . reeves , ian sims , j . c . cripps eds . , clay materials used in construction , p.377 . geological society , 2006 . . master canal engineer . brindley 's reputation spread rapidly and he was soon commissioned to construct more canals . he extended the bridgewater to runcorn , connecting it to his next major work , the trent and mersey canal . at this time brindley had never built a lock and he first built an experimental lock in the grounds of turnhurst , a house he had bought near the summit , and this determined the design of the narrow canal lock which characterised most of the canals in the midlands , with a single upper gate and double mitre lower gates . these were for an elongated version of the boats designed for the underground system at worsley , the so-called 'starvationers ' , which were subsequently known as narrowboats and this decision was to cast a long shadow on the english canal system . brindley believed it would be possible to use canals to link the four great rivers of england : the mersey , trent , severn and thames ( the '' grand cross '' scheme ) . in 1762 he '' set out for chester and shropshire survey or a raconitering '' according to his diary . he had with him a sketch map of the continuation of the dee southwards past whitchurch . since the potteries around stoke-on-trent were in desperate need of something better than the pack-horse to carry their fragile wares , they wholeheartedly supported the connection of staffordshire to the trent and to the mersey . the first sod was cut by josiah wedgwood in 1766 and brindley carried it away in a barrow . from runcorn , the canal would climb by a series of thirty-five locks , pass through a 3000-yard tunnel ( the harecastle tunnel ) , then descend by a further forty locks to join the trent at wilden ferry , near shardlow . there was mounting ridicule about his scheme and in the event , although the canal opened from shardlow to near stafford in 1770 , it took eleven years to drive the tunnel . the trent and mersey canal was the first part of this ambitious network , and the later chester canal , started in 1772 , was also a result . however , although brindley and his assistants surveyed the whole potential system & nbsp ; – from the start , he had asserted his view of the trent and mersey as the '' grand trunk canal '' , the grand cross of waterways across the country & nbsp ; – he did not live to see it completed . the harecastle tunnel finally opened in 1777 and coal was finally transported from the midlands to the thames at oxford in january 1790 , some 18 years after brindley 's death . development of the network , therefore , had to be left to other engineers , such as thomas telford . in total , throughout his life brindley built 365 miles ( 587 & nbsp ; km ) of canals and many watermills , including the staffordshire and worcestershire canal , the coventry canal , the oxford canal and numerous others , and he also constructed the watermill at leek , now the brindley water museum . last years and epitaph . brindley married anne henshall on 8 december 1765 when he was 49 and she was 19 . anne 's brother , hugh henshall , was involved in canal construction himself , on the manchester , bolton and bury canal . the couple had two daughters , anne and susannah . in 1771 , work had begun on the chesterfield canal , but while surveying a new branch of the trent and mersey between froghall and leek , brindley was drenched in a severe rainstorm . it had happened many times before , but he was unable to dry out properly at the inn at which he was staying , and caught a chill . he became seriously ill and returned to his home at turnhurst , staffordshire , where erasmus darwin attended him and discovered that he was suffering from diabetes . james brindley died at turnhurst within sight of the unfinished harecastle tunnel on 27 september 1772 . he was buried on 30 september , just nine days after the completion of his bcn main line , at st . james in newchapel in staffordshire , england . the commemorative plaque ( 1956 ) at the church shows his date of death as 25 september . the inscription on his grave reads '' james brindley , of turnhurst , engineer , was interred 30 september 1772 , aged 56 . '' photograph at brindley 's widow remarried in 1775 ( robert williamson , one of brindley 's assistants ) and lived until 1799 . brindley 's death was noted in the chester courant of 1 december 1772 in the form of an epitaph : james brindley lies amongst these rocks , he made canals , bridges , and locks , to convey water ; he made tunnels for barges , boats , and air-vessels ; he erected several banks , mills , pumps , machines , with wheels and cranks ; he was famous t'invent engines , calculated for working mines ; he knew water , its weight and strength , turn 'd brooks , made soughs to a great length ; while he used the miners ' blast , he stopp 'd currents from running too fast ; there ne'er was paid such attention as he did to navigation . but while busy with pit or well , his spirits sunk below level ; and , when too late , his doctor found , water sent him to the ground . he is remembered in birmingham by brindley drive ( on the site of former canal yards ) , the brindleyplace mixed-use development and a pub , the james brindley ( both being canal-side features ) , and the james brindley school for children in birmingham 's hospitals ; in leek with the james brindley mill ; and by numerous other streets in the areas in which he worked . within the grounds of james brindley primary school at parr fold avenue , walkden , is a wooden barge once used for the transportation of coal from local mines . there is a statue of him ( leaning over his desk ) by james walter butler ( bronze , 18 september 1998 ) located in the canal basin by leicester row , coventry , and another by colin melbourne ( bronze , 20 july 1990 ) in lower bedford street , etruria , stoke-on-trent , at the junction of the trent and mersey canal with the caldon canal , opposite etruria industrial museum . he is commemorated in runcorn by the the brindley , which opened in the autumn of 2004 . there is also james brindley science college ( previously james brindley high school ) in chell , stoke-on-trent , and also , the brindley 's lock pub on silverstone crescent , stoke-on-trent . the well in the village of wormhill is dedicated to brindley . wormhill is in the same parish as tunstead where he was born . see also . history of the british canal system waterways in the united kingdom list of civil engineers . references . notes citations . further reading . archive.org with very clear line-drawings by the author . examines brindley 's working relationship with the gilbert brothers . . external links . biography summary at stoke-ontrent biographies brindley water mill at leek , staffordshire james brindley school , for birmingham hospitals brindleyplace , birmingham the brindley arts centre , runcorn chesterfield canal history archive open library