Amazon river dolphin

taxonomy . the species inia geoffrensis was described by henri marie ducrotay de blainville in 1817 . originally , the amazon river dolphin belonged to the superfamily platanistoidea , which constituted all river dolphins , making them paraphyletic group . today , however , the amazon river dolphin has been reclassified into the superfamily inioidea . there is no consensus on when and how they penetrated the amazon basin ; they may have done so during the miocene from the pacific ocean , before the formation of the andes , or from the atlantic ocean . there is ongoing debate about the classification of species and subspecies , with large international bodies being in disagreement . the iucn recognizes three subspecies : i . g . geoffrensis ( amazon river dolphin ) , i . g . boliviensis ( bolivian river dolphin ) , and i . g . humboldtiana ( orinoco river dolphin ) ; while the committee on taxonomy of the society for marine mammalogy only recognizes the first two of these . however , based on skull morphology in 1994 , it was proposed that i . g . boliviensis was a different species . in 2002 , following the analysis of mitochondrial dna specimens from the orinoco basin , the putumayo river ( tributary of the amazon ) and the tijamuchy and ipurupuru rivers , geneticists proposed that genus inia be divided into at least two evolutionary lineages : one restricted to the river basins of bolivia and the other widely distributed in the orinoco and amazon . a recent study , with more comprehensive sampling of the madeira system , including above and below the teotonio rapids ( which were thought to obstruct gene flow ) , found that the inia above the rapids did not possess unique mtdna . as such the species level distinction once held is not supported by current results . therefore , the bolivian river dolphin is currently recognized as a subspecies . in addition , a 2014 study identifies a third species in the araguaia-tocantins basin , but this designation is not recognized by any international organization and the committee on taxonomy of the society for marine mammalogy suggests this analysis is not persuasive . . subspecies . inia geoffrensis geoffrensis inhabits most of the amazon river , including rivers tocantins , araguaia , low xingu and tapajos , the madeira to the rapids of porto velho , and rivers purus , yurua , ica , caqueta , branco , and the rio negro through the channel of casiquiare to san fernando de atabapo in the orinoco river , including its tributary : the guaviare . inia geoffrensis boliviensis has populations in the upper reaches of the madeira river , upstream of the rapids of teotonio , in bolivia . it is confined to the mamore river and its main tributary , the iténez . inia geoffrensis humboldtiana are located in the orinoco river basin , including the apure and meta rivers . this subspecies is restricted , at least during the dry season , to the waterfalls of rio negro rapids in the orinoco between samariapo and puerto ayacucho , and the casiquiare canal . this subspecies is not recognized by the committee on taxonomy of the society for marine mammalogy , or the iucn . . biology and ecology . description . the amazon river dolphin is the largest river dolphin . adult males reach a maximum length and weight of ( average and ( average , while females reach a length and weight of ( mean and ( average . it has very evident sexual dimorphism , with males measuring and weighing between 16 % and 55 % more than females , making it unique among cetaceans , where females are generally larger than males . the texture of the body is robust and strong but flexible . unlike in oceanic dolphins , the cervical vertebrae are not fused , allowing the head to turn 90 degrees . the flukes are broad and triangular , and the dorsal fin , which is keel-shaped , is short in height but very long , extending from the middle of the body to the caudal region . the pectoral fins are large and paddle-shaped . the length of its fins allows the animal to perform a circular movement , allowing for exceptional maneuverability to swim through the flooded forest but decreasing its speed . the body color varies with age . newborns and the young have a dark grey tint , which in adolescence transforms into light grey , and in adults turns pink as a result of repeated abrasion of the skin surface . males tend to be pinker than females due to more frequent trauma from intra-species aggression . the color of adults varies between solid and mottled pink and in some adults the dorsal surface is darker . it is believed that the difference in color depends on the temperature , water transparency , and geographical location . there is one albino on record , kept in an aquarium in germany . the skull of the species is slightly asymmetrical compared to the other toothed whales . it has a long , thin snout , with 25 to 28 pairs of long and slender teeth to each side of both jaws . dentition is heterodont , meaning that the teeth differ in shape and length , with differing functions for both grabbing and crushing prey . anterior teeth are conical and later have ridges on the inside of the crown . despite small eyes , the species seems to have good eyesight in and out of the water . it has a melon on the head , the shape of which can be modified by muscular control when used for biosonar . breathing takes place every 30 to 110 seconds . . longevity . life expectancy of the amazon river dolphin in the wild is unknown , but in captivity , the longevity of healthy individuals has been recorded at between 10 and 30 years . however , the average longevity in captive animals is only 33 months . an individual named baby at the duisburg zoo , germany , lived at least 46 years , spending 45 years , 9 months at the zoo . . behavior . the amazon river dolphin are commonly seen singly or in twos , but may also occur in pods that rarely contain more than eight individuals . pods as large as 37 individuals have been seen in the amazon , but average is three . in the orinoco , the largest observed groups number 30 , but average is just above five . during prey time , as many as 35 pink dolphins work together to obtain their prey . typically , social bonds occur between mother and child , but may also been seen in heterogeneous groups or bachelor groups . the largest congregations are seen in areas with abundant food , and at the mouths of rivers . there is significant segregation during the rainy season , with males occupying the river channels , while females and their offspring are located in flooded areas . however , in the dry season , there is no such separation . due to the high level of prey fish , larger group-sizes are seen in large sections that are directly influenced by whitewater ( such as main rivers and lakes , especially during low water season ) than in smaller sections influenced by blackwater ( such as channels and smaller tributaries ) . in their freshwater habitat they are apex predators and gatherings depend more on food sources and habitat availability than in oceanic dolphins where protection from larger predators is necessary . captive studies have shown that the amazon river dolphin is less shy than the bottlenose dolphin , but also less sociable . it is very curious and has a remarkable lack of fear of foreign objects . however , dolphins in captivity may not show the same behavior that they do in their natural environment , where they have been reported to hold the oars of the fishermen , rub against the boat , pluck underwater plants , and play with sticks , logs , clay , turtles , snakes , and fish . they are slow swimmers ; they commonly travel at speeds of but have been recorded to swim at speeds up to . when they surface , the tips of the snout , melon and dorsal fins appear simultaneously , the tail rarely showing before diving . they can also shake their fins , and pull their tail fin and head above the water to observe the environment . they occasionally jump out of the water , sometimes as high as a meter ( 3.14 & nbsp ; ft ) . they are harder to train than most other species of dolphin . . courtship . adult males have been observed carrying objects in their mouths such as branches or other floating vegetation , or balls of hardened clay . the males appear to carry these objects as a socio-sexual display which is part of their mating system . the behavior is '' triggered by an unusually large number of adult males and/or adult females in a group , or perhaps it attracts such into the group . a plausible explanation of the results is that object-carrying is aimed at females and is stimulated by the number of females in the group , while aggression is aimed at other adult males and is stimulated by object-carrying in the group . '' before determining that the species had an evident sexual dimorphism , it was postulated that the river dolphins were monogamous . later , it was shown that males were larger than females and are documented wielding an aggressive sexual behavior in the wild and in captivity . males often have a significant degree of damage in the dorsal , caudal , and pectoral fins , as well as the blowhole , due to bites and abrasions . they also commonly have numerous secondary teeth-raking scars . this suggests fierce competition for access to females , with a polygynous mating system , though polyandry and promiscuity can not be excluded . in captivity , courtship and mating foreplay have been documented . the male takes the initiative by nibbling the fins of the female , but reacts aggressively if the female is not receptive . a high frequency of copulations in a couple was observed ; they used three different positions : contacting the womb at right angles , lying head to head , or head to tail . . reproduction . breeding is seasonal , and births occur between may and june . the period of birthing coincides with the flood season , and this may provide an advantage because the females and their offspring remain in flooded areas longer than males . as the water level begins to decrease , the density of food sources in flooded areas increases due to loss of space , providing enough energy for infants to meet the high demands required for growth . gestation is estimated to be around eleven months and captive births take 4 to 5 hours . at birth , calves are long and in captivity have registered a growth of per year . lactation takes about a year . the interval between births is estimated between 15 and 36 months , and the young dolphins are thought to become independent within two to three years . the relatively long duration of breastfeeding and parenting suggests a strong mother-child bond . most couples observed in their natural environment consist of a female and her calf . this suggests that long periods of parental care contribute to learning and development of the young . . diet . the diet of the amazon river dolphin is the most diverse of the toothed whales . it consists of at least 53 different species of fish , grouped in 19 families . the prey size is between , with an average of . the most frequently consumed fish belong to the families sciaenidae ( croakers ) , cichlidae , and characidae ( tetras and piranhas ) . the dolphin 's dentition allows it to access shells of river turtles and freshwater crabs . the diet is more diverse during the wet season , when fish are spread in flooded areas outside riverbeds , thus becoming more difficult to catch . the diet becomes more selective during the dry season when prey density is greater . usually , these dolphins are active and feeding throughout the day and night . however , they are predominantly crepuscular . they consume about 5.5 % of their body weight per day . they sometimes take advantage of the disturbances made by boats to catch disoriented prey . sometimes , they associate with the distantly-related tucuxi ( sotalia fluviatilis ) , and giant otters ( pteronura brasiliensis ) to hunt in a coordinated manner , by gathering and attacking fish stocks at the same time . apparently , there is little competition for food between these species , as each prefers different prey . it has also been observed that captive dolphins share food . . echolocation . amazonian rivers are often very murky , and the amazon river dolphin is therefore likely to depend much more on its sense of echolocation than vision when navigating and finding prey . however , echolocation in shallow waters and flooded forests may result in many echoes to keep track of . for each click produced a multitude of echoes are likely to return to the echolocating animal almost on top of each other which makes object discrimination difficult . this may be why the amazon river dolphin produces less powerful clicks compared to other similar sized toothed whales . by sending out clicks of lower amplitude only nearby objects will cast back detectable echoes , and hence fewer echoes need to be sorted out , but the cost is a reduced biosonar range . toothed whales generally do not produce a new echolocation click until all relevant echoes from the previous click have been received , so if detectable echoes are only reflected back from nearby objects , the echoes will quickly return , and the amazon river dolphin is then able to click at a high rate . this in turn allow these animals to have a high acoustic update rate on their surroundings which may aid prey tracking when echolocating in shallow rivers and flooded forests with plenty of hiding places for the prey . while preying in murky water , they emit series of clicking noises , 30 to 80 per second , which they use by listening to the bouncing sonar which bounces off their prey . . communication . like other dolphins , river dolphins use whistling tones to communicate . the issuance of these sounds is related to the time they return to the surface before diving , suggesting a link to food . acoustic analysis revealed that the vocalisations are different in structure from the typical whistles of other species of dolphins . . distribution and population . amazon river dolphins are the most widespread river dolphins . they are present in six countries in south america : bolivia , brazil , colombia , ecuador , peru , and venezuela , in an area covering about . the boundaries are set by waterfalls , such as the xingu and tapajós rivers in brazil , as well as very shallow water . a series of rapids and waterfalls in the madeira river have isolated one population , recognized as the subspecies i . g . boliviensis , in the southern part of the amazon basin in bolivia . they are also distributed in the basin of the orinoco river , except the caroni river and the upper caura river in venezuela . the only connection between the orinoco and the amazon is through the casiquiare canal . the distribution of dolphins in the rivers and surrounding areas depends on the time of year ; in the dry season they are located in the river beds , but in the rainy season , when the rivers overflow , they disperse to the flooded areas , both the forests and the plains . studies to estimate the population are difficult to analyze due to the difference in the methodology used . in a study conducted in the stretch of the amazon called solimões river , with a length of between the cities of manaus and tabatinga , a total of 332 individuals was sighted ± 55 per inspection . density was estimated at 0.08- 0.33 animals per square kilometer in the main channels , and 0.49 to 0.93 animals per square kilometer in the branches . in another study , on a stretch of at the confluence of colombia , brazil and peru , 345 individuals with a density of 4.8 per square km in the tributaries around the islands . 2.7 and 2.0 were observed along the banks . additionally , another study was conducted in the amazon at the height of the mouth of the caqueta river for six days . as a result of the studies conducted , it was found that the density is higher in the riverbanks , 3.7 per km , decreasing towards the center of the river . in studies conducted during the rainy season , the density observed in the flood plain was 18 animals per square km , while on the banks of rivers and lakes ranged from 1.8 to 5.8 individuals per square km . these observations suggest that the amazon river dolphin is found in higher density than any other cetacean . . habitat and migration . the amazon river dolphin is located in most of the area 's aquatic habitats , including ; river basins , major courses of rivers , canals , river tributaries , lakes , and at the ends of rapids and waterfalls . cyclical changes in the water levels of rivers take place throughout the year . during the dry season , dolphins occupy the main river channels , and during the rainy season , they can move easily to smaller tributaries , to the forest , and to floodplains . males and females appear to have selective habitat preferences , with the males returning to the main river channels when water levels are still high , while the females and their offspring remain in the flooded areas as long as possible ; probably because it decreases the risk of aggression by males toward the young and predation by other species . in the pacaya-samiria national reserve , peru , photo-identification is used to recognize individuals based on pigmentation patterns , scars and abnormalities in the beak . 72 individuals were recognized , of which 25 were again observed between 1991 and 2000 . the intervals between sightings ranged from one day to 7.5 years . the maximum range of motion was , with an average of . the longest distance in one day was , with an average of . in a previous study conducted at the center of the amazon river , a dolphin was observed that moved only a few dozen kilometers from the dry season and wet season . however , three of the reviewed 160 animals were observed over from where they were first registered . research in 2011 concluded that photo-identification by skilled operatives using high-quality digital equipment could be a useful tool in monitoring population size , movements and social patterns . . interactions with humans . in captivity . the amazon river dolphin has historically been kept in dolphinariums . today , only one exists in captivity , at zoologico de guistochoca in peru . several hundred were captured between the 1950s and 1970s , and were distributed in dolphinariums throughout the us , europe , and japan . around 100 went to us dolphinariums , and of that , only 20 survived ; the last died at the pittsburgh zoo in 2002 . . threats . the region of the amazon in brazil has an extension of containing diverse fundamental ecosystems . one of these ecosystems is a floodplain , or a várzea forest , and is home to a large number of fish species which are an essential resource for human consumption . the várzea is also a major source of income through excessive local commercialized fishing . várzea consists of muddy river waters containing a vast number and diversity of nutrient rich species . the abundance of distinct fish species lures the amazon river dolphin into the várzea areas of high water occurrences during the seasonal flooding . in addition to attracting predators such as the amazon river dolphin , these high-water occurrences are an ideal location to draw in the local fisheries . human fishing activities directly compete with the dolphins for the same fish species , the tambaqui ( colossoma macropomum ) and the pirapitinga ( piaractus brachypomus ) , resulting in deliberate or unintentional catches of the amazon river dolphin . the local fishermen overfish and when the amazon river dolphins remove the commercial catch from the nets and lines , it causes damages to the equipment and the capture , as well as generating ill will from the local fishermen . the negative reactions of the local fishermen are also attributed to the brazilian institute of environment and renewable natural resources prohibition on killing the amazon river dolphin , yet not compensating the fishermen for the damage done to their equipment and catch . during the process of catching the commercialized fish , the amazon river dolphins get caught in the nets and exhaust themselves until they die , or the local fishermen deliberately kill the entangled dolphins . the carcasses are discarded , consumed , or used as bait to attract a scavenger catfish , the piracatinga ( calophysus macropterus ) . the use of the amazon river dolphin carcass as bait for the piracatinga dates back to 2000 . increasing demand for the piracatinga has created a market for distribution of the amazon river dolphin carcasses to be used as bait throughout these regions . of the 15 dolphin carcasses found in the japurá river in 2010–2011 surveys , 73 % of the dolphins were killed for bait , disposed of , or abandoned in entangled gillnets . the data do not fully represent the actual overall number of deaths of the amazon river dolphins , whether accidental or intentional , because a variety of factors make it extremely complicated to record and medically examine all the carcasses . scavenger species feed upon the carcasses , and the complexity of the river currents make it nearly impossible to locate all of the dead animals . more importantly , the local fishermen do not report these deaths out of fear that a legal course of action will be taken against them , as the amazon river dolphin and other cetaceans are protected under a brazilian federal law prohibiting any takes , harassments , and kills of the species . . conservation . in 2008 , the international whaling commission ( iwc ) expressed concern for captured botos for use as bait in the central amazon , which is an emerging problem that has spread on a large scale . the species is listed in appendix ii of the cites ( cites ) , and appendix ii of the convention on the conservation of migratory species of wild animals , because it has an unfavorable conservation status or would benefit significantly from international co-operation organized by tailored agreements . according to a previous assessment by the scientific committee of the international whaling commission in 2000 , the population of botos appears great and there is little or no evidence of population decline in numbers and range . however , increased human intervention on their habitat is expected to , in the future , be the most likely cause of the decline of its range and population . a series of recommendations were issued to ensure proper follow-up to the species , among which is the implementation and publication of studies on the structure of populations , making a record of the distribution of the species , information about potential threats as the magnitude of fishing operations and location of pipelines . in september 2012 , bolivian president evo morales enacted a law to protect the dolphin and declared it a national treasure . in 2018 , the species was listed on the red list of endangered species . increasing pollution and gradual destruction of the amazon rainforest add to the vulnerability of the species . the biggest threats are deforestation and other human activities that contribute to disrupt and alter their environment . another source of concern is the difficulty in keeping these animals alive in captivity , due to intra-species aggression and low longevity . captive breeding is not considered a conservation option for this species . . in mythology . in traditional amazon river folklore , at night , an amazon river dolphin becomes a handsome young man who seduces girls , impregnates them , and then returns to the river in the morning to become a dolphin again . similarly , the female becomes a beautiful , well-dressed , wealthy-looking and young woman . she goes to the house of a married man , places him under a spell to keep him quiet , and takes him to a thatched hut and visits him every year on the same night she seduced him . on the 7th night of visiting , she changes the man into a female – baby or male , and soon transfers it into his own wife 's womb . the mythology is said to be the cycle of a baby . this dolphin shapeshifter is called an encantado . the myth has been suggested to have arisen partly because dolphin genitalia bear a resemblance to those of humans . others believe the myth served ( and still serves ) as a way of hiding the incestuous relations which are quite common in some small , isolated communities along the river . in the area , tales relate it is bad luck to kill a dolphin . legend also states that if a person makes eye contact with an amazon river dolphin , he or she will have lifelong nightmares . according to the pink amazon river dolphin myth , it is said that this creature takes form of a human and seduces men and woman to the underworld of encante . this underworld place is said to be 'atlantis-like paradise ' , yet no one has come back from it alive . myths say that whoever kills the amazon dolphin will have bad luck , but it 's worse for whoever eats it . local legends also state that the dolphin is the guardian of the amazonian manatee , and that if one should wish to find a manatee , one must first make peace with the dolphin . associated with these legends is the use of various fetishes , such as dried eyeballs and genitalia . these may or may not be accompanied by the intervention of a shaman . a recent study has shown , despite the claim of the seller and the belief of the buyers , none of these fetishes is derived from the boto . they are derived from costero , are most likely harvested along the coast and the amazon river delta , and then are traded up the amazon river . in inland cities far from the coast , many , if not most , of the fetishes are derived from domestic animals such as sheep and pigs . . gallery . inia geoffrensis skull - muse.jpg amazon river dolphin skull ( inia geoffrensis ) boto heart ( inia geoffrensis ) . jpg heart of the amazon river dolphin boto-cor-de-rosa ( inia geoffrensis ) . jpg amazon river dolphin ( inia geoffrensis ) . see also . unihemispheric slow-wave sleep list of cetaceans porpoise dolphin dolphinarium pacific ocean atlantic ocean boto . references . external links . omacha foundation—a non-government and non-profit organization created to study , research and protect river dolphins and other fauna and aquatic ecosystems in colombia . winner of the 2007 whitley awards ( uk ) . river dolphin research program—research project devoted to the study of the ecology and conservation of river dolphins in the amazon basin , based in the federal university of western pará . the scope of this research project focuses on ecological studies , as well as the impact that human activities have on their survival . convention on migratory species page on the amazon dolphin