Olympia (Paris)

history . co-founded in 1888 , by joseph oller and charles zidler , the co-creators of the moulin rouge , today the venue is easily recognized by its giant red glowing letters announcing its name . it opened in 1889 as the montagnes russes but was renamed the olympia in 1893 . besides musicians , the olympia played host to a variety of entertainment including circuses , ballets , and operettas . however , following a steady decline in appearances by the great stars , from 1929 until 1944 it served as a cinema . it may have opened as a music hall under the german occupation of france during world war ii , but certainly in 1945 after the liberation , it was a music hall free to allied troops in uniform . attendees had to listen to the playing of four national anthems before the varied programs that always ended with a spirited can-can dance . thereafter , at times it may have reverted to movies again until bruno coquatrix revived it as a music hall with a grand re-opening in february 1954 . after bruno coquatrix 's death in 1979 , it went into another slow decline and was in danger of being torn down and turned into a parking lot but on 7 january 1993 , france 's then minister of culture , jack lang issued a preservation order for the olympia which made société générale capitulate . in 1995 , as part of the real estate project initiated in 1993 which required €153millions ( 185,000,000 ) of investment , the edouard-vii area in the 9th arrondissement , where the olympia was located , began to undergo '' a radical '' demolition and reconstruction . on the construction site , only the haussmann-style facades of the listed buildings were saved . in spring 1997 , the demolition of the olympia began . it was rebuilt identically in seven months , keeping its original facade and the grandeur of its famous red interior , next to its original location although the entrance to the venue remained in the same place . on 30 april 1999 , the real estate subsidiary of the société générale at the origin of the project , delivered the large area of buildings ( including the théâtre édouard vii ) to its buyer , the société foncière lyonnaise , a subsidiary of commercial union , for an amount of €328millions ( 397,400,000 ) . as a result , the société foncière lyonnaise became the owner of the olympia building . the vast real estate transaction '' almost signed the death warrant of the olympia '' . in august 2001 , paulette coquatrix and patricia , her daughter , sold the brand l'olympia to vivendi chief executive jean-marie messier . with the tensions tearing the heirs apart , messier also bought the fonds de commerce ( english : goodwill / intangible assets ) from the société générale . messier was the sole initiator of the '' astronomical amount '' of money that transited , which sparked an investigation by the fisc . since that time , the business unit vivendi village owns and operates the olympia , while the société foncière lyonnaise retained commercial property . on 30 november 2016 , olympia was used for movie projection again , with the premiere of the biopic dalida . the screening was significant in france and was broadcast live in 220 other venues from the country and belgium . . notable performances . édith piaf achieved great acclaim at the olympia giving several series of recitals from january 1955 until october 1962 . dalida was the most commercially successful solo performer at the olympia . her first performance in the hall was in early 1956 at auditions held by eddie barclay and bruno coquatrix . it was then when she was discovered and chosen to sign a contract . later that year she supported charles aznavour for his concert . her own first concert there was in 1959 . after that she would perform in olympia every three to four years , singing for 30 nights in row , completely sold-out in 1961 , 1964 , 1967 , 1971 , 1974 , 1977 , 1981 . her last olympia appearance was in 1981 , and in 1983 the hall went bankrupt . releasing olympia 67 after her 1967 olympia concert , she started releasing albums named for olympia concerts , a style followed by other singers . she continued doing that until her last concert in olympia , olympia 81 . olympia 71 , olympia 74 , and olympia 77 are live albums . before going to america , the beatles performed eighteen days ( 16 january – 4 february 1964 ) of concerts at the olympia theatre , playing two and sometimes three shows a day . they were staying at the hotel george v and after returning at the end of their first day , they were told that '' i want to hold your hand '' had reached number one in america . jeff buckley , long an admirer of piaf , gave what he considered the finest performance of his career there in 1995 , which was later released in 2001 on live at l'olympia . jacques brel 's 1961 and 1964 concerts at l'olympia are legendary and preserved to this day on new cd releases . marlene dietrich 's 1962 olympia concert was broadcast . on 3–4 may 1972 the grateful dead played two concerts here as part of their first major european tour . both shows were recorded and songs from each were released on their 1972 live album europe '72 . dave gahan 's performance was released on the 2004 dvd , live monsters . '' dave gahan to release '' live monsters '' dvd march 1 on mute records '' . performers . inaugurated by the biggest artist in france at the time , singer/dancer la goulue , the venue has showcased a wide variety of performers , including french acts such as dalida , alan stivell , alizée , nolwenn leroy , édith piaf , léo ferré , mireille mathieu charles aznavour , grégory lemarchal , joe dassin , chimène badi , julie pietri , adamo , gilbert bécaud , jacques brel , yves montand , johnny hallyday , barbara , véronique sanson , charles trenet , yvonne printemps , michel polnareff , and many others . international artists have included umm kulthum , nana mouskouri , lola beltran , red hot chili peppers , grateful dead , sting , roy orbison , paul simon , art garfunkel , bob dylan , john denver , joan baez , lili ivanova , billie holiday , nina simone , the nice , the cure , coldplay , lindsey stirling , gloria estefan , lana del rey , fally ipupa , tokio hotel , violetta villas , the beach boys , alla pugacheva , the beatles , art blakey and the jazz messengers , david bowie , black sabbath , judy garland , miles davis , john coltrane , pink floyd , alice cooper , jimi hendrix , gary moore , sabah , fairouz , huda haddad , majida el roumi , najwa karam , tina turner , madonna , ray charles , janet jackson , björk , garbage , tori amos , abdel halim hafez , elissa , free , the jackson 5 , jorge ben , maysa , liza minnelli , lara fabian , lluís llach , jethro tull , amália rodrigues , iggy pop , led zeppelin , linda de suza , josephine baker , celine dion , kelly rowland cher , diana ross & the supremes , nelly furtado , tony carreira , evanescence , arctic monkeys , james brown and ahlam , tereza kesovija , oliver dragojević , midnight oil , the rolling stones , coldrain , il volo , ajda pekkan , bülent ersoy , beady eye , olivera katarina , mashrou ' leila , norah jones , blondie , monsta x , aretha franklin , the pogues , julio iglesias , bill haley and his comets , taylor swift , and khaled . references . ; sources jean-michel boris , jean-françois brieu , eric didi : olympia bruno coquatrix , 50 ans de music-hall , 2003 , editions hors collection , paulette coquatrix : mes noces d'or avec l'olympia , bordeaux , le castor astral jeanne tallon : j ’ étais ouvreuse à l'olympia , 2004 , paris , editions fayard , . external links . documentary 52 ' : si l'olympia m'etait conte video official website , accessed 15 july 2011