Norris McWhirter

early life . norris and ross were the twin sons of william mcwhirter , the editor of the sunday pictorial , and margaret williamson . in 1929 , as william was working on the founding of the northcliffe media chain of provincial newspapers , the family moved to '' aberfoyle '' , in broad walk , winchmore hill . ayrshire notes – norris mcwhirter ref used only to confirm that '' aberfoyle '' is house name in winchmore hill , rather than town name in scotland or ireland like their elder brother , kennedy ( born 1923 ) , norris and ross were educated at marlborough college and trinity college , oxford . norris chose to complete his law degree in two years rather than the usual three . between 1943 and 1946 , norris served as a sub-lieutenant with the royal naval volunteer reserve on escort duty in atlantic and on board a minesweeper in the pacific . norris mcwhirter – a short biography . sports . mcwhirter was an all-round athlete and represented scotland at running during the 1950s . he and his brother became sports journalists in 1950 . in 1951 , they published get to your marks and that year they founded an agency to provide facts and figures to fleet street , setting out , in norris mcwhirter 's words : '' to supply facts and figures to newspapers , yearbooks , encyclopedias , and advertisers '' . at the same time , he became a founding member of the association of track and field statisticians . mcwhirter came to public attention while working for the bbc as a sports commentator . on 6 may 1954 , he kept the time when roger bannister ran the first sub 4 minute mile . after the race , he began his announcement : as a result of event four , the one mile , the winner was r . g . bannister of exeter and merton colleges , in a time which , subject to ratification , is a track record , an english native record , a united kingdom record , a european record , in a time of three minutes . at which the rest of mcwhirter 's announcement was drowned out in the enthusiastic uproar . one of the athletes covered was runner christopher chataway , the employee at guinness who recommended them to hugh beaver . after an interview in which the guinness directors enjoyed testing the twins ' knowledge of records and unusual facts , the brothers agreed to start work on the book that became guinness world records in 1954 . in august 1955 , the first slim green volume – 198 pages long – was at the bookstalls , and in four more months it was britain 's no . 1 nonfiction best-seller . in 1954 , the mcwhirter brothers sued daily mail sports writer j . l . manning for his critical piece about non-journalist ( i.e . not members of the national union of journalists ) sports writers . the mcwhirters were awarded £300 in damages . mcwhirter was also part of the bbc commentary team for their olympic games coverage between 1960 and 1976 . political activity . he was an active member of the conservative party in the early 1960s and fought , unsuccessfully , to recapture orpington in the 1964 and 1966 uk general elections after its loss to the liberals in the 1962 by-election . his brother , ross , was a critic of british government policy in northern ireland , and called for a '' tougher '' response by the army against irish republicans . ross was shot dead by the provisional ira in 1975 at his home in middlesex after offering a reward for information leading to the apprehension of those carrying out a bombing campaign in london at the time . following ross 's murder , norris co-founded the right-wing political organisation the national association for freedom ( now the freedom association ) in 1975 . michael ivens : champion of the libertarian right and business freedom , the guardian , 21 november 2001 this organisation initiated legal challenges against the trade union movement in the uk , campaign for nuclear disarmament ( cnd ) and the european economic community ( eec ) in brussels . the organisation states that the work it undertakes falls within the following eight principles of a free society : individual freedom , personal & family responsibility , the rule of law , limited government , free market economy , national parliamentary democracy , strong national defences and a free press and other media . it continues its political activities to this day . norris mcwhirter cbe the freedom association norris was a member of the secretariat of the anti-communist european freedom campaign , established in london at an inaugural rally at westminster central hall on 10 december 1988 . record breakers . both brothers were regulars on the bbc show record breakers . they were noted for their photographic memory , enabling them to provide detailed answers to any questions from the audience about entries in the guinness book of records . after ross 's death , norris continued to appear on the show , eventually making him one of the most recognisable people on children 's television in the 1970s and 1980s . mcwhirter was appointed a order of the british empire in the 1980 new year honours . . personal life and death . in 1957 , mcwhirter married carole eckert , who died in 1987 ; they had a son and a daughter . in 1990 , he married his secretary , tessa von weichardt , née pocock . he retired from the guinness book of records in 1985 , though he continued in an advisory role until 1996 . he continued to write , editing a new reference book , norris mcwhirter 's book of millennium records , in 1999 . in 1985 , he launched an unsuccessful defamation case against the independent broadcasting authority for the tv programme spitting image , which had inserted a subliminal image of mcwhirter 's face imposed on the body of a naked woman . mcwhirter died from a heart attack at his home in kington langley , wiltshire , on 19 april 2004 , aged 78 . his memorial service – attended by , among others , margaret thatcher , john gouriet , jeremy beadle , christopher gill ( who read the lesson ) , jeffrey archer , gregory lauder-frost the peer who did porridge , irish independent , 7 may 2006 and sir roger bannister ( who read an appreciation ) service sheet , 7 october 2004 – was held in st martin-in-the-fields , trafalgar square , london , on 7 october 2004 . he was interred at st peter 's church , wiltshire , england . selected bibliography . ; sports and general encyclopaedia dunlop illustrated encyclopedia of facts this later became the '' guinness book of answers '' get to your marks ( 1951 , with ross mcwhirter ) guinness book of records ( 1955–1975 , with ross mcwhirter ) guinness book of records ( 1976–1985 ) guinness sports record book ( 1977–1978 ) book of millennium records ; ; personal ross : the story of a shared life winchmore hill lives s delvin ( 1991 ) ( contributor ) ; ; political treason at maastricht ( 1994 , with rodney atkinson , contributions by daniel hannan ) – criticism of the treaty of maastricht and the bilderberg group ross was right - the mcwhirter file ( covenant pub . , 29 sep 2014 ) . references . external links . the mcwhirter foundation the mcwhirter foundation