Alfred Deakin

leader of the opposition , 1910–1913 . after the 1910 election , deakin had less influence than any previous opposition leader , with the alp holding clear majorities in both houses . his diaries indicate that he would have preferred to resign and retire from politics , but he was asked to stay on in the absence of an obvious successor . he led the campaign against the fisher government 's 1911 australian referendum in 1911 , which would have significantly expanded the powers of the federal government . he spent two months campaigning for the '' no '' vote , visiting every state except western australia which turned out to be the only state to vote '' yes '' . the result was regarded as a triumph for the opposition . by 1912 , deakin had '' lost all zest for public life and was trudging on until he could retire '' . he made his final speech to parliament on 18 december 1912 and publicly announced his intention to retire on 8 january 1913 , after informing joseph cook a day earlier . his last action as leader of the liberal party was to oversee the election of his successor , held on 20 january . he supported cook , who defeated john forrest by a single vote . deakin retired from parliament at the 1913 federal election held in may , which saw cook and the liberals form government with a bare one-seat majority in the house . final years . after the 1913 election , cook offered deakin the position of chairman of the interstate commission , but he declined . in 1914 , following the outbreak of world war i , he did accept a request to chair a royal commission into food supply during the war . deakin 's final public engagement was as leader of the australian delegation to the 1915 panama–pacific international exposition in san francisco . he was offered the role initially by cook and then by andrew fisher , who returned as prime minister in september 1914 . the appointment was entirely ceremonial and had the support of both fisher and his deputy billy hughes . however , deakin 's involvement was subject to political interference from external affairs minister hugh mahon , and he decided on an early return to australia . illness and death . the final years of deakin 's political career coincided with the early stages of a degenerative neurological condition , with memory loss as the primary feature . in his personal diaries he meticulously documented his loss of function and increasing anguish at his decline . other health records suggest he also suffered from chronic hypertension . he had hoped that his symptoms were due to stress and leaving politics would aid his recovery , but instead found that '' when i stepped out of parliament in some mysterious fashion all my memories commenced to die or disappear '' . contemporary doctors were unable to give him a clear diagnosis , other than a 1913 opinion of '' neurasthenia '' . later writers have suggested vascular dementia , early-onset alzheimer 's disease , neurosyphilis , and vitamin b12 deficiency from vegetarianism as possible causes of his illness . in october 1914 , deakin wrote that he had '' no continuity of memory or argument '' and relied upon '' impressions that fade or are forgotten in a few minutes and often in a few seconds '' . in november 1915 , he wrote that he could remember what he had read for only a few hours and that '' no collapse could be ghastlier '' . the following month , he wrote that '' i have now become a mere juggler with myself . my helpless attempts to read the riddle of my mind and thought must be frankly abandoned '' . at her urging , deakin and his wife left australia in september 1916 to seek advice from specialists in england and the united states , and also to visit their daughter vera in london . they returned to australia in early 1917 , after which he was generally confined to his home in south yarra and only saw family members . deakin died at his home on 7 october 1919 , aged 63 . his official cause of death was given as meningoencephalitis . he was granted a state funeral at queen 's hall in parliament house , melbourne , after a period lying in state . he was interred next to his parents in the non-denominational section of st kilda cemetery , joined by his widow pattie following her death in 1934 . . journalism . in his youth , deakin published quentin massys , a drama in five acts . deakin attempted to burn the prints . fortunately some survived and the play was reprinted 1940 , as an example of australian verse . deakin continued to write prolifically throughout his career . he was a member of the eclectic association , fellow members included authors theodore fink , arthur topp , arthur patchett martin and david mickle . deakin wrote anonymous political commentaries for the london morning post even while he was prime minister . his account of the federation movement appeared as the federal story in 1944 and is a vital primary source for this history . his account of his career in victorian politics in the 1880s was published as the crisis in victorian politics in 1957 . his collected journalism was published as federated australia in 1968 . . spirituality . he was active in the theosophical society until 1896 , when he resigned on joining the australian church led by charles strong . though deakin always took pains to obscure the spiritual dimensions of his character from public gaze , he felt a strong sense of providence and destiny working in his career . al gaby . the mystic life of alfred deakin . cambridge university press , cambridge 1992 . p 2 . like dag hammarskjöld much later , deakin 's sincere longing for spiritual fulfillment led him to express a sense of unworthiness in his private diaries , which mingled with his literary aspirations as a poet . al gaby . the mystic life of alfred deakin . cambridge university press , cambridge 1992 . p 37 . his private prayer diaries , like those of samuel johnson , express a profound contemplative ( though more ecumenical ) christian view of the importance of humility in seeking divine assistance with his career . samuel johnson . doctor johnson 's prayers elton trueblood ( ed ) scm press . london 1947 . '' a life , the life of christ , '' deakin wrote , '' that is the one thing needful—the only revelation required is there . we have but to live it . '' ja la nauze . alfred deakin . a biography . angus and robertson . melbourne . p 79 . in 1888 , as an example relevant to his work for federation , deakin prayed : '' oh god , grant me that judgment & forsight which will enable me to serve my country—guide me and strengthen me , so that i may follow & persuade others to follow the path which shall lead to the elevation of national life & thought & permanence of well earned prosperity—give me light & truth & influence for the highest & the highest only . '' al gaby . the mystic life of alfred deakin . cambridge university press , cambridge 1992 . p 76 citing deakin 's boke of praer and prase prayer xlvii 12 august 1888 as walter murdoch pointed out , '' deakin believed himself to be inspired , and to have a divine message and mission . '' walter murdoch . alfred deakin : a sketch . constable & co ltd . london 1923 p 137 . historian manning clark , whose history of australia cites extensively from his studies of deakin 's private diaries in the national library of australia , wrote : '' by reading the world 's scriptures and mystics a deep peace had settled far inside deakin : now he felt a 'serenity at the core of my heart . ' he wanted to know whether participation in the world 's affairs would disturb that serenity . he was tormented by the thought that the emptiness of the man within corresponded with the emptiness of society at large where mammon had found a new demesne to infest . '' cmh clark . a history of australia . volume v . the people make laws 1888–1915 . melbourne university press . melbourne . 1981 . pp302 and 275 deakin processed a deep spiritual conviction and read widely on the subject . his daughter vera deakin ( lady white ) said in a 1960 abc radio interview '' he had tremendously deep religious views , i 'm sure of that . he read to us on sundays from the bible , from great preachers , and he was deeply , always deeply conscious of being , as he put it , ' a tool for providence to work through ' . any powers he had he felt he owed to the divine one and it was not his doing . '' . legacy . deakin was almost universally liked , admired and respected by his contemporaries , who called him '' affable alfred . '' he made his only real enemies at the time of the fusion , when not only labor but also some liberals such as sir william lyne reviled him as a traitor . he is regarded as a founding father by the modern liberal party . honours . deakin generally rejected honours during his lifetime . he was first offered a knighthood at the 1887 colonial conference , aged 30 , but declined to accept . on three separate occasions – in 1900 , 1907 , and 1913 – he refused appointment to the privy council , which would have entitled him to be styled '' the right honourable '' . his refusal was '' singular , indeed unique , among australian politicians of comparable prominence '' . except for chris watson , who was never offered the appointment , deakin was the only australian prime minister not to be a privy counsellor until gough whitlam in the 1970s . la nauze ( 1965a ) , p . 202 . he also refused to accept any honorary degrees as prime minister , believing they should only be awarded based on academic prowess . he rejected honorary doctor of civil law degrees from the university of oxford in 1900 and 1907 , and an honorary doctor of laws degree from the university of cambridge in 1912 . deakin generally only accepted honours when he believed it would advance australian interests , or if rejection could be taken as an insult . while visiting england as prime minister in 1907 , he was made an honorary freeman of the cities of london and edinburgh and an honorary bencher of gray 's inn . la nauze ( 1965a ) , p . 203 . the one honorary degree he did accept was from the university of california in 1915 , when he was representing australia at the panama–pacific international exposition . la nauze ( 1965a ) , p . 204 . since deakin 's death , a number of places have been named in his honour . educational institutions that bear his name include melbourne 's deakin university , canberra 's alfred deakin high school , deakin house at melbourne grammar school , and deakin hall at monash university . he is one of only two prime ministers to have a university named in his honour , along with john curtin ( curtin university ) . other places named after deakin include the canberra suburb of deakin and the division of deakin in the house of representatives , located in melbourne 's eastern suburbs . in 1969 , australia post honoured him on a postage stamp bearing his portrait . . personal life . deakin had a long and happy marriage and was survived by his wife and their three daughters : ivy ( 1883–1970 ) married businessman herbert brookes . their children were : wilfred deakin brookes ( 1906–1997 ) – businessman and raaf officer jessie clarke ( 1914–2014 ) – social worker , married tony clarke , son of sir frank clarke alfred deakin brookes ( 1920–2005 ) – first head of the australian secret intelligence service stella ( 1886–1976 ) married scientist david rivett . rohan rivett ( 1917-1977 ) - journalist , author , newspaper editor and pow . vera ( 1891–1978 ) married politician sir thomas white . see also . first deakin ministry second deakin ministry third deakin ministry list of prime ministers of australia deakin university . notes . references . bibliography . 1875 – deakin , alfred '' quentin massys : a drama in five acts '' j.p . donaldson , melbourne , 1875 . 1877 – deakin , alfred '' a new pilgrim 's progress '' terry , melbourne , 1877 . 1885 – deakin , alfred '' irrigation in western america , so far as it has relation to the circumstances of victoria '' government printer , melbourne , 1885 . 1893 – deakin , alfred '' irrigated india : an australian view of india and ceylon , their irrigation and agriculture '' w . thacker & co . , london , 1893 . 1893 – deakin , alfred '' temple and tomb in india '' melville , mullen and slade , melbourne , 1893 . 1923 – deakin , alfred / walter murdoch ( ed ) '' alfred deakin – a sketch '' bookman press pty ltd ( first published 1923 later 1999 out of print ) 1944 – deakin , alfred / brookes , herbert ( ed ) '' the federal story : the inner history of the federal cause '' robertson & mullens , melbourne , 1944 ( later editions edited by j.a . la nauze 1963 and stuart macintyre 1995 ) . 1957 – deakin , alfred / la nauze , j a and crawford , r m ( eds ) '' the crisis in victorian politics , 1879–1881 '' melbourne university press , melbourne , 1957 . 1968 – deakin , alfred / la nauze , j a ( ed ) '' federated australia : selections from letters to the morning post 1900–1910 '' melbourne university press , melbourne , 1968 . 1974 – deakin , alfred and murdoch , walter / la nauze , j a and nurser , elizabeth ( eds ) '' walter murdoch and alfred deakin on 'books and men ' : letters and comments , 1900–1918 '' melbourne university press , melbourne , 1974 . further reading . birrell , robert ( 1995 ) , a nation of our own , longman australia , melbourne . gabay , al ( 1992 ) , the mystic life of alfred deakin , cambridge university press . colin hughes ( 1976 ) , mr prime minister . australian prime ministers 1901–1972 , oxford university press , melbourne , victoria , ch.22 . . external links . alfred deakin – australia 's prime ministers / national archives of australia guide to the papers of alfred deakin held and selectively digitised by the national library of australia alfred deakin prime ministerial library deakin university alfred deakin 's personal library on librarything www.alfreddeakin.com