Hot dog

history . the word '' frankfurter '' comes from frankfurt , germany , where pork sausages similar to hot dogs originated . these sausages , frankfurter würstchen , were known since the 13th century and given to the people on the event of imperial coronations , starting with the coronation of maximilian ii , holy roman emperor as king . '' wiener '' refers to vienna , home to a sausage made of a mixture of pork and beef . johann georg lahner , an 18th/19th century butcher from the franconian city of coburg , is said to have brought the frankfurter würstchen to vienna , where he added beef to the mixture and simply called it frankfurter . nowadays , in german-speaking countries , except austria , hot dog sausages are called wiener or vienna sausage ( würstchen means '' little sausage '' ) , to differentiate them from the original pork-only mixture from frankfurt . in swiss german , it is called wienerli , while in austria the terms frankfurter or frankfurter würstel are used . a german immigrant named feuchtwanger , from frankfurt , in hesse , allegedly pioneered the practice in the american midwest ; there are several versions of the story with varying details . according to one account , feuchtwanger 's wife proposed the use of a bun in 1880 : feuchtwanger sold hot dogs on the streets of st . louis , missouri , and provided gloves to his customers so that they could handle the sausages without burning their hands . losing money when customers did not return the gloves , feuchtwanger 's wife suggested serving the sausages in a roll instead . in another version , antoine feuchtwanger , or anton ludwig feuchtwanger , served sausages in rolls at the world 's fair & nbsp ; – either at the 1904 louisiana purchase exposition in st . louis , allen , beth ; westmoreland , susan ( ed . ) ( 2004 ) . good housekeeping great american classics cookbook . new york : hearst books . p . & nbsp ; 49 . snodgrass , mary ellen ( 2004 ) . encyclopedia of kitchen history . new york : fitzroy dearborn . p . & nbsp ; 968 . or , earlier , at the 1893 world 's columbian exposition , in chicago & nbsp ; – again , allegedly because the white gloves provided to customers to protect their hands were being kept as souvenirs . another possible origin for serving the sausages in rolls is the pieman charles feltman , at coney island in new york city . in 1867 he had a cart made with a stove on which to boil sausages , and a compartment to keep buns in which they were served fresh . in 1871 he leased land to build a permanent restaurant , and the business grew , selling far more than just the '' coney island red hots '' as they were known . . etymology . the term dog has been used as a synonym for sausage since the 1800s , possibly from accusations that sausage makers used dog meat in their sausages . in the early 20th century , consumption of dog meat in germany was common . the suspicion that sausages contained dog meat was '' occasionally justified '' . '' hot dog '' at online etymology dictionary an early use of the term hot dog in reference to sausage-meat appears in the evansville ( indiana ) daily courier ( september 14 , 1884 ) : even the innocent 'wienerworst ' man will be barred from dispensing hot dog on the street corner . it was used to mean a sausage in casing in the paterson ( new jersey ) daily press ( 31 december 1892 ) : the 'hot dog ' was quickly inserted in a gash in a roll . subsequent uses include the new brunswick ( new jersey ) daily times ( may 20 , 1893 ) , the new york world ( may 26 , 1893 ) , and the knoxville ( tennessee ) journal ( september 28 , 1893 ) . according to one story , the use of the complete phrase hot dog in reference to sausage was coined by the newspaper cartoonist thomas a . dorgan around 1900 in a cartoon recording the sale of hot dogs during a new york giants baseball game at the polo grounds . however , dorgan 's earliest usage of hot dog was not in reference to a baseball game at the polo grounds , but to a bicycle race at madison square garden , in new york journal american december 12 , 1906 , by which time the term hot dog in reference to sausage was already in use . : '' hot dog ( polo grounds myth & original monograph ) '' no copy of the apocryphal cartoon has ever been found . . general description . ingredients . common hot dog sausage ingredients include : meat trimmings and fat , e.g . mechanically separated meat , pink slime , meat slurry flavorings , such as salt , garlic , and paprika preservatives ( cure ) – typically sodium erythorbate and sodium nitrite pork and beef are the traditional meats used in hot dogs . less expensive hot dogs are often made from chicken or turkey , using low-cost mechanically separated poultry . changes in meat technology and dietary preferences have led manufacturers to lower the salt content and use turkey , chicken , and vegetarian meat substitutes . commercial preparation . hot dogs are prepared commercially by mixing the ingredients ( meats , spices , binders and fillers ) in vats where rapidly moving blades grind and mix the ingredients in the same operation . this mixture is forced through tubes into casings for cooking . most hot dogs sold in the us are '' skinless '' rather than '' natural casing '' sausages . natural-casing hot dogs . as with most sausages , hot dogs must be in a casing to be cooked . traditional casing is made from the small intestines of sheep . the products are known as '' natural casing '' hot dogs or frankfurters . : it 's all in how the dog is served these hot dogs have firmer texture and a '' snap '' that releases juices and flavor when the product is bitten . kosher casings are expensive in commercial quantities in the us , so kosher hot dogs are usually skinless or made with reconstituted collagen casings . . skinless hot dogs . '' skinless '' hot dogs use a casing for cooking , but the casing may be a long tube of thin cellulose that is removed between cooking and packaging , a process invented in chicago in 1925 by erwin o . freund , founder of viskase . the first skinless hot dog casings were produced by freund 's new company under the name '' nojax '' , short for '' no jackets '' and sold to local chicago sausage makers . skinless hot dogs vary in surface texture , but have a softer '' bite '' than with natural casing . skinless hot dogs are more uniform in shape and size and cheaper to make than natural casing hot dogs . home consumption . a hot dog may be prepared and served in various ways . typically it is served in a hot dog bun with various condiments and toppings . the sausage itself may be sliced and added , without bread , to other dishes . file : hotdog ( 4739769948 ) . jpg hot dog garnished with ketchup and onions file : allina volunteer at national night out ( 229022095 ) . jpg hot dogs being grilled file : hot dog toaster.jpg a hot dog bun toaster . sandwich debate . there is an ongoing debate about whether or not a hot dog fits the description of a sandwich . the national hot dog and sausage council ( nhdsc ) has declared that a hot dog is not a sandwich . hot dog eating champion joey chestnut and former hot dog eating champion takeru kobayashi agree with the nhdsc . dictionary merriam-webster , on the other hand , has stated that a hot dog is indeed a sandwich . former united states supreme court justice ruth bader ginsburg also weighed in on the matter , stating that a hot dog might be categorized to be a sandwich , but ultimately it comes down to the definition of a sandwich . she went on to acknowledge that a hot dog bun is a single roll that is not sliced all the way through and in that way is similar to a submarine sandwich . the topic remains widely and heatedly debated in online internet forums . in 2011 , panini happy ran an online survey with a slight majority of respondents ( 54 % ) indicating that they do not consider hot dogs to be sandwiches . a 2020 survey indicated that public opinion may be shifting and that 64 % of respondents do not consider a hot dog to be a sandwich . . health risks . although hot dogs are cooked during manufacture , it is still recommended that they are heated to an internal temperature of at least 165°f ( 75°c ) prior to consumption . most hot dogs are high in fat and salt and have preservatives sodium nitrate and sodium nitrite , which are contributors to nitrate-containing chemicals classified as group 1 carcinogens by the world health organization , although this has been disputed . new attack ad targets hot dogs , citing dubious cancer risk , fox news , august 26 , 2008 . these health concerns have resulted in manufacturers offering alternative product lines made from turkey and chicken , and uncured , low-sodium , and '' all-natural '' franks . hot dogs have relatively low carcinogenic heterocyclic amine ( hca ) levels compared to other types of ready-to-eat meat products because they are manufactured at low temperatures . an american institute for cancer research ( aicr ) report found that consuming one daily 50-gram serving of processed meat — about one hot dog — increases long-term risk of colorectal cancer by 20 percent . aicr statement : hot dogs and cancer risk , american institute for cancer research , july 22 , 2009 . thus , eating a hot dog every day would increase the probability of contracting colorectal cancer from 5.8 percent to 7 percent . the aicr 's warning campaign has been criticized as being '' attack ads '' . attack ad targets hot dogs as cancer risk , canadian broadcasting company , august 27 , 2008 . the cancer project group filed a class-action lawsuit demanding warning labels on packages and at sporting events . hot dog cancer-warning labels sought in lawsuit : healthy cleveland , the plain dealer , august 29 , 2009 . retrieved 2010-07-06 . like many foods , hot dogs can cause illness if not heated properly to kill pathogens . an unopened package of hot dogs contains ingredients that have the potential for promoting the growth of listeria bacteria . listeria monocytogenes can also cause serious infections in infants and pregnant women , and can be transmitted to an infant in utero or after birth . adults with suppressed immune systems can also be harmed . due to their size , shape , and ubiquitous consumption , hot dogs present a significant choking risk , especially for children . a study in the us found that 17 % of food-related asphyxiations among children younger than 10 years of age were caused by hot dogs . the risk of choking on a hot dog is greatly reduced by slicing it . it has been suggested that redesign of the size , shape and texture of hot dogs would reduce the choking risk . . in the united states . in the us , the term '' hot dog '' refers to both the sausage by itself and the combination of sausage and bun . many nicknames applying to either have emerged over the years , including frankfurter , frank , wiener , weenie , coney , and red hot . annually , americans consume 20 billion hot dogs . . hot dog restaurants . stands and trucks sell hot dogs at street and highway locations . wandering hot dog vendors sell their product in baseball parks . at convenience stores , hot dogs are kept heated on rotating grills . 7-eleven sells the most grilled hot dogs in north america & mdash ; 100 million annually . hot dogs are also common on restaurants ' children 's menus . fast-food restaurant chains typically do not carry hot dogs because of its shorter shelf-life , more complex toppings & cooking , and a mismatched consumer expectations . there are also restaurants where hot dogs are a specialty . condiments . hot dogs are commonly served with one or more condiments . in 2005 , the us-based national hot dog & sausage council ( part of the american meat institute ) found mustard to be the most popular , preferred by 32 % of respondents ; 23 % favored ketchup ; 17 % chili ; 9 % pickle relish , and 7 % onions . other toppings include sauerkraut , mayonnaise , lettuce , tomato , cheese , and chili peppers . condiment preferences vary across the u.s . southerners showed the strongest preference for chili , while midwesterners showed the greatest affinity for ketchup . . variations . many variations are named after regions other than the one in which they are popular . the '' new york dog '' or '' new york style '' hot dog , is a natural-casing all-beef frank topped with sauerkraut and spicy brown mustard , onions optional . sauteed bell peppers , onions , and potatoes find their way into new jersey 's deep-fried italian hot dog . in the midwest , the chicago-style hot dog is served on a poppy seed bun and topped with mustard , fresh tomatoes , onions , '' sport peppers '' , bright green relish , dill pickles , and celery salt . michigan hot dogs are popular in upstate new york ( as are white hots ) , while coney island hot dogs are popular in michigan . hot wieners , or weenies , are a staple in rhode island where they are sold at restaurants with the misleading name '' new york system . '' lukas , paul . '' the big flavors of little rhode island . '' the new york times . november 13 , 2002 . texas hot dogs are spicy variants found in upstate new york and pennsylvania ( and as '' all the way dogs '' in new jersey ) , but not texas . in the philadelphia metro area , texas tommy refers to a hot dog variant in which the dog is topped with melted cheddar or another cheese and wrapped in bacon . some baseball parks have signature hot dogs , such as dodger dogs at dodger stadium in los angeles , and fenway franks at fenway park in boston , which are boiled then grilled , and served on a new england-style bun . in canada . skinner 's restaurant , in lockport , manitoba , is reputed to be canada 's oldest hot dog outlet in continuous operation , founded in 1929 by jim skinner sr . hot dogs served at skinner 's are european style foot-long ( 30.5 & nbsp ; cm ) hot dogs with natural casings , manufactured by winnipeg old country sausage in winnipeg , manitoba . the half moon drive in , also in lockport , manitoba , and located directly across the river from skinner 's , was established in 1938 by brothers peter and louie kosowicz . the original drive-in consisted of three wooden buildings shaped like semicircles — one was for takeout , one was for dine-in , and the third was a dance hall and later an arcade . the half moon also serves european-style wieners manufactured by winnipeg old country sausage . one of the most popular items on the menu is the moon dog , consisting of a hot dog topped with cheese , bacon , fried onions , pickles and mustard ; the half moon serves about 2,000 on an average summer weekend day . . outside north america . in most of the world , a '' hot dog '' is recognized as a sausage in a bun , but the type varies considerably . the name is often applied to something that would not be described as a hot dog in north america . for example , in new zealand a '' hot dog '' is a battered sausage , often on a stick , which is known as a corn dog in north america ; an '' american hot dog '' is the version in a bun . gallery . file : thai hot dogs.jpg grilled sausages on sticks for sale in thailand file : わさびぬき ( 3559517214 ) . jpg hot dog sushi file : khanom tokiao.jpg thai khanom tokiao being prepared , a thai style crêpe with a hot dog sausage , at a night market file : ミニホットドック ( 16853193965 ) . jpg miniature hot dogs in japan file : long hot dog in bun.jpg long hot dog in bun . records . the world 's longest hot dog was long and rested within a bun . the hot dog was prepared by shizuoka meat producers for the all-japan bread association , which baked the bun and coordinated the event , including official measurement for the world record . the hot dog and bun were the center of a media event in celebration of the association 's 50th anniversary on august 4 , 2006 , at the akasaka prince hotel in tokyo . on may 31 , 2012 , guinness world records certified the world record for the most expensive hot dog at usd 145.49 . the '' california capitol city dawg '' , served at capitol dawg in sacramento , california , features a grilled all-beef , natural-casing frank from chicago , served on a fresh-baked herb-and-oil focaccia roll , spread with white truffle butter , then grilled . it is topped with whole-grain mustard from france , garlic and herb mayonnaise , sauteed chopped shallots , organic mixed baby greens , maple syrup-marinated and fruitwood-smoked uncured bacon from new hampshire , chopped tomato , moose cheese from sweden , sweetened dried cranberries , basil olive oil and pear-cranberry-coconut balsamic vinaigrette , and ground peppercorn . proceeds from the sale of each super dog were donated to the shriners hospitals for children . hot dogs are a popular food for eating competitions . the record for hot dogs eaten in 10 minutes is 75 hot dogs . this record is held by joey chestnut , who achieved this feat at the nathan 's hot dog eating contest on july 4 , 2020 , beating his previous record of 74 . the last person to hold the record before chestnut was takeru kobayashi . competitive eater miki sudo holds the record for most hot dogs eaten in 10 minutes by a female at 48.5 hot dogs , also setting this record on july 4 , 2020 . the last person to hold the record before sudo was sonya thomas . see also . advanced meat recovery by-products hot dog variations list of hot dogs list of hot dog restaurants mechanically separated meat sausage bun sausage sandwich vienna sausage pigs in a blanket . references . notes bibliography further reading . external links . home page for a pbs documentary about hot dogs usda fact sheet on hot dogs