Rocky V

plot . immediately after his victory over ivan drago in moscow , rocky experiences physical complications from the fight . rocky , his wife adrian , his brother-in-law paulie , and his trainer tony '' duke '' evers return to the united states where they are greeted by rocky 's son , robert . at a press conference , boxing promoter george washington duke attempts to goad rocky into fighting his boxer , union cane , who is the top-rated challenger . rocky declines . after returning home , rocky and adrian discover they are broke after paulie was fooled into signing a '' power of attorney '' over to rocky 's accountant , who squandered all of his money on real estate deals gone sour and failed to pay rocky 's taxes over the previous six years . his mansion has been mortgaged by 400,000 , but his attorney tells rocky that it is fixable with a few more fights . rocky considers accepting the fight with cane , but adrian urges him to see a doctor , and he is diagnosed with cavum septum pellucidum . reluctantly , rocky retires from boxing . his home and belongings are sold to pay the debt and the balboas move back to their old working-class neighborhood in philadelphia . rocky visits mighty mick 's gym ( willed to his son by his old trainer mickey goldmill ) which has fallen into disrepair . seeing a vision of himself and mickey from years past , rocky draws inspiration to become a trainer himself and reopens the gym . rocky and paulie meet a young fighter from oklahoma named tommy gunn . rocky agrees to become his manager . training him gives rocky a sense of purpose , and tommy rises to become a top contender . distracted with tommy 's training , rocky neglects robert , who is being bullied at school . after learning to defend himself , robert falls in with the wrong crowd and becomes withdrawn from his family . union cane wins the vacant world heavyweight title . still wanting to do business with rocky , washington showers tommy with luxuries and promises him that he is the only path to a shot at the title . rocky insists dealing with washington will end badly , causing tommy to desert him . adrian attempts to comfort rocky . rocky apologizes to robert and they mend their relationship . tommy defeats cane for the heavyweight title with a first round knockout but is jeered by spectators for leaving rocky and hounded by reporters after the fight . tommy gives all the credit for his success to george washington duke , which only fans the flames of contempt for tommy by the fans and media . they insist that cane was nothing but a '' paper champion '' , because cane did not lineal championship . washington convinces tommy that he needs to secure a title fight with rocky to refute the notion that he is not the real champion . washington and tommy show up at the local bar with a live television crew to goad rocky into accepting a title fight . rocky declines and tries to reason with him , but tommy calls him weak , prompting paulie to stand up for rocky . when tommy punches paulie , rocky challenges tommy to a street fight . tommy accepts . rocky knocks him to the ground with a flurry of punches , but tommy gets up and attacks rocky from behind . rocky is beaten down before he hears the voice of mickey urging him to get up and continue the fight . rocky gets up and , with robert , paulie , and the neighborhood crowd cheering him on , he defeats tommy . while tommy is escorted away by the police , washington threatens to sue rocky if he touches him . after a brief hesitation , rocky knocks him onto the hood of a car . months later , rocky and robert explore the philadelphia museum of art , and rocky gives his son rocky marciano 's cufflink , given to him years ago as a gift from mickey . cast . sylvester stallone as rocky balboa , '' the italian stallion '' : heavyweight champion of the world , who suffers from brain damage caused by the head-trauma he received at the hands of ivan drago in the previous film . because of his injuries , rocky is forced to officially retire from boxing . after moving back to philadelphia , rocky trains and manages underdog boxer tommy gunn and helps him to rise to fame . talia shire as adrian balboa : rocky 's wife and support throughout his life and his boxing career . burt young as paulie pennino : rocky 's friend , and brother-in-law . sage stallone as rocky balboa jr . : rocky and adrian 's only son , who gets involved with the wrong crowds during his father 's absence , throughout the training and mentoring of tommy gunn . tommy morrison as tommy gunn ( character ) : underdog boxer , who rises to fame under rocky 's training . throughout his career he is called rocky 's '' shadow '' , and angrily seeks out another manager . after his achievements as heavyweight champion , and the public 's continued dis-appreciation for him , he fights rocky in an unofficial street fight , and loses . burgess meredith as mickey goldmill : rocky 's deceased friend , manager and trainer , a former bantamweight fighter from the 1920s and the owner of the local boxing gym . burgess appears in new footage , filmed as a flashback to before rocky 's second fight with apollo . richard gant as george washington duke : loud and obnoxious boxing promoter , who repeatedly tries to convince rocky to re-enter the ring . he becomes tommy gunn 's manager during his shot at the heavyweight champion title . tony burton as tony '' duke '' evers : rocky 's friend , and former trainer and manager of apollo creed . paul j . micale as father carmine ( uncredited ) michael williams as union cane : reigning heavyweight champion of the world who wants to fight legendary rocky , and eventually fights tommy gunn . williams was also a real-life boxer . he and morrison were to have an actual match about a month after rocky v was released , but it was canceled when williams was hurt . the match was being hyped as '' the real cane vs . gunn match . '' the film has cameos by sportswriters and boxing analysts , including al bernstein , stan hochman and al meltzer , and sportscaster stu nahan , who was the ringside announcer in every rocky movie , save the sixth and seventh . dolph lundgren and carl weathers appear as ivan drago and apollo creed in archival footage , uncredited . jodi letizia , who played street kid marie in the original rocky ( 1976 ) , was supposed to reprise her role . her character was shown to have ended up as rocky predicted she would : a prostitute , but the scene ended up on the cutting room floor . she can briefly be seen during the street fight at the end . the character reappears in rocky balboa ( 2006 ) as a bartender and confidante to the aging rocky . actress geraldine hughes took over the role . kevin connolly , who gained success as eric murphy on hbo 's entourage , was in his first acting role as neighborhood bully chickie . production . filming . filming began in mid-january of 1990 . some of the fight sequences were filmed at the blue horizon in philadelphia , a venue which was a mecca for boxing in the city during the 1970s . the rocky statue , which was commissioned for rocky iii , had since been gifted to the city of philadelphia and moved to the entrance of the spectrum , and so had to be moved back to the philadelphia museum of art for the filming . scenes with mickey , played by burgess meredith , were trimmed in the final film when rocky fights tommy . mickey appeared in ghost form on top of the railway bridge , giving words of encouragement . in the final film , this was made into flashbacks . the speech mickey gives to rocky in the flashback sequence is based on an interview with cus d'amato given in 1985 , shortly after mike tyson 's first professional bout . as a promotional gimmick , replicas of the golden glove necklace featured so prominently in the film were distributed to moviegoers at the hollywood premiere of rocky v at grauman 's chinese theatre . professional wrestling veteran terry funk helped choreograph much of the street fight between rocky and tommy gunn . in the original script , rocky is killed during the final fight with tommy , dying in adrian 's arms in the street . according to stallone , the director and the studio had second thoughts . eventually , stallone rewrote the ending , saying that he decided to change it because rocky was supposed to be about perseverance and redemption , and having him die in a street brawl would be against the roots of the series . continuity . in the years following the film 's release , stallone acknowledged that the injury which forces rocky to retire , referenced in the film as a potentially lethal form of 'brain damage ' , was inaccurate . stallone stated that having discussed the story with many boxing medical professionals , the injury rocky suffered was a milder form of brain damage , similar to that of a long term concussion that many boxers suffer from and by modern-day standards are still able to gain licenses to box . it would not have prevented rocky from gaining a license to box nor killed him . tony burton briefly reprises his role as duke at the beginning of the film . however , during his scenes , rocky refers to him as '' tony '' . in the credits , burton is credited as playing '' tony '' , as opposed to '' duke '' ( possibly to avoid confusion with the george washington duke character ) . rocky v is the third time in the series to do so , with the first being rocky ii as apollo asked '' what are you afraid of , tony ? '' , and the second time during rocky iv after receiving a pep talk in the former soviet union , '' thanks , tony . '' rocky balboa names burton 's character '' duke evers '' . sage stallone , sylvester 's real-life son , portrays his character 's son in the film . in rocky iv , he was portrayed as a nine-year-old child whereas sage was 14 at the time of filming , making him a teenager in rocky v , despite it taking place just days after the events of rocky iv . music . soundtrack . the soundtrack album is not the original motion picture score , but rather has music from and inspired by the film . this soundtrack features joey b . ellis , mc hammer , 7a3 , mc tab , rob base , and bill conti . most of the soundtrack album contains rap music , rather than the bill conti score . also , two of the scores from rocky iv were featured in this film 's trailer , but were not present in the actual film or soundtrack . '' measure of a man '' was written by alan menken , elton john , tim rice and performed by john . like rocky iv , a full version of '' gon na fly now '' with lyrics is not heard in the film . however an instrumental horn version is played during the early scene where rocky gets off the airplane , and at the end of the movie after rocky defeats tommy , another instrumental version is heard . in addition , a solo piano version is heard during several scenes including where balboa speaks with his son upon his return from russia , and during the scenes where his property is being auctioned . reception . box office . anticipated to be one of the big hits of the 1990 holiday season , rocky v finished second in its opening weekend to home alone and never recovered . the film earned us 14 million on its opening weekend and 40 million in total us box-office sales , about one-third of its predecessor 's take . rocky v however made almost twice as much overseas and thereby a total of 119.9 million worldwide . critical response . rocky v has a 31 % approval rating on rotten tomatoes from 36 reviews , with the site consensus , '' rocky vs attempts to recapture the original 's working-class grit are as transparently phony as each of the thuddingly obvious plot developments in a misguided installment that sent the franchise flailing into longterm limbo . '' it also has a score of 55 out of 100 on metacritic , based on 16 critics , indicating '' mixed or average reviews '' . audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of '' a '' on an a+ to f scale . in 1999 , time placed the film on a list of the 100 worst ideas of the 20th century . the los angeles times regarded it as the best of the rocky sequels . . accolades . it was nominated for seven golden raspberry awards in 1990 including worst picture , worst actor and worst screenplay for stallone , worst actress for shire , worst supporting actor for young , worst director for avildsen and worst original song for '' the measure of a man '' . other media . sequel . sixteen years later , stallone wrote , directed and starred in the film rocky balboa . stallone suggested that advances in medical science during the period between the films had shown that the injuries mentioned in rocky v were less debilitating than once thought , and that he would receive a '' clean bill of health '' by the time of rocky balboa , allowing him to box again . the film grossed over 70 million at the us box office , and 85 million abroad , and received largely positive reviews . video games . in 2002 , a video game called rocky , based on the first five rocky films , was released by rage software . references . external links .