Tom Brokaw

early life . brokaw was born in webster , south dakota , the son of eugenia '' jean '' ( née conley ; 1917–2011 ) , who worked in sales and as a post-office clerk , and anthony orville '' red '' brokaw ( 1912–1982 ) . he was the eldest of their three sons ( brothers named william and michael ) and named for his maternal great-grandfather , thomas conley . his father was a descendant of huguenot immigrants bourgon and catherine ( née le fèvre ) broucard , and his mother was irish-american , mcguire , john m . ( november 6 , 2002 ) . '' from yankton to yankee town '' . st . louis post-dispatch , p . e1 . although the origin of the name brokaw is contested . his paternal great-grandfather , richard p . brokaw , founded the town of bristol , south dakota , and the brokaw house , a small hotel and the first structure in bristol . brokaw , tom . ( 2003 ) . a long way from home : growing up in the american heartland in the forties and fifties , p . 9 . new york : random house . brokaw 's father was a construction foreman for the army corps of engineers . he worked at the black hills ordnance depot ( bhod ) and helped construct fort randall dam ; his job often required the family to resettle throughout south dakota during brokaw 's early childhood . jordan , larry ( february 1995 ) . '' tom brokaw : a heavyweight in a world of lightweights '' . midwest today . the brokaws lived for short periods in bristol , igloo ( the small residential community of the bhod ) , and pickstown , before settling in yankton , where brokaw attended high school . as a high school student attending yankton high school , brokaw was governor of south dakota american legion boys state , and in that capacity he accompanied then-south dakota governor joe foss to new york city for a joint appearance on a tv game show . it was to be the beginning of a long relationship with foss , whom brokaw would later feature in his book about world war ii veterans , the greatest generation . brokaw also became an advisory board member of the joe foss institute . brokaw matriculated at the university of iowa in iowa city , iowa , but dropped out after a year as he apparently failed to keep up in his studies , in his words majoring in '' beer and co-eds '' . in 2010 , he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the university , and he later donated his papers to the university of iowa libraries . he joked that the '' honorary degree is especially coveted because it helps to make up for the uneven ( to put it mildly ) performance of my freshman year . '' he later transferred to the university of south dakota , where he graduated phi beta kappa in 1964 with a bachelor of arts degree in political science . for several years , brokaw mountain-climbed with the '' do boys , '' whose members included yvon chouinard and douglas tompkins . he owned a 53-acre home in pound ridge , new york , for over two decades . . broadcasting career . 1966–1981 : early years . brokaw 's television career began at ktiv in sioux city , iowa followed by stints at kmtv in omaha , nebraska , and wsb-tv in atlanta , in 1966 , he joined nbc news , reporting from los angeles and anchoring the 11:00 pm news for knbc . in 1973 , nbc made brokaw white house correspondent , covering the watergate scandal , and anchor of the saturday editions of nightly news . he became co-host ( with jane pauley ) of nbc 's today show in 1976 and remained in the job until 1981 . he kept a closely guarded secret for many years , in 2017 brokaw wrote of having been offered – and having promptly turned down – the press secretary position in the nixon white house in 1969 . while living in california before nixon made his political comeback , brokaw had come to know h . r . haldeman ( white house chief of staff and initiator of the offer ) as well as nixon 's press secretary , ron ziegler , and others members of the white house staff . brokaw , tom , '' the offer from nixon i refused '' ( opinion ) , op-ed , the new york times , february 17 , 2017 . retrieved february 18 , 2017 . in 2019 , brokaw wrote a book entitled , '' the fall of richard nixon : a reporter remembers watergate '' , about his experiences working as a reporter and experiences as a member of the white house press corps . 1982–2004 : nbc nightly news . on april 5 , 1982 , brokaw began co-anchoring nbc nightly news from new york with roger mudd in washington . after a year , nbc news president reuven frank concluded that the dual-anchor program was not working and selected brokaw to be sole anchor . frank , reuven . out of thin air : the brief wonderful life of network news ( new york : simon & schuster , 1991 ) , pp . 383–84 . the nbc nightly news with tom brokaw commenced on september 5 , 1983 . among other news items , he covered the challenger disaster , edsa revolution , loma prieta earthquake , fall of the berlin wall and hurricane andrew . brokaw scored a major coup when , on november 9 , 1989 , he was the first english-language broadcast journalist to report the fall of the berlin wall . brokaw attended a televised press conference organized in east berlin by günter schabowski , press spokesman for east german politburo , which had just decided to allow its citizens to apply to permanently leave the country through its border with west germany . when schabowski was asked when this loosening of regulations would take effect , he glanced through his notes , then said , '' sofort , unverzüglich '' ( '' immediately , without delay '' ) , touching off a stampede of east berliners to the wall . brokaw had an interview with schabowski after the press conference , who repeated his '' immediately '' statement when pressed . later that evening brokaw reported from the west side of brandenburg gate on this announcement and pandemonium that had broken out in east berlin because of it . as anchor , brokaw conducted the first one-on-one american television interviews with soviet leader mikhail gorbachev and russian president vladimir putin . he and katie couric hosted a prime-time newsmagazine , now , that aired from 1993 to 1994 before being folded into the multi-night dateline nbc program . also , in 1993 , on the first broadcast of late show with david letterman on cbs , in response to david letterman 's monologue containing jokes about nbc , brokaw walked on stage in a surprise cameo ( accompanied by paul shaffer and the cbs orchestra playing the nbc nightly news theme ) . he congratulated letterman on his new show and wished him well , but also stated he was disappointed and shocked ; he subsequently walked over to the man holding the cue cards , took two , and remarked , '' these last two jokes are the intellectual property of nbc ! '' , leaving the stage afterwards . letterman then remarked , '' who would have thought you would ever hear the words 'intellectual property ' and 'nbc ' in the same sentence ? '' richard jewell sued nbc news for this statement , made by brokaw about the 1996 olympic park bombing , '' the speculation is that the fbi is close to making the case . they probably have enough to arrest jewell right now , probably enough to prosecute him , but you always want to have enough to convict him as well . there are still some holes in this case . '' even though nbc stood by its story , the network agreed to pay jewell 500,000 . on september 11 , 2001 , brokaw joined katie couric and matt lauer around 9:30 & nbsp ; a.m . , following the live attack on the south tower of the world trade center , and continued to anchor all day , until after midnight . following the collapse of the second tower , brokaw observed : '' this is war . this is a declaration and an execution of an attack on the united states . '' he continued to anchor coverage to midnight on the following two days . later that month , a letter containing anthrax was addressed to him as part of the 2001 anthrax attacks . brokaw was not harmed , but two nbc news employees were infected . in 2008 , he testified before the commission on prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism about the anthrax attacks , publicly discussing his experiences for the first time in a detailed , day-by-day account . in 2002 , nbc announced that brokaw would retire as anchor of the nbc nightly news following the 2004 presidential election , to be succeeded by brian williams . brokaw would remain with nbc news in a part-time capacity from that point onwards , serving as an analyst and anchoring and producing documentary programs . brokaw closed his final nightly news broadcast in front of 15.7 million viewers on nbc on december 1 , 2004 , by saying : by the end of his time as nightly news anchor , brokaw was regarded as the most popular news personality in the united states . nightly news had moved into first place in the nielsen ratings in late 1996 and held on to the spot for the remainder of brokaw 's tenure on the program , placing him ahead of abc 's peter jennings and world news tonight , and cbs 's dan rather and the cbs news . along with jennings and rather , brokaw helped usher in the era of the tv news anchor as a lavishly compensated , globe-trotting star in the 1980s . the magnitude of a news event could be measured by whether brokaw and his counterparts on the other two networks showed up on the scene . brokaw 's retirement in december 2004 , followed by rather 's ousting from the cbs evening news in march 2005 , and jennings 's death in august 2005 , brought that era to a close . . 2004–2021 : after nightly news . after leaving the anchor chair , brokaw remained at nbc as special correspondent , providing periodic reports for nightly news . he served as an nbc analyst during the 2008 presidential election campaign and moderated the second presidential debate between barack obama and john mccain at belmont university . he reported documentaries for the discovery channel and the history channel and in 2006 delivered one of the eulogies during the death and state funeral of gerald ford . on june 13 , 2008 , when nbc interrupted its regular programming to announce the sudden death of nbc news washington bureau chief and meet the press moderator tim russert , brokaw served as the announcer . a week later , nbc announced that brokaw would serve as host of meet the press on an interim basis . he was succeeded by david gregory in december 2008 . brokaw serves on the board of directors of the council on foreign relations , the committee to protect journalists , the international rescue committee and the mayo clinic . he is also a member of the howard university school of communications board of visitors and a trustee of the university of south dakota , the norton simon museum , the american museum of natural history , and the international rescue committee . he also provides the voiceover for a university of iowa advertisement that airs on television during iowa hawkeyes athletic events . in 2011 brokaw began hosting the boys in the hall , a baseball documentary series for fox sports net . in december 2012 , brokaw starred in the mormon tabernacle choir 's annual christmas concert , with live audiences of 84,000 . the concert , titled home for the holidays , was nationally televised in december 2013 . in april 2014 , a new broadcast facility opened on the universal studios hollywood lot , and named in brokaw 's honor as the brokaw news center . the facility houses knbc-tv , telemundo owned-and-operated station kvea , and the los angeles bureau of nbc news . in november 2014 , president barack obama presented brokaw with the presidential medal of freedom , american 's highest civilian honor . he received the honor with the citation , '' the chronicler of the greatest generation.we celebrate him as one of our nation ’ s greatest journalists '' . on march 11 , 2016 , brokaw gave one of the eulogies for former first lady nancy reagan at her funeral . he spoke about his relationship with both the reagans as a reporter and later anchor . on january 22 , 2021 , nbc announced brokaw would retire after 55 years at the network , one of the few news anchors in the world who have spent the longest time on the same news network , along with ecuadorian news anchor alfonso espinosa de los monteros who has been in ecuavisa since 1967 . . personal life . since 1962 , brokaw has been married to author meredith lynn auld . they have three daughters : jennifer , andrea , and sarah . brokaw and his wife spend considerable time at their ranch near livingston , montana , which they bought in 1989 . on september 6 , 2012 , brokaw was hospitalized after appearing on msnbc 's morning joe . he later twitter that he was '' all well '' and explained his illness as having accidentally taken half a dose of ambien in the morning . he was diagnosed with multiple myeloma , a treatable but incurable blood cancer , in august 2013 at the mayo clinic . brokaw and his physicians are '' very encouraged with his progress '' . he has continued to work for nbc throughout his treatments . on december 21 , 2014 , brokaw announced that his cancer is in full remission . in 2018 , brokaw was accused of unwanted sexual advances toward two women in the 1990s . brokaw denied the allegations . in response to the allegations , former colleagues rachel maddow , andrea mitchell , maria shriver , kelly o'donnell , and 64 others , signed a letter characterizing brokaw as '' a man of tremendous decency and integrity '' . . career timeline . 1960–1962 : ktiv-tv newscaster , weatherman , and staff announcer 1962–1965 : kmtv-tv reporter 1965 : anchor of wsb-tv late-evening news 1966–2021 : nbc news 1966–1972 : nbc news west coast correspondent and knbc anchor 1973–1976 : white house correspondent and saturday anchor of nbc nightly news 1976–1981 : today show co-anchor 1982–1983 : nbc nightly news co-anchor 1983–2004 : nbc nightly news anchor 2004–2021 : special correspondent 2004–2021 : contributing anchor 2008 : meet the press moderator ( interim ) . speeches . 1971 : college of william and mary commencement speech 1980 ; bentley university commencement speech 1988 : tulane university school of medicine commencement speech 1995 : university of washington commencement speech 2005 : emory university commencement speech 2009 : college of william and mary commencement speech 2011 : northwestern mutual annual meeting opening session speech 2012 : vanderbilt university and arizona state university commencement speeches 2013 : loyola university new orleans commencement speech 2015 : high point university commencement speech 2016 : university of mississippi commencement speech 2017 : university of south dakota open forum . bibliography . 1998 the greatest generation ( hardback ) ( paperback ) depicting the americans who came of age during the great depression and fought world war ii ; 1999 the greatest generation speaks ( hardback ) ( paperback ) ; 2001 an album of memories ( hardback ) ( paperback ) ; 2002 a long way from home : growing up in the american heartland ( hardback ) ( paperback ) ; 2006 galen rowell : a retrospective ( hardback ) foreword by tom brokaw ; 2007 boom ! : voices of the sixties personal reflections on the '60s and today ( hardback ) ; 2011 the time of our lives : a conversation about america ( hardback ) ; 2013 christmas from heaven : the true story of the berlin candy bomber ( hardback ) ; 2015 a lucky life interrupted : a memoir of hope ( hardback ) ( paperback ) ; 2019 the fall of richard nixon : a reporter remembers watergate ( hardback ) ( paperback ) . awards and honors . public and industry awards 1989 peabody award for a report called to be an american ; 48th annual peabody awards , may 1990 . 1989 golden plate award of the academy of achievement alfred i . dupont–columbia university awards for excellence in broadcast journalism for dateline nbc documentary special why ca n't we live together on hidden realities of racial separation in suburban america ; alfred i . dupont–columbia university award for excellence in broadcast journalism for his interview with mikhail gorbachev ; seven emmy awards including one for china in crisis special report ; 1990 national headliner award from the national conference of christians and jews for advancing the understanding of religion , race and ethnicity ; 1992 al neuharth award for excellence in the media presented by the freedom forum ; 1993 emmy award for reporting on floods in the midwest ; 1995 dennis kauff memorial award for lifetime achievement in journalism from boston university ; 1995 lowell thomas award from marist college ; 1997 university of missouri school of journalism honor medal for distinguished service in journalism ; 1998 fred friendly first amendment award , a tribute to those '' individuals whose broadcast career reflects a consistent devotion to freedom of speech and the principles embodied in the first amendment . '' ; 1998 american legion award for distinguished public service in the field of communication ; 1998 citizens ' scholarship foundation of america 's president 's award recognizing '' devotion to helping young people through scholarships . '' ; 1999 congressional medal of honor society 's '' tex '' mccrary excellence in journalism award ; 1999 emmy award for international coverage of the kosovo conflict ; 2002 : paul white award , radio television digital news association 2003 peabody award for his special report called '' a question of fairness '' ; 63rd annual peabody awards , may 2004 . 2005 elected to the american academy of arts and sciences ; 2005 four freedoms medal : freedom of speech and expression ; 2006 washington state university edward r . murrow school of communications lifetime achievement in broadcasting award ; 2006 sylvanus thayer award : united states military academy at west point ; 2006 walter cronkite award for excellence in journalism at arizona state university ; 2006 induction into the television hall of fame ; 2007 horatio alger award for overcoming adversity to achieve success through the american free enterprise system from the horatio alger association of distinguished americans inc . ; 2011 charles osgood lifetime achievement award in broadcast journalism from wfuv ( 90.7 fm ) ; 2012 the nichols-chancellor 's medal awarded by vanderbilt university ; 2012 ken burns lifetime achievement award awarded at old sturbridge village in sturbridge , massachusetts ; 2013 peabody award for enhancing his reputation since he left the nbc news desk in 2004 . 73rd annual peabody awards , may 2014 . 2014 presidential medal of freedom 2016 french legion of honor , for his support of world war ii veterans , along with actor tom hanks and gordon h . mueller , president and co-founder of the national wwii museum , new orleans . honorary degrees air university ( united states air force ) ; arizona state university ; boston college ; brandeis university ; california institute of technology ; the college of william & mary ; dartmouth college ; duke university ; emory university ; fairfield university ; fordham university ; florida state university john carroll university ; johns hopkins university ; montana state university ; mayo clinic and the college of medicine ; northwestern university ; providence college ; saint anselm college ; seton hall university ; skidmore college ; st . lawrence university ; university of iowa ; university of montana ; university of notre dame ; university of oklahoma ; university of pennsylvania ; university of south dakota ; university of south carolina ; washington university in st . louis . see also . new yorkers in journalism . references . external links . booknotes interview with brokaw on the greatest generation , march 7 , 1999 . in depth interview with brokaw , may 6 , 2012 greatest generation online ebook read by tom brokaw ( 2 chapters ) , transcript