Speculative fiction

history . speculative fiction as a category ranges from ancient works to both paradigm-changing and neotraditional works of the 21st century . barry baldwin , emeritus professor of classics , university of calgary , fellow of the royal society of canada , '' ancient science fiction '' , shattercolors literary review speculative fiction can be recognized in works whose authors ' intentions or the social contexts of the versions of stories they portrayed are now known , since ancient greek dramatists such as euripides ( c . 480–406 bce ) whose play medea seems to have offended athenian audiences when he fictionally speculated that shamaness medea killed her own children instead of their being killed by other corinthians after her departure , this theory of euripides ' invention has gained wide acceptance . see ( e.g . ) mcdermott 1989 , 12 ; powell 1990 , 35 ; sommerstein 2002 , 16 ; griffiths , 2006 81 ; ewans 2007 , 55 . and whose play hippolytus , narratively introduced by aphrodite , goddess of love in person , is suspected to have displeased his contemporary audiences because he portrayed phaedra as too lusty . see , e.g . , barrett 1964 ; mcdermott 2000 . in historiography , what is now called speculative fiction has previously been termed '' historical invention '' , '' historical fiction '' , and similar names . it is extensively noted in literary criticism of the works of william shakespeare martha tuck rozett , '' creating a context for shakespeare with historical fiction '' , shakespeare quarterly vol . 46 , no . 2 ( summer , 1995 ) , pp . 220-227 as when he co-locates athenian duke theseus and amazons queen hippolyta , england fairy puck , and roman god cupid across time and space in the fairyland of its merovingian germanic sovereign oberon in a midsummer night 's dream . dorothea kehler , a midsummer night 's dream : critical essays , 2001 in mythography the concept of speculative fiction has been termed '' mythopoesis '' or mythopoeia , '' fictional speculation '' , the creative design and generation of lore , regarding such works as j . r . r . tolkien 's the lord of the rings . adcox , john , '' can fantasy be myth ? mythopoeia and the lord of the rings '' in '' the newsletter of the mythic imagination institute , september/october , 2003 '' such supernatural , alternate history and sexuality themes continue in works produced within the modern speculative fiction genre . eric garber , lyn paleo uranian worlds : a guide to alternative sexuality in science fiction , fantasy , and horror , 2nd edition , g k hall : 1990 the creation of speculative fiction in its general sense of hypothetical history , explanation , or ahistorical storytelling has also been attributed to authors in ostensibly non-fiction mode since as early as herodotus of halicarnassus ( fl . 5th century bce ) , in his histories , herodotus and myth conference , christ church , oxford , 2003 john m . marincola , introduction and notes , the histories by herodotus , tr . aubrey de sélincourt , 2007 and was already both practiced and edited out by early encyclopaedic writers like sima qian ( c . 145 or 135 bce–86 bce ) , author of shiji . stephen w . durrant , the cloudy mirror : tension and conflict in the writings of sima qian , 1995 craig a . lockard , societies , networks , and transitions : a global history : to 1500 , 2007 , p 133 these examples highlight the caveat that many works now regarded as intentional or unintentional speculative fiction long predate the coining of the genre term ; its concept in its broadest sense captures both a conscious and unconscious aspect of human psychology in making sense of the world , and responding to it by creating imagination , inventive , and artistic expressions . such expressions can contribute to practical progress through interpersonal influences , social and cultural movements , scientific research and advances , and philosophy of science . heather urbanski , plagues , apocalypses and bug-eyed monsters : how speculative fiction shows us our nightmares , 2007 , pp 127 sonu shamdasani , cult fictions : c.g . jung and the founding of analytical psychology , 1998 relativity , the special and the general theory by albert einstein ( 1920 ) , with an introduction by niger calder , 2006 in its english language usage in arts and literature since the mid 20th century , '' speculative fiction '' as a genre term is often attributed to robert a . heinlein . he first used the term in an editorial in the saturday evening post , february & nbsp ; 8 , 1947 . in the article , heinlein used '' speculative fiction '' as a synonym for '' science fiction '' ; in a later piece , he explicitly stated that his use of the term did not include fantasy . however , though heinlein may have come up with the term on his own , there are earlier citations : a piece in lippincott 's monthly magazine in 1889 used the term in reference to edward bellamy 's looking backward and other works ; and one in the may 1900 issue of the bookman said that john uri lloyd 's etidorhpa had '' created a great deal of discussion among people interested in speculative fiction '' . a variation on this term is '' speculative literature '' . the use of '' speculative fiction '' in the sense of expressing dissatisfaction with traditional or establishment science fiction was popularized in the 1960s and early 1970s by judith merril and other writers and editors , in connection with the new wave movement . it fell into disuse around the mid-1970s . the internet speculative fiction database contains a broad list of different subtypes . in the 2000s , the term came into wider use as a convenient collective term for a set of genres . however , some writers , such as margaret atwood , continue to distinguish '' speculative fiction '' specifically as a '' no martians '' type of science fiction , '' about things that really could happen . '' academic journals which publish essays on speculative fiction include extrapolation , and foundation . according to publisher statistics , men outnumber women about two to one among english-language speculative fiction writers aiming for professional publication . however , the percentages vary considerably by genre , with women outnumbering men in the fields of urban fantasy , paranormal romance and young adult fiction . . distinguishing science fiction from other speculative fiction . '' speculative fiction '' is sometimes abbreviated '' spec-fic '' , '' spec fic '' , '' specfic '' , '' s-f '' , '' sf '' or '' sf '' . however , the last three abbreviations are ambiguous as they have long been used to refer to science fiction ( which lies within this general range of literature ) and other things in several other contexts . the term has been used by some critics and writers dissatisfied with what they consider to be a limitation of science fiction : the need for the story to hold to scientific principles . they argue that '' speculative fiction '' better defines an expanded , open , imaginative type of fiction than does '' genre fiction '' , and the categories of '' fantasy '' , '' mystery '' , '' horror '' and '' science fiction '' . harlan ellison used the term to avoid being pigeonholed as a writer . ellison , a fervent proponent of writers embracing more literary and modernist directions , davies , philip . '' review untitled ; reviewed work ( s ) : science fiction : its criticism and teaching by patrick parrinder ; fantastic lives : autobiographical essays by notable science fiction writers by martin greenberg ; robert a . heinlein : america as science fiction by h . bruce franklin ; bridges to science fiction by george e . slusser , george r . guffey , mark rose . journal of american studies vol . 16 , no . 1 ( april 1982 ) . pp . 157–159 . broke out of genre conventions to push the boundaries of '' speculative fiction . '' the term '' suppositional fiction '' is sometimes used as a sub-category designating fiction in which characters and stories are constrained by an internally consistent world , but not necessarily one defined by any particular genre . izenberg , orin ( 2011 ) . being numerous : poetry and the ground of social life . princeton : princeton university press . p . 210 . leitch , thomas m . what stories are : narrative theory and interpretation university park , pennsylvania : pennsylvania state university press , 1986 ; p . 127 domańska , ewa ( 1998 ) . encounters : philosophy of history after postmodernism . charlottesville , virginia : university press of virginia . p . 10 . . genres . speculative fiction may include elements of one or more of the following genres : . see also . gender in speculative fiction genre fiction list of genres megatext fiction film comic genres speculative fiction by writers of color . references . external links . internet speculative fiction database the sf page at project gutenberg