Henry Wood

biography . early years . wood was born in oxford street , london , the only child of henry joseph wood and his wife martha , née morris . wood senior had started in his family 's pawnbroker business , but by the time of his son 's birth he was trading as a jeweller , optician and engineering modeller , much sought-after for his model engines . jacobs , p . 4 it was a musical household : wood senior was an amateur cellist and sang as principal tenor in the choir of st sepulchre-without-newgate , known as '' the musicians ' church '' . his wife played the piano and sang songs from her native wales . they encouraged their son 's interest in music , buying him a broadwood piano , on which his mother gave him lessons . wood , p . 13 the young wood also learned to play the violin and viola . jacobs , p . 6 wood received little religious inspiration at st sepulchre , but was deeply stirred by the playing of the resident organist , george cooper , who allowed him into the organ loft and gave him his first lessons on the instrument . wood , p . 17 and jacobs , p . 6 cooper died when wood was seven , and the boy took further lessons from cooper 's successor , edwin m . lott , for whom wood had much less regard . at the age of ten , through the influence of one of his uncles , wood made his first paid appearance as an organist at st mary aldermanbury , being paid half a crown . in june 1883 , visiting the fisheries exhibition at south kensington with his father , wood was invited to play the organ in one of the galleries , making a good enough impression to be engaged to give recitals at the exhibition building over the next three months . jacobs , p . 10 at this time in his life , painting was nearly as strong an interest as music , and he studied in his spare time at the slade school of fine art . he remained a life-long amateur painter . in wood 's later account , the press and the bbc '' fell into the trap and said the scoring was wonderful , klenovsky had the real flare for true colour etc . – and performance after performance was given and asked for . '' wood kept the secret for five years before revealing the truth . '' 'paul klenovsky ' a musical hoax by sir henry wood '' , the times , 4 september 1934 , p . 10 the press treated the deception as a great joke ; the times entered into the spirit of it with a jocular tribute to the lamented klenovsky . '' the late paul klenovsky '' , the times , 5 september 1934 , p . 13 as wood 's working life took a turn for the better , his domestic life started to deteriorate . during the early 1930s , he and his wife gradually became estranged , and their relationship ended in bitterness , with muriel taking most of wood 's money and , for much of the time , living abroad . she refused to divorce him . jacobs , pp . 262–70 and 278 the breach between muriel and wood also caused his estrangement from their daughters . jacobs , p . 269 in 1934 he began a happy relationship with a widowed former pupil , jessie linton , who had sung for him frequently in the past under her professional name of jessie goldsack . one of wood 's players recalled , '' she changed him . he had been badly dressed , awful clothes . jessie got him a new evening suit , instead of the mouldy green one , and he flourished yellow gloves and a cigar . he became human . '' as wood was not free to remarry , she changed her name by deed poll to '' lady jessie wood '' and was generally assumed by the public to be wood 's wife . jacobs , pp . 265–71 in his memoirs , wood mentioned neither his second marriage nor his subsequent relationship . wood , index pp . 376 and 384 in his later years , wood came to be identified with the proms rather than with the year-round concert season . boult was appointed director of music at the bbc in 1930 . in that capacity he strove to ensure that wood was invited to conduct a fitting number of bbc symphony concerts outside the prom season . kennedy , pp . 140–41 ; and jacobs , p . 308 the bbc chose wood for important collaborations with bartók and paul hindemith , and for the first british performance of mahler 's vast symphony no . 8 . but jacobs notes that , in the general concert repertory , wood now had to compete against well-known foreign conductors such as bruno walter , willem mengelberg , and arturo toscanini , '' in comparison with whom he was increasingly seen as a workhorse '' . jacobs arthur , '' wood , sir henry joseph ( 1869–1944 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 . retrieved 17 october 2010 . last years . in 1936 , wood was in charge of his final sheffield festival . the choral works he conducted included the verdi requiem , beethoven 's missa solemnis , berlioz ' te deum , walton 's belshazzar 's feast , and , in the presence of the composer , rachmaninoff 's the bells . jacobs , pp . 302–03 the following year , wood began planning for a grand concert to mark his fiftieth year as a conductor . the royal albert hall was chosen as the venue , having a far larger capacity than the queen 's hall . the concert was given on 5 october 1938 . rachmaninoff played the solo part in his second piano concerto , and vaughan williams , at wood 's request , composed a short choral work for the occasion : the serenade to music for orchestra and 16 soloists . the other composers represented in the programme were sullivan , beethoven , bach , bax , wagner , handel and elgar . the orchestra comprised players from the three london orchestras : the london symphony , london philharmonic and bbc symphony orchestras . the concert raised £9,000 for wood 's chosen charity , providing health care for musicians . jacobs , pp . 311–14 and 329–30 in the same year , wood published his autobiography , my life of music . in september 1939 , the second world war broke out and the bbc immediately put into effect its contingency plans to move much of its broadcasting away from london to places thought less susceptible to bombing . its musical activities , including the orchestra , moved to bristol . cox , p . 110 the bbc withdrew not only the players , but financial support from the proms . wood determined that the 1940 season would nevertheless go ahead . the royal philharmonic society and a private entrepreneur , keith douglas , agreed to back an eight-week season , and the london symphony orchestra was engaged . the season was curtailed after four weeks , when intense bombing forced the queen 's hall to close . cox , p . 116 the last prom given at the queen 's hall was on 7 september 1940 . in may 1941 , the hall was destroyed by bombs . elkin , p . 129 it was immediately agreed that the 1941 season of proms should be held at the albert hall . it was twice the size of the queen 's hall , with poor acoustics , but a six-week series was judged a success , and the albert hall remained the home of the proms . wood , aged seventy-two , was persuaded to have an associate conductor to relieve him of some of the burden . basil cameron undertook the task and remained a prom conductor until his retirement , aged eighty , in 1964 . cox , pp . 122 and 208–09 the bbc brought its symphony orchestra back to london and resumed its backing of the proms in 1942 ; boult joined cameron as wood 's associate conductor during that season . cox , p . 123 in early 1943 , wood 's health deteriorated , and two days after the start of that year 's season , he collapsed and was ordered to have a month in bed . cox , p . 124 despite wartime vicissitudes , the 1943 season sold nearly 250,000 tickets , with an average audience of about 4,000 – many more than could have fitted into the queen 's hall . cox , p . 126 despite his age and the difficulties of wartime travel , wood insisted on going to provincial cities to conduct – as much , according to jacobs , to help the local orchestras survive as to gratify audiences . his final season was in 1944 . the season began well with wood in good form , but after three weeks raids by the devastating new german flying bombs caused the government to order the closure of places of entertainment . orga , p . 120 the proms were immediately relocated to bedford some away , where wood continued to conduct . he was taken ill in early august and was unable to conduct the fiftieth anniversary prom on 10 august ; he was forbidden by his doctor even to listen to its broadcast . wood died just over a week later on 19 august at hitchin hospital in hitchin , hertfordshire ; orga , p . 121 his funeral service was held in the town at st mary 's church , '' bbc proms 2010 sir henry 's hoard '' , bbc press office , september 2010 and his ashes were interred in the musicians ' chapel of st sepulchre-without-newgate . 20th-century church history st sepulchre-without-newgate . retrieved 1 january 2011 . recordings . wood 's recording career began in 1908 , when he accompanied his wife olga in '' farewell , forests '' by tchaikovsky , for the gramophone and typewriter company , better known as hmv or hmv . they made eight other records together for hmv over the next two years . jacobs , p . 425 after olga 's death , wood signed a contract with hmv 's rival , columbia , for whom he made a series of discs between 1915 and 1917 with the singer clara butt , including excerpts from elgar 's the dream of gerontius . jacobs , p . 426 between 1915 and 1925 he conducted 65 recordings for columbia using the early acoustic recording process , including many discs of wagner excerpts and a truncated version of elgar 's violin concerto with albert sammons as soloist . jacobs , pp . 426–28 when the microphone and electrical recording were introduced in 1925 , wood re-recorded the elgar concerto , with sammons , and made 36 other discs for columbia over the next nine years . jacobs , pp . 428–29 the 1929 recording of the elgar concerto has been reissued on compact disc and is well regarded by some critics . wood was wooed from columbia by the young decca company in 1935 . for decca he conducted 23 recordings over the next two years , including beethoven 's fifth symphony , elgar 's enigma variations and vaughan williams 's a london symphony . jacobs , pp . 429–30 in 1938 he returned to columbia , for whom his five new recordings included the serenade to music with the 16 original singers , a few days after the premiere , and his own fantasia on british sea songs . jacobs , p . 430 wood 's recordings did not remain in the catalogues long after his death . the record guide , 1956 , lists none of his records . sackville-west , index , p . 957 a few of his recordings have subsequently been reissued on compact disc , including the decca and columbia vaughan williams recordings from 1936 and 1938 . dutton vocalion cd ( 2001 ) , catalogue number cdbp 9707 . premieres . in jacobs 's 1994 biography , the list of premieres conducted by wood extends to 18 & nbsp ; pages . jacobs , pp . 442–61 his world premieres included frank bridge 's the sea ; britten 's piano concerto ; delius 's a song before sunrise , a song of summer , and idyll ; elgar 's the wand of youth suite no . & nbsp ; 1 , sospiri and the 4th and 5th pomp and circumstance marches ; and vaughan williams 's norfolk rhapsody no . & nbsp ; 1 , flos campi and serenade to music . jacobs , pp . 441–61 wood 's uk premieres included bartók 's dance suite ; chabrier 's joyeuse marche ; copland 's billy the kid ; debussy 's prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune and ibéria ; hindemith 's kammermusik 2 and 5 ; janáček 's sinfonietta , taras bulba and glagolitic mass ; kodály 's dances from galanta ; mahler 's symphonies nos . 4 , 7 and 8 , and das lied von der erde ; prokofiev 's piano concerto no . 1 and violin concerto no . 2 ; rachmaninoff 's piano concerto no 1 ; ravel 's ma mère l'oye , rapsodie espagnole , la valse and piano concerto in d ; rimsky-korsakov 's capriccio espagnol , scheherazade , and symphony no . 2 ; saint-saëns 's the carnival of the animals ; schumann 's konzertstück for four horns and orchestra ; shostakovich 's piano concerto no . 1 and symphonies nos . 7 and 8 ; sibelius 's symphonies nos . 1 , 6 and 7 , violin concerto , karelia suite , and tapiola ; richard strauss 's symphonia domestica ; stravinsky 's the firebird ( suite ) ; tchaikovsky 's manfred symphony and the nutcracker ; and webern 's passacaglia . . honours , memorials and reputation . in addition to the knighthood bestowed in 1911 , wood 's state honours were his appointments as companion of honour in 1944 , to the order of the crown ( belgium ; 1920 ) , and officer of the legion of honour ( france ; 1926 ) . he received honorary doctorates from five english universities and was a fellow of both the royal academy of music ( 1920 ) and the royal college of music ( 1923 ) . jacobs , p . 465 in march 1963 , the henry wood concert society ( in association with the henry wood memorial trust ) presented the henry wood memorial concert . the concert was held at the royal albert hall , london and conducted by sir malcolm sargent in the presence of h.r.h . the duchess of gloucester . jacobs lists 26 & nbsp ; compositions dedicated to wood , including , in addition to the vaughan williams serenade to music , works by elgar , delius , bax , marcel dupré and walton . the poet laureate , john masefield , composed a poem of six verses in his honour , entitled '' sir henry wood '' , often referred to by its first line , '' where does the uttered music go ? '' . walton set it to music as an anthem for mixed choir ; it received its first performance on 26 april 1946 at st sepulchre 's , on the occasion of a ceremony unveiling a memorial stained-glass window in wood 's honour . '' where does the uttered music go ? '' , williamwalton.net . retrieved 21 november 2010 wood is commemorated in the name of the henry wood hall , the deconsecrated holy trinity church in southwark , which was converted to a rehearsal and recording venue in 1975 . '' history '' , henry wood hall . retrieved 20 november 2010 his bust stands upstage centre in the royal albert hall during the whole of each prom season , decorated by a chaplet on the last night of the proms . his collection of 2,800 & nbsp ; orchestral scores and 1,920 & nbsp ; sets of parts is now in the library of the royal academy of music . '' library '' , royal academy of music . retrieved 21 november 2010 ; herbage , julian , '' wood , sir henry joseph '' , oxford dictionary of national biography archive , 1959 . retrieved 14 november 2010 ; and cox , p . 56 for the academy he also established the henry wood fund , giving financial aid to students . the university of strathclyde named a building at its jordanhill campus after him . '' sir henry wood building , '' university of strathclyde . retrieved 1 january 2011 his best-known memorial is the proms , officially '' the henry wood promenade concerts '' , jacobs , pp . 127–28 but universally referred to by the informal short version . his biographer arthur jacobs wrote of wood : his orchestral players affectionately nicknamed him '' timber '' – more than a play on his name , since it seemed to represent his reliability too . his tally of first performances , or first performances in britain , was heroic : at least 717 & nbsp ; works by 357 & nbsp ; composers . greatness as measured by finesse of execution may not be his , particularly in his limited legacy of recordings , but he remains one of the most remarkable musicians britain has produced . . notes and references . notes references . sources . . external links . henry wood 's proms appearances as performer and as composer , listed on bbc proms website at www.bbc.co.uk concert programmes 1790 & ndash ; 1914 at www.cph.rcm.ac.uk two digitally restored recordings conducted by sir henry wood