Robert Simpson (composer)

biography . simpson was born in leamington , warwickshire . his father , robert warren simpson , was a descendant of sir james young simpson , the scottish pioneer of anaesthetics ; his mother , helena hendrika govaars , was the daughter of gerrit govaars , founder of the , the dutch arm of the salvation army . simpson studied at westminster school . he was intended for a medical career and studied in london for two years before his determination to be a musician gained the upper hand . a conscientious objector in world war ii , he served with an arp mobile surgical unit during the london blitz , while taking lessons from herbert howells . howells persuaded him to take the durham university bachelor of music degree , and in 1952 he gained the further degree of doctor of music from that university , the submitted work being his first symphony . after the war simpson lectured extensively and founded the exploratory concerts society ; in 1951 he joined the music staff of the bbc and became one of its best-known and most respected music producers , remaining with the corporation for nearly three decades . simpson was a great champion of havergal brian 's music , and under the bbc 's auspices he produced many broadcasts featuring brian 's works . these included the mammoth '' gothic '' symphony in 1966 under sir adrian boult , and in 1973 the 28th symphony under leopold stokowski who , at the age of 91 , was premiering a work written by a 91-year-old composer . simpson married bessie fraser in 1946 ; she died in 1981 and the following year he married angela musgrave , a fellow bbc employee and relative of composer thea musgrave . in the latter part of his career as a bbc producer simpson frequently clashed with the management of the organisation . in the 1970s he was one of those & nbsp ; – hans keller and deryck cooke were others & nbsp ; – who started the ( unsuccessful ) revolt against the report broadcasting in the seventies and its plan for '' generic broadcasting '' ( i.e . separate networks for pop , classical and speech ) . a decade later simpson was energetic in his opposition to a cost-cutting reorganisation that ultimately proposed the decommissioning of five of the eleven bbc orchestras . during the ensuing musicians ' strike ( which caused the cancellation of the first several weeks of the 1980 bbc the proms ) simpson chose to disregard bbc staff regulations and discuss the matter with a national newspaper ; he then resigned from the corporation , publicly alleging a '' degeneration of traditional bbc values in the scramble for ratings '' . ( hans keller later described these criticisms as '' demonstrable fact '' . hans keller , 'an untainted mass medium ' , the spectator , 20 december 1980 ) had simpson remained silent for a few more months he would have been able to retire with a full pension , but his feeling was that such a course would have compromised his principles . abominating the ethos of thatcherite britain , in 1986 he moved to the republic of ireland , settling on tralee bay in kerry . in 1991 he suffered a severe stroke during an english lecture tour , which caused damage to the thalamus and left him in debilitating pain for the remaining six years of his life . he died in tralee in 1997 . simpson 's other great passions were astronomy ( he was a member of the british astronomical association and & nbsp ; – unusually for an amateur & nbsp ; – was made a fellow of the royal astronomical society ) and pacifism , specifically addressed in the title of his tenth string quartet , for peace . he was awarded many honours , including the carl nielsen gold medal , 1956 ( for his book carl nielsen , symphonist , published in 1952 ) , and the medal of honor of the bruckner society of america , 1962 . he refused appointment as a commander of the order of the british empire in 1980 . music . dedicated as he was to renewing the classical tradition of a dynamic musical architecture built on the gravitational power of tonality , simpson wrote very few small or occasional works and concentrated on large-scale genres . he wrote 11 symphonies as well as concertos for violin , piano , flute and cello . ( the violin concerto was subsequently withdrawn . ) his extensive output of chamber music comprised 15 string quartets , two string quintets , a clarinet quintet , piano trio , clarinet trio , horn trio , violin sonata and a number of non-standard chamber ensemble works as well as works for piano , a sonata for two pianos , and a major organ work entitled ( after the famous remark attributed to galileo ) . he tended to avoid vocal music but his output includes two motets . variation form was important to him , and in addition to variation-movements on his own themes he composed orchestral variations on themes of nielsen and johann sebastian bach , as well as a set of piano variations on a palindromic theme by haydn to which he returned in his large-scale string quartet no . 9 , which is a series of 32 variations and a fugue on the same haydn theme . string quartets nos . 4–6 can be regarded as variations upon the compositional processes , rather than the themes , of beethoven 's three rasumovsky quartets , op . 59 . two significant features of simpson 's oeuvre are his ability to write long works entirely based on a single basic pulse , with faster or slower tempi being suggested by smaller or larger note-values , and the establishment of a dynamic tension between competing tonalities or intervals . symphonies . '' people who write symphonies do it because they feel able to : a lot of those who do n't tell everyone else the symphony is dead . the trouble is that the symphony as an abstraction does not exist : there may be exhausted symphonies and exhausted composers , but the response to a challenge to one 's capacity for large-scale organisation and development & nbsp ; – that can be exhausted only in individuals . '' robert simpson , the listener , 1973 . robert simpson is said to have written and destroyed four symphonies ( one of which even used serial procedures ) before his first published symphony . the official , published symphonies include the following : symphony no . 1 ( 1951 ) , doctorate thesis for the university of durham symphony no . 2 ( 1955–1956 ) , dedicated to anthony bernard symphony no . 3 ( 1962 ) , dedicated to havergal brian symphony no . 4 ( 1970–1972 ) , commissioned by the the hallé symphony no . 5 ( 1972 ) , dedicated to the london symphony orchestra symphony no . 6 ( 1977 ) , dedicated to the renowned gynaecologist ian craft symphony no . 7 ( 1977 ) , dedicated to hans keller and his wife , the artist milein cosman symphony no . 8 ( 1981 ) , dedicated to the painter anthony dorrell symphony no . 9 ( 1985–1987 ) , dedicated to his wife , angela symphony no . 10 ( 1988 ) , dedicated to vernon handley symphony no . 11 ( 1990 ) , dedicated to matthew taylor from 1987 to 1996 vernon handley recorded all but one of the symphonies for hyperion records , with the royal philharmonic orchestra ( in 1 , 3 , 5 and 8 ) , the bournemouth symphony orchestra ( 2 , 4 and 9 ) and the royal liverpool philharmonic orchestra ( 6 , 7 and 10 ) . the cycle was completed in 2003 when no . 11 was recorded by its dedicatee , matthew taylor , conducting the city of london sinfonia . concertos . ; violin concerto ( 1959 ) : a work of some forty minutes , dedicated to the violinist ernest element , withdrawn by the composer late in his life . simpson had considered revising the work , and matthew taylor has reworked the composition to fulfil simpson 's original intentions . ; piano concerto ( 1967 ) : a one-movement twenty-minute work , falling into several sections and written for the pianist john ogdon . the concerto is one of his most big-hearted and instantly accessible scores . ; flute concerto ( 1989 ) : a one movement work of twenty-five minutes duration , commissioned by and dedicated to the flautist susan milan . the work embraces a calmness in the manner of symphony no . 11 . ; cello concerto ( 1991 ) : a one-movement variation-form work of twenty-three minutes duration , commissioned by and dedicated to the cellist raphael wallfisch . the work begins vigorously and ends in an atmosphere of contemplative mystery . quartets . simpson composed 15 numbered string quartets ; a quartet preceding this sequence was written as part of his course at durham university and still exists there . he regarded quartets nos . 1–3 as forming a natural sequence , and nos . 4–6 are a clearly distinct group related to three beethoven quartets , though they can all be performed as entirely independent compositions . the second movement of no . 8 has the label eretmapodites gilletti , and the quartet is dedicated to two people including the discoverer of the mosquito with that scientific name ; the ninth quartet , from 1982 , is a one-movement ( but subdivided , with slow and scherzando sections ) palindromic 32 variations and fugue on a theme by haydn ; number 10 is entitled '' for peace '' . ( see the article by malcolm macdonald in the external links . ) in programme notes for a recital consisting of quartets nos . 1–3 at the arts council of great britain building in london sw1 on 11 february 1955 , simpson wrote that '' although they were not consciously designed as a group , they nevertheless seem to fall into a natural sequence '' . in construction and tonality there are elements of an overall symmetry encompassing the three works . ; string quartet no . 1 ( 1951–52 ) : is in two movements , quick and slow ; the second movement is a set of variations on a palindromic theme stated by the viola . there is a power-struggle by the opposed tonal centres of e flat and a : e flat is the focus of the first movement and beats off the challenge of a , the second movement theme starts and ends in e flat with a central climax in a ; the variations work round to a major , in which key the work ends . the quartet is dedicated to george enescu . ; string quartet no . 2 ( 1953 ) : is the shortest of all simpson 's quartets , playing for about 15 minutes . it is cast in a single movement and a single metronome mark , within which three themes ( and three tempi ) contest for dominance . ; string quartet no . 3 ( 1953–54 ) : is in two movements , slow and quick : an adagio in c major and a pulsing allegro deciso that works round to an affirmative e major . ( simpson made a transcription of this movement as an independent piece for full string orchestra . ) simpson stated that string quartets nos . 4–6 , which are on a much larger scale than nos . 1–3 , constituted '' a close study of beethoven 's three rasumovsky quartets , op . 59 ; that is to say , the attempt to understand those great works resulted in , not a verbal analysis , but music '' . the three simpson quartets offer , in his own idiom , '' musical analogies '' to the procedures of beethoven 's three quartets , but they can be performed without reference to the beethoven and indeed without reference to each other . ; string quartet no . 4 ( 1973 ) : is dedicated to basil lam . the four movements & nbsp ; – an allegro , a presto scherzo , an andante sosteunto slow movement joining on without a break to an assai vivace finale & nbsp ; – correspond to the layout of beethoven 's op.59 no.1 . ; string quartet no . 5 ( 1974 ) : is dedicated to angela musgrave , who became the composer 's second wife . the four movements & nbsp ; – an allegro molto with a written-out literal repeat of the exposition , an adagio , sempre semplice , an allegretto vivace and a whirlwind prestissimo finale & nbsp ; – correspond to the layout of beethoven 's op . 59 , no . 2 . ; string quartet no . 6 ( 1975 ) : is dedicated to the film-maker barrie gavin and his wife jamila . of the four movements , the first begins with an adagio introduction exploring an enigmatic harmony , prefacing a large-scale vivacissimo ; the second is an intermezzo-like con moto ; grazioso ed intensivo , the third a complex canon marked molto tranquillo with an allegretto grazioso middle section , and the finale is marked molto rapido & nbsp ; – these correspond to the layout of beethoven 's op.59 no.3 , which begins with a slow introduction exploring a particular harmony and includes an archaic form ( a minuet ) as its third movement . quartets nos . 7 and 8 both explore the possibilities of the perfect fifth in shaping their themes , harmonies and tonalities . ; string quartet no . 7 ( 1977 ) : is dedicated to the organist susi jeans and written in celebration of the birth-centenary of her husband , the astronomer sir james jeans . the work is in a single movement and makes much use of the open strings of the instruments , whose tuning simpson likened to the forces of gravity . this leads the work to revolve around the circle of fifths . the slow opening tranquillo and closing tempo primo enclose a fast section , vivace , intended to represent the pulsing energy of the universe . ; string quartet no . 8 ( 1979 ) : is dedicated to the biologist and entomologist j.d . gillett and his wife . there are four movements , the tonality of each being a fifth higher than that of its predecessor . the first is a large-scale fugue , grave , molto intensivo , the second is a brief scherzo ( molto vivace ) , 'suggesting the formidable delicacy ' of the mosquito eretmapodites gilletti . the third is an intermezzo , allegretto grazioso , played with mutes . the finale is a strenuous risoluto e concentrato to balance the first movement . ; string quartet no . 9 ( 1982 ) : is subtitled 32 variations and fugue on a theme of haydn and was dedicated to the delmé quartet , who commissioned it , on their 20th anniversary , which was also the 250th anniversary of the birth of haydn . at about 57 minutes ' duration , it is one of the longest continuous movements for string quartet ever written . the theme is the palindrome minuet which haydn used in his symphony no . 47 and piano sonata no.26 . simpson had already composed a set of piano variations on this minuet in 1948 , and three of those variations are transcribed as variations i-iii of the quartet . the 32 quartet variations take simpson 's fascination with formal symmetry to a new extreme , though they are grouped to correspond to first movement , scherzo and slow movement . the free-form fugue forms the finale , gaining energy and speed as it proceeds . ; string quartet no . 10 ( 1983 ) : bears the title for peace and was composed for the tenth anniversary of the coull quartet . simpson said that the title '' refers to its generally pacific character . the music . tries to define the condition of peace . this excludes aggression but not strong feeling . '' the three movements are a serene allegretto , a very short prestissimo scherzo and a concluding molto adagio , longer than the other two movements combined , which climaxes in a fugue and ends in a peaceful epilogue . ; string quartet no . 11 ( 1984 ) : was also written for the coull quartet and shares some material with no . 10 , but is much more turbulent and intense in character : simpson said he was conscious of the influence of beethoven 's f minor quartet , op.95 in this work . quartet no . 11 is in a single large movement and is concerned with salient intervals including the tritone and the major third . an opening allegro molto is followed by a polyphonic adagio , a large-scale scherzo ( presto ) and a concluding molto adagio played pianissimo throughout . ; string quartet no . 12 ( 1987 ) : was commissioned for the 1988 nottingham festival . this work is in two large movements , a meditative and polyphonic adagio and a molto vivace combining the characters of scherzo and finale . ; string quartet no . 13 ( 1989 ) : was commissioned for the 1990 cardiff festival and was premiered there by the delmé quartet . it is dedicated to the bbc producer graham melville-mason and his wife alex . this is the shortest of simpson 's later quartets ( only no . 2 is shorter ) and is in four concise movements , played without any break , in a fast-slow-fast-slow pattern . ; string quartet no . 14 ( 1990 ) : is a large-scale work in the traditional four movements . the slow movement has been particularly praised for its meditative beauty . ; string quartet no . 15 ( 1991 ) : is a shorter work in one movement with three contrasting sections , an adagio introduction and an allegretto finale framing a large central scherzo , marked severo . the character of this quartet is turbulent and granitic , rather in the manner of string quartet no . 11 . other chamber music . ; clarinet quintet ( 1968 ) : this is a large-scale work in five movements forming an arch shape & nbsp ; – a central scherzo of some 800 bars is framed by two slow movements , which themselves are framed by two outer fast movements . the arch shape is completed by a slow introduction and a slow coda . the entire basis of the material for the work is outlined in the opening introduction , with the main theme having some sort of parallel with beethoven 's c sharp minor quartet . it is one of simpson 's more subtle and enigmatic scores , with an epilogue of almost naive , diatonic fluidity and rising scales . ; violin sonata ( 1984 ) : this is a two movement structure , the first movement a vigorous allegro , and the second combining the characters of a slow movement , scherzo and finale . throughout there is a conflict between g major and g minor & nbsp ; – particularly guided by the intervals of a major third and a minor third , which are often combined and pushed against each other to create strange resonances & nbsp ; – for example g to b flat in the low register of the piano , and b natural to d in the upper register . ; string trio ( 1987 ) : a three movement work . an opening prelude ( presto ) and a concluding fugue ( volante ) are separated by a central adagio . it is dedicated to jillian white of bbc bristol . ; string quintet no . 1 ( 1987 ) : a long one-movement work alternating slow and fast sections . it contains some of the most peaceful music the composer ever wrote . ; string quintet no . 2 ( 1995 ) : this was simpson 's final work . most of it was completed in 1991 , before simpson was paralysed with a stroke that left him in permanent pain , but the final coda was dictated to his wife several years later . it is one of simpson 's most severe and dark scores , its structure is built on a minimal amount of material and there is an alternation between two tempo types & nbsp ; – an austere , lyrical moderato and a knotty allegro . the slow , final coda is one of the darkest endings in all string chamber music literature . compositions for brass band . energy ( 1971 ) , test piece , brass band world championships volcano ( 1979 ) , test piece , national brass band championships of britain the four temperaments , suite for brass band ( 1983 ) . the composer also re-orchestrated this work for orchestral brass . introduction and allegro on a bass of max reger ( 1987 ) vortex ( 1989 ) . compositions for keyboard instruments . piano sonata ( 1946 ) variations and finale on a theme of haydn for solo piano ( 1948 ) michael tippett , his mystery for solo piano ( 1984 ) eppur si muove , ricercar and passacaglia for organ ( 1985 ) variations and finale on a theme by beethoven for solo piano ( 1990 ) sonata for two pianos ( 1980 rev . 1990 ) . books and articles . as a writer on music ( he would have disavowed the title 'musicologist ' ) , simpson was guided by his deep admiration for tovey 's ability to discuss a composer 's sophisticated treatment of forms and keys in a manner that was accurate and incisive without ever alienating the non-specialist reader . his earliest published writings were as a reviewer and critic ; but before long his focus had shifted towards being an advocate for widely unappreciated or misunderstood composers like anton bruckner , carl nielsen and jean sibelius , as well as to the analysis of better-known figures ( such as beethoven ) whenever he felt able to illuminate their work from a composer 's perspective . his writings can usefully be divided into five categories : ( i ) books written by simpson ; ( ii ) books edited by simpson ; ( iii ) contributions to other books and collections ; ( iv ) posthumous collections of articles ; ( v ) individual articles , programme- and sleeve-notes , etc . authored by simpson . carl nielsen : symphonist ( 1952 , rev . 1979 ) . bruckner and the symphony ( 1963 ) . sibelius and nielsen : a centenary essay ( 1965 ) . the essence of bruckner : an essay towards the understanding of his music ( 1966 ; revised edition , 1992 ) . beethoven symphonies ( 1970 ) . the proms and natural justice : a plan for renewal ( with foreword by sir adrian boult ; 1980 ) . simpson on beethoven : essays , lectures and talks by r . simpson , selected and edited by lionel pike ( 1996 ) . edited by simpson . the symphony ( 2 vols ; ed . r . simpson ; 1966 ) . besides writing the 'introduction ' to the first volume and the preludial essay 'stravinsky , hindemith and others ' of the second , simpson added several pithy editorial footnotes to the chapters of his contributors . in addition , he wrote the essay on rachmaninoff found in volume 2 . the chapters on mendelssohn , schumann , brahms , and dvořák were written by composer and conductor julius harrison , and the two-volume work is dedicated to harrison 's name . self , geoffrey . '' harrison , julius '' , grove music online oxford music online . retrieved 29 february 2012 . contributions . 'ianus germinus : music in scandinavia ' ( 1960 ) , in twentieth century music & nbsp ; – an international symposium of essays on current trends in music , ed . r . meyers . ( 1960 ; reissued 1968 ) . foreword to : beethoven , sibelius and the 'profound logic ' : studies in symphonic analysis '' , by lionel pike ( 1978 ) . 'beethoven concertos ' , in a guide to the concerto , ed . robert layton ( 1988 ) 'carl nielsen now : a personal view ' , in the nielsen companion , ed . mina f . miller ( 1995 ) . foreword to : experiencing music ( musicians on music , no . 5 ) , by vagn holmboe , ed . and trans . paul rapoport ( 1991 ) . various pieces . 'the seventh symphony of bruckner : an analysis ' music review ( 1947 ) : 178–187 . 'more reflections ( after composition ) ' , tempo no 144 ( 1983 ) . programme note for british premiere of original 1873 edition of bruckner 's symphony no 3 , royal philharmonic society ( 9 december 1987 ) . program notes for the vanbrugh quartet 's beethoven string quartet cycle ( 19 ? ? ) . sleeve notes for the delme quartet 's recording of bach 's 'die kunst der fuge ' arr . r . simpson ( 19 ? ? ) . 'fiftieth birthday essays ' : a tribute to robert simpson , with articles by jascha horenstein , robert layton , hans keller , hugh ottoway , peter dobson and ainslee cox . edited by edward johnson for triad press ( 1971 ) . work as record producer . robert simpson was also the producer for the first commercially available recordings of havergal brian ’ s music . symphonies nos . 10 and 21 , conducted by james loughran and eric pinkett respectively , were recorded at the de montfort hall , leicester in 1972 . the music was performed by the leicestershire schools symphony orchestra and the lp was released by unicorn records to great critical acclaim in 1973 . a special edition of the television programme aquarius called the unknown warrior gave considerable coverage to the recording session and a camera crew also joined robert simpson and members of the orchestra during a visit they made to the composer 's home in shoreham ( see video links below ) . following the success of the unicorn issue , a second brian album , also produced by robert simpson , was recorded by the lsso in 1974 at hove town hall and leicester de montfort hall with the conducting being shared by lászló heltay and eric pinkett . this cbs release included the 22nd symphony , brian 's setting of the 23rd psalm ( which clearly belongs to the mainstream british choral tradition of vaughan williams and parry ) and the english suite rustic scenes which contains some highly original music . writings . . references . further reading . . external links . robert simpson society discography , bibliography and biographical information with a members ' forum article about robert simpson by malcolm macdonald robert simpson interview , 5 january 1991