Fieldfare

etymology . the english common name fieldfare dates back to at least the eleventh century . the old english word feldefare perhaps meant traveller through the fields . another version traces it back to feala-for . the species was described by carl linnaeus in his landmark 1758 10th edition of systema naturae under its current scientific name . the name turdus pilaris comes from two separate latin words for thrush . no subspecies are recognised . . taxonomy . about 65 species of medium to large thrushes are in the genus turdus , characterised by rounded heads , longish , pointed wings , and usually melodious songs . although two european thrushes , the song thrush and mistle thrush , are early offshoots from the eurasian lineage of turdus thrushes after they spread north from africa , the fieldfare is descended from ancestors that had colonised the caribbean islands from africa and subsequently reached europe from there . . description . the fieldfare is easily recognisable with its slate-grey head , nape and rump , dark brown back , blackish tail and boldly speckled breast . in flight , its white under wing-coverts and axillaries are conspicuous . the harsh flight call '' tsak tsak '' is also distinctive . the forehead and crown of the male are bluish-grey and each feather has a central brownish-black band . the lores and under-eye regions are black and there are faint , pale streaks above the eyes . the ear coverts , nape , hind neck and rump are bluish-grey , usually with a white streak near the shaft of each rump feather . the scapulars and mantle feathers are dark chestnut-brown with dark central streaks and pale tips . there are fourteen tail feathers each with a pointed tip , the outer two slightly shorter than the others giving a rounded tail . they are brownish-black , with inconspicuous darker bars visible in some lights . the outer edge of each tail feather is fringed with grey near the base and the outer pair of feathers have a narrow white border on the inner edge . the chin , throat and upper breast are creamy-buff with bold streaks and speckles of brownish-black . the lower breast is creamy-white with a diminishing buff tinge and fewer speckles and the belly is similarly creamy-white , with the speckles restricted to the uppermost parts . the primaries are brownish-black with the leading edge fringed grey and the inner edge of the outer feathers grey near the base whereas the inner feathers are fringed with brown near the base . the secondaries are similar but fringed with chestnut-brown on the leading edge . the upper wing-coverts are brownish-black and similar to the outer primaries in their margin colouration . the axillaries and under wing-coverts are white and the under tail-coverts have dark greyish-brown bases and margins and white centres and tips . the beak is strong , with a slight curve and a notch near the tip . it is orange-yellow in winter , with the upper mandible somewhat brownish and both mandible tips brownish-black . in the summer both mandibles of the male 's beak are yellow . the irises are dark brown and the legs and feet are brown . the average adult length is , the winglength is and the tarsal length . wingspan ranges from 39 to 42 & nbsp ; cm and weight ranges from 80 to 140 g . the female is very similar to the male but the upper parts are somewhat more brownish and the feathers on the crown have narrower black central stripes . the throat and breast are paler with fewer , smaller markings . the beak is similar to the male 's winter beak . the juvenile are a duller colour than the adults with pale coloured streaks on the feathers that have dark streaks in the adult . the young assume their adult plumage after their first moult in the autumn . the call is mostly uttered in flight and is a harsh '' tsak tsak tsuk '' . the same sound , but softer , is made more conversationally when individuals gather in trees . when angry or alarmed they emit various warning sounds reminiscent of the mistle thrush ( turdus viscivorus ) . the male has a rather feeble song that he sings in the breeding season . it is a mixture of a few phrases like those of the common blackbird ( turdus merula ) interspersed with whistles , guttural squeaks and call notes . this is sung on the wing and also from a tree and a subdued version of this song with more warbling notes is sung by a group of birds at communal roosts . . distribution and habitat . the fieldfare is a migratory species with a palearctic realm . it breeds in northern norway , northern sweden , finland , belgium , germany , switzerland , austria , the czech republic , slovakia , hungary , poland and siberia as far east as transbaikal , the aldan river and the tian shan mountains in north west china . its winter range extends through western and southern europe to north africa , though it is uncommon in the mediterranean region . eastern populations migrate to anatolia , israel , iran and northwest india , and occasionally northeast india . it is a vagrant to iceland , greenland , spitsbergen , the canary islands , the balearic islands , madeira , corsica , sardinia , sicily , malta and cyprus . the flight of the fieldfare is slow and direct . it takes several strong beats then closes its wings briefly before flapping on . it is highly gregarious , quite shy and easily scared in the winter and bold and noisy in the breeding season . when a group is in a tree they all tend to face in the same direction , keeping up a constant chatter . when foraging on the ground , often in association with redwings , the group works its way up wind , each bird pausing every so often to stand erect and gaze around before resuming feeding . when alarmed they fly off down wind and the feeding group reforms elsewhere . in woodland they do not skulk in the undergrowth as do blackbirds or song thrushes , instead they perch in the open on bushes and high branches . they roost socially , sometimes in overgrown hedges and shrubberies but usually on the ground . common sites are in rough grass among bushes or clumps of rushes , in young plantations , on stubble and in the furrows of ploughed fields . . habitat . in the summer the fieldfare frequents mixed woodland of birch , alder , pine , spruce and fir , often near marshes , moorland or other open ground . it does not avoid the vicinity of humans and can be seen in cultivated areas , orchards , parks and gardens . it also inhabits open tundra and the slopes of hills above the tree line . in the winter , groups of fieldfares are chiefly found in open country , agricultural land , orchards and open woodland . they are nomadic , wandering wherever there is an abundance of berries and insects . later in the year they move on to pastureland and cultivated fields . . migration . migration southwards from the breeding range starts in october but the bulk of birds arrive in the united kingdom in november . some of these are still on passage and carry on into continental europe but others remain . the passage-migrants return in april and they and the resident migrants depart from the united kingdom mostly by early may . . diet . the fieldfare is omnivory . animal food in the diet includes snails and slugs , earthworms , spiders and insects such as beetles and their larvae , fly and grasshoppers . when berries ripen in the autumn these are taken in great number . hawthorn , holly , rowan , yew , juniper , dog rose , cotoneaster , pyracantha and berberis are all relished . later in the winter windfall apples are eaten , swedes attacked in the field and grain and seeds eaten . when these are exhausted , or in particularly harsh weather , the birds may move to marshes or even the foreshore where molluscs are to be found . . breeding . the breeding season starts in may in poland but further north in scandinavia may not start until early july . the female fieldfare builds a cup-shaped nest with no attempt at concealment . the location is often in woodland but may be in a hedgerow , garden , among rocks , in a pile of logs , in a hut or on the ground . fieldfares usually nest in close proximity to others of the same species . the adults will defend the nest aggressively and nesting gregariously may offer protection from predators . the nest is built of dried grasses and weeds with a few twigs and a little moss , with a lining of mud and an inner lining of fine grasses . there are usually five to six eggs in a clutch , but occasionally three , four , seven or eight eggs are laid . the eggs vary in size from to and are variable in colour . many are pale blue speckled with fine brown dots and resemble those of the common blackbird . others are bright blue , with or without larger red-brown splotches . incubation starts before all the eggs are laid and lasts for thirteen to fourteen days . the female does all or most of the incubation . the chicks are altricial and both parents bring food to them . they are usually ready to leave the nest after fourteen to sixteen days and there may be two broods in the season , especially in the southern parts of the breeding range . . status and conservation . the fieldfare has an extensive range , estimated at 10 & nbsp ; million & nbsp ; square kilometres ( 3.8 & nbsp ; million square miles ) , and a large population , including an estimated forty two to seventy two million individuals in europe . there are thought to be up to twenty million individuals in russia and the global population is estimated to be between forty four and ninety six million individuals . the population size appears to be stable and the bird is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criteria of the iucn red list of threatened species ( i.e . , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and is therefore evaluated as being of '' least concern '' . in the united kingdom , at the extreme edge of the fieldfare 's breeding range , only a handful of pairs breed . it is therefore classified by the rspb as a red list species as of january 2013 . . references . external links . ageing and sexing ( pdf ; 1.4 mb ) by javier blasco-zumeta & gerd-michael heinze bbc video of fieldfare in an english orchard