Thomas John Barnardo

young barnardo . barnardo was born in dublin , ireland , in 1845 . he was the fourth of five children ( one died in childbirth ) of john michaelis barnardo , a furrier who was of sephardic jewish descent , and his second wife , abigail , an englishwoman and member of the plymouth brethren . in the early 1840s , john emigrated from hamburg to dublin , where he established a business ; he married twice and fathered seven children . the barnardo family '' traced its origin to venice , followed by conversion to the lutheran church in the sixteenth century '' . barnardo wrote that , as a child , he was selfish and thought that everything that was not his should belong to him . however , as he grew older , he abandoned this mindset in favour of helping the poor . barnardo moved to london in 1866 . at that time he was interested in becoming a missionary . . philanthropy . barnardo established 'hope place ' ragged school in the east end of london in 1868 , his first attempt at aiding the estimated 30,000 'destitute ' children in victorian london . cook , r . 'tom , jim , & harry… and the law ' , triple helix , summer 1998 , pp.6-7 many of these children were not only impoverished , but orphaned , as the result of a recent cholera outbreak . for those unable to afford private education , the school offered education which although christian-based in nature , was not exclusively religion-focused , simkin , j . thomas barnardo , spartacus educational , 1997 , retrieved 28 february 2015 , available : and worked to provide tutelage on various common trades of that time ( for example , newsboys and shoe-shiners ) . ramsland , j . 'neil j . smelser . social parlalysis and social change : british working-class education in the nineteenth century ' , history of education quarterly , vol . 34 , no . 1 , 1994 , pp . 89 , retrieved 17 march 2015 , jstor database . in 1870 , barnardo was prompted to form a boys ' orphanage at 18 stepney causeway after inspecting the conditions within which london 's orphaned population slept . wagner , g . 'barnardo , thomas john ( 1845-1905 ) ’ , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford , 2004 ; online edn , 2010 , retrieved 3 march 2015 , available : this was the first of 122 such establishments , caring for over 8,500 children , founded before his death in 1905 . rogal , s . a william somerset maugham encyclopedia , s.v '' maugham , gwendolyn maude syrie barnardo '' significant provisions were available to occupants ; infants/younger children were sent to rural districts in an attempt to protect them from industrial pollution , and teenagers were trained in skills such as carpentry and metal work , to provide them a form of basic financial stability . a alford & j brock . bearded gospel men : the epic quest for manliness and godliness , w publishing group , nashville , tn , 2017 , pp . 210 barnardo 's homes did not just accommodate boys ; in 1876 the 'girls ' village home ' was established , and by 1905 accommodated 1,300 girls , who were trained for 'domestic worker ' . another establishment , the 'rescue home for girls in serious danger ' , aimed to protect girls from the growing tide of child prostitution . r praszkier & a nowak . social entrepreneurship : theory and practice , cambridge university press , new york , 2012 , pp . 171 in addition to the various homes and schools established by barnardo and his wife , sara louise elmslie , a seaside retreat and hospital were also founded . praszkier & novak , 171 from the foundation of the homes in 1867 to the date of barnardo 's death , nearly 60,000 children had been taken in , most being trained and placed out in life . at the time of his death , his charity was caring for over 8,500 children in 96 homes . . personal life . in june 1873 , barnardo married sara louise elmslie ( 1842 – 1944 ) , known as syrie , the daughter of an underwriter for lloyd 's of london . syrie shared her husband 's interests in evangelism and social work . the couple settled at mossford lodge , essex , where they had seven children , three of whom died in early childhood . another child , marjorie , had down syndrome . another daughter , syrie maugham ( 1879 – 1955 ) , known as syrie like her mother , was married to wealthy businessman henry wellcome , and later to the writer somerset maugham , and became a socially prominent london interior designer . barnardo died of angina pectoris in london on 19 september 1905 , and was buried in front of cairns house , barkingside , essex . the house is now the head office of the children 's charity he founded , barnardo's . a memorial stands outside cairn 's house . . alleged ripper suspect . at the time of the whitechapel murders , due to the supposed medical expertise of the ripper , various doctors in the area were suspected . long after his death , barnardo was named a possible suspect '' ripperologist '' gary rowlands has theorised that due to barnardo 's lonely childhood he had anger which may have led him to murder prostitutes . however , there is no evidence whatsoever that he committed the murders '' dr . thomas barnardo '' . casebook . retrieved 17 december 2014 . and critics of this theory have also pointed out that his age and appearance did not match any of the descriptions of the ripper . eddleston , john j . ( 2001 ) . jack the ripper : an encyclopedia . abc-clio . p . 197 . . legacy - barnardo 's . after barnardo 's death , a national memorial was instituted to form a fund of £250,000 to relieve the various institutions of all financial liability and to place the entire work on a permanent basis . william baker , formerly the chairman of the council , was selected to succeed the founder of the homes as honorary director . barnardo was the author of 192 books dealing with the charitable work to which he devoted his life . barnardo 's work was carried on by his many supporters under the name dr barnardo 's homes . following societal changes in the mid-20th century , the charity changed its focus from the direct care of children to fostering and adoption , renaming itself dr barnardo 's . following the closure of its last traditional orphanage in 1989 , it took the still simpler name of barnardo 's . controversies . there was controversy early on with barnardo 's work . specifically , he was accused of kidnapping children without parents ' permission and of falsifying photographs of children to make the distinction between the period before they were rescued by barnardo 's and afterwards seem more dramatic . he openly confessed to the former of these charges , describing it as 'philanthropic abduction ' and basing his defence on the idea that the end justified the means . in total , he was taken to court on 88 occasions , usually on the charge of kidnapping . however , being a charismatic speaker and popular figure , he rode through these scandals unscathed . other charges brought against him included presenting staged images of children for barnardo 's 'before and after ' cards and neglecting basic hygiene for the children under his care . barnardo 's was implicated in the scandal of forced child migration , in which children from poor social backgrounds were taken to the former colonies ( australia , canada , new zealand , south africa ) by churches and charities , without their parents ' consent and even under false claims of death . although this was a legal scheme , favoured by government and society , in many cases the children suffered harsh living conditions and many also suffered physical and , in some cases , sexual abuse . this practice went on until the 1970s . this merited a public apology by prime minister gordon brown in 2010 . the charity today . the official mascot of barnardo 's is a bear called barney . h.m . queen elizabeth ii was barnardo 's patron from 1983 to 2016 , when she handed over the role to hrh the duchess of cornwall . its chief executive is javed khan . . see also . the likes of us charitable organization orphanage ragged school museum list of freemasons . notes .