Indigenous languages of the Americas

background . thousands of languages were spoken by various peoples in north and south america prior to their first contact with europeans . these encounters occurred between the beginning of the 11th century ( with the nordic settlement of greenland and failed efforts in newfoundland and labrador ) and the end of the 15th century ( the voyages of christopher columbus ) . several indigenous cultures of the americas had also developed their own writing systems , the best known being the maya script . the indigenous languages of the americas had widely varying demographics , from the quechuan languages , aymara , guarani , and nahuatl , which had millions of active speakers , to many languages with only several hundred speakers . after pre-columbian times , several indigenous creole languages developed in the americas , based on european , indigenous and african languages . the european colonizers and their successor states had widely varying attitudes towards native american languages . in brazil , friars learned and promoted the tupi language . in many latin american colonies , spanish missionaries often learned local languages and culture in order to preach to the natives in their own tongue and relate the christian message to their indigenous religions . in the british american colonies , john eliot of the massachusetts bay colony bible translations into the massachusett language , also called wampanoag , or natick ( 1661–1663 ) ; he published the first bible printed in north america , the eliot indian bible . the europeans also suppressed use of indigenous american languages , establishing their own languages for official communications , destroying texts in other languages , and insisting that indigenous people learn european languages in schools . as a result , indigenous american languages suffered from cultural suppression and loss of speakers . by the 18th and 19th centuries , spanish , english , portuguese , french , and dutch , brought to the americas by european settlers and administrators , had become the official or national languages of modern nation-states of the americas . many indigenous languages have become critically endangered , but others are vigorous and part of daily life for millions of people . several indigenous languages have been given official status in the countries where they occur , such as guaraní in paraguay . in other cases official status is limited to certain regions where the languages are most spoken . although sometimes enshrined in constitutions as official , the languages may be used infrequently in de facto official use . examples are quechua in peru and aymara in bolivia , where in practice , spanish is dominant in all formal contexts . in north america and the arctic region , greenland in 2009 adopted kalaallisut as its sole official language . in the united states , the navajo language is the most spoken native american language , with more than 200,000 speakers in the southwestern united states . the us marine corps recruited navajo men , who were established as code talkers during world war ii . origins . in american indian languages : the historical linguistics of native america ( 1997 ) , lyle campbell lists several hypotheses for the historical origins of amerindian languages . campbell , lyle ( 1997 ) . american indian languages : the historical linguistics of native america . ch . 3 the origin of american indian languages , pp . 90–106 . oxford : oxford university press . a single , one-language migration ( not widely accepted ) a few linguistically distinct migrations ( favored by edward sapir ) multiple migrations multilingual migrations ( single migration with multiple languages ) the influx of already diversified but related languages from the old world extinction of old world linguistic relatives ( while the new world ones survived ) migration along the pacific coast instead of by the bering strait roger blench ( 2008 ) has advocated the theory of multiple migrations along the pacific coast of peoples from northeastern asia , who already spoke diverse languages . these proliferated in the new world . blench , roger . ( 2008 ) accounting for the diversity of amerindian languages : modelling the settlement of the new world . paper presented at the archaeology research seminar , rspas , canberra , australia . . numbers of speakers . bullet points represent minority language status . see also . amerind languages archive of the indigenous languages of latin america classification of indigenous peoples of the americas classification of indigenous languages of the americas haplogroup q-m242 ( y-dna ) indigenous peoples of the americas language families and languages languages of peru list of endangered languages in canada list of endangered languages in mexico list of endangered languages in the united states list of endangered languages with mobile apps list of indigenous languages of south america list of indigenous languages in argentina mesoamerican languages native american languages act of 1990 . notes . bibliography . bright , william . ( 1984 ) . the classification of north american and meso-american indian languages . in w . bright ( ed . ) , american indian linguistics and literature ( pp . & nbsp ; 3–29 ) . berlin : mouton de gruyter . bright , william ( ed . ) . ( 1984 ) . american indian linguistics and literature . berlin : mouton de gruyter . brinton , daniel g . ( 1891 ) . the american race . new york : d . c . hodges . campbell , lyle . ( 1997 ) . american indian languages : the historical linguistics of native america . new york : oxford university press . campbell , lyle ; & mithun , marianne ( eds . ) . ( 1979 ) . the languages of native america : historical and comparative assessment . austin : university of texas press . north america . boas , franz . ( 1911 ) . handbook of american indian languages ( vol . 1 ) . bureau of american ethnology , bulletin 40 . washington : government print office ( smithsonian institution , bureau of american ethnology ) . boas , franz . ( 1922 ) . handbook of american indian languages ( vol . 2 ) . bureau of american ethnology , bulletin 40 . washington : government print office ( smithsonian institution , bureau of american ethnology ) . boas , franz . ( 1929 ) . classification of american indian languages . language , 5 , 1–7 . boas , franz . ( 1933 ) . handbook of american indian languages ( vol . 3 ) . native american legal materials collection , title 1227 . glückstadt : j.j . augustin . bright , william . ( 1973 ) . north american indian language contact . in t . a . sebeok ( ed . ) , linguistics in north america ( part 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 713–726 ) . current trends in linguistics ( vol . 10 ) . the hauge : mouton . goddard , ives ( ed . ) . ( 1996 ) . languages . handbook of north american indians ( w . c . sturtevant , general ed . ) ( vol . 17 ) . washington , d . c . : smithsonian institution . goddard , ives . ( 1999 ) . native languages and language families of north america ( rev . and enlarged ed . with additions and corrections ) . map . lincoln , nebraska : university of nebraska press ( smithsonian institution ) . ( updated version of the map in goddard 1996 ) . goddard , ives . ( 2005 ) . the indigenous languages of the southeast . anthropological linguistics , 47 ( 1 ) , 1–60 . mithun , marianne . ( 1990 ) . studies of north american indian languages . annual review of anthropology , 19 ( 1 ) : 309–330 . mithun , marianne . ( 1999 ) . the languages of native north america . cambridge : cambridge university press . ( hbk ) ; . nater , hank f . ( 1984 ) . the bella coola language . mercury series ; canadian ethnology service ( no . 92 ) . ottawa : national museums of canada . powell , john w . ( 1891 ) . indian linguistic families of america north of mexico . seventh annual report , bureau of american ethnology ( pp . & nbsp ; 1–142 ) . washington , d.c . : government printing office . ( reprinted in p . holder ( ed . ) , 1966 , introduction to handbook of american indian languages by franz boas and indian linguistic families of america , north of mexico , by j . w . powell , lincoln : university of nebraska ) . powell , john w . ( 1915 ) . linguistic families of american indians north of mexico by j . w . powell , revised by members of the staff of the bureau of american ethnology . ( map ) . bureau of american ethnology miscellaneous publication ( no . 11 ) . baltimore : hoen . sebeok , thomas a . ( ed . ) . ( 1973 ) . linguistics in north america ( parts 1 & 2 ) . current trends in linguistics ( vol . 10 ) . the hauge : mouton . ( reprinted as sebeok 1976 ) . sebeok , thomas a . ( ed . ) . ( 1976 ) . native languages of the americas . new york : plenum . sherzer , joel . ( 1973 ) . areal linguistics in north america . in t . a . sebeok ( ed . ) , linguistics in north america ( part 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 749–795 ) . current trends in linguistics ( vol . 10 ) . the hauge : mouton . ( reprinted in sebeok 1976 ) . sherzer , joel . ( 1976 ) . an areal-typological study of american indian languages north of mexico . amsterdam : north-holland . sletcher , michael , 'north american indians ' , in will kaufman and heidi macpherson , eds . , britain and the americas : culture , politics , and history , ( 2 vols . , oxford , 2005 ) . sturtevant , william c . ( ed . ) . ( 1978–present ) . handbook of north american indians ( vol . 1–20 ) . washington , d . c . : smithsonian institution . ( vols . 1–3 , 16 , 18–20 not yet published ) . vaas , rüdiger : 'die sprachen der ureinwohner ' . in : stoll , günter , vaas , rüdiger : spurensuche im indianerland . hirzel . stuttgart 2001 , chapter 7 . voegelin , carl f . ; & voegelin , florence m . ( 1965 ) . classification of american indian languages . languages of the world , native american fasc . 2 , sec . 1.6 ) . anthropological linguistics , 7 ( 7 ) : 121–150 . zepeda , ofelia ; hill , jane h . ( 1991 ) . the condition of native american languages in the united states . in r . h . robins & e . m . uhlenbeck ( eds . ) , endangered languages ( pp . & nbsp ; 135–155 ) . oxford : berg . south america . willem adelaar ; & muysken , pieter c . ( 2004 ) . the languages of the andes . cambridge language surveys . cambridge university press . fabre , alain . ( 1998 ) . '' manual de las lenguas indígenas sudamericanas , i-ii '' . münchen : lincom europa . kaufman , terrence . ( 1990 ) . language history in south america : what we know and how to know more . in d . l . payne ( ed . ) , amazonian linguistics : studies in lowland south american languages ( pp . & nbsp ; 13–67 ) . austin : university of texas press . kaufman , terrence . ( 1994 ) . the native languages of south america . in c . mosley & r . e . asher ( eds . ) , atlas of the world 's languages ( pp . & nbsp ; 46–76 ) . london : routledge . key , mary r . ( 1979 ) . the grouping of south american languages . tübingen : gunter narr verlag . čestmír loukotka . ( 1968 ) . classification of south american indian languages . los angeles : latin american studies center , university of california . mason , j . alden . ( 1950 ) . the languages of south america . in j . steward ( ed . ) , handbook of south american indians ( vol . 6 , pp . & nbsp ; 157–317 ) . smithsonian institution bureau of american ethnology bulletin ( no . 143 ) . washington , d.c . : government printing office . migliazza , ernest c . ; & campbell , lyle . ( 1988 ) . panorama general de las lenguas indígenas en américa . historia general de américa ( vol . 10 ) . caracas : instituto panamericano de geografía e historia . rodrigues , aryon . ( 1986 ) . linguas brasileiras : para o conhecimento das linguas indígenas . são paulo : edições loyola . rowe , john h . ( 1954 ) . linguistics classification problems in south america . in m . b . emeneau ( ed . ) , papers from the symposium on american indian linguistics ( pp . & nbsp ; 10–26 ) . university of california publications in linguistics ( vol . 10 ) . berkeley : university of california press . sapir , edward . ( 1929 ) . central and north american languages . in the encyclopædia britannica : a new survey of universal knowledge ( 14 ed . ) ( vol . 5 , pp . & nbsp ; 138–141 ) . london : the encyclopædia britannica company , ltd . voegelin , carl f . ; & voegelin , florence m . ( 1977 ) . classification and index of the world 's languages . amsterdam : elsevier . debian north american indigenous languages project . external links . catálogo de línguas indígenas sul-americanas diccionario etnolingüístico y guía bibliográfica de los pueblos indígenas sudamericanos towards a general typology of south american indigenous languages . a bibliographical database south american languages society to advance indigenous vernaculars of the united states ( saivus ) indigenous peoples languages : articles , news , videos documentation center of the linguistic minorities of panama the archive of the indigenous languages of latin america indigenous language institute the society for the study of the indigenous languages of the americas ( ssila ) southern oregon digital archives first nations tribal collection ( collection of ethnographic , linguistic , & historical material ) center for the study of the native languages of the plains and southwest project for the documentation of the languages of mesoamerica programa de formación en educación intercultural bilingüe para los países andinos native american language center ( university of california at davis ) native languages of the americas international journal of american linguistics our languages ( saskatchewan indian cultural centre ) swadesh lists of brazilian native languages alaska native language center