David Hasselhoff

get hasselhoff to number 1 campaign . in 2006 , fans of david hasselhoff launched a tongue-in-cheek website '' get hasselhoff to number 1 '' in an attempt to get the 1989 hit '' looking for freedom '' to the top of the uk music charts through internet downloads of the single . the campaign attracted attention on british radio and television broadcasts , in the national press and on the internet . over 40,000 people signed up to receive the '' hoff alert '' e-mail when the time had come to purchase the single . the focus of the campaign shifted to '' jump in my car '' , when that was actually released as a single , and bbc radio 1 dj scott mills lent his support . on october 3 , 2006 , '' the hoff alert '' was sent out , and hasselhoff promptly gained his highest ever uk chart entry ( number 3 ) on october 8 , 2006 . hoffspace . in 2008 hasselhoff launched a myspace-like social networking site , known as '' hoffspace '' . . the hasselhoffs . hasselhoff and his daughters , taylor-ann and hayley , starred in a reality series on a & e called the hasselhoffs . the series launched on december 5 , 2010 , and focused on hasselhoff 's attempts to resuscitate his career and launch his daughters onto the hollywood stage . on december 10 , 2010 , a & e confirmed in a statement that , after airing just two episodes , the hasselhoffs had been canceled . according to nielsen co . ratings , the first episode was seen by 718,000 viewers . viewers dropped to 505,000 for the second installment , which aired on the same evening . the full series aired in the uk on may 30 , 2011 , on bio . ( uk ) . hasselhoff stars in a casino-style game series online , produced in partnership with eric bischoff with europe being among the first markets to roll out the game . in keeping with internet and online gambling culture in the uk , '' the hoff '' series of games includes video slots and scratch-card type games , all played for real money in europe 's online casino environment . the first in the series of games launched on valentine 's day in early march 2013 , with media and promotional activities commencing in early february . . hoff the record . in 2014 , uk channel dave announced that it had commissioned hoff the record , a sitcom series in which hasselhoff plays a fictionalized version of himself . the series started airing on june 18 , 2015 . . it 's no game and the hoffbot . in 2017 hasselhoff appeared in short film it 's no game by director oscar sharp , playing '' the hoffbot '' . hasselhoff 's lines were generated by a neural network artificial intelligence ( called benjamin ) using a statistical model trained on his own 80 's and 90s television performances . hasselhoff said the a.i . '' really had a handle on what 's going on in my life and it was strangely emotional '' . . motivational speaking . hasselhoff works as a motivational speaker . in january 2014 , he spoke before hundreds of students at nottingham college in nottingham , england . in april 2019 , hasselhoff spoke before thousands of attendees at twitchcon europe in berlin , germany . . music career . 1970s . on february 2 , 1977 , david hasselhoff made its musical debut on the merv griffin show performing '' nadia 's theme '' , the theme song from the american television soap opera the young and the restless , show in which hasselhoff was starring at the time . his version of the song will be included ten years later , on his second album lovin ' feelings ( 1987 ) . . 1980s . six years after his debut live performance , hasselhoff released in 1983 , his debut single '' i get the message '' . in 1984 , hasselhoff made a guest appearance on the first season of kids incorporated , performing '' do you love me '' , which became the lead single from his upcoming debut studio album , night rocker , which was released in january 1985 . the album was a big success in austria , reaching number one there and being certified platinum . in 1987 , hasselhoff released his second studio album , lovin ' feelings , which reached the top-twenty in austria and germany , and being certified gold in the former country . that same year , due to the popularity of knight rider in europe at the time , hasselhoff embarked on his first headlining tour across austria , with a special guest appearance from kitt . in 1988 , hasselhoff released the song '' looking for freedom '' . the song became a hit in europe , specially in germany , where it reached number one for eight consecutive weeks . the song was also certified platinum in germany and became the best-performing single of 1989 in the country . '' looking for freedom '' also topped the charts in austria and switzerland ; and reached the top-twenty in france and belgium . due to its success , hasselhoff released on june 21 , 1989 , his third studio album of the same name , which was produced by german music producer jack white . the album was a commercial success , reaching the top-five in austria , germany and switzerland ; and being certified three-times platinum in europe . he was noted for his performance of the song at the berlin wall on new year 's eve 1989 , two months after the east german government had opened the wall , but nine months before unification took place . wearing a piano-keyboard scarf and a leather jacket covered in motion lights , hasselhoff stood in a bucket crane and performed the song along with the crowd . the performance has had a lasting impact on culture of germany with hasselhoff commenting that the song became an '' anthem '' and '' song of hope '' for the people of east germany . in 2004 , hasselhoff lamented the lack of a photo of him in the checkpoint charlie museum in berlin . in july 1989 , hasselhoff released his first compilation album , knight lover , who contains 17 greatest hits from his first two albums night rocker and lovin ' feelings . the album reached the top-twenty in switzerland ; and the top-forty in germany . 1990s . following the breakthrough success of looking for freedom , hasselhoff embarked on his second tour , the freedom tour , which took around april and may of 1990 , across germany and switzerland . in august of that year , hasselhoff released his fourth studio album , crazy for you , which topped the charts in austria and switzerland , as well as reached the top-ten in germany , eventually becoming hasselhoff 's biggest-selling album in his career . in september 1991 , hasselhoff released his fifth studio album , david , which matched the success of its predecessor , with both the album and its lead single '' do the limbo dance '' reaching number one in austria . that same year , in order to promote david , hasselhoff embarked on his third tour , the dreams come true tour , which took around november and december of 1991 , across austria , germany and switzerland . in late 1991 , two compilation albums were released : looking for freedom and for you , with the former album including hits from 1989 and 1990 , and the latter including hits from 1985 to 1987 ; however , both albums failed to chart . in september 1992 , hasselhoff released his sixth studio album everybody sunshine , which became his last album being produced by jack white , who collaborated with hasselhoff since 1988 . though the album was certified gold in austria , germany and switzerland , it failed to reach the commercial heights of his three previous albums , looking for freedom , crazy for you and david . in november 1993 , hasselhoff released his seventh studio album you are everything , which also met with moderate success in europe , though it reached the top-ten in austria and was certified gold . the songs '' if i could only say goodbye '' and '' wir zwei allein '' became hits in europe , with the former becoming his first uk singles chart peaking at number 35 , and the latter becoming another top-ten hit in austria , germany and switzerland . that same year , he released the single '' pingu dance '' based on the children 's show pingu , and his fourth compilation album , crazy for you , which contains several hits from 1989 to 1991 , however , both releases failed to chart . in 1994 , hasselhoff toured across germany in order to promote you are everything . that same year , he was scheduled to perform a concert on pay-per-view from atlantic city . the concert was expected to help his singing career in the united states . however , on the night of the concert , o . j . simpson was involved in his slow-speed chase in southern california . viewership of the concert was significantly lower than expected due to the live coverage of the chase , and the event was ultimately a 1.5 & nbsp ; million loss . hasselhoff joked that '' 90 million people watched o . j . and three people watched me , including me and my mom and my dad '' . following this , hasselhoff released his eighth studio album du , which became hasselhoff 's first studio album not to receive any certification in europe , and also met with moderate success on european charts . in 1995 , hasselhoff released four greatest hits albums , including his self-titled fifth compilation album , david hasselhoff , released on april 11 , 1995 in the united states , which became his first album in eight years since lovin ' feelings ( 1987 ) to be released in the us . the record includes several songs from the albums you are everything and du . a new recording , called '' fallin ' in love '' , was released as the only single from the album . to promote david hasselhoff , hasselhoff performed for the first time '' fallin ' in love '' on the tonight show with jay leno aired on april 13 , 1995 . as attempting to launch his singing career in the us , both the album and the single '' fallin ' in love '' were commercially unsuccessful , as failed to enter any billboard chart . his sixth and seventh compilation albums , watch out for the bay and is everybody happy were released in mid-1995 , with the former album including songs from 1985 to 1987 ; and the latter , from 1989 to 1991 ; however , both albums failed to chart as well . his eighth compilation album , looking for . the best was released in october 1995 , which contains 18 greatest hits from 1989 to 1994 , including the hits '' looking for freedom '' ( 1988 ) , '' crazy for you '' ( 1990 ) , '' do the limbo dance '' ( 1991 ) , '' everybody sunshine '' ( 1992 ) , '' wir zwei allein '' ( 1993 ) and '' du '' ( 1994 ) , as well as the us single '' fallin ' in love '' ( 1995 ) , and a new recording , titled '' i believe '' with laura branigan . the album charted in austria , peaking at number 50 . two years later , in 1997 , hasselhoff signed with polydor records and released his ninth studio album , hooked on a feeling . the album became hasselhoff 's least successful album to that point in his career , becoming his first studio album that failed to chart in germany . in 1999 , a ninth compilation album was released , watch out for hasselhoff . 2000s . between 2001 and 2004 , two more compilations were released , the very best of and greatest hits . seven years after the release of hooked on a feeling , hasselhoff returned to the music scene with his tenth studio album , sings america , released in august 2004 , with the album performing slighty better on european charts , peaking at numbers 11 and 27 in austria and germany , respectively . that same year , hasselhoff released his eleventh studio album , which became his first christmas album , the night before christmas . the album met with negative reviews and failed to enter any chart . in 2006 , hasselhoff released '' jump in my car '' , which debuted at number three on the uk singles chart , becoming hasselhoff 's first and only top-ten single in the uk . it also became his first and only aria charts , peaking at number 50 . in may 2006 , hasselhoff was mentioned in an interview of dirk nowitzki , an nba star playing for the dallas mavericks and a native of germany . nowitzki was asked what he does to concentrate when shooting foul shots . dirk replied that he sings '' looking for freedom '' to himself . he meant this as a joke but it was thought to be a serious answer . shortly thereafter , hasselhoff attended the may 26 , 2006 , mavericks home playoff game where they faced the phoenix suns in the nba western conference finals . interviewed by craig sager , hasselhoff stated he was as much a fan of nowitzki as nowitzki was a fan of him . in the 2006 nba finals , fans of the miami heat in the american airlines arena held up facial photos of hasselhoff and chanted his name when nowitzki went to the foul line . on august 2 , 2006 , he proclaimed himself '' king of the internet '' in a tongue-in-cheek advertisement for pipex . featuring david hasselhoff in december 2008 , he sang the national anthem at the ncaa las vegas bowl . although the game was televised live by espn , the station chose not to broadcast hasselhoff 's performance . '' oh say can you see the hoff ? '' , tmz.com , december 22 , 2008 . in 2008 , a twelfth compilation was released under the title of das allerbeste . 2010s . seven years after his last album , hasselhoff released in 2011 his twelfth studio album , a real good feeling , which reached number three in austria , the top-thirty in germany and became hasselhoff 's first album in fourteen years since hooked on a feeling ( 1997 ) to chart in switzerland . hasselhoff toured across those countries to promote the album . in 2012 , he released his thirteen studio album this time around , however , it failed to chart . in 2015 , he recorded the single '' true survivor '' , accompanied by a music video , which featured as the lead track for the 2015 swedish short film kung fury . the song was composed by mitch murder ( johan bengtsson ) . recorded in sweden , the song and the video is designed as an ostentatious over-the-top 1980s homage/parody , with the video featuring dinosaurs , kung fu , adolf hitler , skateboarding , norse gods and time travelling . hasselhoff claimed that he had received the offer to record the song and the video by a request from sweden universal to '' sing a tribute to the '80s '' . hasselhoff performed a live version of the song during the 2016 guldbagge awards . '' true survivor '' debuted and peaked at number 94 on the canadian hot 100 , becoming his first chart entry in canada . in 2017 , a retro music video called '' guardians ' inferno '' was released as a bonus on the guardians of the galaxy vol . 2 home release , where hasselhoff does the singing . 'guardians of the galaxy ' : david hasselhoff stars in retro 'inferno ' video in september 2019 , hasselhoff released his fourteenth studio album , open your eyes . the album consists of covers of popular songs such as '' sweet caroline '' and '' lips like sugar '' , with all but one song featuring collaborations from other artists , including todd rundgren and steve stevens . the album charted in austria , germany and switzerland , with the former reaching the top-thirty there . a promotional music video for the title track was released on youtube on september 9 , followed by the album 's release on cd , vinyl , digital download and streaming services on september 27 , 2019 . to promote the album , as well as celebrating the 30th anniversary of the album looking for freedom and the song of the same name , hasselhoff toured across austria , germany and switzerland on the freedom ! the journey continues tour , which took place in october 2019 . 2020s . on december 10 , 2020 , hasselhoff released his first heavy metal song titled '' through the night '' . the song was recorded alongside cuestack , an austrian duo who also enlisted the help of beartooth frontman caleb shomo to produce a retro synth-wave remix of the song . . personal life . hasselhoff 's autobiography making waves was released in the uk in september 2006 . in an interview in april 2006 , he said the book would present the '' last chapter '' regarding controversial elements of his personal life . in november 2015 , hasselhoff posted a youtube video in which he announced that he had changed his name to '' david hoff '' . it was then reported that he was not changing his name ; that the video was an excerpt from an upcoming advertising campaign . after touring glasgow in late 2015 , hasselhoff stated that he supports scottish football team partick thistle f.c . . family . hasselhoff was married to actress catherine hickland from march 24 , 1984 , to march 1 , 1989 . their wedding was recreated in the knight rider season 4 episode '' the scent of roses '' which first aired on january 3 , 1986 . hasselhoff married actress pamela bach in december 1989 . the couple have two daughters : taylor ann hasselhoff , born may 5 , 1990 , who attended the university of arizona and was cast for the 2015 season of rich kids of beverly hills , and actress hayley hasselhoff , born august 26 , 1992 . in january 2006 , hasselhoff announced he was filing for divorce , citing irreconcilable differences . their divorce was finalized in august 2006 . bach was given custody of one daughter and hasselhoff custody of the other , until hasselhoff later obtained custody of both . he resided in southern california with his daughters . in 2012 , hasselhoff began dating hayley roberts , from the town of glynneath in wales . he is a fan of welsh rugby union , and they regularly attend matches in wales . he and hayley were married at a ceremony in italy on july 31 , 2018 . in may 2016 , david hasselhoff said he could not afford alimony of 252k a year to his ex-wife pamela bach anymore , because he had less than 4000 in cash to his name . he made 112k a month , but spent 66k and due to alimony , taxes and living expenses he had little left . in september 2017 , hasselhoff filed formal requests to end alimony payments and cited his ex-wife 's “ failure to make any efforts to become self supporting , contribute to her own support , or even make any efforts to gain job skills . ” hasselhoff and bach reached an agreement which reduced payments since december 1 , 2017 from 10,000 to 5,000 per month . . alcoholism . on may 3 , 2007 , a viral video surfaced online of hasselhoff appearing to be severely drunk inside his home . his daughter , taylor ann , who filmed the video , can be heard interrogating him and asking him to stop abusing alcohol . she also warns her father he could be jeopardizing his spot on the las vegas production of the producers he starred in at the time . in the wake of the leaked clip , hasselhoff issued a statement saying it was recorded by taylor ann so that he could see how he behaved while intoxicated and the footage was deliberately released . '' hasselhoff 'too drunk ' to board plane '' , inthenews.co.uk , july 27 , 2006 . as a result of the video , hasselhoff 's visitation rights with his two daughters were suspended on may 7 , 2007 , for two weeks until the video 's authenticity and distributor were determined . ap , '' hasselhoff 's visitation rights suspended '' , usa today , may 3 , 2007 ; retrieved june 30 , 2007 . in may 2009 , hasselhoff 's attorney , mel goldsman , described hasselhoff as '' a recovering alcoholic '' . . list of works . honors and awards . 1983 – favorite male performer in a new tv program : people 's choice awards 2005 – international star of the year award for outstanding contribution to global entertainment : bollywood awards 2006 – comeback star of the year : vh1 big in '06 awards 2010 – the comedy central roast of david hasselhoff : comedy central . references . external links . q & a , the guardian , april 11 , 2009 .