Bogomilism

etymology . the term bogomil in free translation means '' dear to god '' , and is a compound of the slavic words for '' god '' ( common slavic : bogъ ) and '' dear '' ( common slavic : milъ ) . it may be also a translation of the greek name theophilos , literally '' dear to god ; loved by the gods , '' from theos '' god '' + philos '' loved , beloved '' . it is difficult to ascertain whether the name was taken from the reputed founder of that movement , the priest bogomil , or whether he assumed that name after it had been given to the sect itself . the word is an old church slavonic calque of massaliani , the syriac name of the sect corresponding to the greek euchites . the bogomils are identified with the messalians in greek and slavonic documents from the 12th-14th centuries . the members are referred to as babuni in church slavonic documents , which originally meant '' superstition ; superstitious person '' ( common slavic : babonъ , babunъ babona ) . toponyms which retain the name include the river babuna , the mountain babuna , the bogomila waterfall and village bogomila , all in the azot ( region ) today in central north macedonia , suggesting that the movement was very active in the region . . sources . much of their literature has been lost or destroyed by the contemporary christian churches . the earliest description of the bogomils is in a letter from patriarch theophylact of bulgaria to tsar peter of bulgaria . the main source of doctrinal information is the work of euthymius zigabenus , who says that they believe that god created man 's soul but matter was the invention of satan , god 's older son , who in seducing eve lost his creative power . '' bogomils '' at st . pachomius library concerning the bogomils , something can be gathered from the polemic against the newly-appeared heresy of the bogomils written in slavonic by cosmas the priest , a 10th-century bulgarian official . the old slavonic lists of forbidden books of the 15th and 16th century also give us a clue to the discovery of this heretical literature and of the means the bogomils employed to carry on their teachings . much may also be learned from the doctrines of the numerous variations of bogomilism which spread in medieval kievan rus ' after the 11th century . . history . paulicians . one of the earliest christian dualist sects , marcionism , originated in eastern anatolia . ehrman , bart d . lost christianities : the battles for scripture and the faiths we never knew . oxford university press , 2005 . the church marcion himself established , appeared to die out around the 5th century , although similarities between marcionism and paulicianism , a sect in the same geographical area , indicate that marcionist elements may have survived . helmut koester , history and literature of early christianity , 2nd edition , ( walter de gruyter & co . , 2000 ) , 9 . paulicianism began in the mid-7th century , when constantine-silvanus , basing his message solely on the new testament , began to teach that there were two gods : a good god who had made men 's souls , and an evil god who had created the entire physical universe including the human body . his followers , who became known as paulicians , were not marked by extreme deviance in lifestyle compared to contemporaries , despite their belief that the world was evil , and were renowned as good fighting men . in 970 the byzantine emperor john i tzimiskes transplanted 200,000 armenian paulicians to europe and settled them in the neighbourhood of philippopolis ( today 's plovdiv in thrace ) . under byzantine and then later ottoman rule , the armenian paulicians lived in relative safety in their ancient stronghold near plovdiv , and further northward . linguistically , they were assimilated into the bulgarians , by whom they were called pavlikiani ( the byzantine greek word for paulician ) . in 1650 , the roman catholic church gathered them into its fold . fourteen villages near nicopolis , in moesia , embraced catholicism , as well as the villages around philippopolis . a colony of paulicians in the wallachian village of near bucharest also followed the example of their brethren across the danube . . origins . the gnostic social-religious movement and doctrine originated in the time of peter i of bulgaria ( 927 & ndash ; 969 ) , alleged in the modern day to be a reaction against state and clerical oppression of the byzantine church . in spite of all measures of repression , it remained strong and popular until the fall of the second bulgarian empire in the end of the 14th century . bogomilism was an outcome of many factors that had arisen in the beginning of the 10th century , most probably in the region of macedonia . it was also strongly influenced by the paulicians who had been driven out of armenia . the slavonic sources are unanimous on the point that bogomil 's teaching was manichaean . a synodikon from the year 1210 adds the names of his pupils or '' apostles '' , mihail , todur , dobri , stefan , vasilie and peter . zealous missionaries carried their doctrines far and wide . in 1004 , scarcely 25 years after the introduction of christianity into kievan rus , we hear of a priest adrian teaching the same doctrines as the bogomils . he was imprisoned by leontius , bishop of kiev . in 1125 , the church in the south of rus had to combat another heresiarch named dmitri . the church in bulgaria also tried to extirpate bogomilism . several thousand went in the army of alexios i komnenos against the norman , robert guiscard ; but , deserting the emperor , many of them ( 1085 ) were thrown into prison . efforts were again put forth for their conversion ; and for the converts the new city of alexiopolis was built , opposite philippopolis . when the crusaders took constantinople ( 1204 ) , they found some paulicians , whom the historian geoffrey of villehardouin calls popelicans . the legend of saint gerard discloses that followers of bulgarian bogomilism were present during the early 11th century in ahtum 's realm , which comprised present day banat . they invoked archangel uriel , whose name is common in amulets and magic rituals . spread of bogomilism in the balkans . slav peasantry in parts of bulgaria very likely was the first in closer contact with bogomilism and young bulgarian church was aware of the danger . pope nicholas i warns boris i of the danger of false teachings but he was not specific about heresy as such . bogomilism was a native slavic sect from the middle of the 10th century began to flourish while the theophylact of constantinople warned peter i against this new heresy . alexis p . vlasto ; ( 1970 ) the entry of the slavs into christendom : an introduction to the medieval history of the slavs p . 228-229 ; cambridge university , the bogomils spread westwards and settled in serbia , where they were to be known as babuns ( babuni ) . at the end of the 12th century serbian grand prince stefan nemanja and the serbian council deemed bogomilism a heresy , and expelled them from the country . large numbers , majority of vlach origin , took refuge in bosnia and dalmatia where they were known under the name of patarenes ( patareni ) . in the time of samuel , bogomilism spread into serbia and bosnia . the most active area become west bosnia , centred on the valley of the river bosna . in the province of hum ( modern herzegovina ) the bogomils were also strong , in cities of split and trogir bogomils were numerous but later they took refuge in bosnia . alexis p . vlasto ; ( 1970 ) the entry of the slavs into christendom : an introduction to the medieval history of the slavs p . 231 ; cambridge university , providing refuge to those labeled heretics , including bogomils , was a recurrent pretext for hungarian rulers to declare crusades against bosnia and extend their influence in the region . a first hungarian complaint to the pope was averted by the public abjuration of the bosnian ruler ban kulin , close relative of stefan nemanja , in 1203 . thierry mudry , histoire de la bosnie-herzégovine faits et controverses , éditions ellipses , 1999 ( chapitre 2 : la bosnie médiévale p . 25 à 42 et chapitre 7 : la querelle historiographique p . 255 à 265 ) . dennis p . hupchick et harold e . cox , les balkans atlas historique , éditions economica , paris , 2008 , p . 34 a second hungarian crusade against bosnia on bogomil heresy pretext was launched in 1225 , but failed . in 1254 , rebelling against the papal order to accept a hungarian bishop , the bosnian church chose the schism . in the following centuries , the bosnian church and the heretic sect of the bogomils came to be identified with each other , due to the scarcity of documents after the ottoman conquest . the issue of the false bogomil hypothesis is accurately dealt with by noel malcolm ( bosnia . a short history ) as well as by john v.a . fine ( in mark pinson , the bosnian muslims ) in 1203 , pope innocent iii , with the aid of the king of hungary , forced an agreement of kulin to acknowledge papal authority and religion : in practice this was ignored . on the death of kulin in 1216 a mission was sent to convert bosnia to rome but failed . in 1234 , the bishop of bosnia was removed by pope gregory ix for allowing heretical practices . malcolm lambert , medieval heresy : popular movements from bogomil to hus , ( edward arnold ltd , 1977 ) , 143 . in addition , gregory called on the hungarian king to crusade against the heretics . christian dualist heresies in the byzantine world , c . 650-c . 1450 , ed . janet hamilton , bernard hamilton , yuri stoyanov , ( manchester university press , 1998 ) , 48-49 . however , bosnian nobles were able to expel the hungarians . malcolm lambert , medieval heresy : popular movements from bogomil to hus , 143 . in 1252 , pope innocent iv decided to put bosnia 's bishop under the hungarian kalocsa jurisdiction . such decision provoked the schism of the bosnian christians , who refused to submit to the hungarians and broke off their relations with rome . mudry 1999 ; hupchick and cox 2008 in that way , an autonomous bosnian church came into being , in which some later saw a bogomil or cathar church , while in reality no trace of bogomilism , cathars or dualism can be found in the original documents of the bosnian christians . the issue of the false bogomil hypothesis is accurately dealt with by noel malcolm ( bosnia . a short history ) as well as by john v.a . fine ( in mark pinson , the bosnian muslims ) it was not until pope nicholas ' bull '' prae cunctis '' in 1291 that the dominican-led inquisition was imposed on bosnia . biller , peter , caterina bruschi , and shelagh sneddon , eds . inquisitors and heretics in thirteenth-century languedoc : edition and translation of toulouse inquisition depositions , 1273–1282 . brill , 2010 . 43 . the inquisition reported of the existence of a dualist sect in bosnia in the late 15th century and called them '' bosnian heretics '' , but this sect was most likely not the same as the bosnian church . bogomilism was eradicated in bulgaria , rascia ( one of serbian medieval states ) and byzantium in the 13th century , but some smaller elements survived in rascia 's principality of hum ( present day herzegovina ) and bosnia by embracing eastern tradition of the bosnian church noel malcolm , bosnia : short history , john a . fine '' late medieval balkan . '' h until the ottoman empire gained control of the region in 1463 . some scholars , who sought certain ideological backgrounds and justifications for their political narratives , argue that both catholics and orthodox persecuted the bogomils as heretics and according to them , the pressures drew bosnia to bogomilism . it has purportedly been said that , with the introduction of ottoman rule , bosnians were often more likely to convert to islam since some of them were not adherents of either the roman catholic or serb orthodox churches . however , these claims have been completely rejected today john a . fine – the late medieval balkans noel malcolm – bosnia : a short history as an anachronism from the austro-hungarian era . although this narrative has been debunked , it continues to be emphasized by the bosniak academic community . from bosnia , their influence extended into italy ( piedmont ) . the hungarians undertook many crusades against the heretics in bosnia , but towards the close of the 15th century , the conquest of that country by the turks put an end to their persecution . few or no remnants of bogomilism have survived in bosnia . the ritual in slavonic written by the bosnian radoslav , and published in vol . xv . of the starine of the south slavonic academy at agram , shows great resemblance to the cathar ritual published by cunitz , 1853 . franjo rački , '' bogomili i paternai '' in rad , vols . vii . , viii . and x . ( zagreb , 1870 ) dollinger , beiträge zur ketzergeschichte des mittelalters , 2 vols . ( munich , 1890 ) . in the 18th century , the paulician people from around nicopolis were persecuted by the turks , presumably on religious grounds , and a good part of them fled across the danube and settled in the banat region that was part of the kingdom of hungary at the time , and became known as banat bulgarians . there are still over ten thousand banat bulgarians in banat today in the villages of dudeştii vechi , vinga , denta and also in the city of timișoara , with a few in arad ; however , they no longer practice bogomilism , having converted to roman catholicism . there are also a few villages of paulicians in the serbian part of banat , especially the villages of ivanovo and belo blato , near pančevo . social factors . the gradual christianization of the bulgarian population , the fact that the service was initially practiced in greek , which only the elite knew , resulted in a low level of understanding of the religion among the peasantry . due to the constant wars during the time of tsar simeon i , the lands near the byzantine border ( thrace ) were devastated , and the people living there were left without occupation . the constant change of authority over these lands , and the higher taxes during the time of tsar peter i , gave birth to a great social discontent at the beginning of the 10th century . moreover , the corruption of the church as an institution led to grave disappointment among its recently converted flock . religious factors . the existence of older christian heresies in the bulgarian lands ( manichaeism and paulicianism ) , which were considered very dualistic , influenced the bogomil movement . manichaeism 's origin is related to zoroastrianism ; that is why bogomilism is sometimes indirectly connected to zoroastrianism in the sense of its duality . connections to the royal court . most probably , as samuil of bulgaria revolted against the byzantine empire , he relied on the popular support of the movement . there are no sources of bogomil persecution during his reign ( 976–1014 ) . . doctrine . sources . j . c . wolf , historia bogomilorum ( wittenberg , 1712 ) euthymius zygabenus , narratio de bogomilis , ed . gieseler ( göttingen , 1842 ) c . j . jirecek , geschichte d . bulgaren ( prague , 1876 ) , s . 155 , 174-175 l . p . brockett , the bogomils of bulgaria and bosnia : the early protestants of the east ( s.l . , 1879 ) v . sharenkoff , a study of manicheism in bulgaria ( new york , 1927 ) . d . obolensky , the bogomils : a study in balkan neo-manichaeism ( cambridge , 1948 ) , reprint new york , 1978 s . runciman , the medieval manichee : a study of the christian dualist heresy ( cambridge , 1947 ) k . papasov , christen oder ketzer – die bogomilen ( stuttgart , 1983 ) d . angelov , bogomilstvoto ( stara zagora , 1995 ) j . meiers , archbishop ancient order of bogomil , of americas ' . j . ivanov , bogomilski knigi i legendi ( sofija , 1925 ) . french translation by m . ribeyrol , livres et légendes bogomiles ( paris , 1976 ) . further reading . h . g . beck , vom umgang mit ketzern ( münchen 1993 ) , esp . chapter 8 . averil cameron , '' how to read heresiology '' . journal of medieval and early modern studies 33 , no . 3 ( 2003 ) , 471-92 j . wolski , '' autoproscoptae , bogomils and messalians in the 14th century bulgaria '' . studia ceranea , no . 4 ( 2014 ) , 233–241 . n . garsoïan , byzantine heresy : a reinterpretation , dumbarton oaks papers ( dop ) 25 ( 1971 ) ,87-113 j . gouillard , l'hérésie dans l'empire byzantin des origines au xiie siècle , travaux et mémoires 1 b . hamilton , '' the state of research : the legacy of charles schmidt to the study of christian dualism '' , journal of medieval history 24-2 ( 1998 ) , 191-214 e . hösch , '' kritische anmerkungen zum gegenwärtigen stand der bogomilen forschung '' , kurturelle tradition in bulgarien ( göttingen 1989 ) isidor ieşan , secta patarenă în balcani şi în dacia traiană ( romanian ) . institutul de arte grafice c . sfetea , bucurești , 1912 aurelio de santos otero , bogomilen , theologische realenzyklopädie 7 ( berlin 1981 ) h . ch . puech et a . vaillant , le traité contre les bogomiles de cosmas le prêtre , paris 1945 a . schmaus , der neumanichäismus auf dem balkan , saeculum 3 ( 1951 ) , 271-297 m . loos , dualist heresy in the middle ages , praha 1972 y . stoyanov , the hidden tradition in europe : the secret history of medieval christian heresy , penguin books 1994 j . hamilton , bernard hamilton , and yuri stoyanov . christian dualist heresies in the byzantine world , c . 650-c . 1450 : selected sources ( new york 1998 ) . external links . anna comnena 's the bogomils modern day bogomil movement worldwide modern day bogomil movement in balkans raoul vaneigem , the resistance to christianity djordje capin : myth about bogomils christian dualist heresies in the byzantine world c.650–c.1450 l . p . brockett , the bogomils of bulgaria and bosnia : the early protestants of the east euthymius zygadenus , narratio de bogomilis