Anderlecht

history . origins and medieval times . the first traces of human activity on the right bank of the zenne date from the stone age and bronze age . the remnants of a roman villa and of a franks necropolis were also found on the territory of anderlecht . the first mention of the name anderlecht , however , dates only from 1047 under the forms anrelech , then andrelet ( 1111 ) , andreler ( 1148 ) , and anderlech ( 1186 ) . at that time , this community was already home to a chapter of canons and to two feudal manors , those of the powerful lords of aa and of anderlecht . in 1356 , louis ii of flanders , fought against brussels on the territory of anderlecht , in the so-called battle of scheut , supposedly over a monetary matter . although he defeated his sister-in-law , joanna , duchess of brabant , and briefly took her title , she regained it the following year with the help of charles iv , holy roman emperor . in 1393 , joanna 's charter made anderlecht a part of brussels . it is also around this time that the church of saint guy was rebuilt above the earlier romanesque crypt in the brabantian gothic style . 15th–18th centuries . the city of anderlecht became a beacon of culture in the 15th and 16th centuries . in 1521 , erasmus lived in the erasmus house for a few months . charles , duke of aumale and grand veneur of france also had a residence here . the 17th and 18th centuries were marked by the wars between the low countries and france . on 13 november 1792 , right after the battle of jemappes , general dumouriez and the french revolutionary army routed the austrians here once again . among the consequences were the disbanding of the canons and anderlecht being proclaimed an independent municipality by the french . 19th century and later . the 19th century saw a remarkable population growth , mainly because of the proximity to a rapidly expanding brussels . remarkable new urban developments and garden cities such as het rad , moortebeek and / were built at the beginning of the 20th century to house the influx of newcomers . today , the name anderlecht rings a bell in every belgian ear thanks to its very successful football club . districts . historical centre . the historical centre of anderlecht is the municipality 's central district . formerly known as rinck , it is divided into several sectors : the / district , also called the vaillance ( dutch : dapperheid ) district , is the meeting point for those who hail to the heart of anderlecht . it is also where the place de la vaillance with its collegiate church , the / , as well as anderlecht 's main schools are located . / is the municipality 's main shopping street . it is centred on the / and some neighbouring streets . the aumale district mainly comprises / and its surrounding streets . it includes erasmus house , the old beguinage and the bibliothèque de l'espace maurice carême public french-speaking library . cureghem/kuregem . located in the east of anderlecht , the cureghem ( dutch : district is one of the municipality 's largest and most populated neighbourhoods . it developed during the industrial revolution along the brussels–charleroi canal and is currently in a fragile social and economic situation due to the decline of its economy and the poor quality of some of its housing . between 1836 and 1991 , the district housed the royal school of veterinary medicine , now moved to liège but often still referred to as 'cureghem ' . the old campus , listed as protected heritage , is currently facing a large process of rehabilitation . three listed buildings ; the former atlas brewery , the old power station and the former moulart mill are testaments to the old industrial activities next to the waterway . the town hall of anderlecht is located on the / , at the heart of this district . la roue/het rad . located in the south of anderlecht , the la roue ( dutch : district is one of the largest districts of the municipality and one of the garden cities of the brussels region . built in the 1920s , with its modest and picturesque houses , it offers a great vision of an early 20th century working class neighbourhood . it is also home to one of the largest agribusiness industry campuses in belgium , ceria/coovi , and other popular department stores . sights . the collegiate church of st . peter and st . guido is located in the municipality 's historical centre , on the northern side of the place de la vaillance , its main square . it contains the grave of the 11th century saint guy of anderlecht . its romanesque crypt dates from the 10th century and is one of the oldest in belgium . most of the church , however , dates from 1350 and later , with most of the currently visible architecture representing the ogee style ( 15th–16th centuries ) . construction of the tower started in 1517 but stopped with the square part up to the balcony , and was not completed until 1898 . eug . de seyn , '' geschied- en aardrijkskundig woordenboek der belgische gemeenten '' ( historic and geographic dictionary of belgian communes ) , a . bieleveld , brussels 1933-1934 . right next to the church , the old beguinage is home to a local historical museum . erasmus house , built in 1458 , and its medicinal and philosophical gardens can be visited nearby . the national museum of the resistance , which traces the history of the belgian resistance and german occupation of belgium during world war ii the museum of china – scheut , which houses documents and pieces brought back to europe by the cicm missionaries , including a 15th-century bronze buddha the maurice carême museum , in the maison blanche where the belgian poet lived and wrote the luizenmolen , a replica of an old windmill which once stood on the site anderlecht is the location of the cureghem cellars ( french : , dutch : , a subterranean complex of handmade brick caves with romanesque vaults , pillars , and arches , originally the site of a cattle market covered by a forged-iron roof construction in the 1890s . the cellars were simply a foundation for the upper structure until the 1930s , after which the city council decided to make better use of them . it proved more profitable to grow mushrooms in the dark and damp underground spaces for local consumption . it fell into disuse as a cattle market but , in 1984 , the hall officially got listed as a belgian monument . due to its characteristic architecture and unique layout it was refurbished and transformed by a private company , abattoir sa . since 1992 , it serves as an attractive and functional event site for various private , corporate or public occasions and events . one of these was the anatomic exposition body worlds by dr . gunther von hagens , which ran in the cellars between 2008 and 2009 and attracted over 500,000 visitors . anderlecht also houses the cantillon brewery , a gueuze museum established in an actual working brewery . the museum of medicine , located on the erasmus campus of the université libre de bruxelles the jean-claude van damme statue located on / , near the westland shopping center file : anderlect , maison d'erasme.jpg erasmus house file : anderlechtbegijnhof.jpg beguinage of anderlecht file : cité de moortebeek 04.jpg moortebeek garden city file : porseileinstraatanderlecht.jpg porselein street file : anderlecht justice de paix 2014.jpg justice de paix of anderlecht . events . the annual anderlecht fair , originally a cattle fair , was authorised by william ii of the netherlands in 1825 . since then , it has taken the form of a series of celebrations , which still include animal shows but also a large market , a floral show , and the recreation of a religious procession in honour of saint guy . economy . the abattoirs of anderlecht , located at 24 , / in cureghem , is the main slaughterhouse in brussels , employing some 1,500 people . in addition to its main activities , the great hall serves as a covered market for food and flea markets . in recent years , several major international companies have set up their headquarters in anderlecht , notably the delhaize group , which operates many supermarket chains , from 40 , marie curie square , '' contacts . '' delhaize group . retrieved on 16 may 2012 . '' square marie curie 40 1070 brussels - belgium '' coca-cola benelux at 1424 , / , as well as the belgian chocolate company leonidas at 41 , / . . healthcare . several hospitals and clinics are located in anderlecht : erasmus hospital joseph bracops hospital st . anne st . remigius clinic . sports . football . anderlecht is the home of the football club rsc anderlecht , the most successful belgian football team in european competition as well as in the belgian first division with 34 titles . the club 's home stadium is the lotto park , located within astrid park . the team colors are white and purple . parks and green spaces . green spaces in the commune include : astrid park / , in scheut scherdemael park peterbos park joseph lemaire park jean vives park / , in neerpede parc de la rosée/dauwpark , in cureghem the vogelzang or vogelenzang , a natural protected area . famous inhabitants . guy of anderlecht 950–1012 ) , known as the poor man of anderlecht , patron saint of anderlecht guy of anderlecht at saints.sqpn.com . retrieved 26.march 2013 adrian vi ( 1459–1523 ) , pope , theologian , rector at the university of leuven , canon at the chapter of anderlecht , lived in anderlecht . joseph bracops ( 1900–1966 ) , politician and mayor jacques brel , singer . he lived from 1942 to 1951 at 7 , / , and worked from 1946 to 1953 in the family cartonery vanneste & brel ( now sca packaging ) at 18 , / . a metro station , located in the municipality , is named after him . maurice carême ( 1899–1978 ) , poet fernand dineur ( 1904–1956 ) , cartoonist desiderius erasmus ( 1466–1536 ) , humanism and theologian désiré keteleer ( 1920–1970 ) , cyclist filip peeters ( b . 1962 ) , flemish actor germaine schneider ( 1903–1945 ) , belgian-swiss resistance fighter henri seroka ( b . 1949 ) , composer henri simonet ( 1931–1996 ) , politician and mayor jacques simonet ( 1963–2007 ) , politician and mayor philippe thys ( 1889–1971 ) , cyclist and three-time champion of the tour de france tonia ( b . 1947 ) , singer toots thielemans ( 1922–2016 ) , jazz musician , lived in anderlecht . william vance ( b . 1935 ) , comic book artist constant vanden stock ( 1914–2008 ) , entrepreneur , footballer and functionary virgile vandeput ( b . 1994 ) , belgian-born alpine skier who competes for israel régine zylberberg ( b . 1929 ) , chanson singer , actress and nightclub entrepreneur born in anderlecht : princess elisabeth , duchess of brabant ( b . 2001 ) , duchess of brabant , the oldest child of the belgian king philippe ; heiress the princes gabriel and emmanuel and princess eléonore ; 2nd , 3rd and 4th in line to the throne of belgium , were born in anderlecht . yannick mertens ( b . 1987 ) , tennis . international relations . anderlecht is twinned with : boulogne-billancourt , france berlin-neukölln , germany london borough of hammersmith and fulham , united kingdom zaandam , netherlands marino , italy in addition , anderlecht has signed a friendship agreement with : sainte-maxime , france . references . external links . official site of anderlecht ( only in french or dutch ) mayor jacques simonet died