Prophetic biography

etymology . in the arabic language the word sīra or sīrat comes from the verb sāra , which means to travel or to be on a journey . a person 's sīra is that person ’ s journey through life , or biography , encompassing their birth , events in their life , manners and characteristics , and their death . in modern usage it may also refer to a person 's resume . it is sometimes written as '' seera '' , '' sirah '' or '' sirat '' , all meaning '' life '' or '' journey '' . in islamic literature , the plural form , siyar , could also refer to the rules of war and dealing with non-muslims . the phrase sīrat rasūl allāh , or as-sīra al-nabawiyya , refers to the study of the life of muhammad . the term sīra was first linked to the biography of muhammad by ibn shihab al-zuhri , and later popularized by the work of ibn hisham . in the first two centuries of islamic history , sīra was more commonly known as maghāzī ( literally , stories of military expeditions ) , which is now considered to be only a subset of sīra -- one that concerns the military campaigns of muhammad . early works of sīra consist of multiple historical reports , or akhbār , and each report is called a khabar . sometimes the word tradition or hadith is used instead . content . the sīra literature includes a variety of heterogeneous materials , containing mainly narratives of military expeditions undertaken by muhammad and his sahabah . these stories are intended as historical accounts and are used for veneration . the sīra also includes a number of written documents , such as political treaties ( e.g . , treaty of hudaybiyyah or constitution of medina ) , military enlistments , assignments of officials , letters to foreign rulers , and so forth . it also records some of the speeches and sermons made by muhammad , like his speech at the farewell pilgrimage . some of the sīra accounts include verses of poetry commemorating certain events and battles . at later periods , certain type of stories included in sīra developed into their own separate genres . one genre is concerned with stories of prophetic miracles , called aʿlām al-nubuwa ( literally , '' proofs of prophethood '' —the first word is sometimes substituted for amārāt or dalāʾil ) . another genre , called faḍāʾil wa mathālib — tales that show the merits and faults of individual sahaba , enemies , and other notable contemporaries of muhammad . some works of sīra also positioned the story of muhammad as part of a narrative that includes stories of earlier prophets , persian kings , pre-islamic arab tribes , and the rashidun . parts of sīra were inspired by , or elaborate upon , events mentioned in the qur'an . these parts were often used by writers of tafsir and asbab al-nuzul to provide background information for events mentioned in certain ayat . . comparison to hadith . in terms of structure , a hadith and a historical report ( khabar ) are very similar ; they both contain isnads ( chains of transmission ) . the main difference between a hadith and a khabar is that a hadith is not concerned with an event as such , and normally does not specify a time or place . rather the purpose of hadith is to record a religious doctrine as an authoritative source of sharia . by contrast , while a khabar may carry some legal or theological implications , its main aim is to convey information about a certain event . starting from the 8th and 9th century , many scholars have devoted their efforts to both kinds of texts equally . some historians consider the sīra and maghāzī literature to be a subset of hadith . . reception . during the early centuries of islam , the sīra literature was taken less seriously compared to the hadiths . in umayyad times , qāṣṣ used to tell stories of muhammad and earlier prophets in private gatherings and mosques , given they obtained permission from the authorities . many of these storytellers are now unknown . after the umayyad period , their reputation deteriorated because of their inclination to exaggerate and fantasize , and for relying on the isra'iliyat . thus they were banned from preaching at mosques . in later periods , however , works of sīra became more prominent . more recently , western historical criticism and debate concerning sīra have elicited a defensive attitude from some muslims who wrote apologetic literature defending its content . . authenticity . for centuries , muslim scholars have recognized the problem of authenticity of hadith . thus they have developed sophisticated methods ( see hadith studies ) of evaluating isnāds ( chains of transmission ) . this was done in order to classify each hadith into '' sound '' ( ṣaḥīḥ ) for authentic reports , as opposed to '' weak '' ( ḍaʿīf ) for ones that are probably fabricated , in addition to other categories . since many sīra reports also contain isnād information and some of the sīra compilers ( akhbārīs ) were themselves practicing jurists and hadīth transmitters ( muḥaddiths ) , it was possible to apply the same methods of hadīth criticism to the sīra reports . however , some sīra reports were written using an imprecise form of isnād , or what modern historians call the '' collective isnād '' or '' combined reports '' . the use of collective isnād meant that a report may be related on the authority of multiple persons without distinguishing the words of one person from another . this lack of precision led some hadith scholars to take any report that used a collective isnād to be lacking in authenticity . according to wim raven , it is often noted that a coherent image of muhammad can not be formed from the literature of sīra , whose authenticity and factual value have been questioned on a number of different grounds . he lists the following arguments against the authenticity of sīra , followed here by counter arguments : hardly any sīra work was compiled during the first century of islam . however , fred donner points out that the earliest historical writings about the origins of islam first emerged in ah 60-70 , well within the first century of hijra ( see also list of biographies of muhammad ) . furthermore , the sources now extant , dating from the second , third , and fourth centuries ah , are mostly compilations of material derived from earlier sources . raven , w . , “ sīra ” , in : brill encyclopaedia of islam , second edition , v.9 p.662 the many discrepancies exhibited in different narrations found in sīra works . yet , despite the lack of a single orthodoxy in islam , there is still a marked agreement on the most general features of the traditional origins story . later sources claiming to know more about the time of muhammad than earlier ones . scholar patricia crone found a pattern , where the farther a commentary was removed in time from the life of muhammad and the events in the quran , the more information it provided , despite the fact it depended on the earlier sources for its content . crone attributed this phenomenon to storytellers ' embellishment . if one storyteller should happen to mention a raid , the next storyteller would know the date of this raid , while the third would know everything that an audience might wish to hear about . in the case of ibn ishaq , there are no earlier sources we can consult to see if and how much embroidering was done by him and other earlier transmitters , but , crone argues , '' it is hard to avoid the conclusion that in the three generations between the prophet and ibn ishaq '' fictitious details were not also added . discrepancies compared to non-muslim sources . but there are also similarities and agreements both in information specific to muhammad , and concerning muslim tradition at large . some parts or genres of sīra , namely those dealing with miracles , do not qualify as sources for scientific historiographical information about muhammad , except for showing the beliefs and doctrines of his community . nevertheless , other content of sīra , like the constitution of medina , are generally considered to be authentic . . early compilations of sīra . the following is a list of some of the early hadith collectors who specialized in collecting and compiling sīra and maghāzī reports : ʿurwa ibn al-zubayr ( d . 713 ) . he wrote letters replying to inquiries of the umayyad caliphs , abd al-malik ibn marwan and al-walid i , involving questions about certain events that happened in the time of the prophet . since abd al-malik did not appreciate the maghāzī literature , these letters were not written in story form . he is not known to have written any books on the subject . wahb ibn munabbih ( d . during 725 to 737 ) . several books were ascribed to him but none of them are now extant . some of his works survive as quotations found in works by ibn ishaq , ibn hisham , ibn jarir al-tabari , and abū nuʿaym al-iṣfahānī . ibn shihāb al-zuhrī ( d . c . 737 ) , a central figure in sīra literature , who collected both ahadith and akhbār . his akhbār also contain chains of transmissions , or isnad . he was sponsored by the umayyad court and asked to write two books , one on genealogy and another on maghāzī . the first was canceled and the one about maghāzī is either not extant or has never been written . musa ibn ʿuqba , a student of al-zuhrī , wrote kitāb al-maghāzī , a notebook used to teach his students ; now lost . some of his traditions have been preserved , although their attribution to him is disputed . muhammad ibn ishaq ( d . 767 or 761 ) , another student of al-zuhrī , who collected oral traditions that formed the basis of an important biography of the prophet . his traditions survived through a number of sources , most notably ibn hisham and ibn jarir al-tabari . see also . sunnah hadith biographical evaluation ( ʿilm al-rijāl ) historiography of early islam list of biographies of muhammad . notes . references . . further reading . hagen , gottfried , sira , ottoman turkish , in muhammad in history , thought , and culture : an encyclopedia of the prophet of god ( 2 vols . ) , edited by c . fitzpatrick and a . walker , santa barbara , abc-clio , 2014 , vol . ii , pp . & nbsp ; 585–597 . jarar , maher , sira ( biography ) , in muhammad in history , thought , and culture : an encyclopedia of the prophet of god ( 2 vols . ) , edited by c . fitzpatrick and a . walker , santa barbara , abc-clio , 2014 , vol . ii , pp . & nbsp ; 568–582 . williams , rebecca , sira , modern english , in muhammad in history , thought , and culture : an encyclopedia of the prophet of god ( 2 vols . ) , edited by c . fitzpatrick and a . walker , santa barbara , abc-clio , 2014 , vol . ii , pp . & nbsp ; 582–585 .