Thrissur

law and order . the city is the headquarters of thrissur city police and thrissur rural police . the thrissur city police is headed by a police commissioner , an indian police service ( ips ) officer . the city is divided into two sub divisions , thrissur and guruvayur . it also operates 14 police stations , including a woman police station and a traffic police station . the thrissur city police commissionerate operates out of the erst-while district armed police headquarters at ramavarmapuram . the thrissur rural police has its headquarters at the district collectorate complex at ayyanthole . the city is also the headquarters of inspector general of police , thrissur range , which looks after the law and order of thrissur district , palakkad district and malappuram district . all the superintendent of police of these three districts come under his jurisdiction . the city also contains the kerala police academy , central prison , viyyur , police dog training centre and excise academy and research centre . indian reserve battalion , new commando unit of kerala police is headquartered in ramavarmapuram . border security force ( 148 battalion ) have its first centre in kerala in thrissur only . . demographics . india census , thrissur city had a population of 315,957 . males constitute 48.2 % and females constitute 51.8 % of the total population numbering 152,296 and 163,661 respectively . the density of population is 3,130/km 2 . the sex ratio is 1,092/1,000 male . the total number of the households in the city is 66,827 . the average family size in the city is 4.27 members . the city has a slum population equivalent to 0.30 % of the total city population and 0.37 % of the kerala 's slum population . the city has an average literacy rate of 95.5 % : male literacy rate is 97 % whereas female literacy rate is 94.6 % . thrissur municipal corporation is spread over an area of 101.42 & nbsp ; km 2 . the city alone accounts for 38 % of the urban population in the thrissur district . thrissur urban development authority area encompasses the municipal corporation area and adjoining panchayats . the total area under municipal corporation jurisdiction is 101.42 & nbsp ; km 2 , and the area under the panchayats is 18.83 & nbsp ; km 2 together , these constitute an area covering 120.25 & nbsp ; km 2 . hindus constitute the majority with 58.42 % of the population christians constitute 24.27 % of the population muslims constitute 17.07 % of the population in thrissur district . politics . thrissur has played a significant part in the political history of south india . the city of thrissur is represented in the kerala state assembly by two elected members , one from thrissur assembly constituency and another from ollur assembly constituency . v . s . sunilkumar is the representative of thrissur assembly constituency and k . rajan from ollur assembly constituency . thrissur city is also a part of the thrissur lok sabha constituency and elects a member to the lok sabha , the lower house of the parliament of india , once every five years . the current mp is t . n . prathapan . the lok sabha seat has been held by the indian national congress for seven terms ( 1951–1957 , 1984–1989 , 1989–1991 , 1991–1996 , 1999–2004 and 2009–2014 , 2019 to present ) and the communist party of india for ten terms ( 1957–1962 , 1962–1967 , 1967–1970 , 1971–1977 , 1977–1979 , 1980–1984 , 1996–1997 , 1998–1999 , 2004–2009 and 2014–2019 ) . transport . road . the city is connected to the north-south corridor national highway ( india ) via the four-lane national highway 544 , previously nh 47 . the highway traverses through the entire length and breadth of the city from different points and provides access to the nearby cities such of kochi , palakkad and coimbatore . nh 544 provides two main exit points at mannuthy and which is bypass to the thrissur city and thalore . the ongoing construction of mannuthy- vadakkencherry 6 lane national highway is a major traffic problem in the district . a tunnel was planned to built in kuthiran which is the main point of accidents . during 2018 floods there was a landslide in kuthiran the roads were jammed for 5 days . central and state governments are not willing to take any actions . as it is one the main roads which connect neighbouring states to kerala . when monsoon starts roads will be fully damaged , people were forced to risk their lives inorder to provide income in their family . the city is largely dependent on private buses , taxis and auto rickshaws ( called autos ) for public transport . a transit terminal mobility hub situated in puzhakkal is also under wraps to be made on lines of vyttila mobility hub to reduce traffic congestion is recently approved to be realised soon . state-owned kerala state road transport corporation ( ksrtc ) runs inter-state , inter-district and city services . thrissur has three bus stations , the shaktan thampuran private bus stand , thrissur in sakthan thampuran nagar , vadakke stand ( northern bus stand ) and the thrissur ksrtc bus station near the thrissur railway station . state highway ( sh 69 ) thrissur-kuttippuram road , sh 22 kodungallur – shornur road , sh 75 thrissur – kanjani – vadanappally road are the three state highways which connect city with its suburbs and municipalities . railway . the southern railway zone of the indian railways operates the main rail transport system in thrissur . there are four railway stations in thrissur city . thrissur railway station , one of the four a+ railway station in kerala provides trains to three directions and lies on the busy shoranur-cochin harbour section . it has a satellite station , punkunnam railway station and two minor stations , ollur railway station and mulankunnathukavu railway station . thrissur railway station also connects to the temple town of guruvayur by thrissur-guruvayur section . in addition , southern railways is running a suburban railway system connecting thrissur to kochi and palakkad using mainline electrical multiple unit services ( memu ) . . air . the city is served by cochin international airport ( nedumbassery ) , which is about 55 kilometres away . direct domestic flights are available to major indian cities like new delhi , mumbai , hyderabad , chennai , bangalore , pune , nagpur , kolkata , visakhapatnam ( proposed ) . international flights to middle east cities like dubai , kuwait , bahrain , muscat , sharjah , jeddah , riyadh , doha and to southeast asian cities bangkok , singapore and kuala lumpur are available here . it has a dedicated heli-taxi service and chartered flights . calicut international airport at karipur , is 80 & nbsp ; kilometers from the city and coimbatore airport , which is 114 & nbsp ; kilometers from the city also can be used by travellers . . culture and literature . festivals . thrissur is known as the cultural capital of kerala , the city enjoys a thriving cultural tradition dating back to centuries , and being the centre of kerala 's cultural activities . thrissur pooram also called as 'the pooram of all poorams ' is celebrated in every year in the month of medam ( mid-april to mid-may ) as per the malayalam calendar . it is the biggest of all poorams held in kerala . the city plays host , for 36 hours from the wee hours of the pooram day , to one of the most largest collection of people and elephants . puli kali also known as kavakali is another festival , which attracts thousands of people to the city . it is performed by trained artists to entertain people on the occasion of onam , an annual harvest festival , celebrated mainly in kerala . the most important festivals celebrated in the city include christmas , onam , easter , eid and vishu . the city is widely acclaimed as the land of elephant lovers . aanayoottu ( feeding of elephants ) , is the world largest elephant feeding ceremony held in vadakkunnathan temple in the city annually . the ceremony is conducted on the first day of the malayalam month of karkidakam . . literature . literary lineage of city dates back to early history of kerala but it came to prominence after kerala government set up kerala lalita kala akademi , kerala sahitya academy , kerala sangeetha nadaka academy and college of fine arts , thrissur for promoting literature , music and arts in kerala . after the partition of india , thrissur became the literary capital of kerala as turned to the playground of novelist , poets and orators . in 1952 when current books set its first shop in thrissur by former education minister professor joseph mundassery , it become the abode of writer 's like o . v . vijayan , kovilan , v . k . n . , uroob , edasseri govindan nair , m . t . vasudevan nair , k . g . sankara pillai and sarah joseph . the area was later known as current moola ( '' current corner '' ) . the building that housed the current books bookshop was demolished in 2011 . thrissur is home to prominent malayalam literary figures like kovilan , kunhunni mash , sukumar azhikode , k . satchidanandan , mullanezhi , sarah joseph , attoor ravi varma , lalitha lenin , p . bhaskaran , joseph mundassery . . temples , churches and mosques . temples the vadakkunnathan temple , believed to have been founded by the legendary saint parasurama , is an example of the kerala style of architecture and houses several sacred shrines and murals delineating graphically , various episodes from the mahabharata . thiruvambadi sri krishna temple , one of the largest krishna temples in kerala and paramekkavu bagavathi temple which is one of the largest bagavathi temples in kerala is also situated in the city . guruvayur temple , is located in guruvayur ( municipal town ) , thrissur district . it is also referred to as vaikuntha which means '' holy abode of vishnu on earth '' . the thriprayar sreerama temple and irinjalakuda kudalmanikyam temple which are part of naalamabalam is also in thrissur churches asia 's tallest church , the our lady of dolours syro-malabar catholic basilica ( puthan pally ) , our lady of lourdes syro-malabar catholic metropolitan cathedral which has an underground shrine , is a masterpiece of architecture . mart mariam cathedral , the oldest church in the city , which belongs to the assyrian church of the east also known as chaldean syrian church of the east , is situated in thrissur . the st . anthony 's forane church , also known as chinna roma ( small rome ) , which is around 300 years old , are also in thrissur . mosques the chettiyangadi hanafi mosque in thrissur city is one of the oldest mosque in thrissur . kalathode mosque ( kalathode juma masjid ) in thrissur city has the facility of cemetery . kokkalai juma masjid , westfort sunni juma masjid ( west fort ) , salafi juma masjid near railway station , mic juma masjid near shakthan bus stand , ayyanthole juma masjid ( ayyanthole ) , olari juma masjid ( olari ) are other mosques in thrissur city . cheraman juma mosque in kodungalloor , ( 40 & nbsp ; km from thrissur ) is the first mosque in india . cuisine . the cuisine of thrissur is linked to its history , geography , demography and culture . rice is the staple food . achappam , kuzhalappam and pazham pori are common snacks . vellayappam , a kind of rice hopper is another dish which is special to the city . education . list of colleges and universities in thrissur district already known as the cultural capital of kerala , it is also fast developing as an education hub . the city has traditionally been a centre of learning from ancient times . with the decline of buddhism and jainism and due to the growing supremacy of brahminism during the revival of hinduism , the city became an important centre of sanskrit learning . schools in city are either run publicly by the kerala government or privately , some with financial aid from the government . the medium of education is either english or malayalam , with the former being the majority . most schools are affiliated with the kerala state education board or indian certificate of secondary education ( icse ) or the central board for secondary education ( cbse ) or the national institute of open schooling ( nios ) or the montessori system . there are 93 lower primary schools ; 34 upper primary schools ; and 78 high schools ; and 157 higher secondary schools in the city . with universities like kerala kalamandalam , kerala police academy , kerala agricultural university , kerala university of health sciences , national research institute for panchakarma , cheruthuruthy and kerala institute of local administration , the city would add another feather in its crown by having 'world class university ' and a 'science city ' . the raj kovu institute of agriculture was made in 2012 to teach farmers about modern techniques of agriculture and better farming practices . the college currently has 300 students . with three medical colleges , government medical college , thrissur , jubilee mission medical college and research institute , amala institute of medical sciences and kerala medical university ( kuhs ) , the city has become synonymous with medical education in kerala the district has two kendriya vidyalayas . institute of cost accountants of india ( statutory body ) have thrissur chapter located tc 37 , cma bhawan , 1879/1 , kottappuram rd . healthcare . the city serves as a centre for healthcare in the central kerala . the portion covers thrissur district , palakkad district , malappuram district and northern part of ernakulam district . most of the people in these districts come to city of thrissur for their medical care . there are three medical colleges , government medical college , thrissur , amala institute of medical sciences and jubilee mission medical college and research institute , and few other hi-tech hospitals . the city has an ancient tradition of ayurvedic treatment . from the ashtavaidya tradition , oushadhi , vaidyaratnam oushadhasala , sitaram ayurvedic pharmacy and sna oushadhasala is located in city of thrissur , all these firms have been instrumental in spreading the fame of kerala ayurvedic treatment , as thousands of overseas patients visit the ayurvedic treatment facilities in and around thrissur , every year . vaidyaratnam runs a medical college and chikitsalayam , with global standards . sitaram have a 100 bedded eight storied super speciality hospital in the city of thrissur , envisaged as the first of its kind ayurveda super speciality hospital in the country . an index case of covid-19 was reported in thrissur from a student in wuhan university returning from wuhan on 30 january 2020 and has since recovered . . sports . football is the most popular sport in the city , and there are two football stadiums in the city , thrissur municipal corporation stadium and thope stadium . international players and former indian captains c . v . pappachan , i . m . vijayan and jo paul ancheri , the young under 17 world cup player k . p . rahul belongs to thrissur . the n.i . david memorial trophy , an annual inter-club football tournament is held in thrissur every year . the football championship was started in 1996 by the then superintendent of police , thrissur . the city has a floodlit stadium , known as thrissur municipal corporation stadium . it also has two indoor stadiums , v.k.n . menon indoor stadium and a sports authority of india ( sai ) maintained thrissur aquatic complex with international facilities . thrissur has contributed many national and international bodybuilding stars to india such as tv poly and vm basheer . chess prodigy nihal sarin is from thrissur . media . the first malayalam newspaper which published from thrissur was lokamanyan in 1920 . then came deenabandhu edited by v . r . krishnan ezhuthachan . ezhuthachan started publishing as a weekly in 1941 from thrissur . it was one of the first periodicals that supported the national movement . as soon as the quit india movement was started , its editor and staff were sent to jail and publications were banned . later lokamanyan ( 1920 ) ; kerala chintamani ( 1905 ) ; kerala kesari ( 1924 ) ; mahatma ( 1930 ) ; gomathy ( 1930 ) and navajeevan of joseph mundassery was also published from thrissur . the express started in 1944 from thrissur with k krishanan as the editor is known in central kerala for its nationalist and socialist views . major malayalam newspapers published in thrissur include malayala manorama , mathrubhumi , madhyamam , deepika , kerala kaumudi , deshabhimani , mangalam , veekshanam , metro vaartha and janayugom . a number of evening papers , like general in malayalam and city journal in english , are also published from the city . newspapers in other regional languages like hindi , kannada , tamil and telugu are also available in city . the first cinema hall in kerala , with a manually operated film projector , was opened in thrissur by jose kattookkaran in 1907 . in 1913 , the first electrically operated film projector was established in city again by jose kattookkaran and was called the jose electrical bioscope now known as jose theatre . a film festival , known as vibgyor film festival , is held in the city every year . it is an international short and documentary film festival . telephony services are provided by various players like aircel , airtel , idea cellular , vodafone , reliance infocomm , tata docomo , mts , uninor , tata indicom and the state owned bsnl . bsnl is also offering 3g services in thrissur . the city also have broadband wireless services on wimax platform . private fm radio stations in the thrissur are club fm 104.8 & nbsp ; mhz , radio mango 91.9 & nbsp ; mhz , best fm 95 by ( asianet communications limited ) , red fm 91.1 & nbsp ; mhz . all india radio has an am ( 630 & nbsp ; khz ) and an fm ( 101.1 & nbsp ; mhz ) station for the city . the transmitter of the all india radio ( 630 & nbsp ; khz ) was commissioned on 4 november 1956 . the station started independent broadcasting in 1974 . address of air station , thrissur ( retrieved 8 january 2009 ) in euphonious harmony , the hindu dated 3 february 2006 thrissur has a doordarshan studio with a low power transmitter located near the studio . . tourism circuit tourism . 2017 is being celebrated by the united nations as the year of sustainable development of tourism . keeping this in mind , dtpc , thrissur , under the department of tourism , kerala has launched tourism circuits all across the district , with a view to promote and uplift these cherished hopes . in order to full fill the goals , six ( 06 ) tourism circuits have been formed in thrissur district , namely , blue circuit brown circuit yellow circuit orange circuit green circuit red circuit these circuits were conceptualised by the assistant collector under trainee mr . m.v.r krishna teja ias under the aegis of the district collector dr . a . kowsigan ias . they were inaugurated by the honb minister of industries sri a.c . moideen and honb agriculture minister sri v.s . sunil kumar on 7 april . picture gallery . file : thrissur museum and zoo - dec2011- 0216.jpg entrance gate of thrissur zoo file : artmuseum.jpg archaeological museum , thrissur file : st thomas college thrissur.jpg st . thomas college , thrissur file : k . karunakaran smaraka town hall 02.jpg thrissur town hall file : mural art museum , thrissur.jpg mural art museum file : sakthan thampuran palace.jpg shakthan thampuran palace . see also . list of thrissur corporation wards list of people from thrissur list of twin towns and sister cities in india visitor attractions in thrissur list of tallest buildings in thrissur thrissur zoo veerolipadam thrissur municipal corporation