Honky-tonk

etymology . the origin of the term honky-tonk is unknown . the earliest known use in print is an article in the peoria journal dated june 28 , 1874 , stating , '' the police spent a busy day today raiding the bagnios and honkytonks . '' “ underworld – women , ” “ peoriana ” collection , peoria public library , pp . 2335-2342 . the capitalization of the term suggests that it may have been the proper name of the theater ; it is not known whether the name was taken from a generic use of the term or whether the name of the theater became a generic term for similar establishments . there are subsequent citations from 1890 in the dallas morning news , the dallas morning news ( dallas , texas ) , 6 aug . 1890 : '' myself and him set and talked awhile and he got up and said he wanted to go to the honk-a-tonk ( variety show ) . '' 1892 in the galveston daily news ( galveston , texas ) galveston daily news , july 26 , 1892 , p . 6 : '' fort worth , tex . ( . ) a youth named goodman , who arrived here from wilbarger county entered andrews ' honkatonk on fifteenth street and was ordered out on account of his age . '' ( '' honky tonk ( not from tonk pianos ) ' '' , retrieved july 9 , 2006 ) ( which used the term to refer to an adult establishment in fort worth ) , and in 1894 in the ardmoreite in oklahoma , the daily ardmoreite ( oklahoma ) , february 26 , 1894 , p . 2 , col . 1 . ( oklahoma historical society , microfilm 110 ) . '' the honk-a-tonk last night was well attended by ball heads , bachelors and leading citizens . most of them are inclined to kick themselves this morning for being sold . '' early uses of the term in print mostly appear along a corridor roughly coinciding with cattle drive trails extending from dallas and fort worth , texas , into south central oklahoma , suggesting that the term may have been a localism spread by cowboys driving cattle to market . the sound of honky-tonk ( or honk-a-tonk ) and the types of places that were called honky-tonks suggests that the term may be an onomatopoeia reference to the loud , boisterous music and noise heard at these establishments . one theory is that the '' tonk '' portion of the name may have come from the brand name of piano made by william tonk & bros . , an american manufacturer of large upright pianos pierce , pierce piano atlas . ( established 1881 ) , which made a piano with the decal '' ernest a . tonk '' . the tonk brothers , william and max , established the tonk bros . manufacturing company in 1873 , so such an etymology is possible , however , these pianos were not manufactured until 1889 , at which point the term seems to have already been established . an early source purporting to explain the derivation of the term ( spelled honkatonk ) was an article published in 1900 by the new york sun and widely reprinted in other newspapers . reno evening gazette ( nevada ) , 3 february 1900 , p . 2 , col . 5 . the article , however , reads more like a humorous urban ( or open range ) legend or fable , so its veracity is questionable . history . an article in the los angeles times of july 28 , 1929 , with the headline honky-tonk ' origin told '' , which was probably in response to the sophie tucker movie musical , honky tonk ( 1929 ) , reads : honky-tonks were rough establishments , providing country music in the deep south and southwest and serving alcoholic beverages to a working class clientele . some honky-tonks offered dancing to music played by pianists or small bands , and some were centers of prostitution . katrina hazzard-gordon wrote that the honky-tonk was '' the first urban manifestation of the jook '' , and that '' the name itself became synonymous with a style of music . related to the classic blues in tonal structure , honky-tonk has a tempo that is slightly stepped up . it is rhythmically suited for many african-american dance . '' hazzard-gordon , katrina ( 1990 ) . jookin . temple university press . p . 84 . as chris smith and charles mccarron wrote in their 1916 hit song '' down in honky tonk town '' , '' it 's underneath the ground , where all the fun is found . '' . origins of the establishment . although the derivation of the term is unknown , honky tonk originally referred to bawdy variety shows in the west ( oklahoma and indian territories and texas ) and to the theaters housing them . the earliest mention of them in print refers to them as '' variety theaters '' the daily oklahoman , sunday , september 5 , 1915 , p . 1 . , col . 1 . '' there is scarcely an old-time gambler in the united states who does not remember the reeves gambling house and 'honkytonk ' in guthrie . a stage and rows of curtained boxes , was built as an addition for the purposes of a free-and-easy variety show . '' and describe the entertainment as '' variety shows '' . reno evening gazette ( nevada ) , 3 february 1900 , pg . 2 , col . 5 . '' the programme is made up largely of specialties . whatever the feeling of a long-suffering public , the honkatonk vocalists never will permit 'sweet rosie o'grady ' and 'just one girl ' to perish from the earth , and coon songs are sung as may irwin never did and never will sing them . always at least one drama is presented , the entire company , vocalists , dancers and all , participating . among the most popular plays are 'the dalton boys ' and 'mildred , the she-devil of the plains , ' for the old traditions still are respected to a certain extent , though the participation of the audience is no longer solicited . '' the theaters often had an attached gambling house and always a bar . in recollections long after the frontiers closed , writers such as wyatt earp and e.c . abbott referred to honky-tonks in the cowtowns of kansas , nebraska , and montana in the 1870s and 1880s . hunter , trail drivers of texas , p . 832 : '' i went to dodge city , the honkatonk town , cleaned up an bought a suit of clothes , and left for san antonio , reaching home july 1 , 1885 . '' their recollections contain lurid accounts of the women and violence accompanying the shows . however , in contemporary accounts these were nearly always called hurdy-gurdy shows , possibly derived from the term hurdy-gurdy , which was sometimes mistakenly applied to a small , portable barrel organ that was frequently played by organ grinders and buskers . as late as 1913 , col . edwin emerson , a former rough rider commander , hosted a honky-tonk party in new york city . '' col . emerson 's novel party ; rough rider veteran gives 'old forty-niners ' honky-tonk fandango . the new york times , february 23 , 1913 . p . c7 the rough riders were recruited from the ranches of texas , new mexico , oklahoma and indian territories , so the term was still in popular use during the spanish–american war . music . the honky-tonk sound has a full rhythm section playing a two-beat rhythm with a crisp backbeat . steel guitar and fiddle are the dominant instruments . campbell , michael ( 2011 ) . popular music in america : the beat goes on . cengage learning . p . 127 . the first music genre to be commonly known as honky-tonk music was a style of piano playing related to ragtime but emphasizing rhythm more than melody or harmony ; the style evolved in response to an environment in which the pianos were often poorly cared for , tending to be out of tune and having some nonfunctioning keys . honky-tonk music influenced the boogie-woogie piano style , as indicated by jelly roll morton 's 1938 record '' honky tonk music '' and meade lux lewis 's hit '' honky tonk train blues . '' lewis recorded the latter many times from 1927 into the 1950s , and the song was covered by many other musicians , including oscar peterson . the twelve-bar blues instrumental '' honky tonk '' by the bill doggett combo , with a sinuous saxophone line and driving , slow beat , was an early rock and roll hit . new orleans native fats domino was another honky-tonk piano man , whose '' blueberry hill '' and '' walkin ' to new orleans '' were hits on the popular music charts . in the years before world war ii , the music industry began to refer to honky-tonk music played from texas and oklahoma to the west coast as hillbilly music . more recently , the term has come to refer to the primary sound in country music , developing in nashville as western swing became accepted there . originally , it featured the guitar , fiddle , string bass , and steel guitar ( imported from hawaiian folk music ) . the vocals were originally rough and nasal , as exemplified by the singer-songwriters floyd tillman and hank williams , but later developed a clear and sharp sound , such as that of george jones and faron young . lyrics tended to focus on working-class life , with frequently tragic themes of lost love , adultery , loneliness , alcoholism , and self-pity . copyrighted and released in 1941 , '' walking the floor over you '' , by ernest tubb , '' walking the floor over you '' sheet music by george iv hamilton , sheetmusicnow.com ernest tubb , country music hall of fame and museum his sixth release for decca , country music hall of fame and museum helped establish the honky-tonk style and tubb as one of its foremost practitioners . morrison , craig ( 1952 ) . go cat go ! university of illinois press . p . 28 . tubb , from crisp , texas , was a fan of jimmie rodgers and fused western swing , which had been using electric guitars for years , with other '' country '' sounds . nassour , ellis . honky tonk angel : the intimate story of patsy cline . p . 39 . he took the sound to nashville , where he was the first musician to play electric guitar on grand ole opry . in the 1950s , honky tonk entered its golden age , with the popularity of webb pierce , hank locklin , lefty frizzell , faron young , george jones , and hank williams . in the mid- to late 1950s , rockabilly ( which melded honky-tonk country with rhythm and blues ) and the slick country music of the nashville sound ended honky-tonk 's initial period of dominance . the rolling stones ' number-one single and gold record '' honky tonk women '' ( 1969 ) was based on the sound of 1940s honky-tonk artists like hank williams . and referred to the reputation of honky-tonk bars as centres of prostitution . . in the 1970s , outlaw country 's brand of rough honky-tonk was represented by artists such as gary stewart , waylon jennings , willie nelson , david allan coe , and billy joe shaver . see also . dive bar list of public house topics the honky tonk man country music honky . references . bibliography . abbott , e.c . ( 2000 ) . we pointed them north : recollections of a cowpuncher . norman : university of oklahoma press . american dialect society ( 2005 ) . '' honkatonk ( 1900 , from wild geese ? ) '' . american dialect society . retrieved july 16 , 2006 . boyd , jean ann ( 1998 ) . jazz of the southwest : an oral history of western swing . austin : university of texas press . dary , david ( 1989 ) . cowboy culture : a saga of five centuries . university press of kansas . reprint ed . hunter , j . marvin ( ed . ) ( 1993 ) . trail drivers of texas : interesting sketches of early cowboys . austin : university of texas press . reprint of 1925 edition . kienzle , rich ( 2003 ) . southwest shuffle : pioneers of honky tonk , western swing , and country jazz . new york : routledge . lake , stuart ( 1994 ) . wyatt earp : frontier marshal . pocket . reprint ed . pierce , bob ; ashley , larry ( 1996 ) . pierce piano atlas . 10th ed . shay , anthony . boys night out in leadville . retrieved july 16 , 2006 . tennessean tootsies ' 56th birthday bash october 2016