Lúthien and Beren

context . lúthien was a telerin ( sindarin ) princess , the only child of thingol , king of doriath , and his queen , melian the maia , making her half-royal , half-divine . she was born in the years of the trees , according to the grey annals . at her birth , the white flower niphredil bloomed for the first time in doriath . lúthien 's romance with the mortal man beren is considered the '' chief '' of the silmarillion tales by tolkien himself ; he called it '' the kernel of the mythology '' . letters , 165 to the houghton mifflin co . , 30 june 1955 elrond was lúthien 's great-grandson and aragorn was descended from her via elros and the royal family of númenor . she is described as the morning star of the elves and as the most beautiful daughter of the one god , ilúvatar . beren was the son of emeldir and barahir , a man of the royal house of bëor of dorthonion . in contrast , lúthien 's descendant arwen was called evenstar , the evening star of the elves , meaning that her beauty reflects that of lúthien tinúviel . lúthien was first cousin once removed of galadriel , whose mother , eärwen of alqualondë , was the daughter of thingol 's brother . the story of lúthien and beren is mirrored in the tale of aragorn and arwen . the return of the king , appendix a : the tale of aragorn and arwen . etymology . the name lúthien appears to mean '' daughter of flowers '' in a beleriandic dialect of sindarin , but it can also be translated '' blossom '' . noel , ruth s . '' the languages of tolkien 's middle-earth '' , page 166 . houghton mifflin , 1974 tinúviel was a name given to her by beren . it literally means '' daughter of the starry twilight '' , which signifies '' nightingale '' . the name beren means '' brave '' in sindarin . christopher tolkien ( 1989 ) , the history of middle-earth , the lost road , p.352 ; . fictional biography . meeting . beren saw lúthien dancing under moonrise in her father 's forest , and fell in love with her , for she was the most beautiful of elves and men . he stood in the shadows wishing to be near enough to lúthien to touch her , but daeron , her childhood friend and partner in music and dance , noticed beren and , believing him to be a wild animal , shouted for lúthien to flee . she saw beren 's shadow and ran away . but as she hid in the foliage , beren touched her arm . lúthien ran away in shock , believing it to be an animal stalking her in the woods . one day in summer when lúthien was dancing on a green hill surrounded by coniums , she sang , awakening beren from his enchantment . he ran to her , and again she tried to escape and he cried tinúviel ( '' nightingale '' ) . when lúthien gazed upon him for the first time she reciprocated his love . he kissed her on the lips , but she slipped away and he fell into a deep sleep . in his hour of despair , she appeared before him , and in the hidden kingdom set her hand in his and cradled his head against her breast . from then on they met secretly . . the quest of the silmaril . however , daeron , who also loved her , reported her meetings with beren to her father . though melian warned her husband against it , thingol was determined not to let beren marry his daughter , and set a seemingly impossible task as the bride price : beren had to bring him one of the silmarils from morgoth 's iron crown . thingol did not kill beren outright as he had promised lúthien that he would spare beren 's life . . vision and imprisonment . lúthien had a vision of beren lying suffering in the hellish pits of the lord of wolves , and horror weighed upon her heart . she sought the counsel of her mother who told her that beren was captive in the dungeons of sauron , the dark lord 's evil lieutenant . lúthien decided to save beren . she asked daeron for help , but he betrayed her to thingol . thingol then had her guarded in the high branches of a great beech tree . daeron was filled with remorse for his actions , and lúthien forgave him , and devised a plan to escape . using her magical power , lúthien enchanted her hair into a cloak to lull her guards to sleep , and ran from her prison . on her way to rescue beren , she found huan , the hound of valinor , and was taken to his master celegorm . he , plotting to force her to marry him , offered to help her , asking her to follow him to nargothrond . when she arrived , celegorm held her hostage and forbade her to talk to anyone else . huan took pity on her , betraying his master , and freed her . huan was granted the power to speak , and together they escaped from nargothrond . they came to sauron 's isle , and lúthien sang a call to beren . he answered , thinking it his imagination . sauron , also hearing her song , sought to catch her and sent wolf after wolf to slay huan , but each time huan killed them . finally going himself , sauron transformed into the most powerful of all werewolves . huan flinched , but lúthien smothered sauron 's lunge in the folds of her enchanted cloak . sauron changed into different shapes , but huan bested him . lúthien forced the defeated sauron to surrender the keys of his tower ; he fled in the shape of a vampire . lúthien destroyed the tower and freed its prisoners . finding beren , she thought him dead and fell down beside him in grief , but with the rising sun he awoke and they were reunited . huan then returned to his master celegorm . . celegorm , curufin and the dance of lúthien before morgoth . beren pleaded with lúthien to return to her father , but she refused . as they were about to embrace , celegorm and curufin appeared , exiled because of lúthien 's escape from nargothrond . seeking revenge , they fought beren , and huan again fought on lúthien 's side . beren defeated them , but spared their lives at lúthien 's request . beren stole one of their horses , and the couple fled . as she slept he went to angband to get the silmaril . when lúthien discovered beren had left , she and huan disguised themselves as thuringwethil , the vampire servant of morgoth , and draugluin the werewolf . she found beren and joined his quest . together beren and luthien reached the throne of morgoth , but the dark lord saw through lúthien 's disguise . she declared herself and offered to sing for morgoth . filled with an evil lust , he accepted , and she put him and his entire court into a deep sleep . she awakened beren , and he cut a silmaril from morgoth 's crown . however , as he tried for another silmaril , his blade snapped , striking morgoth 's cheek and awakening him . lúthien and beren fled to the gates , where carcharoth attacked them . beren thrust the silmaril into the wolf 's face , but the wolf bit off beren 's hand and swallowed the silmaril . lúthien was left cradling a mortally wounded beren in her arms , with the hosts of angband on her heels . lúthien sucked out the venom , and with her failing power tried to restore beren . just when all hope seemed lost , the eagles of manwë snatched them into the sky at the summons of huan , carrying them to safety in doriath . . return to doriath and death of beren . lúthien waited by beren 's side and healed him . then together they entered and stood before the throne of lúthien 's father . beren told thingol that the quest was , indeed , fulfilled , and that he held a silmaril in his hand . when thingol demanded to see it , beren showed him his stump . they were married before thingol 's throne that day . meanwhile , carcharoth was ravaging all living beings on the borders of doriath , empowered and enraged by the burning jewel in his stomach . beren , thingol , huan , and other elves went to defeat the beast . beren was assaulted by the wolf ; huan leaped to his aid and killed the beast , but died soon afterwards of his wounds . beren was carried to doriath , where he died in lúthien 's arms . . lúthien becomes mortal for beren . in grief , lúthien lay down and died , going to the halls of mandos , lord of the dead . there she sang a song of woe before the throne of mandos , of the tribulations and suffering of both elves and men , the greatest ever sung , so touching that mandos was moved to pity for the only time . he summoned beren from the houses of the dead , and lúthien 's spirit met his for the last time by the shores of the sea . mandos consulted with manwë , king of arda . even manwë could not change the fate of men , and so he presented lúthien with the only choice possible : to live in the immortal land of valinor , where she could forget all her grief and enjoy eternal happiness along with her people and the valar , but without beren ; or to return to middle-earth with beren as a mortal herself , accepting the doom of men . she chose mortality , relinquishing everything for beren . . return to life , and death . lúthien and beren dwelt together in ossiriand until after the sack of menegroth . their abode was known as dor firn-i-guinar : the '' land of the dead that lived '' . they had a son , dior , called eluchíl — the heir of thingol . years later , thingol received the nauglamír from húrin , who had recovered it from the ruins of nargothrond after the departure of glaurung the dragon . thingol decided to unite the greatest works of the dwarves and the elves , and recruited dwarf smiths from nogrod to complete his plan . thingol was then murdered by the dwarves , who plundered thingol 's treasuries and took the nauglamír . beren and an army of green elves and ents waylaid the returning dwarf army . beren reclaimed the nauglamír , and lúthien kept the necklace and the great jewel all her life . the beauty of lúthien combined with the splendour of the gem and necklace made her home of tol galen the fairest land east of valinor , but the silmaril hastened beren 's and lúthien 's end , since her beauty enhanced by the jewel was too bright for mortal lands to bear . elrond and arwen were descendants of lúthien , as was aragorn , a descendant of elrond 's brother elros . . earlier versions . in the various versions of the tale of tinúviel , tolkien 's earliest form of his tale , as published in the book of lost tales , her original name is tinúviel ( lúthien was invented later ) . beren is , in this earlier version , an elf ( specifically a noldo , or gnome ) , and sauron has not yet emerged . in his place , they face tevildo , the prince of cats , a monstrous cat who is the principal enemy of the valinorean hound huan . however tolkien initially created the character of beren as a mortal man before this in an even earlier but erased version of the tale . the story is also told in an epic poem in the lays of beleriand , upon which most of the finer details of her life and relationship to beren is extracted from in this article , since the silmarillion provides only a generalization of the tale . . inspirations . in a letter to his son christopher , dated 11 july 1972 , tolkien requested the inscription below for his wife edith 's grave '' for she was ( and knew she was ) my lúthien . '' letters , 340 to christopher tolkien , 11 july 1972 he added , '' i never called edith luthien – but she was the source of the story . it was first conceived in a small woodland glade filled with hemlocks at roos in yorkshire where . she was able to live with me for a while . '' in a footnote to this letter , tolkien added '' she knew the earliest form of the legend.also the poem eventually printed as aragorn 's song . '' particularly affecting for tolkien was edith 's conversion to the catholic church from the church of england for his sake upon their marriage ; this was a difficult decision for her that caused her much hardship , paralleling the difficulties and suffering of lúthien from choosing mortality . the tale of beren and lúthien also shares an element with folktales such as the welsh culhwch and olwen and others — namely , the disapproving parent who sets a seemingly impossible task ( or tasks ) for the suitor , which is then fulfilled . . the tolkien grave . edith and j . r . r . tolkien lie in wolvercote cemetery in north oxford . their gravestone shows the association of lúthien with edith , and tolkien with beren . the stone reads : . notes .