Macalester College

history . macalester college was founded by rev . dr . edward duffield neill in 1874 with help from the presbyterian church in minnesota . neill had served as a chaplain in the civil war and traveled to minnesota territory in 1849 . he became connected politically and socially . he went on to found two local churches , was appointed the first chancellor of the university of minnesota and became the state 's first superintendent of public education . in leaving the university of minnesota board of regents he desired to build a religious college affiliated with the presbyterian church that would also be open to other christian church members . the college 's original name was baldwin college ; it was affiliated with the baldwin school , a presbyterian secondary school . after a large donation from charles macalester , a prominent businessman and philanthropist from philadelphia , the institution was renamed macalester college . macalester donated a hotel , the winslow house , as the first permanent classroom building . with additional funding from the presbyterian church and its trustees , macalester college opened for courses in 1885 with five teachers , six freshmen , and 52 preparatory students . james wallace joined the faculty in 1887 and later became president . he helped stabilize the college 's finances and advance the institution . during his tenure , macalester created a focus on a liberal arts curriculum . thumb in 2008 macalester publicly launched a 150 million campaign . in 2009 , construction was completed on markim hall , a new home for the institute for global citizenship . plans called for the building to qualify for platinum certification under the leadership in energy and environmental design ( leed ) system , a building rating system devised by the u.s . green building council that evaluates structures ' sustainability and environmental impact . in 2012 , macalester opened its renovated and expanded janet wallace fine arts center . in 2020 , suzanne rivera became the college 's 17th president ; she is the first woman and first hispanic to serve in the role . . academics . rankings . in 2020 u.s . news & world report ranked macalester the 27th best liberal arts college in the united states , and tied at 24th for '' most innovative '' , tied at 43rd for '' best undergraduate teaching '' , and 30th for '' best value '' national liberal arts college . in 2019 , forbes rated it 86th out of 650 colleges , universities and service academies in the u.s . , and 38th among liberal arts colleges . in 2020 , washington monthly ranked macalester 47th among 218 liberal arts colleges in the u.s . based on its contribution to the public good as measured by social mobility , research , and promoting public service . macalester was named one of the hidden ivies for providing an education comparable to that of the ivy league , based on academics , admissions process , financial aid , and student experience . greene , howard and greene , mathew , the hidden ivies , 2009 . . admissions . macalester is considered '' most selective '' by the u.s . news & world report rankings . for the class of 2023 , macalester received 6,598 applications and accepted 31 % of applicants . of those admitted , the median sat scores were 720 for critical reading and 730 for math , the median act score was 32 , and 72 % were in the top 10 % of their high school class . . faculty . macalester has 188 full-time faculty , 94 % of whom have a doctorate or the highest degree in their field . twenty-nine percent of faculty are international or u.s . citizens of color . the student-faculty ratio is 10:1 and the average class size 17 . . academic program . macalester offers over 800 courses and 39 majors . students may also design their own interdisciplinary majors . courses are available in the physical sciences , humanities , mathematics and computer sciences , arts , social sciences , foreign languages , classics , several interdisciplinary fields , and pre-professional programs . pre-professional programs includes pre-law , pre-medical , a cooperative architecture program , and a cooperative engineering program . the most popular majors ( in order ) are economics , mathematics , biology , psychology , and political science . the academic calendar at macalester is divided into a 14-week fall semester ( september to december ) and a 14-week spring semester ( january to may ) . all courses are offered for semester credit . most courses are offered for four semester credits , but the amount of credit may vary . during january , macalester students may earn up to two semester credits in independent projects , internships , or macalester-sponsored off-campus courses . they may also earn up to eight semester credits in independent study during the summer through independent projects or internships . . study abroad and off-campus . macalester college has a long tradition of providing opportunities for students to build an international and intercultural perspective into their college education through international or domestic off-campus study . students may propose participation from among an array of overseas and domestic programs relevant to macalester 's liberal arts curriculum . about 60 % of macalester students study abroad before graduation . statistics - international center - macalester college eleven departments require off-campus study for completion of a major . macalester has programs in the netherlands , south africa , germany , austria ( e.g . , at the university of vienna ) , singapore , and france . academic consortia memberships . macalester is a member of the associated colleges of the twin cities ( actc ) , a consortium of five liberal arts colleges in saint paul and minneapolis formed to develop cooperative programs and offer cross-registration to their students . the other members are the university of st . thomas , augsburg university , hamline university , and st . catherine university . in addition to over 800 courses available on campus , macalester students have access to all courses offered through the consortium without paying additional tuition . actc provides free busing among the campuses . macalester also has an agreement with the minneapolis college of art and design ( mcad ) whereby students may take one course per term there , provided that macalester approves the course . . tuition and financial aid . macalester is committed to providing financial aid packages equal to the full demonstrated financial need of all admitted students . two out of three macalester students quality for need-based financial aid . macalester also provides merit-based scholarships to around half of all students ( most also receive need-based aid ) . its comprehensive tuition , room , and board fee for the 2019–20 academic year was 68,884 . . student life . student body . macalester is known for its high international enrollment for its institutional type as a percentage of its student body . as of fall 2018 , international students constituted approximately 24 % of the student body . its 2,174 students come from 50 u.s . states , washington d.c . , puerto rico , the mariana islands and 97 countries ; 31 % of the u.s . student body are students of color . macalester 's student body is 40 % male and 60 % female . . student organizations . the main campus newspaper is the student-run mac weekly , which has a circulation of up to 1,600 and was established in 1914 . almost all the newspaper staff works on a volunteer basis . each semester the paper publishes 12 or 13 volumes , ranging from 12 to 24 pages . a satirical section , the mock weekly , appears in the last issue of each semester . the paper has published a magazine three times , in april 2006 and march and november 2007 . macalester has over 100 student clubs and organizations , including the college radio station wmcn , the macalester peace and justice committee , chanter literary and arts magazine , the experimental college , student labor action coalition , african music ensemble , macalester gaming society , mac anime , macalester mock trial , mac dems , mac gop , mac greens , bad comedy , fresh concepts , the macalester review : a political magazine , the hegemonocle humor magazine , a cappella groups including scotch tape , sirens , chromactics , off kilter , and the trads ; cheeba , macbrews , macslackers , macbike , the macalester outing club , the macalester climbing club , minnesota public interest research group ( mpirg ) , macalester conservation and renewable energy society ( maccares ) , fossil free mac , macalester international organization ( mio ) , macplayers , naral macalester activists for choice , queer union , macalester young artists for revolutionary needlework ( macyarn ) , macalester quiz bowl , mac rugby , medicinal melodies , the physics and astronomy club , and club water polo ( sons of neptune ) . civic engagement . macalester is one of only 360 institutions that have been awarded the carnegie community engagement classification for excellence in civic engagement . civic engagement is a core component of a macalester education and is included in its mission statement . the college actively encourages student dialogue by bringing in speakers , hosting an international roundtable to bring distinguished international scholars to discuss emerging global issues , and hosting collective meetings such as women of color . macalester links academic learning to community involvement . in 2011–12 , 16 departments offered 59 courses with civic engagement components . each year approximately 200 students complete internships , 65 % of which are in the nonprofit sector , schools , government , or the arts . macalester also allows students to earn their work-study financial aid award while working at a local nonprofit or elementary school . almost all students ( 96 % ) volunteer in the twin cities while at macalester . many student organizations encourage active civic engagement , including mpirg , maction , queer union ( qu ) , macalester habitat for humanity . macalester is the primary financial contributor and sponsor of the minnesota institute for talented youth , which was founded in 1967 and has its main facilities in the lampert building . mity provides two different gifted education programs during the summer and one on weekends during the academic year . macalester also participates in project pericles , a commitment to further encourage civic engagement at the college . in 2000 , macalester signed the talloires declaration , making a commitment to environmental sustainability , as well as a sweatshop pledge , making a commitment to fair-labor practices in the purchase of college apparel . . lgbtq community . macalester is widely recognized as one of the most lgbtq-friendly colleges in the nation . the campus pride index awarded macalester a full five out of five stars for lgbtq-friendly campuses . in 2007 , the princeton review named macalester the most gay-friendly college in the nation . for people whose gender expression is not always recognized , macalester has started an initiative to ensure access to single-stall and all-gender bathrooms across campus . all gender bathrooms it also offers all-gender housing on campus . macalester has a student-powered gender and sexuality resource center that aims to build a culture of resistance against all forms of oppression . it also has many active lgbtq student organizations and groups , including queer union , allies project training , and the macalester out and proud community . . athletics . macalester 's athletic teams are nicknamed the scots . macalester is a member of the ncaa division iii minnesota intercollegiate athletic conference ( miac ) in all sports except football . the scots ' football team set an ncaa division iii record by losing streak american football . earlham college broke that record in 2018 , losing 51 straight games . in 1977 , macalester set a division iii record by allowing 59.1 points per game . the losing streak ended in dramatic fashion : kicker bob kaye put a 23-yarder through the uprights with 11 seconds remaining in a september 1980 game as the scots beat mount senario college . the scots left the miac after the 2001 season and competed as independents until 2014 , when they joined the midwest conference . under head coach tony jennison , macalester won the midwest conference title , the scots ' first conference football title since 1947 . macalester also won nine games in 2014 , the most ever in a scots season in their 121 years of intercollegiate football . the college actually dissolved the football program in 1906 , pronouncing , according to the mac weekly : '' thoroughly aroused to the evils , real or imaginary , of this game , the public is clamoring for the entire abolition or reform on this 'relic of barbarism . ' '' soccer has always been a popular sport at macalester . both men 's and women 's teams remain competitive , appearing in multiple ncaa playoffs since 1995 . the women 's team won the ncaa championship in 1998 . the 2010 men 's team won the miac regular-season championship and both the men and women 's teams received at-large bids for the 2010 ncaa division iii tournament . both teams are well-supported by students , parents and alumni . mental floss cited one of macalester sports fans ' most ( in ) famous cheers– '' drink blood , smoke crack , worship satan , go mac ! '' –as one of '' 7 memorable sports chants '' . the cross country ski team became a club team in 2004 , when skiing was eliminated as an miac-sanctioned sport . a women 's hockey team formed in 2000 and continues to play at the club level . macalester athletics compete in a new athletic facility , the leonard center , which opened in august 2008 . the 45 million facility encompasses 175,000 square feet . the leonard center includes a 200-meter track , a natatorium , a fitness center , several multipurpose rooms , and a health and wellness center . materials from the former facility were disposed of in environmentally friendly ways , with some incorporated into the new structure . the macalester women 's water polo team won its conference championship in 2017 , 2018 and 2019 . every year in early may , macalester hosts the al storm games , a competition between various athletes at macalester consisting of various events such as a hunger games simulation . . campus . housing . as at many small liberal arts colleges , students at macalester are required to live on campus for their first two years . the college began implementing limited all-gender housing options in 2007 . residence halls . dupre hall , which houses freshman and sophomores , is on the corner of summit and snelling avenues and was built in 1962 . renovated in 1994 , dupre houses about 260 students and is macalester 's largest residence hall . turck hall was built in 1957 and most recently remodeled in 2004 . it houses nearly 180 first-year students . doty hall was built in 1964 and is one of two residence halls on campus with single-sex floors . in 2012 , doty 1 was designated the gender-neutral or all-gender floor . bigelow hall is on the corner of grand avenue and macalester street . built in 1947 and remodeled in 1992 , it is connected via tunnels to wallace , doty and 30 macalester street and has single-sex and coed floors . it is connected to turck by skyway , and houses sophomores . george draper dayton hall ( gdd ) houses sophomores , juniors and seniors , typically in suites of four to six occupants . 30 macalester street is one of the newest residence halls on campus , is more handicap-accessible than other residence halls and houses a small number of students . it is a quiet and substance-free living community . wallace hall is the campus 's oldest residence hall , built in 1907 and renovated in 2002 . it houses sophomores . kirk hall houses upperclassmen and is between the campus center and the leonard athletic center . it contains singles , doubles , and triples . the doubles and triples each have a common room with singles branching off of it . with the opening of the institute for global citizenship , summit house , which previously housed the international center , has been converted into a residence hall housing 16 students . there are three cottages on campus . specialty housing . summit house : across snelling avenue from dupre hall , the summit house offers residence for up to 16 upperclassmen . starting in fall 2011 , the summit house operated on a per-semester cycle exclusively for students studying abroad for half the school year . veggie co-op : under the stadium bleachers , it houses 20 students who eat vegetarian meals together for most of the week . all food in the house is vegetarian . students buy and make food together for their meals . cultural house : at 37 macalester street , residents of the cultural house are usually required to work or volunteer for the department of multicultural life and engage in moving toward a more diverse , accepting , and open campus environment . all-gender housing ( part of kirk hall ) eco-house : at 200 vernon street , eco-house residents focus on environmentally friendly practices throughout their daily lives . language houses : students are expected to speak the language of their particular house as much as possible . there are six language houses , focusing on german , japanese , french , spanish , russian , and mandarin . inter-faith house : in section 8 of kirk , the inter-faith house is for students wishing to explore faith in their lives and others ' . food services . food services on campus are provided by bon appétit , a national company . the cafeteria , in the ruth stricker dayton campus center , is called café mac . three different meal plans are available for students who live on campus . all freshmen are required to have the highest meal plan offered . sustainability . in the sustainable endowments institute 's 2011 college sustainability report card , macalester received an overall grade of a− , earning it recognition as an '' overall campus sustainability leader '' . in 2011 , the association for the advancement of sustainability in higher education ( aashe ) awarded macalester a sustainability tracking , assessment & rating system ( stars ) silver rating in recognition of its sustainability achievements . many student organizations focus on sustainability , including macalester conservation and renewable energy society ( maccares ) , minnesota public interest research group ( mpirg ) , mac bike , macalester urban land and community health ( mulch ) , and outing club . sustainability - student organizations in april 2003 , macalester installed a 10 & nbsp ; kw urban wind turbine on campus thanks to that year 's senior class gift donating the installation cost and xcel energy donating the tower and turbine . maccares is developing a proposal for macalester to invest in a utility-scale wind turbine in the range of 2mw . other projects include the eco-house , a student residence with a range of green features and research opportunities ; a rain garden that prevents stormwater from running off into groundwater , a bike share program , and a veggie co-op . the class of 2008 designated its senior class gift to a sustainability fund to support initiatives to improve environmental sustainability on campus and in the greater community . on january 1 , 2013 , macalester started campus composting . in september 2009 macalester declared a goal to become carbon-neutral by 2025 and zero-waste by 2020 . the school is a signatory to the talloires declaration and the american college and university president 's climate commitment , the latter obligating the college to work toward carbon neutrality . sustainability - policies on april 18 , 2012 , president brian rosenberg signed the “ commitment to sustainable practices of higher education institutions on the occasion of the united nations conference on sustainable development ” . on april 18 , 2012 , president brian rosenberg signed the “ commitment to sustainable practices of higher education institutions on the occasion of the united nations conference on sustainable development ” in 2009 , macalester opened markim hall , a leed platinum building that houses the school 's institute for global citizenship . the building uses 45 % less water and 75 % less energy than a typical minnesota building . macalester is planning to remodel its music , theater , and art buildings and is designing them to minnesota b3 guidelines . recent sustainability efforts have highlighted the intersection of social justice and climate change at macalester as well as the potential conflict between its on-campus sustainability and its investments . since 2012 , students have criticized the college for making significant endowment investments in fossil fuel companies , including direct investments in oil & gas private partnerships . the student organization fossil free mac has led a campaign urging the college to fossil fuel divestment . the campaign initially proposed full endowment divestment from the top 200 publicly traded fossil fuel companies , which macalester 's social responsibility committee rejected in 2015 . in 2018 , the social responsibility committee unanimously approved a revised fossil free mac proposal advocating a moratorium on the college 's direct investment partnerships with oil & gas companies , and the board of trustees is considering it . the divestment campaign has received significant support from the student body , student government , faculty , staff , and alumni . . notable alumni . kofi annan , 1961 , former un secretary general and nobel peace prize laureate siah armajani , 1963 , sculptor charles baxter , 1969 , university of minnesota professor , author and national book award finalist ( the feast of love ) peter berg , 1983 , actor , film director , ( friday night lights and hancock ) . one scene in hancock shows charlize theron wearing a macalester t-shirt . richard p . binzel , 1980 , astronomer and professor of planetary sciences at the massachusetts institute of technology amy briggs , 1984 , video game designer and creator of plundered hearts mike carr , 1973 , creator of dawn patrol game , author of the classic dungeons and dragons adventure in search of the unknown , commodities trader michael james davis , 1969 , judge of the united states district court for the district of minnesota chank diesel , 1990 , typographer mark doten , 2001 , novelist and librettist , the source , one of granta 's '' best of young american novelists . '' ari emanuel , 1983 , talent agent , basis for the character ari gold ( entourage ) william p . gerberding , 1951 , president of the university of washington danai gurira , 2001 , actress ( the walking dead , black panther ) and playwright christy haynes , 1998 , award-winning professor of chemistry at university of minnesota mary karr , 1974 , author new york times bestseller ( the liars ' club ) , whiting award winner , guggenheim fellow , pushcart awardee shawn lawrence otto , 1984 , screenwriter and film producer ( house of sand and fog ) carl lumbly , 1973 , actor ( cagney and lacey and alias ) walter mondale , 1950 , former vice president of the united states and u.s . ambassador to japan ( 1993–97 ) bob mould , 1982 , musician , guitarist , writer , and vocalist for hüsker dü and sugar as well as a solo artist tim o'brien , 1968 , author of the things they carried and the winner of the 1979 national book award for his novel going after cacciato rebecca otto , 1985 , minnesota state auditor ; former minnesota house member ( 2003–04 ) fred swaniker , 1999 , co-founder african leadership academy dewitt wallace , 1911 , founder of reader 's digest , philanthropist christopher o . ward , 1976 , executive director of the port authority of new york and new jersey robert willis warren , 1950 , judge of the united states district court for the eastern district of wisconsin dave zirin , 1996 , political sportswriter . see also . list of colleges and universities in minnesota higher education in minnesota . references . further reading . kilde , jeanne halgren . nature and revelation : a history of macalester college ( university of minnesota press , 2010 ) 400 pp . external links . official website official athletics website