Rayon

rayon and its variants . rayon is produced by dissolving cellulose followed by the conversion of this solution back to insoluble fibrous cellulose . various processes have been developed for this regeneration . principally , the methods are the cuprammonium method , viscose method , and the lyocell process . especially the former two methods have been practiced for more than a century . cuprammonium method . swiss chemist matthias eduard schweizer ( 1818–1860 ) discovered that cellulose dissolves in schweizer 's reagent . max fremery and johann urban developed a method to produce carbon fibers for use in light bulbs in 1897 . over 100 years old and still going strong from glanzstoff ( artificial silk ) factory to industry park . industriepark-oberbruch.de production of cuprammonium rayon for textiles started in 1899 in the vereinigte glanzstoff fabriken ag in oberbruch near aachen . verinigte glanstoff fabriken merged with the nederlandse kunstzijdefabrieken in 1929 to form the algemene kunstzijde unie , akzonobel 's predecessor . improvement by j . p . bemberg ag in 1904 made the artificial silk a product comparable to silk . j . p . bemberg ag was one of the vereinigte glanzstoff-fabriken which merged into the dutch based algemene kunstzijde unie ( aku ) -- akzonobel today . cuprammonium rayon has properties similar to viscose ; however , during its production , the cellulose is combined with copper and ammonia ( schweizer 's reagent ) . due to the detrimental environmental effects of this production method , cuprammonium rayon is no longer produced in the united states . . viscose method . english chemist charles frederick cross and his collaborators , edward john bevan and clayton beadle , patented their artificial silk in 1894 . they named their material '' viscose '' because its production involved the intermediacy of a highly viscous solution . the process built on the reaction of cellulose with a strong base , followed by treatment of that solution with carbon disulfide to give a xanthate derivative . the xanthate is then converted back to a cellulose fiber in a subsequent step . the first commercial viscose rayon was produced by the uk company courtaulds in november 1905 . courtaulds formed an american division , american viscose ( later known as avtex fibers ) , to produce their formulation in the united states in 1910 . the name '' rayon '' was adopted in 1924 , with '' viscose '' being used for the viscous organic liquid used to make both rayon and cellophane . in europe , though , the fabric itself became known as '' viscose '' , which has been ruled an acceptable alternative term for rayon by the us federal trade commission ( ftc ) . the viscose method can use wood as a source of cellulose , whereas other routes to rayon require lignin-free cellulose as a starting material . the use of woody sources of cellulose makes viscose cheaper , so it was traditionally used on a larger scale than the other methods . on the other hand , the original viscose process generates large amounts of contaminated wastewater . newer technologies use less water and have improved the quality of the wastewater . rayon was produced only as a filament fiber until the 1930s when methods were developed to utilize '' broken waste rayon '' as staple fiber . the physical properties of rayon remained unchanged until the development of high-tenacity rayon in the 1940s . further research and development led to high-wet-modulus rayon ( hwm rayon ) in the 1950s . research in the uk was centred on the government-funded british rayon research association . industrial applications of rayon emerged around 1935 . substituting cotton fiber in tires and belts , industrial types of rayon developed a totally different set of properties , amongst which tensile strength and elastic modulus were paramount . modal . modal is a type of rayon but made from particularly high-quality cellulose . two forms are available : '' polynosics '' and '' high wet modulus '' ( mwm ) . modal is used alone or with other fibers ( often cotton or spandex ) in clothing and household items like pajamas , underwear , bathrobes , towels , and bedsheets . modal can be tumble dried without damage due to its increased molecular alignment . the fabric has been known to pill less than cotton due to fiber properties and lower surface friction . high wet modulus rayon ( hwm ) is a modified version of viscose that is stronger when wet . it also has the ability to be mercerized like cotton . hwm rayons are also known as '' polynosic . '' polynosic fibers are dimensionally stable and do not shrink or get pulled out of shape when wet like many rayons . they are also wearing resistant and strong while maintaining a soft , silky feel . they are sometimes identified by the trade name modal . joyce a . smith . rayon – the multi-faceted fiber . ohio state university rayon fact sheet high-tenacity rayon is another modified version of viscose that has almost twice the strength of hwm . this type of rayon is typically used for industrial purposes such as tire cord . . lyocell . the lyocell process relies on dissolution of cellulose products in a solvent , n-methylmorpholine n-oxide . the lyocell process is not widely used , because it is relatively expensive . the process starts with cellulose and involves dry jet-wet spinning . it was developed at the now defunct american enka and courtaulds fibres . lenzing 's tencel is an example of a lyocell fiber . unlike the vicose process , the lycocell process does not use highly-toxic carbon sulfide . '' lyocell '' has become a genericized trademark , used to refer to the lyocell process for making cellulose fibers . . related materials . related materials are not regenerated cellulose , but esters of cellulose . . nitrocellulose . nitrocellulose is a derivative of cellulose that is soluble in organic solvents . it is mainly used as an explosive or as a lacquer . many early plastics , including celluloid , were made from nitrocellulose . acetate . cellulose acetate shares many similarities with viscose rayon , and was formerly considered as the same textile . however , rayon resists heat while acetate is prone to melting . acetate must be laundered with care either by hand-washing or dry cleaning , and acetate garments disintegrate when heated in a tumble-dryer . the two fabrics are now required to be listed distinctly on garment labels . . major fiber properties . rayon is a versatile fiber and is widely claimed to have the same comfort properties as natural fibers , although the drape and slipperiness of rayon textiles are often more like nylon . it can imitate the feel and texture of silk , wool , cotton and linen . the fibers are easily dyed in a wide range of colors . rayon fabrics are soft , smooth , cool , comfortable , and highly absorbent , but they do not always insulate body heat , making them ideal for use in hot and humid climates , although also making their '' hand '' ( feel ) cool and sometimes almost slimy to the touch . the durability and appearance retention of regular viscose rayons are low , especially when wet ; also , rayon has the lowest elastic recovery of any fiber . however , hwm rayon ( high-wet-modulus rayon ) is much stronger and exhibits higher durability and appearance retention . recommended care for regular viscose rayon is dry-cleaning only . hwm rayon can be machine-washed . image : rayon_closeup_1.jpg a sample of rayon from a skirt photographed with a macro lens . image : rayon_closeup_2.jpg another skirt with a different texture . image : rayon_closeup_3.jpg a blouse with a texture similar to the second . regular rayon has lengthwise lines called striations and its cross-section is an indented circular shape . the cross-sections of hwm and cupra rayon are rounder . filament rayon yarns vary from 80 to 980 filaments per yarn and vary in size from 40 to 5000 denier . staple fibers range from 1.5 to 15 denier and are mechanically or chemically crimped . rayon fibers are naturally very bright , but the addition of delustering pigments cuts down on this natural brightness . . manufacture . the raw material for viscose is primarily wood pulp , which is chemically converted into a soluble compound . it is then dissolved and forced through a spinneret to produce filaments which are chemically solidified , resulting in fibers of nearly pure cellulose . unless the chemicals are handled carefully , workers can be seriously harmed by the carbon disulfide used to manufacture most rayon . to prepare viscose , pulp is treated with aqueous sodium hydroxide ( typically 16-19 % w/w ) to form '' alkali cellulose '' , which has the approximate formula c 6 h 9 o 4 -ona . this material is allowed to depolymerize to an extent . the rate of depolymerization ( ripening or maturing ) depends on temperature and is affected by the presence of various inorganic additives , such as metal oxides and hydroxides . air also affects the ripening process since oxygen causes depolymerization . the alkali cellulose is then treated with carbon disulfide to form sodium cellulose xanthate . : c 6 h 5 ( oh ) 4 -ona + cs 2 & nbsp ; → & nbsp ; c 6 h 5 ( oh ) 4 -ocs 2 na rayon fiber is produced from the ripened solutions by treatment with a mineral acid , such as sulfuric acid . in this step , the xanthate groups are hydrolyzed to regenerate cellulose and carbon disulfide . : c 6 h 5 ( oh ) 4 -ocs 2 na 2 + h 2 so 4 & nbsp ; → & nbsp ; c 6 h 5 ( oh ) 4 -oh 2 +2cs 2 + na 2 so 4 aside from regenerated cellulose , acidification gives hydrogen sulfide ( h 2 s ) , sulfur , and carbon disulfide . the thread made from the regenerated cellulose is washed to remove residual acid . the sulfur is then removed by the addition of sodium sulfide solution and impurities are oxidized by bleaching with sodium hypochlorite solution or hydrogen peroxide solution . production begins with processed cellulose obtained from wood pulp and plant fibers . the cellulose content in the pulp should be around 87-97 % . the steps : immersion : the cellulose is treated with caustic soda . pressing . the treated cellulose is then pressed between rollers to remove excess liquid . the pressed sheets are crumbled or shredded to produce what is known as '' white crumb . '' the '' white crumb '' is aged through exposure to oxygen . this is a depolymerization step and is avoided in the case of polynosics . the aged '' white crumb '' is mixed in vats with carbon disulfide to form the xanthate ( see chemical equation above ) . this step produces '' orange-yellow crumb . '' the '' yellow crumb '' is dissolved in a caustic solution to form viscose . the viscose is set to stand for a period of time , allowing it to '' ripen '' . during this stage the molecular weight of the polymer changes . after ripening , the viscose is filtered , degassed , and then extruded through a spinneret into in a bath of sulfuric acid , resulting in the formation of rayon filaments . the acid is used as a regenerating agent . it converts cellulose xanthate back to cellulose . the regeneration step is rapid which does n't allow proper orientation of cellulose molecules . so to delay the process of regeneration , zinc sulfate is used in the bath which converts cellulose xanthate to zinc cellulose xanthate thus providing time for proper orientation to take place before regeneration . spinning . the spinning of viscose rayon fiber is done using a wet-spinning process . the filaments are allowed to pass through a coagulation bath after extrusion from the spinneret holes . the two-way mass transfer takes place . drawing . the rayon filaments are stretched , in a procedure known as drawing , to straighten out the fibers . washing . the fibers are then washed to remove any residual chemicals from them . cutting . if filament fibers are desired , then the process ends here . the filaments are cut down when producing staple fibers . history . french scientist and industrialist hilaire de chardonnet ( 1838–1924 ) , inventor of the first artificial textile fiber , artificial silk , created viscose . british scientists charles frederick cross and edward john bevan took out british patent no . 8,700 , '' improvements in dissolving cellulose and allied compounds '' in may , 1892 . in 1893 , they formed the viscose syndicate to grant licences and , in 1896 , formed the british viscoid co . ltd . to exploit the process . . producers . in 2018 , viscose fiber production in the world was approximately 5.8 million tons , and china was the largest producer with about 65 % of total global production . trade names are used within the rayon industry to label the type of rayon in the product . viscose rayon was first produced in coventry england in 1905 by courtaulds . bemberg is a trade name for cupramonium rayon developed by bemberg . bemberg performs much like viscose but has a smaller diameter and comes closest to silk in feel . bemberg is now only produced in japan . the fibers are finer than viscose rayon . modal and tencel are widely used forms of rayon produced by lenzing ag . tencel , generic name lyocell , is made by a slightly different solvent recovery process , and is considered a different fiber by the us ftc . tencel lyocell was first produced commercially by courtaulds , grimsby in england . the process , which dissolves cellulose without a chemical reaction , was developed by courtaulds research . accordis was a major manufacturer of cellulose-based fibers and yarns . production facilities can be found throughout europe , the u.s . and brazil . colbond history . colbond.us . acordis was a spinoff by akzonobel in 2000 after it had acquired courtaulds . it was through akzonobel 's original parent company 's , the nederlandse kunstzijdefabriek ( enka ) , a joint venture with rento hofstede crull 's de vijf , named de internationale spinpot exploitatie maatschappij ( isem ) that the commercial production of rayon was made viable . hofstede crull had supplied the solution for the problem of manufacturing rayon with his driving device for a centrifugal spinning machine in 1925 ( 1931 . the isem was fully integrated with the algemene kunstzijde unie , the nederlandse kunstzijdefabriek 's successor , with the death of hofstede crull in 1938 . ( see akzonobel , american enka company , and also rento hofstede crull . ) visil rayon and hope fr are flame retardant forms of viscose that have silica embedded in the fiber during manufacturing . north american rayon corporation of tennessee produced viscose rayon until its closure in the year 2000 . '' north american rayon corporation and american bemberg corporation '' in the tennessee encyclopedia north american rayon corporation of tennessee was an american subsidiary of j . p . bemburg a.g . which was part of the vereinigte glanstoff fabriken that were absorbed into the dutch aku , akzonobel today indonesia is one of the largest producers of rayon in the world , and asia pacific rayon ( apr ) of the country has an annual production capacity of 0.24 million tons . . environment and sustainability . carbon disulfide toxicity . much attention has been paid to the toxicity of carbon disulfide use in the viscose process . in some cases , 25-30 % of the carbon disulfide is lost during the process . highly toxic carbon disulfide is used in the production of viscose , leading to many incidents and legal cases supreme court of alabama . courtaulds fibers , inc . v . horace l . long , jr . , et al . horace l . long , jr . , et al . v . courtaulds fibers , inc . 1971996 and 1972028 . decided : september 15 , 2000 in the early years of viscose technology development . however , the volatile carbon disulfide is lost before the rayon gets to the consumer ; the rayon itself is basically pure cellulose . studies from the 1930s show that 30 % of american rayon workers suffered severe effects . during the second world war , political prisoners in nazi germany were made to work in appalling conditions at the phrix rayon factory in krefeld . because carbon disulfide is highly toxic , its use on a large scale demands care . historically , however , several incidents have resulted in many poisonings . with production facilities often located in developing countries , concerns for worker safety continue . newer control technologies have enabled improved collection of carbon disulfide and reuse of it , resulting in a lower emissions of carbon disulfide . rates of disability in modern factories ( mainly in china , indonesia , and india ) are unknown . . disposal and biodegradability . the biodegradation of various fibers in soil burial and sewage sludge was evaluated by korean researchers . rayon was found to be more biodegradable than cotton , and cotton more than acetate . the more water-repellent the rayon-based fabric , the more slowly it will decompose . silverfish like the firebrat can eat rayon , but damage was found to be minor , potentially due to the heavy , slick texture of the tested rayon . another study states that '' artificial silk . was readily eaten '' by ctenolepisma longicaudata . a 2014 ocean survey found that rayon contributed to 56.9 % of the total fibers found in deep sea areas , the rest being polyester , polyamides , acetate and acrylic . abundance of microplastics in the world 's deep seas ( 2014-12-16 ) . retrieved on 2014-12-17 . a 2016 study found a discrepancy in the ability to identify natural fibers in a marine environment via fourier transform infrared spectroscopy . . see also . nitrocellulose , another form of modified cellulose cellophane ( sheet-extruded viscose rayon ) hilaire de chardonnet ray p . dinsmore - pioneered use of rayon in tires . products made from viscose . art silk cellophane sausage casings velvet . further reading . gupta , vb ; kothari , vk and sengupta , ak eds . ( 1997 ) manufactured fibre technology . chapman & hall , london . for a review of all rayon production methods and markets see '' regenerated cellulose fibres '' ( book – edited by c r woodings ) hardback 2001 , , woodhead publishing ltd . for a description of the production method at a factory in germany in world war ii , see agnès humbert ( tr . barbara mellor ) résistance : memoirs of occupied france , london , bloomsbury publishing plc , 2008 ( american title : resistance : a frenchwoman 's journal of the war , bloomsbury , usa , 2008 ) pp . & nbsp ; 152–155 for a complete set of photographs of the process see '' the story of rayon '' published by courtaulds ltd ( 1948 ) arnold hard , the textile journalist , produced two books documenting the experiences of some of the pioneers in the early british rayon industry the hard , arnold . h . ( 1933 ) . the romance of rayon . whittaker & robinson , manchester and hard , arnold ( 1944 ) the story of rayon , united trade press ltd , london . references . external links . what is viscose ? from barnhardt natural fibers viscose fibre