Congo Free State

early economics and concessions . leopold could not meet the costs of running the congo free state . desperately , he set in motion a system to maximize revenue . the first change was the introduction of the concept of terres vacantes , '' vacant '' land , which was any land that did not contain a habitation or a cultivated garden plot . all of this land ( i.e . , most of the country ) was therefore deemed to belong to the state . servants of the state ( namely any men in leopold 's employ ) were encouraged to exploit it . shortly after the anti-slavery conference he held in brussels in 1889 , leopold issued a new decree which said that africans could only sell their harvested products ( mostly ivory and rubber ) to the state in a large part of the free state . this law grew out of the earlier decree which had said that all '' unoccupied '' land belonged to the state . any ivory or rubber collected from the state-owned land , the reasoning went , must belong to the state ; creating a de facto state-controlled monopoly . suddenly , the only outlet a large share of the local population had for their products was the state , which could set purchase prices and therefore could control the amount of income the congolese could receive for their work . however , for local elites this system presented new opportunities as the free state and concession companies paid them with guns to tax their subjects in kind . trading companies began to lose out to the free state government , which not only paid no taxes but also collected all the potential income . these companies were outraged by the restrictions on free trade , which the berlin act had so carefully protected years before . their protests against the violation of free trade prompted leopold to take another , less obvious tack to make money . a decree in 1892 divided the terres vacantes into a domainal system , which privatized extraction rights over rubber for the state in certain private domains , allowing leopold to grant vast concessions to private companies . in other areas , private companies could continue to trade but were highly restricted and taxed . the domainal system enforced an in-kind tax on the free state 's congolese subjects . as essential intermediaries , local rulers forced their men , women and children to collect rubber , ivory and foodstuffs . depending on the power of local rulers , the free state paid below rising market prices . vos , j . ( 2008 ) . '' the economics of the kwango rubber trade c . 1900 '' . angola on the move : transport routes , communications and history . b . heintze and a . von oppen . frankfurt am main , lembeck : 85–98 . in october 1892 , leopold granted concessions to a number of companies . each company was given a large amount of land in the congo free state on which to collect rubber and ivory for sale in europe . these companies were allowed to detain africans who did not work hard enough , to police their vast areas as they saw fit and to take all the products of the forest for themselves . in return for their concessions , these companies paid an annual dividend to the free state . at the height of the rubber boom , from 1901 until 1906 , these dividends also filled the royal coffers . the free trade zone in the congo was open to entrepreneurs of any european nation , who were allowed to buy 10- & nbsp ; and 15-year monopoly leases on anything of value : ivory from a district or the rubber concession , for example . the other zone—almost two-thirds of the congo—became the domaine privé , the exclusive private property of the state . in 1893 , leopold excised the most readily accessible portion of the free trade zone and declared it to be the domaine de la couronne , literally , '' fief of the crown '' . rubber revenue went directly to leopold who paid the free state for the high costs of exploitation . jean stengers . '' combien le congo à-t-il coûté à la belgique '' . bruxelles : académie royale des sciences coloniale 1957 . the same rules applied as in the domaine privé . in 1896 global demand for rubber soared . from that year onwards , the congolese rubber sector started to generate vast sums of money at an immense cost for the local population . . scramble for katanga . , to take possession of katanga one way or another . moloney ( 1893 ) : chapter x–xi . msiri tried to play the free state off against rhodes and when negotiations bogged down , stairs flew the free state flag anyway and gave msiri an ultimatum . instead , msiri decamped to another stockade . stairs sent a force to capture him but msiri stood his ground , whereupon captain omer bodson shot msiri dead and was fatally wounded in the resulting fight . the expedition cut off msiri 's head and put it on a pole , as he had often done to his enemies . this was to impress upon the locals that msiri 's rule had really ended , after which the successor chief recognized by stairs signed the treaty . rené de pont-jest : l'expédition du katanga , d'après les notes de voyage du marquis christian de bonchamps published 1892 in : edouard charton ( editor ) : le tour du monde magazine , website accessed 5 may 2007 . . war with arab slavers . in the short term , the third problem , that of the east african slave trade like zanzibari/swahili strongman tippu tip ( nom de guerre ) —his real name was hamad bin muhammad bin juma bin rajab el murjebi—was temporarily solved . initially the authority of the congo free state was relatively weak in the eastern regions of the congo . in early 1887 , henry morton stanley arrived in zanzibar and proposed that tippu tip be made governor ( wali ) of the stanley falls district . both leopold ii and barghash bin said agreed and on february 24 , 1887 , tippu tip accepted . bennett and brode in the longer term this alliance was indefensible at home and abroad . leopold ii was heavily criticized by the european public opinion for his dealings with tippu tip . in belgium , the belgian anti-slavery society was founded in 1888 , mainly by catholic intellectuals led by count hippolyte d'ursel , aimed at abolishing the arab slave trade . furthermore , tippu tip and leopold were commercial rivals . every person that tippu tip hunted down and put into chattel slavery and every pound of ivory he exported to zanzibar was a loss to leopold ii . this , and leopold 's humanitarian pledges to the berlin conference to end slavery , meant war was inevitable . open warfare broke out in late november 1892 . both sides fought by proxy , arming and leading the populations of the upper congo forests in conflict . by early 1894 the zanzibari/swahili slavers were defeated in the eastern congo region and the congo arab war came to an end . the lado enclave . in 1894 , king leopold ii signed a treaty with the united kingdom which conceded a strip of land on the free state 's eastern border in exchange for the lado enclave , which provided access to the navigable nile and extended the free state 's sphere of influence northwards into sudan . after rubber profits soared in 1895 , leopold ordered the organization of an expedition into the lado enclave , which had been overrun by mahdist rebels since the outbreak of the mahdist war in 1881 . roger louis , william ( 2006 ) . ends of british imperialism . i.b.tauris . p . 68 . the expedition was composed of two columns : the first , under belgian war hero baron dhanis , consisted of a sizable force , numbering around three-thousand , and was to strike north through the jungle and attack the rebels at their base at rejaf . the second , a much smaller force of only eight-hundred , was led by louis-napoléon chaltin and took the main road towards rejaf . both expeditions set out in december 1896 . charles de kavanagh boulger , demetrius ( 1898 ) . the congo state : or , the growth of civilisation in central africa . congo : w . thacker & company . p . 214 . although leopold ii had initially planned for the expedition to carry on much farther than the lado enclave , hoping indeed to take fashoda and then khartoum , batetela rebellion in february 1897 , resulting in the death of several belgian officers and the loss of his entire force . richard fox bourne 1903 p . 230 . nonetheless , chaltin continued his advance , and on 17 february 1897 , his outnumbered forces defeated the rebels in the battle of rejaf , securing the lado enclave as a belgian territory until leopold 's death in 1909 . pakenham 1991 p . 525–526 . leopold 's conquest of the lado enclave met with approval from the british government , at least initially , which welcomed any aid in their ongoing war with mahdist sudan . but frequent raids outside of lado territory by belgian congolese forces based in rejaf caused alarm and suspicion among british and french officials wary of leopold 's imperial ambitions . richard fox bourne ( 1903 ) , p . 232 . in 1910 , following the belgian annexation of the congo free state as the belgian congo in 1908 and the death of the belgian king in december 1909 , british authorities reclaimed the lado enclave as per the anglo-congolese treaty signed in 1894 , and added the territory to anglo-egyptian sudan . . economy during leopold 's rule . while the war against african powers was ending , the quest for income was increasing , fueled by the aire policy . by 1890 , leopold was facing considerable financial difficulty . district officials ' salaries were reduced to a bare minimum , and made up with a commission payment based on the profit that their area returned to leopold . after widespread criticism , this '' primes system '' was substituted for the allocation de retraite in which a large part of the payment was granted , at the end of the service , only to those territorial agents and magistrates whose conduct was judged '' satisfactory '' by their superiors . this meant in practice that nothing changed . congolese communities in the domaine privé were not merely forbidden by law to sell items to anyone but the state ; they were required to provide state officials with set quotas of rubber and ivory at a fixed , government-mandated price and to provide food to the local post . in direct violation of his promises of free trade within the cfs under the terms of the berlin treaty , not only had the state become a commercial entity directly or indirectly trading within its dominion , but also , leopold had been slowly monopolizing a considerable amount of the ivory and rubber trade by imposing export duties on the resources traded by other merchants within the cfs . in terms of infrastructure , leopold 's regime began construction of the railway that ran from the coast to the capital of leopoldville ( now kinshasa ) . this project , known today as the matadi–kinshasa railway , took years to complete . by the final decade of the 19th century , john boyd dunlop ’ s 1887 invention of inflatable , rubber bicycle tubes and the growing popularity of the automobile dramatically increased global demand for rubber . to monopolize the resources of the entire congo free state , leopold issued three decrees in 1891 and 1892 that reduced the native population to serfs . collectively , these forced the natives to deliver all ivory and rubber , harvested or found , to state officers thus nearly completing leopold 's monopoly of the ivory and rubber trade . the rubber came from wild vines in the jungle , unlike the rubber from brazil ( hevea brasiliensis ) , which was tapped from trees . to extract the rubber , instead of tapping the vines , the congolese workers would slash them and lather their bodies with the rubber latex . when the latex hardened , it would be scraped off the skin in a painful manner , as it took off the worker 's hair with it . hochschild , adam . king leopold 's ghost . boston and new york : houghton mifflin , 1998 , 161 . the force publique ( fp ) , leopold 's private army , was used to enforce the rubber quotas . early on , the fp was used primarily to campaign against the arab slave trade in the upper congo , protect leopold 's economic interests , and suppress the frequent uprisings within the state . the force publique 's officer corps included only white europeans ( belgian regular soldiers and mercenaries from other countries ) . on arriving in the congo , these recruited men from zanzibar and west africa , and eventually from the congo itself . in addition , leopold had been actually encouraging the slave trade among arabs in the upper congo in return for slaves to fill the ranks of the fp . during the 1890s , the fp 's primary role was to exploit the natives as corvée laborers to promote the rubber trade . many of the black soldiers were from far-off peoples of the upper congo , while others had been kidnapped in raids on villages in their childhood and brought to roman catholic missions , where they received a military training in conditions close to slavery . armed with modern weapons and the chicotte—a bull whip made of hippopotamus hide—the force publique routinely took and tortured hostages , slaughtered families of rebels , and flogged and raped congolese people with a reign of terror and abuse that cost millions of lives . one refugee from these horrors described the process : we were always in the forest to find the rubber vines , to go without food , and our women had to give up cultivating the fields and gardens . then we starved & nbsp ; . when we failed and our rubber was short , the soldiers came to our towns and killed us . many were shot , some had their ears cut off ; others were tied up with ropes round their necks and taken away . they also burned recalcitrant villages , and above all , cut off the hands of congolese natives , including children . the human hands were collected as trophies on the orders of their officers to show that bullets had not been wasted . officers were concerned that their subordinates might waste their ammunition on hunting animals for sport , so they required soldiers to submit one hand for every bullet spent . cawthorne , nigel . the world 's worst atrocities , 1999 . octopus publishing group . these mutilations also served to further terrorize the congolese into submission . this was all contrary to the promises of uplift made at the berlin conference which had recognized the congo free state . storyofthecongofreestate 172b.jpg congolese people working at the port of leopoldville storyofthecongofreestate 382.jpg construction of a railroad by congolese workers storyofthecongofreestate 412.jpg melting latex of rubber in the forest of lusambo s.a . mining and engineering journal ( 1891 ) ( 14592056547 ) . jpg mining by the company union minière du haut katanga . humanitarian disaster . mutilation . failure to meet the rubber collection quotas was punishable by death . meanwhile , the force publique were required to provide the hand of their victims as proof when they had shot and killed someone , as it was believed that they would otherwise use the munitions ( imported from europe at considerable cost ) for hunting . as a consequence , the rubber quotas were in part paid off in chopped-off hands . sometimes the hands were collected by the soldiers of the force publique , sometimes by the villages themselves . there were even small wars where villages attacked neighboring villages to gather hands , since their rubber quotas were too unrealistic to fill . a catholic priest quotes a man , tswambe , speaking of the hated state official léon fiévez , who ran a district along the river north of pool malebo : all blacks saw this man as the devil of the equator . from all the bodies killed in the field , you had to cut off the hands . he wanted to see the number of hands cut off by each soldier , who had to bring them in baskets . a village which refused to provide rubber would be completely swept clean . as a young man , i saw fiévez 's soldier molili , then guarding the village of boyeka , take a net , put ten arrested natives in it , attach big stones to the net , and make it tumble into the river . rubber causes these torments ; that 's why we no longer want to hear its name spoken . soldiers made young men kill or rape their own mothers and sisters . hochschild , king leopold 's ghost , 166 one junior officer described a raid to punish a village that had protested . the officer in command '' ordered us to cut off the heads of the men and hang them on the village palisades . and to hang the women and the children on the palisade in the form of a cross '' . after seeing a congolese person killed for the first time , a danish missionary wrote , '' the soldier said 'do n't take this to heart so much . they kill us if we do n't bring the rubber . the commissioner has promised us if we have plenty of hands he will shorten our service . in forbath 's words : the baskets of severed hands , set down at the feet of the european post commanders , became the symbol of the congo free state . the collection of hands became an end in itself . force publique soldiers brought them to the stations in place of rubber ; they even went out to harvest them instead of rubber . they became a sort of currency . they came to be used to make up for shortfalls in rubber quotas , to replace . the people who were demanded for the forced labour gangs ; and the force publique soldiers were paid their bonuses on the basis of how many hands they collected . in theory , each right hand proved a killing . in practice , to save ammunition soldiers sometimes '' cheated '' by simply cutting off the hand and leaving the victim to live or die . more than a few survivors later said that they had lived through a massacre by acting dead , not moving even when their hands were severed , and waiting till the soldiers left before seeking help . in some instances a soldier could shorten his service term by bringing more hands than the other soldiers , which led to widespread mutilations and dismemberment . death toll . a reduction of the population of the congo is noted by all who have compared the country at the beginning of leopold 's control with the beginning of belgian state rule in 1908 , but estimates of the death toll vary considerably . estimates of some contemporary observers suggest that the population decreased by half during this period . according to e . d . morel , the congo free state counted '' 20 million souls '' . morel , e . d . ( 1904 ) king leopold 's rule in africa . london : william heinnemann , p . 105 hence , mark twain mentioned the number of ten million deaths . twain , m . ( 1905 ) king leopold ’ s soliloquy a defense of his congo rule . boston : p . r . warren co . , p . 12 . according to irish diplomat roger casement , this depopulation had four main causes : '' indiscriminate war '' , starvation , reduction of births , and disease . hochschild , a . pp . 226–232 . sleeping sickness was also a major cause of fatality at the time . opponents of leopold 's rule stated , however , that the administration itself was to be considered responsible for the spreading of the epidemic . hochschild , a . pp . 230–231 . in the absence of a census providing even an initial idea of the size of population of the region at the inception of the congo free state ( the first was taken in 1924 ) , it is impossible to quantify population changes in the period . despite this , forbath more recently claimed the loss was at least five million . adam hochschild and jan vansina use the number 10 million . hochschild cites several recent independent lines of investigation , by anthropologist jan vansina and others , that examine local sources ( police records , religious records , oral traditions , genealogies , personal diaries ) , which generally agree with the assessment of the 1919 belgian government commission : roughly half the population perished during the free state period . since the first official census by the belgian authorities in 1924 put the population at about 10 million , these various approaches suggest a rough estimate of a total of 10 million dead . jan vansina returned to the issue of quantifying the total population decline , and revised his earlier position , he concluded that the kuba population ( one of the many congolese populations ) was rising during the first two decades of leopold ii 's rule , and declined with 25 percent from 1900 to 1919 , mainly due to sickness . jan vansina is an anthropologist that made quantitative estimates based on qualitative research . vansina , jan ( 2010 ) . being colonized : the kuba experience in rural congo , 1880–1960 . madison , wisconsin : university of wisconsin press . pp . 127–149 . vanthemsche , guy ( 2012 ) . belgium and the congo , 1885–1980 . new york : cambridge university press . p 25 others argued a decrease of 20 percent over the first forty years of colonial rule ( up to the census of 1924 ) . pages 8–9 according to the congolese historian isidore ndaywel è nziem 13 million died . to put these population changes in context , sourced references state that in 1900 africa as a whole had between 90 million and 133 million people . world population prospects : the 2006 revision however , no verifiable records exist . louis and stengers state that population figures at the start of leopold 's control are only '' wild guesses '' , while calling e . d . morel 's attempt and others at coming to a figure for population losses '' but figments of the imagination '' . louis , r . and stengers , j . ( 1968 ) e.d . morel 's history of the congo reform movement . oxford : clarendon , pp . 252–257 . however , authors that point out the lack of reliable demographic data are questioned by others calling the former minimalists and agnosticists , proving that these questions remain the object of heated debate . international criticism . leopold ran up high debts with his congo investments before the beginning of the worldwide rubber boom in the 1890s . prices increased throughout the decade as industries discovered new uses for rubber in tires , hoses , tubing , insulation for telegraph and telephone cables and wiring . by the late-1890s , wild rubber had far surpassed ivory as the main source of revenue from the congo free state . the peak year was 1903 , with rubber fetching the highest price and concessionary companies raking in the highest profits . however , the boom sparked efforts to find lower-cost producers . congolese concessionary companies started facing competition from rubber cultivation in southeast asia and latin america . as plantations were begun in other tropical regions around the world , the global price of rubber started to dip . competition heightened the drive to exploit forced labour in the congo in order to lower production costs . meanwhile , the cost of enforcement was eating away at profit margins , along with the toll taken by the increasingly unsustainable harvesting methods . as competition from other areas of rubber cultivation mounted , leopold 's private rule was left increasingly vulnerable to international scrutiny . missionary carefully documented and exposed atrocities committed . eye-witness reports from missionaries portrayed actions by the state that broke laws set by the european nations . as rumours circulated leopold attempted to discredit them , even creating a commission for the protection of the natives . in january 1908 , william henry sheppard published a report on colonial abuses in the american presbyterian congo mission ( apcm ) newsletter , and both he and william morrison were sued for libel against the kasai rubber company ( compagnie de kasai ) , a prominent belgian rubber contractor in the area . when the case went to court in september 1909 , the two missionaries had support from the cra , american progressives , and their lawyer emile vandervelde . the judge acquitted sheppard ( morrison had been acquitted earlier on a technicality ) on the premise that his editorial had not named the major company , but smaller charter companies instead . however , it is likely that the case was decided in favor of sheppard as a result of international politics ; the u.s . , socially in support of the missionaries , had questioned the validity of king leopold ii 's rule over the congo . sheppard 's documented cases of cruelty or violence were in direct violation of the berlin act of 1885 , which gave leopold ii control over the congo as long as he '' cared for the improvements of their conditions of their moral and material well-being '' and '' helped in suppressing slavery . '' however , historians have noted that he and other missionaries have traditionally received little recognition for their contributions and reports . . congo reform association . joseph conrad ’ s novel heart of darkness , originally published in 1899 as a three-part series in blackwood 's magazine , inspired by his service as a captain on a steamer on the congo 12 years before , sparked an organized international opposition to leopold 's exploitational activities . in 1900 , e . d . morel , a part-time journalist and head of trade with congo for the liverpool shipping firm elder dempster , noticed that ships that brought vast loads of rubber from the congo only ever returned there loaded with guns and ammunition for the force publique . morel became a journalist and then a publisher , attempting to discredit leopold 's regime . in 1902 , morel retired from his position at elder dempster to focus on campaigning . he founded his own magazine , the west african mail , and conducted speaking tours in britain . increasing public outcry over the atrocities in the cfs moved the british government to launch an official investigation . in 1903 , morel and those who agreed with him in the house of commons succeeded in passing a resolution calling on the british government to conduct an inquiry into alleged violations of the berlin agreement . roger casement , then the british consul at boma ( at the mouth of the congo river ) , was sent to the congo free state to investigate . reporting back to the foreign office in 1900 , casement wrote : the root of the evil lies in the fact that the government of the congo is above all a commercial trust , that everything else is orientated towards commercial gain & nbsp ; . e . d . morel was introduced to roger casement by their mutual friend herbert ward martial frindéthié : francophone african cinema : history , culture , politics and theory just before the publication of casement 's 1904 detailed eyewitness report—known as the casement report—in 1904 and realized that he had found the ally he had sought . casement convinced morel to establish an organisation for dealing specifically with the congo question , the congo reform association . with casement 's and dr . guinness 's assistance , he set up and ran the congo reform association , which worked to end leopold 's control of the congo free state . branches of the association were established as far away as the united states . the congo reform movement 's members included sir arthur conan doyle , mark twain , joseph conrad , booker t . washington , and bertrand russell . the mass deaths in the congo free state became a cause célèbre in the last years of the 19th century . the congo reform movement led a vigorous international movement against the maltreatment of the congolese population . r . j . rummel exemplifying the horror of european colonization : leopold 's congo '' . the british parliament demanded a meeting of the 14 signatory powers to review the 1885 berlin agreement . the belgian parliament , pushed by emile vandervelde and other critics of the king 's congolese policy , forced leopold to set up an independent commission of inquiry , and despite the king 's efforts , in 1905 it confirmed casement 's report . one of the main ways england was involved in ending leopold ii of belgium ’ s rule in the congo , was by making belgium , as a whole , more aware of the brutality present in the congo . e . d . morel was one of the key activists of england for a congo free from belgium rule . once the u.s became aware of the occurrences in the congo , morel began the congo reform association . one of the methods morel used to make the world more aware of the atrocities in the congo during leopold ’ s rule was through the press . articles were published in both magazines and newspapers in order to make the people of these powerful countries , such as the u.s and england , more aware of what truly was being done in this part of africa . with this newfound unwanted publicity , the belgium government was pressured in assuming control of the congo from leopold . individuals such as george washington williams also had a significant impact on the congo free state propaganda war . in his famous letter , '' an open letter to his serene majesty léopold ii , king of the belgians and sovereign of the independent state of congo '' , sent on july 18 , 1890 , williams described in great detail the crimes committed against the residents of the congo and their overall mistreatment . this letter was a key factor in the propaganda struggle over conditions in the congo . . belgian annexation of the congo free state as the belgian congo . leopold ii offered to reform his congo free state regime , but international opinion supported an end to the king 's rule , and no nation was willing to accept this responsibility . belgium was the obvious european candidate to annex the congo free state . for two years , it debated the question and held new elections on the issue . yielding to international pressure , the parliament of belgium annexed the congo free state and took over its administration on november 15 , 1908 , as the colony of the belgian congo . the governance of the belgian congo was outlined in the 1908 colonial charter . senelle , r . , and e . clément ( 2009 ) , léopold ii et la charte coloniale , brussels : editions mols . despite being effectively removed from power , the international scrutiny was no major loss to leopold ii—who died in brussels on 17 december 1909—or to the concessionary companies in the congo . by then southeast asia and latin america had become lower-cost producers of rubber . along with the effects of resource depletion in the congo , international commodity prices had fallen to a level that rendered congolese extraction unprofitable . just prior to releasing sovereignty over the cfs , leopold had all evidence of his activities in the cfs destroyed , including the archives of the departments of finance and of the interior . leopold ii lost the absolute power he had had there , but the population now had a belgian colonial regime , which had become heavily paternalism , with church , state , and private companies all instructed to oversee the welfare of the inhabitants . manning , patrick , the african diaspora , pg . 227 . . legacy . the order of the crown , originally created in 1897 , rewarded heroic deeds and service achieved while serving in the congo free state . the order was made a decoration of the belgian state with the abolition of the congo free state in 1908 and is still awarded today . between 1886 and 1908 the free state issued a number of postage stamps . these typically showed scenes of wildlife , landscapes , and natives . coins were minted from 1887 to 1908 , using the belgian standard . they ranged from a copper 1 centime through a silver 5 francs . the lower values showed a star on the obverse and were holed , the higher ones had a bust of leopold ii . . genocide question . in the aftermath of the 1998 publication of king leopold 's ghost by adam hochschild , where he had written '' the killing in the congo was of genocidal proportions '' , but '' it was not strictly speaking a genocide '' , the guardian reported that the royal museum for central africa in brussels would finance an investigation into some of the claims made by hochschild . an investigatory panel announced in 2002 , likely to be headed by professor jean-luc vellut , was scheduled to report its findings in 2004 . robert g . weisbord stated in the 2003 journal of genocide research that attempting to eliminate a portion of the population is enough to qualify as genocide under the un convention . in the case of the congo free state , the unbearable conditions would qualify as a genocide . in the aftermath of the report , an exhibition was held at the royal museum for central africa entitled the memory of congo . critics , including hochschild , claimed that there were '' distortions and evasions '' in the exhibition and stated : '' the exhibit deals with this question in a wall panel misleadingly headed 'genocide in the congo ? ' this is a red herring , for no reputable historian of the congo has made charges of genocide ; a forced labor system , although it may be equally deadly , is different . '' an early day motion presented to the british parliament in 2006 described '' the tragedy of king leopold 's regime '' as genocide and called for an apology from the belgian government . it received the signature of 48 members of parliament . . see also . list of colonial governors of the congo free state and belgian congo districts of the congo free state king leopold 's ghost king leopold 's soliloquy heart of darkness lado enclave abir congo company brussels anti-slavery conference 1889–90 brussels conference act of 1890 royal museum for central africa . notes . references . forbath , peter , the river congo , 1977 . harper & row . adam hochschild , king leopold 's ghost , pan ( 1999 ) . pakenham , thomas , the scramble for africa , abacus . ( 1991 ) . further reading . alexander , nathan g . '' e.d . morel ( 1873–1924 ) , the congo reform association , and the history of human rights . '' britain and the world 9 , no . 2 ( 2016 ) : 213–235 . ascherson , neal , the king incorporated , , 1963 . de roo , bas , taxation in the congo free state , an exceptional case ? , economic history of developing regions 32 ( 2 ) , p . & nbsp ; 97-126 , 2017 . grant , kevin , a civilised savagery : britain and the new slaveries in africa , 1884–1926 , routledge ( london , 2005 ) . johnston , george grenfell and the congo ( two volumes , london , 1908 ) . morel , e . d . ( edmund dene ) , 1873–1924 , e . d . morel 's history of the congo reform movement ; edited by wm . roger louis and jean stengers , oxford , clarendon press , 1968 ( includes morel and the congo reform association , 1904–1913 , by w . r . louis and morel and belgium , by j . stengers ) . ó síocháin , séamas : roger casement : imperialist , rebel , revolutionary . dublin : lilliput press , 2008 . petringa , maria , brazza , a life for africa , authorhouse . ( 2006 ) rodney , walter , how europe underdeveloped africa , howard university press . ( 1974 ) stanard , matthew g . selling the congo : a history of european pro-empire propaganda and the making of belgian imperialism ( u of nebraska press , 2012 ) vandersmissen , jan , the king 's most eloquent campaigner . emile de laveleye , leopold ii and the creation of the congo free state , in : belgisch tijdschrift voor nieuwste geschiedenis , 2011 , blz . 7-57 . . primary sources . ; also via hathitrust ó síocháin , séamas and michael o ’ sullivan , eds : the eyes of another race : roger casement 's congo report and 1903 diary . university college dublin press , 2004 . henry morton stanley , the congo and the founding of the congo free state ( london , 1885 ) report of the british consul , roger casement , on the administration of the congo free state , reprinted in full in the eyes of another race : roger casement ’ s congo report and 1903 diary edited by seamas o siochain and michael o ’ sullivan . dublin , 2003 . the reports of the congo reform association , particularly the '' memorial on the present phase of the congo question '' ( london , 1912 ) . the congo report of commission of inquiry ( new york , 1906 ) burrows , guy and edgar canisius , the curse of central africa . london : everett , 1903 . external links . antwerp is a colonial city , by bas de roo heart of darkness , the novel the crime of the congo , by sir arthur conan doyle at google books a journal of a tour in the congo free state , 1905 , by marcus dorman , from project gutenberg catalogue of the edmund morel papers at the archives division of the london school of economics . archive congo free state , royal museum of central africa