Long John Silver

profile . long john silver is a cunning and opportunistic pirate who was quartermaster under the notorious captain flint . stevenson 's portrayal of silver has greatly influenced the modern iconography of the pirate . karg , p . 220 . silver has a parrot , named captain flint in honor—or mockery—of his former captain , stevenson ( 1883 ) , '' the voyage '' ch . 10 , pp . 80f . who generally perches on silver 's shoulder , and is known to chatter pirate or seafaring phrases like '' pieces of eight '' , and '' stand by to go about '' . silver uses the parrot as another means of gaining jim 's trust , by telling the boy all manner of exciting stories about the parrot 's buccaneer history . 'now that bird , ' silver would say , 'is , maybe , two hundred years old , hawkins—they lives forever mostly , and if anybody 's seen more wickedness it must be the devil himself . she 's sailed with england—the great pirate cap ' n england . she 's been at madagascar , and at malabar , and surinam , and providence , and portobello . she was at the boarding of the viceroy of the indies out of goa , she was , and to look at her you would think she was a baby . '' silver claims to have served in the royal navy and lost his leg under '' the immortal hawke '' . '' his left leg was cut off close by the hip , and under the left shoulder , he carried a crutch , which he managed with wonderful dexterity , hopping about upon it like a bird . he was very tall and strong , with a face as big as a ham—plain and pale , but intelligent and smiling . '' ( treasure island ( 1883 ) by robert louis stevenson page 82 ) he also claims to have been the only man whom flint ever feared . like many of stevenson 's characters , there is significant duality in the character ; ostensibly silver is a hardworking and likeable seaman , and it is only as the plot unfolds that his villainous nature is gradually revealed . his relationship with jim hawkins , the novel 's protagonist and narrator , belies that duality , as he serves as a mentor and eventually father-figure to jim , creating much shock and emotion when it is discovered that he is in charge of the mutiny , and especially when jim must confront and fight him later on . although treacherous and willing to change sides at any time to further his own interests , silver has compensating virtues . he is wise enough to save his money , in contrast to the spendthrift ways of most of the pirates . he is physically courageous despite his disability : for instance , when flint 's cache is found to be empty , he coolly stands his ground against five murderous seamen despite having only jim , a boy in his teens , to back him . when silver escapes at the end of the novel , he takes '' three or four hundred guineas '' of the treasure with him , thus becoming one of only two former members of captain flint 's crew to get his hands on a portion of the recovered treasure . ( the repentant maroonee ben gunn is the other , but he spends all £1,000 in nineteen days . ) jim 's own ambivalence towards silver is reflected in the last chapter , when he speculates that the old pirate must have settled down in comfortable retirement : '' it is to be hoped so , i suppose , for his chances of comfort in another world are very small . '' silver is married to a woman of african descent , whom he trusts to manage his business affairs in his absence and to liquidate his bristol assets when his actions make it impossible for him to go home . he confides in his fellow pirates that he and his wife plan to rendezvous after the voyage to skeleton island is complete and flint 's treasure is recovered , at which point silver will retire to a life of luxury . ironically his '' share '' of flint 's treasure ( £420 ) is considerably less than that of ben gunn ( £1,000 ) and what silver boasts was his share from england ( £900 ) and from flint ( £2,000 ) . according to stevenson 's letters , the idea for the character of long john silver was inspired by his real-life friend william henley , a writer and editor . prince , p . 78 . stevenson 's stepson , lloyd osbourne , described henley as '' . a great , glowing , massive-shouldered fellow with a big red beard and a crutch ; jovial , astoundingly clever , and with a laugh that rolled like music ; he had an unimaginable fire and vitality ; he swept one off one 's feet '' . elwin , p . 154 . in a letter to henley after the publication of treasure island , stevenson wrote : '' i will now make a confession . it was the sight of your maimed strength and masterfulness that begot long john silver.the idea of the maimed man , ruling and dreaded by the sound , was entirely taken from you '' . stevenson ( 1883 ) , p . 316 . . adaptations and related works . literature . a prequel novel to treasure island , titled porto bello gold , was published in 1924 by arthur d . howden smith . british historian dennis judd presents silver as the main character in his 1977 prequel , the adventures of long john silver , and in the 1979 sequel , return to treasure island . john silver is also the protagonist in björn larsson 's fictional 1995 autobiography , long john silver : the true and eventful history of my life of liberty and adventure as a gentleman of fortune and enemy to mankind , published in sweden in 1995 . silver is the main character in edward chupack 's 2008 silver & nbsp ; — my own tale as told by me with a goodly amount of murder . . audio-radio . orson welles played silver in a july 18 , 1938 broadcast of the mercury theatre on the air . basil rathbone starred as both the narrator and silver in a 1944 audio recording for columbia masterworks records . william redfield played silver on the may 14 , 1948 your playhouse of favorites adaptation . ronald colman hosted an adaptation of the novel on the april 27 , 1948 broadcast of favorite story . james mason played silver opposite bobby driscoll 's '' jim hawkins '' on the lux radio theatres adaptation on january 29 , 1951 . james kennedy played silver in the tale spinners for children audio adaptation of treasure island ( united artists records , uac 11013 ) . there have been two bbc radio adaptations of treasure island , with silver being played by peter jeffrey in 1989 , and jack shepherd in 1995 . the author john le carré performed an abridged reading of the novel in five parts as part of bbc radio 4 's afternoon reading . tom baker starred as silver in big finish productions ' 2012 audio adaptation . . theatre . there have been several major stage adaptations made . dury , richard . stage and radio adaptations of treasure island . the number of minor adaptations remains countless . for a time , in london , there was an annual production of the musical treasure island , based on a book by bernard miles and josephine wilson . the music was composed by cyril ornadel and the lyrics by hal shaper . the musical was performed at the mermaid theatre , originally under the direction of bernard miles , who played long john silver , a part he also played in various television versions . comedian spike milligan would often play ben gunn in these productions , and in 1981 , tom baker played long john silver . pieces of eight , a musical adaptation by jule styne , premiered in edmonton , alberta , in 1985 . in 2011 , tom hewitt starred in b . h . barry and vernon morris 's stage adaptation of the novel , which officially opened 5 march at the irondale center in brooklyn . in july 2011 , bristol old vic staged a large-scale outdoor production of treasure island outside the theatre on king street , bristol directed by sally cookson , with music by benji bower . from october 2013 to 2014 , mind the gap theatre company held a national tour of treasure island , retold by olivier award-winning writer mike kenny . in 2013 , youthplays published long joan silver by arthur m . jolly , an adaptation where all of the pirates are women . from december 2014 to april 2015 , a version by bryony lavery and directed by polly findlay was produced at london 's royal national theatre . in this version of the play , jim is a girl . another doctor who alumnus , arthur darvill , played silver in the 2014 national theatre production of treasure island . the broadway musical spongebob squarepants ( musical ) features the character in the song '' poor pirates '' . as part of their 2017 season , the stratford festival premiered a new adaptation of treasure island by canadian playwright nicolas billon . film . charles ogle played silver in the 1920 silent film . wallace beery was the first speaking long john silver in the 1934 film . robert newton became the definitive long john silver in the disney 's 1950 live-action film . born in dorset in the south west of england , newton had a broad 'west country ' accent & when this was encouraged & exaggerated by the writers , it became the archetypal 'pirate voice' . ! the phrases '' arrrrrh , matey ! '' & '' ha , haaar , jim lad '' have become iconic to the way historic pirates are perceived . the 1954 film , long john silver , again starred robert newton as the title character , which he would reprise in television ( see below ) . the 1971 anime film depicts silver as an anthropomorphic pig who captains his own pirate ship , sporting a hook prosthesis on his left hand rather than a missing leg . animal treasure island ( 1971 ) in 1971 , boris andreyev played silver in the soviet version ostrov sokrovishch . orson welles portrayed silver in the 1972 live action film adaptation . in treasure island ( 1988 film ) , armen dzhigarkhanyan provided the voice talent for john silver . in the 1994 movie the pagemaster , the character of silver is voiced by jim cummings . tim curry portrays long john silver in disney 's muppet treasure island . jack palance , in one of his last film appearances , portrays silver in the 1999 film . silver is voiced by brian murray and depicted as a cyborg in the disney 2002 animated science fiction adventure film treasure planet . lance henriksen played silver in the 2006 film pirates of treasure island . tobias moretti played silver in the 2007 german film adaptation of treasure island , entitled die schatzinsel . in the film solo : a star wars story ( 2018 ) , the character of tobias beckett ( as played by woody harrelson ) was inspired by long john silver . . television . robert newton followed up his two feature films with a 1955 australian-produced television series the adventures of long john silver . peter wyngarde played silver in the 1958 tv series the adventures of ben gunn . bbc television has presented the story in miniseries format four times , with the role of silver being played by bernard miles in 1951 and again in 1957 ; , peter vaughan in 1968 ; and alfred burke in 1977 . miles played the role one final time in a 1982 tv movie . in 1959 , ivo garrani played silver in an italian television miniseries . ivor dean played the character in an acclaimed european four-part mini-series in 1966 . he intended to reprise the role in another series with more adventures of silver and began writing it with director robert s . baker , but his sudden death in 1974 stopped all further plans . in 1985 , the ivor dean script was used as foundation for the disney 10-part tv series return to treasure island , starring brian blessed as long john silver . in the 1978 anime series takarajima directed by osamu dezaki the character is voiced by genzō wakayama . a 1982 soviet miniseries had silver portrayed by oleg borisov . anthony quinn played silver in the 1987 television miniseries treasure island in outer space . charlton heston portrayed a darker long john silver in the 1990 made-for-television movie , treasure island . eddie izzard played long john silver in the 2012 sky mini-series . luke arnold played john silver in the starz television series black sails ( 2014–2017 ) , a prequel story set 20 years before treasure island . in this series , silver as a young man begins as a scheming cook who rises to serve as quartermaster on the walrus and on a captured spanish man-of-war , later to lead the pirate and former-slave forces that attempt to re-take nassau from the british . reflecting his relationship with jim hawkins , silver intends only to use his crewmates to enrich himself , but comes to care for them despite himself . at one point , a rival pirate crew captures the walrus but , being too few to sail the ship themselves , ask silver for a list of crew members who can be counted on to shift their loyalties , intending to execute the rest . silver refuses , and the pirates torture him by repeatedly striking his leg with an ax . the walrus crew free themselves and rescue him , but his leg is beyond saving and has to be amputated . he loses consciousness , and wakes to find that a grateful and impressed crew has voted him quartermaster . costas mandylor portrays '' captain silver '' in the 2016 episode '' the brothers jones '' on abc 's once upon a time . other print media . a ballad of john silver , a poem from john masefield , was published in 1921 . masefield 's original 1902 work was entitled salt-water ballads . long john silver is a franco-belgian comics series written by xavier dorison and illustrated by mathieu laufray which was published in french and english . published by cinebook in english . john silver , a fictional space pirate with mechanical leg who appears in the italy comic book nathan never , was inspired by long john silver . . other . the rock band jefferson airplane created an album in 1972 named long john silver . a fast-food seafood restaurant chain , long john silver 's , is named after the character .