1917 in literature

events . january francis picabia produces the first issue of the dada periodical 391 in barcelona . philosopher hu shih , the main advocate of replacing scholarly language with the vernacular in chinese literature , publishes an article in the magazine new youth ( xin qingnian ) , '' a preliminary discussion of literature reform '' , offering eight guidelines for writers . j . r . r . tolkien , on medical leave from the british army at great haywood , begins the book of lost tales ( the first version of the silmarillion ) , starting with the '' fall of gondolin '' . this first chronicles tolkien 's mythopoeia middle-earth legendarium in prose . february 4 or 5 – the english writer hugh kingsmill is captured in action in france . february 16 – the publisher boni & liveright is founded in new york city by horace liveright with albert boni , and initiates the '' modern library '' imprint . april – leonard and virginia woolf take delivery of a hand printing press needed to establish the hogarth press at their home in richmond upon thames . their first publication is two stories . may – w . b . yeats acquires thoor ballylee in ireland . june 4 – the first pulitzer prizes are awarded : laura e . richards , maude h . elliott , and florence hall receive the first for biography ( for julia ward howe ) , jean jules jusserand the first for history with with americans of past and present days , and herbert b . swope the first for journalism for his work for the new york world . june 18 – luigi pirandello 's drama right you are ( if you think so ) ( così è ( se vi pare ) ) is first performed , in milan . july – siegfried sassoon issues a '' soldier 's declaration '' against prolonging world war i . he is sent by the military ( with assistance from robert graves ) to edinburgh 's craiglockhart hydropathic , where wilfred owen introduces himself on august 18 . at sassoon 's urging , owen writes his two great war poems , '' anthem for doomed youth '' and '' dulce et decorum est '' , although like almost all his poetry they remain unpublished until after his death in action next year . their meeting would later inspire stephen macdonald 's drama not about heroes ( 1982 ) and pat barker 's novel regeneration ( 1991 ) . summer – the siuru expressionism and neo-romantic literary movement in estonia is formed by young poets and writers . september 6 – at the national eisteddfod of wales in birkenhead , the chairing of the bard ceremony ends with the chair draped in black , the winner , hedd wyn , having died a month earlier in battle . october ernest hemingway takes his first job , as a reporter on the kansas city star . d . h . lawrence is forced to leave cornwall at three days ' notice under terms of the defence of the realm act in the united kingdom . partly reflected in his novel kangaroo ( 1923 ) . october 20 – the 51-year-old poet w . b . yeats marries 25-year-old georgie hyde-lees at harrow road register office in london , with ezra pound as best man , a couple of months after his proposal of marriage to his ex-mistress 's daughter , iseult gonne , is rejected . december 25 – jesse lynch williams ' why marry ? , the first drama to win a pulitzer prize , opens at the astor theatre ( new york ) . unknown dates the colonial government of the dutch east indies establishes the kantoor voor de volklectuur ( '' office for people 's reading '' ) , later renamed balai pustaka . the marc chagall illustrated version of the magician ( דער קונצענמאכער , der kuntsenmakher ) by i . l . peretz ( died 1915 ) appears in vilnius . . new books . fiction . elizabeth von arnim – christine mariano azuela – los caciques ( the bosses ) henri barbusse – under fire ( first english language edition ) e . f . benson an autumn sowing mr . teddy adrien bertrand – l'orage sur le jardin de candide ( the thunderstorm in candide 's garden ) rhoda broughton – a thorn in the flesh edgar rice burroughs a princess of mars the son of tarzan abraham cahan – the rise of david levinsky gilbert cannan – the stucco house sarat chandra chattopadhyay – devdas mary cholmondeley – under one roof joseph conrad – the shadow line ( serialization concluded and in book form ) clemence dane – regiment of women miguel de unamuno – abel sánchez norman douglas – south wind arthur conan doyle – his last bow ( collected sherlock holmes stories ) edna ferber – fanny herself anna katharine green – the mystery of the hasty arrow zona gale – a daughter of the morning joseph hergesheimer – the three black pennys robert hichens – in the wilderness ricarda huch – the deruga case ( der fall deruga ) henry james ( posthumously ) the ivory tower the sense of the past gaston leroux – rouletabille at krupp's sinclair lewis – the job jack london – jerry of the islands oscar micheaux – the homesteader christopher morley – parnassus on wheels baroness orczy lord tony 's wife a sheaf of bluebells david graham phillips – susan lenox : her rise and fall marmaduke pickthall – knights of araby ernest poole – his family horacio quiroga – cuentos de amor de locura y de muerte henry handel richardson ( et florence robertson ) – australia felix ( first part of the fortunes of richard mahony ) may sinclair – the tree of heaven annie m . p . smithson – her irish heritage hermann sudermann – the excursion to tilsit ( litauische geschichten ) ivan tavčar – cvetje v jeseni ( flowers in autumn ) edgar wallace – the secret house robert walser – der spaziergang ( the walk ) mary augusta ward missing towards the goal the war and elizabeth alec waugh – the loom of youth edith wharton – summer p . g . wodehouse the man with two left feet ( collected stories ) piccadilly jim . children and young people . lucy maud montgomery – anne 's house of dreams beatrix potter – appley dapply 's nursery rhymes else ury – nesthäkchen and the world war . drama . leonid andreyev – the life of man guillaume apollinaire – the breasts of tiresias ( les mamelles de tirésias , written 1903 , first performed ) bruce bairnsfather and arthur elliot – the better 'ole j . m . barrie – dear brutus dorothy brandon – wild heather ferdinand bruckner – der herr in den nebeln hall caine – the woman thou gavest me gilbert cannan – everybody 's husband jean cocteau – parade john drinkwater – x 0 : a night of the trojan war john galsworthy – justice mary p . hamlin and george arliss – hamilton georg kaiser the burghers of calais ( die bürger von calais , written 1913 , first performed ) the coral ( die koralle ) from morning to midnight ( von morgens bis mitternachts , written 1912 , first performed ) somerset maugham – our betters a . a . milne – wurzel-flummery luigi pirandello – right you are ( if you think so ) gertrude stein – an exercise in analysis ridgely torrence – three plays for a negro theater brita von horn – kring drottningen jesse lynch williams – why marry ? . poetry . lascelles abercrombie – emblems of love may wedderburn cannan – in war time t . s . eliot – prufrock , and other observations robert graves – fairies and fusiliers ivor gurney – severn and somme james weldon johnson – fifty years and other poems joseph lee – work-a-day warriors edna st . vincent millay - renascense and other poems siegfried sassoon – the old huntsman , and other poems alan seeger ( posthumously ) – poems ( including '' i have a rendezvous with death '' ) edward thomas ( posthumously ) – poems ( including '' adlestrop '' ) william watson – the man who saw : and other poems arising out of the war w . b . yeats – the wild swans at coole . non-fiction . g . k . chesterton – a short history of england daniel jones – an english pronouncing dictionary henry festing jones – samuel butler , author of erewhon ( 1835–1902 ) theodore wesley koch – books in camp , trench and hospital rudolf otto – the idea of the holy ( das heilige ) alfred w . pollard – shakespeare 's fight with the pirates and the problems of the transmission of his text d'arcy wentworth thompson – on growth and form francis brett young – marching on tanga . births . january 6 – maeve brennan , irish-born short story writer and journalist ( died 1993 ) february 11 – sidney sheldon , american novelist ( died 2007 ) february 25 – anthony burgess , english novelist ( died 1993 ) march 1 – robert lowell , american poet ( died 1977 ) march 17 – carlo cassola , italian novelist ( died 1987 ) april 9 – johannes bobrowski , german author ( died 1965 ) may 16 – juan rulfo , mexican fiction writer ( died 1986 ) june 7 – gwendolyn brooks , american poet ( died 2000 ) june 13 – augusto roa bastos , paraguayan novelist ( died 2005 ) june 16 – katharine graham , american journalist ( died 2001 ) june 28 – a . e . hotchner , american writer ( died 2020 ) july 8 – j . f . powers , american author ( died 1999 ) july 15 – robert conquest , english-born historian and poet ( died 2015 ) august 24 – ruth park , new zealand children 's writer ( died 2010 ) october 5 – magda szabó , hungarian novelist , dramatist and essayist ( died 2007 ) october 24 – denys val baker , welsh writer ( died 1984 ) october 31 – patience gray , english cookery and travel writer ( died 2005 ) november 3 – conor cruise o'brien , irish biographer and political writer ( died 2008 ) november 12 – leila berg , english children 's author and education writer ( died 2015 ) november 28 – marni hodgkin ( marion rous ) , american children 's book editor ( died 2015 ) december 14 – tove ditlevsen , danish poet and fiction writer ( suicide 1976 ) december 21 diana athill , english author and editor ( died 2019 ) heinrich böll , german nobel prize winning novelist ( died 1985 ) december 27 – onni palaste , finnish novelist ( died 2009 ) date unknown – fadwa tuqan , palestinian poet ( died 2003 ) . deaths . january 15 – william de morgan , english novelist and potter ( born 1839 ) january 18 – andrew murray , south african minister , writer and teacher ( born 1828 ) february 16 – octave mirbeau , french novelist and critic ( born 1848 ) april 3 – arthur graeme west , english war poet and military writer ( killed in action , born 1891 ) april 9 edward thomas , british poet and prose writer ( killed in action , born 1878 ) r . e . vernède , english war poet ( killed in action , born 1875 ) april 14 – l . l . zamenhof , polish creator of esperanto ( born 1859 ) april 17 – jane barlow , irish novelist and poet ( born 1856 ) april 21 – f . c . burnand , english dramatist and editor ( born 1836 ) stedman , jane w . '' burnand , sir francis cowley ( 1836–1917 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , september 2004 , accessed 8 june 2014 , may 13 – gustav jaeger , german naturalist ( born 1832 ) june 1 – joseph ashby-sterry , english poet and comic writer ( born 1836 or 1838 ) june 18 – titu maiorescu , romanian culture critic , philosopher , and politician ( born 1840 ) july 31 francis ledwidge , english war poet ( killed in action , born 1887 ) hedd wyn , welsh-language poet ( killed in action , born 1887 ) september 28 – t . e . hulme , english critic ( killed in action , born 1883 ) october 16 – walter flex , german author ( died of wounds , born 1887 ) november 15 – émile durkheim , french sociologist ( born 1858 ) november 16 – georges de peyrebrune , french novelist ( born 1841 ) nelly sanchez , georges de peyrebrune : de la société des gens de lettres au jury du prix vie heureuse , classiques garnier , '' correspondances et mémoires '' , 2016 , 177 pages november 18 – adrien bertrand , french novelist ( died of wounds , born 1888 ) december 27 – george diamandy , romanian journalist , dramatist , and political figure ( angina , born 1867 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : karl adolph gjellerup , henrik pontoppidan . see also . world war i in literature . references .