Edward R. Murrow

death . a chain smoker throughout his life , murrow was almost never seen without his trademark camel cigarette . it was reported that he smoked between sixty and sixty-five cigarettes a day , equivalent to roughly three packs . see it now was the first television program to have a report about the connection between smoking and cancer . during the show , murrow said , '' i doubt i could spend a half hour without a cigarette with any comfort or ease . '' he developed lung cancer and lived for two years after an operation to remove his left lung . murrow died at his home in pawling , new york on april 27 , 1965 , two days after his 57th birthday . obituary variety , april 28 , 1965 , p . 60 . his colleague and friend eric sevareid said of him , '' he was a shooting star ; and we will live in his afterglow a very long time . '' cbs carried a memorial program , which included a rare on-camera appearance by william s . paley , founder of cbs . honors . murrow was repeatedly honored with the peabody award , jointly and individually . in 1947 murrow received the alfred i . dupont award . all dupont–columbia award winners , columbia journalism school . retrieved august 6 , 2013 . in 1964 , murrow was awarded the presidential medal of freedom . 1964 : paul white award , radio television digital news association he was made an honorary knight commander of the order of the british empire by queen elizabeth ii on march 5 , 1965 and received similar honors from the governments of belgium , france , and sweden . he received '' special '' george polk awards in 1951 and 1952 . in 1967 , he was awarded the grammy award for best spoken word album for his edward r . murrow – a reporter remembers , vol . i the war years . the edward r . murrow award , given annually by the radio television digital news association is named in his honor ; it is presented for '' outstanding achievement in electronic journalism '' the edward r . murrow college of communication at washington state university is named in his honor . the edward r . murrow park in washington , d.c . is named in his memory . edward r . murrow high school in brooklyn , new york is named after him . murrow boulevard is a large thoroughfare in the heart of greensboro , north carolina . the last remaining voice of america broadcast transmitting site in the united states is named after him . a statue of native edward r . murrow stands on the grounds of the greensboro historical museum . in 1984 , murrow was posthumously inducted into the television hall of fame . in 1996 , murrow was ranked 22 on tv guides '' 50 greatest tv stars of all time '' list . the edward r . murrow park in pawling , new york was named for him . legacy . after murrow 's death , the edward r . murrow center of public diplomacy was established at tufts university 's fletcher school of law and diplomacy . murrow 's library and selected artifacts are housed in the murrow memorial reading room that also serves as a special seminar classroom and meeting room for fletcher activities . murrow 's papers are available for research at the digital collections and archives at tufts , which has a website for the collection and makes many of the digitized papers available through the tufts digital library . the center awards murrow fellowships to mid-career professionals who engage in research at fletcher , ranging from the impact of the '' new world information order '' debate in the international media during the 1970s and 1980s to , currently , telecommunications policies and regulation . many distinguished journalists , diplomats , and policymakers have spent time at the center , among them the late david halberstam , who worked on his pulitzer prize-winning book , the best and the brightest , as a writer-in-residence in the early 1970s . veteran journalist crocker snow jr . was named director of the murrow center in 2005 . in 1971 the rtnda ( now radio television digital news association ) established the edward r . murrow awards , honoring outstanding achievement in the field of electronic journalism . there are four other awards also known as the '' edward r . murrow award , '' including the one at washington state university . in 1973 , murrow 's alma mater , washington state university , dedicated its expanded communication facilities the edward r . murrow communications center and established the annual edward r . murrow symposium . in 1990 , the wsu department of communications became the edward r . murrow school of communication , followed on july 1 , 2008 , with the school becoming the edward r . murrow college of communication . veteran international journalist lawrence pintak is the college 's founding dean . several movies were filmed , either completely or partly about murrow . in 1986 , hbo broadcast the made-for-cable biographical movie , murrow , with daniel j . travanti in the title role , and robert vaughn in a supporting role . in the 1999 film the insider , lowell bergman , a television producer for the cbs news magazine 60 minutes , played by al pacino , is confronted by mike wallace , played by christopher plummer , after an exposé of the tobacco industry is edited down to suit cbs management and then , itself , gets exposed in the press for the self-censorship . wallace passes bergman an editorial printed in the new york times , which accuses cbs of betraying the legacy of edward r . murrow . good night , and good luck is a 2005 oscar-nominated film directed , co-starring and co-written by george clooney about the conflict between murrow and joseph mccarthy on see it now . murrow is portrayed by actor david strathairn , who received an oscar nomination . in the film , murrow 's conflict with cbs boss william paley occurs immediately after his skirmish with mccarthy . in 2003 fleetwood mac released '' say you will , '' featuring the track '' murrow turning over in his grave . '' on the track , lindsey buckingham reflects on current news media and claims ed murrow would be shocked at the bias and sensationalism displayed by reporters in the new century if he was alive . works . filmography . around the world in 80 days ( 1956 ) as prologue narrator the lost class of '59 ( 1959 ) as himself montgomery speaks his mind ( 1959 ) as himself sink the bismarck ! ( 1960 ) as himself ( final film role ) murrow ( 1986 ) made-for-cable biographical movie directed by jack gold , originally broadcast by hbo good night , and good luck , 2005 historical drama portraying the conflict between murrow and u.s . senator joseph mccarthy , especially relating to the anti-communist senator 's actions with the senate permanent subcommittee on investigations , directed by george clooney . books . rise of the vice presidency by irving g . williams , introduced by edward r . murrow ( washington : public affairs press , 1956 ) . references . external links and references . the life and work of edward r . murrow : an archives exhibit , digital collections and archives , tufts university murrow papers at mount holyoke college . biographies and articles . edward r . murrow bibliography via uc berkeley library new york times obituary , april 28 , 1965 museum of broadcast communications , biography edward r . murrow and the time of his time by joseph wershba , cbs news writer , editor and correspondent , beginning in 1944 ; producer of 60 minutes ( 1968–1988 ) state library of north carolina , biography . programs . original this i believe transcript , 1951 . murrow radio broadcasts on earthstation 1 , selected world war ii broadcasts from london and germany