Neologism

background . neologisms are often formed by combining existing words ( see compound noun and adjective ) or by giving words new and unique suffixes or prefixes . neologisms can also be formed by blending words , for example , '' brunch '' is a blend of the words '' breakfast '' and '' lunch '' , or through abbreviation or acronym , by intentionally rhyme with existing words or simply through playing with sounds . neologisms can become popular through memetics , through mass media , the internet , and word of mouth , including academic discourse in many fields renowned for their use of distinctive jargon , and often become accepted parts of the language . other times , they disappear from common use just as readily as they appeared . whether a neologism continues as part of the language depends on many factors , probably the most important of which is acceptance by the public . it is unusual for a word to gain popularity if it does not clearly resemble other words . when a word or phrase is no longer '' new '' , it is no longer a neologism . neologisms may take decades to become '' old '' , however . opinions differ on exactly how old a word must be to lose its status as a neologism . history and meaning . the term neologism is first attested in english in 1772 , borrowed from french néologisme ( 1734 ) . being called the '' neologist-in-chief '' . in an academic sense , there is no professional neologist , because the study of such things ( cultural or ethnic vernacular , for example ) is interdisciplinary . anyone such as a lexicography or an etymology might study neologisms , how their uses span the scope of human expression , and how , due to science and technology , they spread more rapidly than ever before in the present times . the term neologism has a broader meaning which also includes '' a word which has gained a new meaning '' . sally barr ebest writing from a to z : the easy-to-use reference handbook 1999– p . 449 '' a neologism is a newly coined word or phrase or a new usage of an existing word or phrase . '' lynne bowker , jennifer pearson working with specialized language 2002 p . 214 '' neologisms can also be formed in another way , however , by assigning a new meaning to an existing word . '' sometimes , the latter process is called semantic shifting , or semantic extension . ole nedergaard thomsen competing models of linguistic change : evolution and beyond 2006 – p . 68 '' extensions , by contrast , are applications of extant means in new usage . note that since individual speakers differ in their command of their shared tradition of speaking , one person 's extension may be experienced by another as a neologism '' michael d . picone anglicisms , neologisms and dynamic french 1996 – p . 3 '' proceeding now to the task of defining terms , i will begin with the more general term 'neologism ' . a neologism is any new word , morpheme or locution and any new meaning for a pre-existent word , morpheme or locution that appears in a language . likewise , any semantic extension of a pre-existent word , morpheme or locution . but is also , by accepted definition , a neologism . '' neologisms are distinct from a person 's idiolect , one 's unique patterns of vocabulary , grammar , and pronunciation . neologisms are usually introduced when it is found that a specific notion is lacking a term , or when the existing vocabulary lacks detail , or when a speaker is unaware of the existing vocabulary . the law , governmental bodies , and technology have a relatively high frequency of acquiring neologisms . another trigger that motivates the coining of a neologism is to disambiguate a term which may be unclear due to having many meanings . cowan , robert . '' shadow of a doubt : a phantom caesura in horace odes 4.14 . '' classical journal , the 109.4 ( 2014 ) : 407-417 . . literature . neologisms may come from a word used in the narrative of fiction such as novels and short stories . examples include '' grok '' ( to intuitively understand ) from the science fiction novel about a martian , entitled stranger in a strange land by robert a . heinlein ; '' mcjob '' ( precarious , poorly-paid employment ) from generation x : tales for an accelerated culture by douglas coupland ; '' cyberspace '' ( widespread , interconnected digital technology ) from neuromancer by william gibson dunn , robin . 2003 : '' the generative edge . '' foundation 87 ( 2003 ) : 73–93 . and '' quark '' ( slavic slang for '' rubbish '' ; german for a type of dairy product ) from james joyce 's finnegans wake . the title of a book may become a neologism , for instance , catch-22 ( from the title of joseph heller 's novel ) . alternatively , the author 's name may give rise to the neologism , although the term is sometimes based on only one work of that author . this includes such words as '' orwellian '' ( from george orwell , referring to his dystopian novel nineteen eighty-four ) and '' kafkaesque '' ( from franz kafka ) , which refers to arbitrary , complex bureaucratic systems . names of famous characters are another source of literary neologisms , e.g . quixotic ( referring to the romantic and misguided don quixote in don quixote by miguel de cervantes ) , scrooge ( from the avaricious main character in charles dickens ' a christmas carol ) and pollyanna ( from the unfailingly optimistic character in eleanor h . porter 's book of the same name ) . cant . polari is a cant used by some actors , circus performers , and the gay subculture to communicate without outsiders understanding . some polari terms have crossed over into mainstream slang , in part through their usage in pop song lyrics and other works . example include : acdc , barney , blag , butch , camp , khazi , cottaging , hoofer , mince , ogle , scarper , slap , strides , tod , rough trade ( rough trade ) . verlan , ( verlan is the reverse of the expression '' l'envers '' ) is a type of argot in the french language , featuring inversion of syllables in a word , and is common in slang and youth language . it rests on a long french tradition of transposing syllables of individual words to create slang words . some verlan words , such as meuf ( '' femme '' , which means '' woman '' roughly backwards ) , have become so commonplace that they have been included in the petit larousse . see the petit larousse itself . these words are also given on the larousse website : keuf meuf ripou like any slang , the purpose of verlan is to create a somewhat secret language that only its speakers can understand . words becoming mainstream is counterproductive . as a result , such newly common words are re-verlanised : reversed a second time . the common meuf became feumeu . . popular culture . neologism development may be spurred , or at least spread , by popular culture . examples of pop-culture neologisms include the american alt-right ( 2010s ) , the canadian portmanteau '' snowmageddon '' ( 2009 ) , the russian parody '' monstration '' ( ca . 2004 ) , santorum ( c . 2003 ) . neologisms spread mainly through their exposure in mass media . the genericize of brand names , such as '' coke '' for coca-cola , '' kleenex '' for kleenex facial tissue , and '' xerox '' for xerox photocopier , all spread through their popular use being enhanced by mass media . sayadi , forough ( april 2011 ) . '' the translation of neologisms '' . translation journal . however , in some limited cases , words break out of their original communities and spread through social media . '' doggo-lingo '' , a term still below the threshold of a neologism according to merriam-webster , is an example of the latter which has specifically spread primarily through facebook group and twitter account use . boddy , jessica ( april 23 , 2017 ) . '' dogs are doggos : an internet language built around love for the puppers '' . national public radio . the suspected origin of this way of referring to dogs stems from a facebook group founded in 2008 and gaining popularity in 2014 in australia . in australian english it is common to use diminutives , often ending in –o , which could be where doggo-lingo was first used . the term has grown so that merriam-webster has acknowledged its use but notes the term needs to be found in published , edited work for a longer period of time before it can be deemed a new word , making it the perfect example of a neologism . . translations . because neologisms originate in one language , translations between languages can be difficult . in the scientific community , where english is the predominant language for published research and studies , like-sounding translations ( referred to as 'naturalization ' ) are sometimes used . alternatively , the english word is used along with a brief explanation of meaning . the four translation methods are emphasized in order to translate neologisms : transliteration , transcription , the use of analogues , calque or loan translation . when translating from english to other languages , the naturalization method is most often used . lindblad , jonathan . 2017 . '' translation strategies of h.p . lovecraft ’ s neologisms into japanese . '' networked digital library of theses & dissertations the most common way that professional translators translate neologisms is through the think aloud protocol ( tap ) , wherein translators find the most appropriate and natural sounding word through speech . as such , translators can use potential translations in sentences and test them with different structures and syntax . correct translations from english for specific purposes into other languages is crucial in various industries and legal systems . inaccurate translations can lead to 'translation asymmetry ' or misunderstandings and miscommunication . many technical glossaries of english translations exist to combat this issue in the medical , judicial , and technological fields . . other uses . in psychiatry and neuroscience , the term neologism is used to describe words that have meaning only to the person who uses them , independent of their common meaning . this can be seen in schizophrenia , where a person may replace a word with a nonsensical one of their own invention , e.g . “ i got so angry i picked up a dish and threw it at the geshinker . ” the use of neologisms may also be due to aphasia acquired after brain damage resulting from a stroke or head injury . b butterworth , hesitation and the production of verbal paraphasias and neologisms in jargon aphasia . brain lang , 1979 . see also . aureation blend word language planning nonce word mondegreen morphology ( linguistics ) phono-semantic matching portmanteau protologism retronym sniglet syllabic abbreviations word formation . references . external links . neologisms in journalistic text interpretation of the formation of internet neologisms fowler , h.w . , '' the king 's english '' , chapter i . vocabulary , neologism algeo , john . fifty years among the new words : a dictionary of neologisms , 1941–1991 wordspy rice university neologisms database neologisms from the internet – with esther dyson , jimmy wales and more .