Leopold and Loeb

prison . leopold and loeb initially were held at joliet prison . although they were kept apart as much as possible , the two managed to maintain a friendship behind bars . leopold later was transferred to stateville penitentiary , and loeb was transferred there as well . once reunited , the two expanded the prison school system , adding a high school and junior college curriculum . leopold worked in the prison hospital and showed that he was the perfect model prisoner . he also organized the prison library . leopold later said that all his good work later in life was a way of making up for his earlier crime . life & death in prison by marilyn bardsley . crime library & nbsp ; — courtroom television network , llc . retrieved april 11 , 2007 . . loeb 's death in prison . on january 28 , 1936 , loeb was attacked by fellow inmate james day with a straight razor in a shower room and died soon after in the prison hospital . day claimed that loeb had assaulted him , but he was unharmed while loeb sustained more than 50 wounds , including defensive wounds on his arms and hands ; his throat had been slashed from behind . news accounts suggested loeb had propositioned day ; the authorities , perhaps embarrassed by publicity sensationalizing alleged decadent behavior in the prison , ruled that day had been defending himself . while some have claimed that newsman ed lahey wrote this clever lead for the chicago daily news – '' richard loeb , despite his erudition , today ended his sentence with a proposition '' – no evidence that this lead was ever published has been found , and actual copy from that date reads otherwise . on february 19 , 1936 , in a column printed in the syracuse journal , mark hellinger wrote '' i must tell you of the line that came to me from an unknown correspondent in chicago . this anonymous contributor said he had the absolute low-down on the recent slaying of dickie loeb . seems that loeb made a slight mistake in grammar . he ended a sentence in a propositon . '' other newspapers at the time appeared to praise day , who was later tried and acquittal of loeb 's murder . leopold and loeb : the crime of the century p . 301 a sexual motive for the killing has been suggested . there is no evidence that loeb was a sexual predator while in prison , but day later was caught at least once in a prison sexuality . leopold , loeb & the crime of the century , pg 302 in his autobiography life plus 99 years , leopold ridiculed day 's claim that loeb had attempted to sexually assault him . this was echoed by the prison 's catholic chaplaina confidant of loeb'swho said that it was more likely that day had attacked loeb after loeb rebuffed his advances . leopold , loeb & the crime of the century , pg 293 . leopold 's prison life . although leopold continued with his work in prison after loeb 's death , he suffered from depression . he became a model prisoner and made many significant contributions to improving conditions at stateville penitentiary . these included reorganizing the prison library , revamping the schooling system and teaching its students , and volunteer work in the prison hospital . in 1944 , leopold volunteered for the stateville penitentiary malaria study ; he was deliberately inoculated with malaria pathogens and then subjected to several experimental malaria treatments . higdon , h . the crime of the century ( 1975 ) . new york , putnams . asin : b000lzx0ro pp . 281-317 . in the early 1950s , author meyer levin , a classmate at the university of chicago , requested leopold 's cooperation in writing a novel based on the franks murder . leopold responded that he did not wish his story told in fictionalized form , but offered levin a chance to contribute to his own memoir , which was in progress . levin , unhappy with that suggestion , went ahead with his book alone , despite leopold 's express objections . the novel , titled compulsion , levin , m . compulsion ( 1956 ) . new york , simon & schuster . was published in 1956 . levin portrayed leopold ( under the pseudonym judd steiner ) as a brilliant but deeply disturbed teenager , psychologically driven to kill because of his troubled childhood and an obsession with loeb . leopold later wrote that reading levin 's book made him '' physically sick.more than once i had to lay the book down and wait for the nausea to subside . i felt as i suppose a man would feel if he were exposed stark-naked under a strong spotlight before a large audience . '' in nathan leopold 's own words . umkc archive . retrieved august 1 , 2014 . leopold 's autobiography life plus 99 years was published in 1958 , leopold , n . life plus 99 years ( 1958 ) . new york , doubleday & co . as part of his campaign to win parole . in beginning his account with the immediate aftermath of the crime , he engendered widespread criticism for his deliberate refusal ( expressly stated in the book ) to recount his childhood or to describe any details of the murder . higdon h . leopold and loeb : the crime of the century . university of illinois press ( 1999 ) , p . 262 . he also was accused of writing the book solely as a means of rehabilitating his public image by ignoring the dark side of his past . larson ej . murder will out : rethinking the right of publicity through one classic case . rutgers law review archive . retrieved february 11 , 2015 . . leopold 's post-prison years . after 33 years and numerous unsuccessful parole petitions , leopold was released in march 1958 . in april , he attempted to set up the leopold foundation , to be funded by royalties from life plus 99 years , '' to aid emotionally disturbed , retarded , or delinquent youths . '' daily defender ; may 29 , 1958 ; p9 the state of illinois voided his charter , however , on grounds that it violated the terms of his parole . chicago daily tribune , july 16 , 1958 p.23 in 1959 , leopold sought unsuccessfully to block production of the compulsion ( 1959 film ) on the grounds that levin 's book had privacy law , defamed him , profited from his life story , and '' intermingled fact and fiction to such an extent that they were indistinguishable . '' eventually the illinois supreme court ruled against him , leopold v . levin , 259 n.e.2d 250 , 255–56 ( ill . 1970 ) ; gertz , supra note 48 , at 166 . holding that leopold , as the confessed perpetrator of the '' crime of the century '' could not reasonably demonstrate that any book had injured his reputation . the brethren service commission , a church of the brethren affiliated program , accepted leopold as a medical technician at its hospital in puerto rico . he expressed his appreciation in an article : '' to me the brethren service commission offered the job , the home , and the sponsorship without which a man can not be paroled . but it gave me so much more than that , the companionship , the acceptance , the love which would have rendered a violation of parole almost impossible . '' '' the companionship , the acceptance . '' the brethren encyclopedia . vol . 2 1983 . print . he was known as '' nate '' to neighbors and co-workers at castañer general hospital in adjuntas , puerto rico , where he worked as a laboratory and x-ray assistant . subsequently , leopold moved to santurce , puerto rico and married a widowed florist . he earned a master 's degree at the university of puerto rico , then taught classes there ; became a researcher in the social service program of puerto rico 's department of health ; worked for an urban renewal and housing agency ; and did research on leprosy at the university of puerto rico 's school of medicine . higdon ( 1975 ) , p.332 leopold was also active in the natural history society of puerto rico , traveling throughout the island to observe its birdlife . in 1963 , he published checklist of birds of puerto rico and the virgin islands . while he spoke of his intention to write a book titled reach for a halo about his life following prison , he never did . higdon ( 1975 ) , p.361 leopold died of a diabetes-related heart attack on august 29 , 1971 at the age of 66 . his corneas were donated . . in popular culture . the franks murder has inspired works of film , theatre , and fiction , including the 1929 play rope by patrick hamilton , performed on bbc television in 1939 , and alfred hitchcock 's rope ( film ) in 1948 . a fictionalized version of the events formed the basis of meyer levin 's 1956 novel compulsion and its 1959 film adaptation . in 1957 , two more fictionalized novels were released : nothing but the night by james yaffe and little brother fate by mary-carter roberts . never the sinner , john logan 's 1988 play , was based on contemporary newspaper accounts of the case , and included an explicit portrayal of leopold and loeb 's sexual relationship . in 2019 , the story was fictionally retold again in the third season of the sinner . in his book murder most queer ( 2014 ) , theater scholar jordan schildcrout examines changing attitudes toward homosexuality in various theatrical and cinematic representations of the leopold and loeb case . other works influenced by the case include richard wright 's 1940 novel native son , the columbo episode '' columbo goes to college '' ( 1990 ) , the drama murdoch mysteries , tom kalin 's 1992 film swoon , michael haneke 's 1997 austrian film funny games and the 2008 international remake , the 2002 black comedy r.s.v.p . , barbet schroeder 's murder by numbers ( 2002 ) , daniel clowes 's 2005 graphic novel ice haven , and stephen dolginoff 's 2005 off-broadway musical thrill me : the leopold and loeb story .