MicroRNA

history . the first mirna was discovered in the early 1990s . however , mirnas were not recognized as a distinct class of biological regulators until the early 2000s . mirna research revealed different sets of mirnas expressed in different cell types and tissues and multiple roles for mirnas in plant and animal development and in many other biological processes . aberrant mirna expression are implicated in disease states . mirna-based therapies are under investigation . the first mirna was discovered in 1993 by a group led by ambros and including lee and feinbaum . however , additional insight into its mode of action required simultaneously published work by ruvkun 's team , including wightman and ha . these groups published back-to-back papers on the lin-4 gene , which was known to control the timing of c . elegans larval development by repressing the lin-14 gene . when lee et al . isolated the lin-4 mirna , they found that instead of producing an mrna encoding a protein , it produced short non-coding rnas , one of which was a ~22-nucleotide rna that contained sequences partially complementary to multiple sequences in the 3 ' utr of the lin-14 mrna . this complementarity was proposed to inhibit the translation of the lin-14 mrna into the lin-14 protein . at the time , the lin-4 small rna was thought to be a nematode idiosyncrasy . in 2000 , a second small rna was characterized : let-7 rna , which represses lin-41 to promote a later developmental transition in c . elegans . the let-7 rna was found to be conserved in many species , leading to the suggestion that let-7 rna and additional '' small temporal rnas '' might regulate the timing of development in diverse animals , including humans . a year later , the lin-4 and let-7 rnas were found to be part of a large class of small rnas present in c . elegans , drosophila and human cells . the many rnas of this class resembled the lin-4 and let-7 rnas , except their expression patterns were usually inconsistent with a role in regulating the timing of development . this suggested that most might function in other types of regulatory pathways . at this point , researchers started using the term '' microrna '' to refer to this class of small regulatory rnas . the first human disease associated with deregulation of mirnas was chronic lymphocytic leukemia.in this disorder the mirnas have a dual role working as both tumor suppressors and oncogene . nomenclature . under a standard nomenclature system , names are assigned to experimentally confirmed mirnas before publication . the prefix '' mir '' is followed by a dash and a number , the latter often indicating order of naming . for example , mir-124 was named and likely discovered prior to mir-456 . a capitalized '' mir- '' refers to the mature form of the mirna , while the uncapitalized '' mir- '' refers to the pre-mirna and the -mirna . the mirnas encoding genes are also named using the same three-letter prefix according to the conventions of the organism gene nomenclature . for examples , the official mirnas gene names in some organisms are “ mir-1 in c . elegans and drosophila , mir-1 in rattus norvegicus and mir-25 in human . mirnas with nearly identical sequences except for one or two nucleotides are annotated with an additional lower case letter . for example , mir-124a is closely related to mir-124b . for example : : hsa-mir-181a : : hsa-mir-181b : pre-mirnas , -mirnas and genes that lead to 100 % identical mature mirnas but that are located at different places in the genome are indicated with an additional dash-number suffix . for example , the pre-mirnas -mir-194-1 and -mir-194-2 lead to an identical mature mirna -mir-194 ) but are from genes located in different genome regions . species of origin is designated with a three-letter prefix , e.g . , -mir-124 is a human ( homo sapiens ) mirna and oar-mir-124 is a sheep ( ovis aries ) mirna . other common prefixes include '' v '' for viral ( mirna encoded by a viral genome ) and '' d '' for drosophila mirna ( a fruit fly commonly studied in genetic research ) . when two mature micrornas originate from opposite arms of the same pre-mirna and are found in roughly similar amounts , they are denoted with a -3p or -5p suffix . ( in the past , this distinction was also made with '' s '' ( sense ) and '' as '' ( antisense ) ) . however , the mature microrna found from one arm of the hairpin is usually much more abundant than that found from the other arm , in which case , an asterisk following the name indicates the mature species found at low levels from the opposite arm of a hairpin . for example , mir-124 and mir-124 share a pre-mirna hairpin , but much more mir-124 is found in the cell . targets . plant mirnas usually have near-perfect pairing with their mrna targets , which induces gene repression through cleavage of the target transcripts . in contrast , animal mirnas are able to recognize their target mrnas by using as few as 6–8 nucleotides ( the seed region ) at the 5 ' end of the mirna , which is not enough pairing to induce cleavage of the target mrnas . combinatorial regulation is a feature of mirna regulation in animals . a given mirna may have hundreds of different mrna targets , and a given target might be regulated by multiple mirnas . estimates of the average number of unique messenger rnas that are targets for repression by a typical mirna vary , depending on the estimation method , but multiple approaches show that mammalian mirnas can have many unique targets . for example , an analysis of the mirnas highly conserved in vertebrates shows that each has , on average , roughly 400 conserved targets . likewise , experiments show that a single mirna species can reduce the stability of hundreds of unique messenger rnas . other experiments show that a single mirna species may repress the production of hundreds of proteins , but that this repression often is relatively mild ( much less than 2-fold ) . the first human disease discovered to be associated with deregulation of mirnas was chronic lymphoid leukemia . other b cell malignancies followed . biogenesis . as many as 40 % of mirna genes may lie in the introns or even exons of other genes . these are usually , though not exclusively , found in a sense orientation , and thus usually are regulated together with their host genes . the dna template is not the final word on mature mirna production : 6 % of human mirnas show rna editing ( isomir ) , the site-specific modification of rna sequences to yield products different from those encoded by their dna . this increases the diversity and scope of mirna action beyond that implicated from the genome alone . transcription . mirna genes are usually transcribed by rna polymerase ii ( pol ii ) . the polymerase often binds to a promoter found near the dna sequence , encoding what will become the hairpin loop of the pre-mirna . the resulting transcript is 5 ' cap with a specially modified nucleotide at the 5 ' end , polyadenylated with multiple adenosines ( a poly ( a ) tail ) , and spliced . animal mirnas are initially transcribed as part of one arm of an ∼80 nucleotide rna stem-loop that in turn forms part of a several hundred nucleotide-long mirna precursor termed a pri-mirna . when a stem-loop precursor is found in the 3 ' utr , a transcript may serve as a pri-mirna and a mrna . rna polymerase iii ( pol iii ) transcribes some mirnas , especially those with upstream alu sequences , transfer rnas ( trnas ) , and mammalian wide interspersed repeat ( mwir ) promoter units . . nuclear processing . a single pri-mirna may contain from one to six mirna precursors . these hairpin loop structures are composed of about 70 nucleotides each . each hairpin is flanked by sequences necessary for efficient processing . the double-stranded rna ( dsrna ) structure of the hairpins in a pri-mirna is recognized by a nuclear protein known as pasha ( protein ) ( dgcr8 or '' pasha '' in invertebrates ) , named for its association with digeorge syndrome . dgcr8 associates with the enzyme drosha , a protein that cuts rna , to form the microprocessor complex . in this complex , dgcr8 orients the catalytic rnase iii domain of drosha to liberate hairpins from pri-mirnas by cleaving rna about eleven nucleotides from the hairpin base ( one helical dsrna turn into the stem ) . the product resulting has a two-nucleotide overhang at its 3 ' end ; it has 3 ' hydroxyl and 5 ' phosphate groups . it is often termed as a pre-mirna ( precursor-mirna ) . sequence motifs downstream of the pre-mirna that are important for efficient processing have been identified . pre-mirnas that are spliced directly out of introns , bypassing the microprocessor complex , are known as '' mirtrons . '' originally thought to exist only in drosophila and c . elegans , mirtrons have now been found in mammals . as many as 16 % of pre-mirnas may be altered through nuclear rna editing . most commonly , enzymes known as adenosine deaminases acting on rna ( adars ) catalyze adenosine to inosine ( a to i ) transitions . rna editing can halt nuclear processing ( for example , of pri-mir-142 , leading to degradation by the ribonuclease tudor-sn ) and alter downstream processes including cytoplasmic mirna processing and target specificity ( e.g . , by changing the seed region of mir-376 in the central nervous system ) . . nuclear export . pre-mirna hairpins are exported from the nucleus in a process involving the nucleocytoplasmic shuttler xpo5 . this protein , a member of the karyopherin , recognizes a two-nucleotide overhang left by the rnase iii enzyme drosha at the 3 ' end of the pre-mirna hairpin . exportin-5-mediated transport to the cytoplasm is energy-dependent , using guanosine triphosphate ( gtp ) bound to the ran protein . . cytoplasmic processing . in the cytoplasm , the pre-mirna hairpin is cleaved by the rnase iii enzyme dicer . this endoribonuclease interacts with 5 ' and 3 ' ends of the hairpin and cuts away the loop joining the 3 ' and 5 ' arms , yielding an imperfect mirna : mirna duplex about 22 nucleotides in length . overall hairpin length and loop size influence the efficiency of dicer processing . the imperfect nature of the mirna : mirna pairing also affects cleavage . some of the g-rich pre-mirnas can potentially adopt the g-quadruplex structure as an alternative to the canonical stem-loop structure . for example , human pre-mirna 92b adopts a g-quadruplex structure which is resistant to the dicer mediated cleavage in the cytoplasm . although either strand of the duplex may potentially act as a functional mirna , only one strand is usually incorporated into the rna-induced silencing complex ( risc ) where the mirna and its mrna target interact . while the majority of mirnas are located within the cell , some mirnas , commonly known as circulating mirnas or extracellular mirnas , have also been found in extracellular environment , including various biological fluids and cell culture media . . biogenesis in plants . mirna biogenesis in plants differs from animal biogenesis mainly in the steps of nuclear processing and export . instead of being cleaved by two different enzymes , once inside and once outside the nucleus , both cleavages of the plant mirna are performed by a dicer homolog , called dicer-like1 ( dl1 ) . dl1 is expressed only in the nucleus of plant cells , which indicates that both reactions take place inside the nucleus . before plant mirna : mirna duplexes are transported out of the nucleus , its 3 ' overhangs are methylated by a methyltransferase called hua-enhancer1 ( hen1 ) . the duplex is then transported out of the nucleus to the cytoplasm by a protein called hasty ( hst ) , an exportin 5 homolog , where they disassemble and the mature mirna is incorporated into the risc . . rna-induced silencing complex . the mature mirna is part of an active rna-induced silencing complex ( risc ) containing dicer and many associated proteins . risc is also known as a microrna ribonucleoprotein complex ( mirnp ) ; a risc with incorporated mirna is sometimes referred to as a '' mirisc . '' dicer processing of the pre-mirna is thought to be coupled with unwinding of the duplex . generally , only one strand is incorporated into the mirisc , selected on the basis of its thermodynamic instability and weaker base-pairing on the 5 ' end relative to the other strand . the position of the stem-loop may also influence strand choice . the other strand , called the passenger strand due to its lower levels in the steady state , is denoted with an asterisk ( ) and is normally degraded . in some cases , both strands of the duplex are viable and become functional mirna that target different mrna populations . members of the argonaute ( ago ) protein family are central to risc function . argonautes are needed for mirna-induced silencing and contain two conserved rna binding domains : a paz domain that can bind the single stranded 3 ' end of the mature mirna and a piwi domain that structurally resembles ribonuclease h and functions to interact with the 5 ' end of the guide strand . they bind the mature mirna and orient it for interaction with a target mrna . some argonautes , for example human ago2 , cleave target transcripts directly ; argonautes may also recruit additional proteins to achieve translational repression . the human genome encodes eight argonaute proteins divided by sequence similarities into two families : ago ( with four members present in all mammalian cells and called e1f2c/hago in humans ) , and piwi ( found in the germ line and hematopoietic stem cells ) . additional risc components include trbp human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) transactivating response rna ( tar ) binding protein , pact ( protein activator of the interferon-induced protein kinase ) , the smn complex , fragile x syndrome ( fmrp ) , tudor staphylococcal nuclease-domain-containing protein ( tudor-sn ) , the putative dna helicase mov10 , and the rna recognition motif containing protein tnrc6b . . mode of silencing and regulatory loops . gene silencing may occur either via mrna degradation or preventing mrna from being translated . for example , mir16 contains a sequence complementary to the au-rich element found in the 3'utr of many unstable mrnas , such as tnf alpha or gm-csf . it has been demonstrated that given complete complementarity between the mirna and target mrna sequence , ago2 can cleave the mrna and lead to direct mrna degradation . in the absence of complementarity , silencing is achieved by preventing translation . the relation of mirna and its target mrna ( s ) can be based on the simple negative regulation of a target mrna , but it seems that a common scenario is the use of a '' coherent feed-forward loop '' , '' mutual negative feedback loop '' ( also termed double negative loop ) and '' positive feedback/feed-forward loop '' . some mirnas work as buffers of random gene expression changes arising due to stochastic events in transcription , translation and protein stability . such regulation is typically achieved by the virtue of negative feedback loops or incoherent feed-forward loop uncoupling protein output from mrna transcription . turnover . turnover of mature mirna is needed for rapid changes in mirna expression profiles . during mirna maturation in the cytoplasm , uptake by the argonaute protein is thought to stabilize the guide strand , while the opposite ( or '' passenger '' ) strand is preferentially destroyed . in what has been called a '' use it or lose it '' strategy , argonaute may preferentially retain mirnas with many targets over mirnas with few or no targets , leading to degradation of the non-targeting molecules . decay of mature mirnas in caenorhabditis elegans is mediated by the 5'-to-3 ' exoribonuclease xrn2 , also known as rat1p . in plants , sdn ( small rna degrading nuclease ) family members degrade mirnas in the opposite ( 3'-to-5 ' ) direction . similar enzymes are encoded in animal genomes , but their roles have not been described . several mirna modifications affect mirna stability . as indicated by work in the model organism arabidopsis thaliana ( thale cress ) , mature plant mirnas appear to be stabilized by the addition of methyl moieties at the 3 ' end . the 2'-o-conjugated methyl groups block the addition of uracil ( u ) residues by uridyltransferase enzymes , a modification that may be associated with mirna degradation . however , uridylation may also protect some mirnas ; the consequences of this modification are incompletely understood . uridylation of some animal mirnas has been reported . both plant and animal mirnas may be altered by addition of adenine ( a ) residues to the 3 ' end of the mirna . an extra a added to the end of mammalian mir-122 , a liver-enriched mirna important in hepatitis c , stabilizes the molecule and plant mirnas ending with an adenine residue have slower decay rates . . cellular functions . ) located in 5'utr region . the actual work of rna silencing is performed by risc in which the main catalytic subunit is one of the argonaute proteins ( ago ) , and mirna serves as a template for recognizing specific mrna sequences . the function of mirnas appears to be in gene regulation . for that purpose , a mirna is complementary to a part of one or more messenger rnas ( mrnas ) . animal mirnas are usually complementary to a site in the 3 ' utr whereas plant mirnas are usually complementary to coding regions of mrnas . perfect or near perfect base pairing with the target rna promotes cleavage of the rna . this is the primary mode of plant mirnas . in animals the match-ups are imperfect . for partially complementary micrornas to recognise their targets , nucleotides 2–7 of the mirna ( its 'seed region ' ) must be perfectly complementary . animal mirnas inhibit protein translation of the target mrna ( this is present but less common in plants ) . partially complementary micrornas can also speed up deadenylation , causing mrnas to be degraded sooner . while degradation of mirna-targeted mrna is well documented , whether or not translational repression is accomplished through mrna degradation , translational inhibition , or a combination of the two is hotly debated . recent work on mir-430 in zebrafish , as well as on bantam-mirna and mir-9 in drosophila cultured cells , shows that translational repression is caused by the disruption of translation initiation , independent of mrna deadenylation . mirnas occasionally also cause histone modification and dna methylation of promoter sites , which affects the expression of target genes . nine mechanisms of mirna action are described and assembled in a unified mathematical model : cap-40s initiation inhibition ; 60s ribosomal unit joining inhibition ; elongation inhibition ; ribosome drop-off ( premature termination ) ; co-translational nascent protein degradation ; sequestration in p-bodies ; mrna decay ( destabilisation ) ; mrna cleavage ; transcriptional inhibition through microrna-mediated chromatin reorganization followed by gene silencing . it is often impossible to discern these mechanisms using experimental data about stationary reaction rates . nevertheless , they are differentiated in dynamics and have different kinetic signatures . unlike plant micrornas , the animal micrornas target diverse genes . however , genes involved in functions common to all cells , such as gene expression , have relatively fewer microrna target sites and seem to be under selection to avoid targeting by micrornas . dsrna can also activate gene expression , a mechanism that has been termed '' small rna-induced gene activation '' or rnaa . dsrnas targeting gene promoters can induce potent transcriptional activation of associated genes . this was demonstrated in human cells using synthetic dsrnas termed small activating rnas ( sarnas ) , mirnas plays a role in posttranslational gene silencing by targeting genes in the pathogenesis of cerebral ischemia , such as the inflammatory , angiogenesis , and apoptotic pathway . . alcoholism . the vital role of mirnas in gene expression is significant to addiction , specifically alcoholism . chronic alcohol abuse results in persistent changes in brain function mediated in part by alterations in gene expression . mirna global regulation of many downstream genes deems significant regarding the reorganization or synaptic connections or long term neural adaptations involving the behavioral change from alcohol consumption to withdrawal and/or dependence . up to 35 different mirnas have been found to be altered in the alcoholic post-mortem brain , all of which target genes that include the regulation of the cell cycle , apoptosis , cell adhesion , neural development and cell signaling . altered mirna levels were found in the medial prefrontal cortex of alcohol-dependent mice , suggesting the role of mirna in orchestrating translational imbalances and the creation of differentially expressed proteins within an area of the brain where complex cognitive behavior and decision making likely originate . mirnas can be either upregulated or downregulated in response to chronic alcohol use . mir-206 expression increased in the prefrontal cortex of alcohol-dependent rats , targeting the transcription factor brain-derived neurotrophic factor ( bdnf ) and ultimately reducing its expression . bdnf plays a critical role in the formation and maturation of new neurons and synapses , suggesting a possible implication in synapse growth/synaptic plasticity in alcohol abusers . mir-155 , important in regulating alcohol-induced neuroinflammation responses , was found to be upregulated , suggesting the role of microglia and inflammatory cytokines in alcohol pathophysiology . downregulation of mir-382 was found in the nucleus accumbens , a structure in the basal forebrain significant in regulating feelings of reward that power motivational habits . mir-382 is the target for the dopamine receptor d1 ( drd1 ) , and its overexpression results in the upregulation of drd1 and delta fosb , a transcription factor that activates a series of transcription events in the nucleus accumbens that ultimately result in addictive behaviors . alternatively , overexpressing mir-382 resulted in attenuated drinking and the inhibition of drd1 and delta fosb upregulation in rat models of alcoholism , demonstrating the possibility of using mirna-targeted pharmaceuticals in treatments . . obesity . mirnas play crucial roles in the regulation of stem cell progenitors differentiating into adipocytes . studies to determine what role pluripotent stem cells play in adipogenesis , were examined in the immortalized human bone marrow-derived stromal cell line hmsc-tert20 . decreased expression of mir-155 , mir-221 , and mir-222 , have been found during the adipogenic programming of both immortalized and primary hmscs , suggesting that they act as negative regulators of differentiation . conversely , ectopic expression of the mirnas 155,221 , and 222 significantly inhibited adipogenesis and repressed induction of the master regulators pparγ and ccaat/enhancer-binding protein alpha ( cebpa ) . this paves the way for possible genetic obesity treatments . another class of mirnas that regulate insulin resistance , obesity , and diabetes , is the let-7 family . let-7 accumulates in human tissues during the course of aging . when let-7 was ectopically overexpressed to mimic accelerated aging , mice became insulin-resistant , and thus more prone to high fat diet-induced obesity and diabetes . in contrast when let-7 was inhibited by injections of let-7-specific antagomirs , mice become more insulin-sensitive and remarkably resistant to high fat diet-induced obesity and diabetes . not only could let-7 inhibition prevent obesity and diabetes , it could also reverse and cure the condition . these experimental findings suggest that let-7 inhibition could represent a new therapy for obesity and type 2 diabetes . hemostasis . mirnas also play crucial roles in the regulation of complex enzymatic cascades including the hemostatic blood coagulation system . large scale studies of functional mirna targeting have recently uncovered rationale therapeutic targets in the hemostatic system . . non-coding rnas . when the human genome project mapped its first chromosome in 1999 , it was predicted the genome would contain over 100,000 protein coding genes . however , only around 20,000 were eventually identified . since then , the advent of bioinformatics approaches combined with genome tiling studies examining the transcriptome , systematic sequencing of full length cdna libraries and experimental validation ( including the creation of mirna derived antisense oligonucleotides called antagomirs ) have revealed that many transcripts are non-protein-coding rna , including several snornas and mirnas . . viruses . viral micrornas play an important role in the regulation of gene expression of viral and/or host genes to benefit the virus . hence , mirnas play a key role in host–virus interactions and pathogenesis of viral diseases . the expression of transcription activators by human herpesvirus-6 dna is believed to be regulated by viral mirna . . target prediction . mirnas can bind to target messenger rna ( mrna ) transcripts of protein-coding genes and negatively control their translation or cause mrna degradation . it is of key importance to identify the mirna targets accurately . a comparison of the predictive performance of eighteen in silico algorithms is available . large scale studies of functional mirna targeting suggest that many functional mirnas can be missed by target prediction algorithms .