Crowd psychology

origins . the first debate in crowd psychology began in rome at the first international congress of criminal anthropology on 16 november 1885 . the meeting was dominated by cesare lombroso and his fellow italians , who emphasized the biological determinates . : '' lombroso detailed before the first congress his theories of the physical anomalies of criminals and his classification of criminals as 'born criminals ' , or criminals by occasion and mattoids . ferri expressed his view of crime as degeneration more profound than insanity , for in most insane persons the primitive moral sense has survived the wreck of their intelligence . along similar lines were the remarks of benedickt , sergi and marro . '' a weak response was offered by the french , who put forward an environmental theory of human psychology . : '' m . anguilli called attention to the importance of the influence of the social environment upon crime . professor alexandre lacassagne thought that the atavistic and degenerative theories as held by the italian school were exaggerations and false interpretations of the facts , and that the important factor was the social environment . '' reicher , stephen . '' the psychology of crowd dynamics '' , blackwell handbook of social psychology : group processes . ed . michael a . hogg & r . scott tindale . blackwell publishers inc . malden , mass . page 185 . in paris during 10–17 august 1889 , the italian school received a stronger rebuke of their biological theories during the 2nd international congress of criminal anthropology . a radical divergence in the views between the italian and the french schools was reflected in the proceedings . : '' professor lombroso laid stress upon epilepsy in connection with his theory of the 'born criminal ' . professor léonce pierre manouvrier characterized lombroso 's theory as nothing but the exploded science of phrenology . the anomalies observed by lombroso were met with in honest men as well as criminals , manouvrier claimed , and there is no physical difference between them . baron raffaele garofalo , drill , alexandre lacassagne and benedikt opposed lombroso 's theories in whole or in part . pugliese found the cause of crime in the failure of the criminal to adapt himself to his social surroundings , and benedikt , with whom tarde agreed , held that physical defects were not marks of the criminal qua criminal . '' edward lindsey , '' the international congress of criminal anthropology : a review '' , journal of the american institute of criminal law and criminology , vol . 1 , no . 4 ( nov . , 1910 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 578–583 . northwestern university . retrieved 24 may 2013 . it is in this context that you have a debate between scipio sighele , an italian lawyer and gabriel tarde , a french magistrate on how to determine criminal responsibility in the crowd and hence who to arrest . ( sighele , 1892 ; tarde , 1890 , 1892 , 1901 ) literature on crowds and crowd behavior appeared as early as 1841 , with the publication of charles mackay 's book extraordinary popular delusions and the madness of crowds . the attitude towards crowds underwent an adjustment with the publication of hippolyte taine 's six-volume the origins of contemporary france ( 1875 ) . in particular taine 's work helped to change the opinions of his contemporaries on the actions taken by the crowds during the 1789 revolution . many europeans held him in great esteem . while it is difficult to directly link his works to crowd behavior , it may be said that his thoughts stimulated further study of crowd behavior . however , it was not until the latter half of the 19th century that scientific interest in the field gained momentum . french physician and anthropologist gustave le bon became its most-influential theorist . nye , r . a . ( 1975 ) . the origins of crowd psychology . london : sage . barrows , susanna ( 1981 ) . '' distorting mirrors – visions of the crowd '' . new haven : yale university press . van ginneken , jaap ( 1992 ) . crowds , psychology and politics 1871–1899 . new york : cambridge university press . . types of crowds . there is limited research into the types of crowd and crowd membership and there is no consensus as to the classification of types of crowds . two recent scholars , momboisse ( 1967 ) and berlonghi ( 1995 ) focused upon purpose of existence to differentiate among crowds . momboisse developed a system of four types : casual , conventional , expressive , and aggressive . berlonghi classified crowds as spectator , demonstrator , or escaping , to correlate to the purpose for gathering . another approach to classifying crowds is sociologist herbert blumer 's system of emotional intensity . he distinguishes four types of crowds : casual , conventional , expressive , and acting . his system is dynamic in nature . that is , a crowd changes its level of emotional intensity over time , and therefore , can be classed in any one of the four types . generally , researchers in crowd psychology have focused on the negative aspects of crowds , but not all crowds are volatile or negative in nature . for example , in the beginning of the socialist movement crowds were asked to put on their sunday dress and march silently down the street . a more-modern example involves the sit-ins during the civil rights movement . crowds can reflect and challenge the held ideologies of their sociocultural environment . they can also serve integrative social functions , creating temporary communities . crowds can be active ( mobs ) or passive ( audiences ) . active crowds can be further divided into aggressive , escapist , acquisitive , or expressive mobs . aggressive mobs are often violent and outwardly focused . examples are football riots and the 1992 los angeles riots . escapist mobs are characterized by a large number of panicked people trying to get out of a dangerous situation . acquisitive mobs occur when large numbers of people are fighting for limited resources . an expressive mob is any other large group of people gathering for an active purpose . civil disobedience , rock concerts , and religious revivals all fall under this category . . theoretical perspectives . gustave le bon . le bon held that crowds existed in three stages : submergence , contagion , and suggestion . during submergence , the individuals in the crowd lose their sense of individual self and personal responsibility . this is quite heavily induced by the anonymity of the crowd . contagion refers to the propensity for individuals in a crowd to unquestioningly follow the predominant ideas and emotions of the crowd . in le bon 's view , this effect is capable of spreading between '' submerged '' individuals much like a disease . suggestion refers to the period in which the ideas and emotions of the crowd are primarily drawn from a shared unconscious ideology . crowd members become susceptible to any passing idea or emotion . this behavior comes from an archaic shared unconscious and is therefore uncivilized in nature . it is limited by the moral and cognitive abilities of the least capable members . le bon believed that crowds could be a powerful force only for destruction . additionally , le bon and others have indicated that crowd members feel a lessened sense of legal culpability , due to the difficulty in prosecuting individual members of a mob . in short , the individual submerged in the crowd loses self control as the '' collective mind '' takes over and makes the crowd member capable of violating personal or social norms . le bon 's idea that crowds foster anonymity and generate emotion has been contested by some critics . clark mcphail points out studies which show that '' the madding crowd '' does not take on a life of its own , apart from the thoughts and intentions of members . norris johnson , after investigating the who concert disaster concluded that the crowd was composed of many small groups of people mostly trying to help each other . additionally , le bon 's theory ignores the socio-cultural context of the crowd , which some theorists argue can disempower social change . r . brown disputes the assumption that crowds are homogenous , suggesting instead that participants exist on a continuum , differing in their ability to deviate from social norms . . freudian theory . sigmund freud 's crowd behavior theory primarily consists of the idea that becoming a member of a crowd serves to unlock the unconscious mind . this occurs because the super-ego , or moral center of consciousness , is displaced by the larger crowd , to be replaced by a charismatic crowd leader . mcdougall argues similarly to freud , saying that simplistic emotions are widespread , and complex emotions are rarer . in a crowd , the overall shared emotional experience reverts to the least common denominator ( lcd ) , leading to primitive levels of emotional expression . this organizational structure is that of the '' primal horde '' —pre-civilized society—and freud states that one must rebel against the leader ( re-instate the individual morality ) in order to escape from it . moscovici expanded on this idea , discussing how dictators such as mao zedong and joseph stalin have used mass psychology to place themselves in this '' horde leader '' position . theodor adorno criticized the belief in a spontaneity of the masses : according to him , the masses were an artificial product of '' administrated '' modern life . the ego of the bourgeois subject dissolved itself , giving way to the id and the '' de-psychologized '' subject . furthermore , adorno stated the bond linking the masses to the leader through the spectacle is feigned : '' when the leaders become conscious of mass psychology and take it into their own hands , it ceases to exist in a certain sense . & nbsp ; . just as little as people believe in the depth of their hearts that the jews are the devil , do they completely believe in their leader . they do not really identify themselves with him but act this identification , perform their own enthusiasm , and thus participate in their leader 's performance . & nbsp ; . it is probably the suspicion of this fictitiousness of their own 'group psychology ' which makes fascist crowds so merciless and unapproachable . if they would stop to reason for a second , the whole performance would go to pieces , and they would be left to panic . '' t . w . adorno , '' freudian theory and the pattern of fascist propaganda . '' in vol . iii of psychoanalysis and the social sciences . ed . géza roheim . new york : international universities press , 1951 , pp . & nbsp ; 408–433 . reprinted in vol . viii of gesammelte schriften . frankfurt : suhrkamp verlag , 1975 , and in the culture industry : selected essays on mass culture . ed . j . m . berstein . london : routledge , 1991 . . deindividuation theory . deindividuation theory is largely based on the ideas of gustave le bon and argues that in typical crowd situations , factors such as anonymity , group unity , and arousal can weaken personal controls ( e.g . guilt , shame , self-evaluating behavior ) by distancing people from their personal identities and reducing their concern for social evaluation . this lack of restraint increases individual sensitivity to the environment and lessens rational forethought , which can lead to antisocial behavior . more recent theories have stated that deindividuation hinges upon a person being unable , due to situation , to have strong awareness of their self as an object of attention . this lack of attention frees the individual from the necessity of normal social behavior . american social psychologist leon festinger and colleagues first elaborated the concept of deindividuation in 1952 . it was further refined by american psychologist philip zimbardo , who detailed why mental input and output became blurred by such factors as anonymity , lack of social constraints , and sensory overload . zimbardo , philip ( 1969 ) . '' the human choice – individuation , reason and order versus deindividuation , impulse and chaos '' . nebraska symposium on motivation , vol . 17 , pp . & nbsp ; 237–307 . zimbardo 's famous stanford prison experiment is a strong argument for the power of deindividuation . further experimentation has had mixed results when it comes to aggressive behaviors , and has instead shown that the normative expectations surrounding the situations of deindividuation influence behavior ( i.e . if one is deindividuated as a kkk member , aggression increases , but if it is as a nurse , aggression does not increase ) . a further distinction has been proposed between public and private deindividuation . when private aspects of self are weakened , one becomes more subject to crowd impulses , but not necessarily in a negative way . it is when one no longer attends to the public reaction and judgement of individual behavior that antisocial behavior is elicited . philip zimbardo also did not view deindividuation exclusively as a group phenomenon , and applied the concept to suicide , murder , and interpersonal hostility . . convergence theory . convergence theory holds that crowd behavior is not a product of the crowd , but rather the crowd is a product of the coming together of like-minded individuals . floyd allport argued that '' an individual in a crowd behaves just as he would behave alone , only more so . '' convergence theory holds that crowds form from people of similar dispositions , whose actions are then reinforced and intensified by the crowd . convergence theory claims that crowd behavior is not irrational ; rather , people in crowds express existing beliefs and values so that the mob reaction is the rational product of widespread popular feeling . however , this theory is questioned by certain research which found that people involved in the 1970s riots were less likely than nonparticipant peers to have previous convictions . critics of this theory report that it still excludes the social determination of self and action , in that it argues that all actions of the crowd are born from the individuals ' intents . . emergent norm theory . ralph h . turner and lewis killian put forth the idea that norms emerge from within the crowd . emergent norm theory states that crowds have little unity at their outset , but during a period of milling about , key members suggest appropriate actions , and following members fall in line , forming the basis for the crowd 's norms . key members are identified through distinctive personalities or behaviors . these garner attention , and the lack of negative response elicited from the crowd as a whole stands as tacit agreement to their legitimacy . the followers form the majority of the mob , as people tend to be creatures of conformity who are heavily influenced by the opinions of others . this has been shown in the conformity studies conducted by sherif and asch . crowd members are further convinced by the universality phenomenon , described by allport as the persuasive tendency of the idea that if everyone in the mob is acting in such-and-such a way , then it can not be wrong . emergent norm theory allows for both positive and negative mob types , as the distinctive characteristics and behaviors of key figures can be positive or negative in nature . an antisocial leader can incite violent action , but an influential voice of non-violence in a crowd can lead to a mass sit-in . when a crowd described as above targets an individual , anti-social behaviors may emerge within its members . a major criticism of this theory is that the formation and following of new norms indicates a level of self-awareness that is often missing in the individuals in crowds ( as evidenced by the study of deindividuation ) . another criticism is that the idea of emergent norms fails to take into account the presence of existent sociocultural norms . additionally , the theory fails to explain why certain suggestions or individuals rise to normative status while others do not . . social identity theory . the social identity theory posits that the self is a complex system made up primarily of the concept of membership or non-membership in various social groups . these groups have various moral and behavioral values and norms , and the individual 's actions depend on which group membership ( or non-membership ) is most personally salient at the time of action . this influence is evidenced by findings that when the stated purpose and values of a group changes , the values and motives of its members also change . crowds are an amalgam of individuals , all of whom belong to various overlapping groups . however , if the crowd is primarily related to some identifiable group ( such as christians or hindus or muslims or civil-rights activists ) , then the values of that group will dictate the crowd 's action . in crowds which are more ambiguous , individuals will assume a new social identity as a member of the crowd . this group membership is made more salient by confrontation with other groups - a relatively common occurrence for crowds . the group identity serves to create a set of standards for behavior ; for certain groups violence is legitimate , for others it is unacceptable . this standard is formed from stated values , but also from the actions of others in the crowd , and sometimes from a few in leadership-type positions . a concern with this theory is that while it explains how crowds reflect social ideas and prevailing attitudes , it does not explain the mechanisms by which crowds enact to drive social change . . see also . references . further reading . borch , christian . the politics of crowds : an alternative history of sociology . cambridge university press 2012 , buford , bill . among the thugs : the experience , and the seduction , of crowd violence . new york , ny : w . w . norton & co . , inc . ( 1990 ) challenger , r . , clegg , c . w . , & robinson , m . a . ( 2009 ) . understanding crowd behaviours . multi-volume report for the uk government 's cabinet office . london : cabinet office . johnson , norris r . '' panic at 'the who concert stampede ' : an empirical assessment . '' social problems . vol . 34 , no . 4 ( october 1987 ) : 362–373 . gustave le bon ( 1895 ) psychology of crowds . improved edition www.sparklingbooks.com . everett dean martin , the behavior of crowds , a psychological study , harper & brothers publishers , new york , 1920 . mc phail , clark , the myth of the madding crowd , new york , aldine de gruyter , 1991 . serge moscovici psychologie des minorités actives , p.u.f . , 1979 l'age des foules : un traité historique de psychologie des masses , fayard , 1981 ( about gustave le bon 's invention of crowd psychology and gabriel tarde ) howard rheingold , smart mob , 2003 james surowiecki , the wisdom of crowds , 2004 . jaap van ginneken , crowds , psychology and politics 1871–1899 , new york : cambridge university press , 1992 . jaap van ginneken , kurt baschwitz - a pioneer of communication studies and social psychology . amsterdam : amsterdam university press , 2017 . external links . dr . j . p van de sande , on crowds ( dutch and english ) '' crowd disasters '' by prof . dr . g . keith still understanding crowd behaviours , gov.uk