Michael Eisner

early life . eisner was born to an affluent , secular jewish family pinsky , mark i . , the gospel according to disney : faith , trust , and pixie dust p . 123-129 financial post : '' lawrence solomon : the jewish press and israel '' by lawrence solomon 30 november 2012 in mount kisco , new york . his mother , margaret ( née dammann ) , film reference : michael d . eisner biography ( 1942- ) whose family founded the american safety razor company , was the president of the irvington institute , a hospital that treated children with rheumatic fever . his father , lester eisner , jr . , was a lawyer and regional administrator of the united states department of housing and urban development . new york times : '' lester eisner jr . dies at 73 ; former u.s . housing official '' 19 june 1987 his great-grandfather , sigmund eisner obituary , ny times , 6 january 1925 sigmund eisner , established a very successful clothing company that was one of the first uniform suppliers to the boy scouts of america and his great-grandmother , bertha weiss , belonged to an immigrant family that established the town of red bank , new jersey . he was raised on park avenue in manhattan . he attended the allen-stevenson school kindergarten through ninth grade followed by the lawrenceville school in 10th through his senior year and graduated from denison university in 1964 with a bachelor of arts degree in english . he is a member of the delta upsilon fraternity and credits much of his accomplishments to his time at keewaydin ( camp ) for boys in vermont . eisner has one sister , margot freedman . . career . abc and paramount . after two brief stints at nbc and cbs , barry diller at abc hired eisner as assistant to the national programming director . eisner moved up the ranks , eventually becoming a senior vice president in charge of programming and development . in 1976 , diller , who had by then moved on to become chairman of paramount pictures , recruited eisner from abc and made him president and coo of the movie studio . during his tenure at paramount , the studio produced films such as saturday night fever , grease , the star trek film franchise , ordinary people , raiders of the lost ark , an officer and a gentleman , flashdance , terms of endearment , beverly hills cop , and footloose , and tv shows such as happy days , laverne & shirley , cheers and family ties . diller left paramount on september 30 , 1984 , and , as his protégé , eisner expected to assume diller 's position as studio chief . when he was passed over for the job , though , he left to look for work elsewhere and lobbied for the position of ceo of the walt disney company . the walt disney company . following the death of founder walt disney in 1966 , the walt disney company narrowly survived several takeover attempts . its shareholders sid bass and roy e . disney brought in eisner ( as ceo and chairman of the board ) and former warner bros . chief frank wells ( as president ) to replace ron w . miller in 1984 and strengthen the company . eisner brought in jeffrey katzenberg as walt disney studios chairman . a couple of years after becoming chairman and ceo , eisner became the presenter of the wonderful world of disney tv series , making him the public face of the company as well as its top executive . although eisner was not a performer by profession , studio management believed he could do the hosting job , after filming a test video with his wife jane and a member of his executive team ( which required multiple takes ) . eisner hired michael kay , a director of political commercials for then-u.s . senator bill bradley , to help him improve his on-camera performance . as a result , eisner was well recognized by children at the company 's theme parks who often asked him for autographs . during the second half of the 1980s and early 1990s , eisner revitalized disney . beginning with the films who framed roger rabbit ( 1988 ) and the little mermaid ( 1989 ) , its flagship animation studio enjoyed a disney renaissance . disney also broadened its adult offerings in film when it acquired miramax films in 1993 . under eisner , disney acquired many other media sources , including abc , most of espn , and the muppets franchise . the abc purchase in particular reunited eisner with his former employer . in the early part of the 1990s , eisner and his partners set out to plan '' the disney decade '' which was to feature new parks around the world , existing park expansions , new films , and new media investments . while some of the proposals were completed , most were not . those completed included the euro disney resort ( now disneyland paris ) , disney-mgm studios ( now disney 's hollywood studios ) , disney 's california adventure park ( now disney california adventure ) , disney-mgm studios paris ( eventually opened in 2002 as walt disney studios park ) , and various film projects including a who framed roger rabbit franchise . in 1993 , katzenberg had lobbied to become eisner 's second in command , which would have meant moving frank wells from president to vice chairman , to which eisner 'replied that wells would feel '' hurt '' in that scenario' . wells died in a helicopter crash in 1994 . when eisner did not appoint katzenberg to wells ' now available post , this caused tensions between the two that led to katzenberg being fired later that year . katzenberg went on to found dreamworks skg , with partners steven spielberg and david geffen . eisner recalled that '' roy e . disney walt disney 's nephew and a force on disney 's board who eisner says '' could be a troublemaker '' , who did not like him at all — i forget the reason , but jeffrey probably did not treat him the way that roy would have wanted to be treated — said to me , 'if you make him the president , i will start a proxy fight . ' '' eisner then recruited his friend michael ovitz , one of the founders of the creative artists agency , to be president , with minimal involvement from disney 's board of directors ( which at the time included oscar-winning actor sidney poitier , the ceo of hilton hotels corporation stephen bollenbach , former u.s . senator george mitchell , yale dean robert a . m . stern , and eisner 's predecessors raymond watson and card walker ) . ovitz lasted only 14 months , and left disney in december 1996 , via a '' no fault termination '' with a severance package of 38 million in cash , and 3 million stock options worth roughly 100 million , at the time of ovitz 's departure . the ovitz episode engendered a long running derivative suit , which finally concluded in june 2006 , almost 10 years later . chancellor william b . chandler , iii of the delaware court of chancery , despite describing eisner 's behavior as falling '' far short of what shareholders expect and demand from those entrusted with a fiduciary position . '' found in favor of eisner and the rest of the disney board because they had not violated the duty of care owed by a corporation 's officers and board to its shareholders . . '' save disney '' campaign and retirement . on november 30 , 2003 , roy e . disney , the son and nephew of co-founders roy o . disney and walt disney , respectively , resigned from his positions as disney vice chairman and chairman of walt disney animation studios . his reason for resigning was his feeling that there was too much micromanagement within the studio , flops with the abc television network , the company 's growing timidity in the theme park business , the walt disney company turning into a '' rapacious , soul-less '' company , eisner 's refusal to establish a clear succession plan , as well as the studio releasing a string of box-office movie failures starting in the year 2000 . on march 3 , 2004 , at disney 's annual shareholders ' meeting , a surprising and unprecedented 43 % of disney 's shareholders , predominantly rallied by former board members roy disney and stanley gold , withheld their proxies to re-elect eisner to the board . disney 's board then gave the chairmanship position to board member george mitchell . however , the board did not immediately remove eisner as chief executive . on march 13 , 2005 , eisner announced that he would step down as ceo one year before his contract expired , and handed off day-to-day duties to bob iger , who had been serving as disney 's president and chief operating officer and had just been selected by the directors as the ceo-designate . eisner did not initially promote iger as a successor until after the board put pressure on eisner to resign . eisner remarked that '' i would not have agreed to leave if it had n't been bob . because of governance , they wanted a big search and everything . … and by the end of the search , it was clear that i was able to convince the board—our newly constructed board—that bob was great . '' on september 30 , eisner resigned both as an executive and as a member of the board of directors , and , severing all formal ties with the company , he waived his contractual rights to perks such as the use of a corporate jet and an office at the company 's burbank headquarters . in january 2006 , disney 's corporate headquarters in burbank was renamed to team disney in eisner 's honor . . post-disney . on october 7 , 2005 , eisner was a guest host for the charlie rose talk show . his guests were john travolta and his ex-boss , barry diller . '' the charlie rose show '' episode dated 7 october 2005 ( 2005 ) impressed with eisner 's performance , cnbc president mark hoffman hired eisner in early 2006 to host his own talk show , conversations with michael eisner . the show mostly featured ceos , political leaders , artists and actors , cnbc website until its cancellation in 2009 . eisner was also an executive producer of the show . in march 2007 , eisner 's investment firm , the tornante company , launched a studio , vuguru , that produces and distributes videos for the internet , portable media devices and cell phones . in october 2007 , eisner , through his tornante company investment firm , partnered with madison dearborn partners in the acquisition of topps , the bubble-gum and collectibles firm . he produced a mockumentary style show about his takeover of the topps company , called '' back on topps . '' his investment firm has funded the critically acclaimed netflix series bojack horseman . the college of education at california state university , northridge is named in his honor . in 2009 , eisner used his own money to produce a claymation show called glenn martin , dds . he was inducted into the television academy hall of fame in 2012 . portsmouth football club ( 2017–present ) . in march 2017 came the revelation that eisner was interested in a takeover of portsmouth f.c . , a football club in the south of england that had fallen on hard times after years of poor ownership , before being taken over by its fans . the club released a statement on 23 march 2017 that eisner and his tornante company were in an exclusivity agreement . on 3 august 2017 came confirmation that eisner and his tornante company had completed their purchase for a reported fee of £5.67 million . . personal life . after college in 1964 , he met his future wife , jane breckenridge , a unitarian of swedish and scottish descent . they have three sons : breck , eric and anders eisner . michael eisner ( i ) – biography . books . work in progress ( 1998 ) camp ( 2005 ) working together ( 2010 ) . awards and recognition . 1994 golden plate award of the academy of achievement 2001 honor award from the national building museum 2004 uja-federation of new york 's steven j . ross humanitarian of the year award received a star on the hollywood walk of fame in 2008 . inducted into the television academy hall of fame on march 1 , 2012 . . references . further reading . the disney touch : how a daring management team revived an entertainment empire by ron grover ( richard d . irwin , inc . , 1991 ) , disneywar by james b . stewart , simon & schuster , 2005 , work in progress by michael eisner with tony schwartz ( random house , 1998 ) , . external links . eisner foundation michael eisner 's interview on plum