First law of thermodynamics

history . the first law of thermodynamics was developed empirically over about half a century . a main aspect of the struggle was to deal with the previously proposed caloric theory of heat . in 1840 , germain hess stated a hess 's law for the so-called 'heat of reaction ' for chemical reactions . his law was later recognized as a consequence of the first law of thermodynamics , but hess 's statement was not explicitly concerned with the relation between energy exchanges by heat and work . in 1842 , julius robert von mayer made a statement that has been rendered by truesdell ( 1980 ) in the words '' in a process at constant pressure , the heat used to produce expansion is universally interconvertible with work '' , but this is not a general statement of the first law . truesdell , c . a . ( 1980 ) , pp . 157–158 . mayer , robert ( 1841 ) . paper : 'remarks on the forces of nature '' ; as quoted in : lehninger , a . ( 1971 ) . bioenergetics – the molecular basis of biological energy transformations , 2nd . ed . london : the benjamin/cummings publishing company . the first full statements of the law came in 1850 from rudolf clausius and from william rankine . some scholars consider rankine 's statement less distinct than that of clausius . . original statements : the '' thermodynamic approach '' . the original 19th-century statements of the first law of thermodynamics appeared in a conceptual framework in which transfer of energy as heat was taken as a primitive notion , not defined or constructed by the theoretical development of the framework , but rather presupposed as prior to it and already accepted . the primitive notion of heat was taken as empirically established , especially through calorimetry regarded as a subject in its own right , prior to thermodynamics . jointly primitive with this notion of heat were the notions of empirical temperature and thermal equilibrium . this framework also took as primitive the notion of transfer of energy as work . this framework did not presume a concept of energy in general , but regarded it as derived or synthesized from the prior notions of heat and work . by one author , this framework has been called the '' thermodynamic '' approach . bailyn , m . ( 1994 ) , p . 79 . the first explicit statement of the first law of thermodynamics , by rudolf clausius in 1850 , referred to cyclic thermodynamic processes . : :in all cases in which work is produced by the agency of heat , a quantity of heat is consumed which is proportional to the work done ; and conversely , by the expenditure of an equal quantity of work an equal quantity of heat is produced . clausius , r . ( 1850 ) , page 373 , translation here taken from truesdell , c . a . ( 1980 ) , pp . 188–189 . clausius also stated the law in another form , referring to the existence of a function of state of the system , the internal energy , and expressed it in terms of a differential equation for the increments of a thermodynamic process . clausius , r . ( 1850 ) , p . 384 , equation ( iia . ) . this equation may be described as follows : : :in a thermodynamic process involving a closed system , the increment in the internal energy is equal to the difference between the heat accumulated by the system and the work done by it . because of its definition in terms of increments , the value of the internal energy of a system is not uniquely defined . it is defined only up to an arbitrary additive constant of integration , which can be adjusted to give arbitrary reference zero levels . this non-uniqueness is in keeping with the abstract mathematical nature of the internal energy . the internal energy is customarily stated relative to a conventionally chosen standard reference state of the system . the concept of internal energy is considered by bailyn to be of '' enormous interest '' . its quantity can not be immediately measured , but can only be inferred , by differencing actual immediate measurements . bailyn likens it to the energy states of an atom , that were revealed by bohr 's energy relation hν e n − e n . in each case , an unmeasurable quantity ( the internal energy , the atomic energy level ) is revealed by considering the difference of measured quantities ( increments of internal energy , quantities of emitted or absorbed radiative energy ) . bailyn , m . ( 1994 ) , p . 80 . . conceptual revision : the '' mechanical approach '' . in 1907 , george h . bryan wrote about systems between which there is no transfer of matter ( closed systems ) : '' definition . when energy flows from one system or part of a system to another otherwise than by the performance of mechanical work , the energy so transferred is called heat . '' bryan , g . h . ( 1907 ) , p . 47 . also bryan had written about this in the enzyklopädie der mathematischen wissenschaften , volume 3 , p . 81 . also in 1906 jean baptiste perrin wrote about it in bull . de la société français de philosophie , volume 6 , p . 81 . this definition may be regarded as expressing a conceptual revision , as follows . this was systematically expounded in 1909 by constantin carathéodory , whose attention had been drawn to it by max born . largely through born 's influence , this revised conceptual approach to the definition of heat came to be preferred by many twentieth-century writers . it might be called the '' mechanical approach '' . bailyn , m . ( 1994 ) , pp . 65 , 79 . energy can also be transferred from one thermodynamic system to another in association with transfer of matter . born points out that in general such energy transfer is not resolvable uniquely into work and heat moieties . in general , when there is transfer of energy associated with matter transfer , work and heat transfers can be distinguished only when they pass through walls physically separate from those for matter transfer . the '' mechanical '' approach postulates the law of conservation of energy . it also postulates that energy can be transferred from one thermodynamic system to another adiabatically as work , and that energy can be held as the internal energy of a thermodynamic system . it also postulates that energy can be transferred from one thermodynamic system to another by a path that is non-adiabatic , and is unaccompanied by matter transfer . initially , it '' cleverly '' ( according to bailyn ) refrains from labelling as 'heat ' such non-adiabatic , unaccompanied transfer of energy . it rests on the primitive notion of walls , especially adiabatic walls and non-adiabatic walls , defined as follows . temporarily , only for purpose of this definition , one can prohibit transfer of energy as work across a wall of interest . then walls of interest fall into two classes , ( a ) those such that arbitrary systems separated by them remain independently in their own previously established respective states of internal thermodynamic equilibrium ; they are defined as adiabatic ; and ( b ) those without such independence ; they are defined as non-adiabatic . bailyn , ( 1994 ) , p . 82 . this approach derives the notions of transfer of energy as heat , and of temperature , as theoretical developments , not taking them as primitives . it regards calorimetry as a derived theory . it has an early origin in the nineteenth century , for example in the work of helmholtz , helmholtz , h . ( 1847 ) . but also in the work of many others . . conceptually revised statement , according to the mechanical approach . the revised statement of the first law postulates that a change in the internal energy of a system due to any arbitrary process , that takes the system from a given initial thermodynamic state to a given final equilibrium thermodynamic state , can be determined through the physical existence , for those given states , of a reference process that occurs purely through stages of adiabatic work . the revised statement is then : :for a closed system , in any arbitrary process of interest that takes it from an initial to a final state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium , the change of internal energy is the same as that for a reference adiabatic work process that links those two states . this is so regardless of the path of the process of interest , and regardless of whether it is an adiabatic or a non-adiabatic process . the reference adiabatic work process may be chosen arbitrarily from amongst the class of all such processes . this statement is much less close to the empirical basis than are the original statements , but is often regarded as conceptually parsimonious in that it rests only on the concepts of adiabatic work and of non-adiabatic processes , not on the concepts of transfer of energy as heat and of empirical temperature that are presupposed by the original statements . largely through the influence of max born , it is often regarded as theoretically preferable because of this conceptual parsimony . born particularly observes that the revised approach avoids thinking in terms of what he calls the '' imported engineering '' concept of heat engines . max born ( 1949 ) , lecture , pp . 31–45 . basing his thinking on the mechanical approach , born in 1921 , and again in 1949 , proposed to revise the definition of heat . in particular , he referred to the work of constantin carathéodory , who had in 1909 stated the first law without defining quantity of heat . born 's definition was specifically for transfers of energy without transfer of matter , and it has been widely followed in textbooks ( examples : ) . born observes that a transfer of matter between two systems is accompanied by a transfer of internal energy that can not be resolved into heat and work components . there can be pathways to other systems , spatially separate from that of the matter transfer , that allow heat and work transfer independent of and simultaneous with the matter transfer . energy is conserved in such transfers . description . cyclic processes . the first law of thermodynamics for a closed system was expressed in two ways by clausius . one way referred to cyclic processes and the inputs and outputs of the system , but did not refer to increments in the internal state of the system . the other way referred to an incremental change in the internal state of the system , and did not expect the process to be cyclic . a cyclic process is one that can be repeated indefinitely often , returning the system to its initial state . of particular interest for single cycle of a cyclic process are the net work done , and the net heat taken in ( or 'consumed ' , in clausius ' statement ) , by the system . in a cyclic process in which the system does net work on its surroundings , it is observed to be physically necessary not only that heat be taken into the system , but also , importantly , that some heat leave the system . the difference is the heat converted by the cycle into work . in each repetition of a cyclic process , the net work done by the system , measured in mechanical units , is proportional to the heat consumed , measured in calorimetric units . the constant of proportionality is universal and independent of the system and in 1845 and 1847 was measured by james joule , who described it as the mechanical equivalent of heat . sign conventions . in a non-cyclic process , the change in the internal energy of a system is equal to net energy added as heat to the system minus the thermodynamic work done by the system , both being measured in mechanical units . taking \delta u as a change in internal energy , one writes : \delta u q~ - ~ w~~~~\text where denotes the internal energy per unit mass . these authors actually use the symbols and to denote internal energy but their notation has been changed here to accord with the notation of the present article . these authors actually use the symbol to refer to total energy , including kinetic energy of bulk flow . '' glansdorff , p , prigogine , i , ( 1971 ) , p . 9 . this usage is followed also by other writers on non-equilibrium thermodynamics such as lebon , jou , and casas-vásquez , lebon , g . , jou , d . , casas-vázquez , j . ( 2008 ) , p . 45 . and de groot and mazur . de groot , s . r . , mazur , p . ( 1962 ) , p . 18 . this usage is described by bailyn as stating the non-convective flow of internal energy , and is listed as his definition number 1 , according to the first law of thermodynamics . this usage is also followed by workers in the kinetic theory of gases . de groot , s . r . , mazur , p . ( 1962 ) , p . 169 . truesdell , c . , muncaster , r . g . ( 1980 ) , p . 3 . balescu , r . ( 1997 ) , p . 9 . this is not the ad hoc definition of '' reduced heat flux '' of haase . haase , r . ( 1963/1969 ) , p . 18 . in the case of a flowing system of only one chemical constituent , in the lagrangian representation , there is no distinction between bulk flow and diffusion of matter . moreover , the flow of matter is zero into or out of the cell that moves with the local center of mass . in effect , in this description , one is dealing with a system effectively closed to the transfer of matter . but still one can validly talk of a distinction between bulk flow and diffusive flow of internal energy , the latter driven by a temperature gradient within the flowing material , and being defined with respect to the local center of mass of the bulk flow . in this case of a virtually closed system , because of the zero matter transfer , as noted above , one can safely distinguish between transfer of energy as work , and transfer of internal energy as heat . eckart , c . ( 1940 ) . . see also . laws of thermodynamics perpetual motion microstate ( statistical mechanics ) – includes microscopic definitions of internal energy , heat and work entropy production relativistic heat conduction . remarks . references . cited sources . adkins , c . j . ( 1968/1983 ) . equilibrium thermodynamics , ( first edition 1968 ) , third edition 1983 , cambridge university press , . aston , j . g . , fritz , j . j . ( 1959 ) . thermodynamics and statistical thermodynamics , john wiley & sons , new york . balian , r . ( 1991/2007 ) . from microphysics to macrophysics : methods and applications of statistical physics , volume 1 , translated by d . ter haar , j.f . gregg , springer , berlin , . bailyn , m . ( 1994 ) . a survey of thermodynamics , american institute of physics press , new york , . max born ( 1949 ) . natural philosophy of cause and chance , oxford university press , london . bryan , g . h . ( 1907 ) . thermodynamics . an introductory treatise dealing mainly with first principles and their direct applications , b . g . teubner , leipzig . balescu , r . ( 1997 ) . statistical dynamics ; matter out of equilibrium , imperial college press , london , . buchdahl , h . a . ( 1966 ) , the concepts of classical thermodynamics , cambridge university press , london . callen , h . b . ( 1960/1985 ) , thermodynamics and an introduction to thermostatistics , ( first edition 1960 ) , second edition 1985 , john wiley & sons , new york , . a translation may be found here . also a mostly reliable translation is to be found at kestin , j . ( 1976 ) . the second law of thermodynamics , dowden , hutchinson & ross , stroudsburg pa . . see english translation : on the moving force of heat , and the laws regarding the nature of heat itself which are deducible therefrom . phil . mag . ( 1851 ) , series 4 , 2 , 1–21 , 102–119 . also available on google books . crawford , f . h . ( 1963 ) . heat , thermodynamics , and statistical physics , rupert hart-davis , london , harcourt , brace & world , inc . de groot , s . r . , mazur , p . ( 1962 ) . non-equilibrium thermodynamics , north-holland , amsterdam . reprinted ( 1984 ) , dover publications inc . , new york , . denbigh , k . g . ( 1951 ) . the thermodynamics of the steady state , methuen , london , wiley , new york . denbigh , k . ( 1954/1981 ) . the principles of chemical equilibrium . with applications in chemistry and chemical engineering , fourth edition , cambridge university press , cambridge uk , . eckart , c . ( 1940 ) . the thermodynamics of irreversible processes . the simple fluid , phys . rev . 58 : 267–269 . fitts , d . d . ( 1962 ) . nonequilibrium thermodynamics . phenomenological theory of irreversible processes in fluid systems , mcgraw-hill , new york . glansdorff , p . , prigogine , i . , ( 1971 ) . thermodynamic theory of structure , stability and fluctuations , wiley , london , . gyarmati , i . ( 1967/1970 ) . non-equilibrium thermodynamics . field theory and variational principles , translated from the 1967 hungarian by e . gyarmati and w . f . heinz , springer-verlag , new york . haase , r . ( 1963/1969 ) . thermodynamics of irreversible processes , english translation , addison-wesley publishing , reading ma . haase , r . ( 1971 ) . survey of fundamental laws , chapter 1 of thermodynamics , pages 1–97 of volume 1 , ed . w . jost , of physical chemistry . an advanced treatise , ed . h . eyring , d . henderson , w . jost , academic press , new york , lcn 73–117081 . helmholtz , h . ( 1847 ) . ueber die erhaltung der kraft . eine physikalische abhandlung , g . reimer ( publisher ) , berlin , read on 23 july in a session of the physikalischen gesellschaft zu berlin . reprinted in helmholtz , h . von ( 1882 ) , wissenschaftliche abhandlungen , band 1 , j . a . barth , leipzig . translated and edited by j . tyndall , in scientific memoirs , selected from the transactions of foreign academies of science and from foreign journals . natural philosophy ( 1853 ) , volume 7 , edited by j . tyndall , w . francis , published by taylor and francis , london , pp . & nbsp ; 114–162 , reprinted as volume 7 of series 7 , the sources of science , edited by h . woolf , ( 1966 ) , johnson reprint corporation , new york , and again in brush , s . g . , the kinetic theory of gases . an anthology of classic papers with historical commentary , volume 1 of history of modern physical sciences , edited by n . s . hall , imperial college press , london , , pp . & nbsp ; 89–110 . kestin , j . ( 1966 ) . a course in thermodynamics , blaisdell publishing company , waltham ma . kirkwood , j . g . , oppenheim , i . ( 1961 ) . chemical thermodynamics , mcgraw-hill book company , new york . landsberg , p . t . ( 1961 ) . thermodynamics with quantum statistical illustrations , interscience , new york . landsberg , p . t . ( 1978 ) . thermodynamics and statistical mechanics , oxford university press , oxford uk , . lebon , g . , jou , d . , casas-vázquez , j . ( 2008 ) . understanding non-equilibrium thermodynamics , springer , berlin , . münster , a . ( 1970 ) , classical thermodynamics , translated by e . s . halberstadt , wiley–interscience , london , . j.r . partington ( 1949 ) . an advanced treatise on physical chemistry , volume 1 , fundamental principles . the properties of gases , longmans , green and co . , london . brian pippard ( 1957/1966 ) . elements of classical thermodynamics for advanced students of physics , original publication 1957 , reprint 1966 , cambridge university press , cambridge uk . max planck ( 1897/1903 ) . treatise on thermodynamics , translated by a . ogg , longmans , green & co . , london . prigogine , i . ( 1947 ) . étude thermodynamique des phénomènes irréversibles , dunod , paris , and desoers , liège . prigogine , i . , ( 1955/1967 ) . introduction to thermodynamics of irreversible processes , third edition , interscience publishers , new york . reif , f . ( 1965 ) . fundamentals of statistical and thermal physics , mcgraw-hill book company , new york . tisza , l . ( 1966 ) . generalized thermodynamics , m.i.t . press , cambridge ma . truesdell , c . a . ( 1980 ) . the tragicomical history of thermodynamics , 1822–1854 , springer , new york , . truesdell , c . a . , muncaster , r . g . ( 1980 ) . fundamentals of maxwell 's kinetic theory of a simple monatomic gas , treated as a branch of rational mechanics , academic press , new york , . tschoegl , n . w . ( 2000 ) . fundamentals of equilibrium and steady-state thermodynamics , elsevier , amsterdam , . further reading . chpts . 2 and 3 contain a nontechnical treatment of the first law . chapter 2 . . external links . misn-0-158 , the first law of thermodynamics ( pdf file ) by jerzy borysowicz for project physnet . first law of thermodynamics in the mit course unified thermodynamics and propulsion from prof . z . s . spakovszky de : thermodynamik erster hauptsatz