Assisted suicide

terminology . suicide is the act of killing oneself . assisted suicide is when another person materially helps an individual person die by suicide , such as providing tools or equipment , while physician-assisted suicide involves a physician ( doctor ) '' knowingly and intentionally providing a person with the knowledge or means or both required to commit suicide , including counseling about lethal doses of drugs , prescribing such lethal doses or supplying the drugs '' . assisted suicide is contrasted to euthanasia , sometimes referred to as mercy killing , where the person dying does not directly bring about their own death , but is killed in order to stop the person from experiencing further suffering . euthanasia can occur with or without consent , and can be classified as voluntary , non-voluntary or involuntary . killing a person who is suffering and who consents is called voluntary euthanasia . this is currently legal in some regions . if the person is unable to provide consent it is referred to as non-voluntary euthanasia . killing a person who does not want to die , or who is capable of giving consent and whose consent has not been solicited , is the crime of involuntary euthanasia , and is regarded as murder . right to die is the belief that people have a right to die , either through various forms of suicide , euthanasia , or refusing life-saving medical treatment . suicidism can be definied as '' the quality or state of being suicidal '' or as '' . an oppressive system ( stemming from non-suicidal perspectives ) functioning at the normative , discursive , medical , legal , social , political , economic , and epistemic levels in which suicidal people experience multiple forms of injustice and violence . '' . assisted dying vs assisted suicide . some advocates for assisted suicide strongly oppose the use of '' assisted suicide '' and '' suicide '' when referring to physician-assisted suicide , and prefer the phrase '' assisted dying '' . the motivation for this is to distance the debate from the suicides commonly performed by those not terminally ill and not eligible for assistance where it is legal . they feel those cases have negatively impacted the word '' suicide '' to the point that it bears no relation to the situation where someone who is suffering irremediably seeks a peaceful death . . the oppression of suicidal people . suicidal people constitute an oppressed group whose claims remain unintelligible within society , law , medical/psychiatric systems and lgbtq scholarship . '' the wish to die of suicidal people and suicidal attempt are judged as irrational or illegitimate . it leads to an injunction to live and to futurity where suicidal people must be kept alive . baril uses the term suicidism to describe this oppression . to reduce the oppression of suicidal people , alexandre baril , a professor in social work , suggest to validate suicidal ideation as a legitimate experience and create a welcoming environment to listen to their voice . . physician-assisted suicide . support . . arguments for . arguments in support of assisted death include respect for patient autonomy , equal treatment of terminally ill patients on and off life support , compassion , personal liberty , transparency and ethics of responsibility . when death is imminent ( half a year or less ) patients can choose to have assisted death as a medical option to shorten what the person perceives to be an unbearable dying process . pain is mostly not reported as the primary motivation for seeking physician-assisted suicide in the united states ; the three most frequently mentioned end‐of‐life concerns reported by oregon residents who took advantage of the death with dignity act in 2015 were : decreasing ability to participate in activities that made life enjoyable ( 96.2 % ) , loss of autonomy ( 92.4 % ) , and loss of dignity ( 75.4 % ) . . oregon statistics . a study of hospice nurses and social workers in oregon reported that symptoms of pain , depression , anxiety , extreme air hunger and fear of the process of dying were more pronounced among hospice patients who did not request a lethal prescription for barbiturates , the drug used for physician assisted death . a journal of palliative medicine report on patterns of hospice use noted that oregon was in both the highest quartile of hospice use and the lowest quartile of potentially concerning patterns of hospice use . a similar trend was found in vermont , where aid-in-dying ( aid ) was authorized in 2013 . in february 2016 , oregon released a report on their 2015 numbers . during 2015 , there were 218 people in the state who were approved and received the lethal drugs to end their own life . of that 218 , 132 terminally ill patients ultimately made the decision to ingest drugs , resulting in their death . according to the state of oregon public health division 's survey , the majority of the participants , 78 % , were 65 years of age or older and predominately white , 93.1 % . 72 % of the terminally ill patients who opted for ending their own lives had been diagnosed with some form of cancer . in the state of oregon 's 2015 survey , they asked the terminally ill who were participating in medical aid in dying , what their biggest end-of-life concerns were : 96.2 % of those people mentioned the loss of the ability to participate in activities that once made them enjoy life , 92.4 % mentioned the loss of autonomy , or their independence of their own thoughts or actions , and 75.4 % stated loss of their dignity . . washington state statistics . an increasing trend in deaths caused from ingesting lethal doses of medications prescribed by physicians was also noted in washington : from 64 deaths in 2009 to 202 deaths in 2015 . washington state department of health among the deceased , 72 % had terminal cancer and 8 % had neurodegenerative diseases ( including als ) . . u.s . polls . polls conducted by gallup dating back to 1947 positing the question , '' when a person has a disease that can not be cured , do you think doctors should be allowed to end the patient 's life by some painless means if the patient and his family request it ? '' show support for the practice increasing from 37 % in 1947 to a plateau of approximately 75 % lasting from approximately 1990 to 2005 . when the polling question was modified as such so the question posits '' severe pain '' as opposed to an incurable disease , '' legalization '' as opposed to generally allowing doctors , and '' patient suicide '' rather than physician-administered voluntary euthanasia , public support was substantially lower , by approximately 10 % to 15 % . a poll conducted by national journal and regence foundation found that both oregonians and washingtonians were more familiar with the terminology '' end-of-life care '' than the rest of the country and residents of both states are slightly more aware of the terms palliative and hospice care . a survey from the journal of palliative medicine found that family caregivers of patients who chose assisted death were more likely to find positive meaning in caring for a patient and were more prepared for accepting a patient 's death than the family caregivers of patients who did n't request assisted death . . safeguards . many current assisted death laws contain provisions that are intended to provide oversight and investigative processes to prevent abuse . this includes eligibility and qualification processes , mandatory state reporting by the medical team , and medical board oversight . in oregon and other states , two doctors and two witnesses must assert that a person 's request for a lethal prescription was n't coerced or under undue influence . these safeguards include proving one 's residency and eligibility . the patient must meet with two physicians and they must confirm the diagnoses before one can continue ; in some cases , they do include a psychiatric evaluation as well to determine whether or not the patient is making this decision on their own . the next steps are two oral requests , a waiting period of a minimum of 15 days before making the next request . a written request which must be witnessed by two different people , one of which can not be a family member , and then another waiting period by the patient 's doctor in which they say whether they are eligible for the drugs or not ( '' death with dignity '' ) . the debate about whether these safeguards work is debated between opponents and proponents . religious stances . unitarian universalism . according to a 1988 general resolution , '' unitarian universalists advocate the right to self-determination in dying , and the release from civil or criminal penalties of those who , under proper safeguards , act to honor the right of terminally ill patients to select the time of their own deaths '' . . opposition . . medical ethics . code of ethics . the most current version of the american medical association 's code of ethics states that physician-assisted suicide is prohibited . it prohibits physician-assisted suicide because it is '' fundamentally incompatible with the physician ’ s role as healer '' and because it would be '' difficult or impossible to control , and would pose serious societal risks '' . & nbsp ; . hippocratic oath . some doctors remind that physician-assisted suicide is contrary to the hippocratic oath , which is the oath historically taken by physicians . it states '' i will not give a lethal drug to anyone if i am asked , nor will i advise such a plan . '' . the original oath however has been modified many times and , contrary to popular belief , is not required by most modern medical schools , nor confers any legal obligations on individuals who choose to take it . there are also procedures forbidden by the hippocratic oath which are in common practice today , such as abortion . . declaration of geneva . the declaration of geneva is a revision of the hippocratic oath , first drafted in 1948 by the world medical association in response to forced ( involuntary ) euthanasia , eugenics and other medical crimes performed in nazi germany . it contains , '' i will maintain the utmost respect for human life . '' . international code of medical ethics . the international code of medical ethics , last revised in 2006 , includes '' a physician shall always bear in mind the obligation to respect human life '' in the section '' duties of physicians to patients '' . . statement of marbella . the statement of marbella was adopted by the 44th world medical assembly in marbella , spain , in 1992 . it provides that '' physician-assisted suicide , like voluntary euthanasia , is unethical and must be condemned by the medical profession . '' . concerns of expansion to people with chronic disorders . a concern present among health care professionals who are opposed to pas , are the detrimental effects that the procedure can have with regard to vulnerable populations . this argument is known as the '' slippery slope '' . this argument encompasses the apprehension that once pas is initiated for the terminally ill it will progress to other vulnerable communities , namely the disabled , and may begin to be used by those who feel less worthy based on their demographic or socioeconomic status . in addition , vulnerable populations are more at risk of untimely deaths because , '' patients might be subjected to pas without their genuine consent '' . . religious stances . catholicism . the roman catholic church acknowledges the fact that moral decisions regarding a person 's life must be made according to one 's own conscience and faith . catholic tradition has said that one 's concern for the suffering of another is not a sufficient reason to decide whether it is appropriate to act upon voluntary euthanasia . according to the catechism of the catholic church , '' god is the creator and author of all life . '' in this belief system god created human life , therefore god is the judge when to end life . from the roman catholic church 's perspective , deliberately ending one 's life or the life of another is morally wrong and defies the catholic doctrine . furthermore , ending one 's life deprives that person and his or her loved ones of the time left in life and causes enormous grief and sorrow for those left behind . pope francis is the current dominant figure of the catholic church . he affirms that death is a glorious event and should not be decided for by anyone other than god . pope francis insinuates that defending life means defending its sacredness . the roman catholic church teaches its followers that the act of euthanasia is unacceptable because it is perceived as a sin , as it goes against the ten commandments , ten commandments in catholic theology as implied by the fifth commandment , the act of assisted suicide contradicts the dignity of human life as well as the respect one has for god . as an alternative to the physician-assisted suicide and in order to alleviate pain , the catholic church proposes that terminally ill patients focus on religion and making peace with the creator while receiving the love and mercy of their families and caregivers . additionally , the roman catholic church recommends that terminally ill patients should receive palliative care , which deals with physical pain while treating psychological and spiritual suffering as well , instead of physician-assisted suicide . . judaism . while preservation of life is one of the greatest values in judaism , there are instances of suicide and assisted suicide appearing in the bible and rabbinic literature . the medieval authorities debate the legitimacy of those measures and in what limited circumstances they might apply . the conclusion of the majority of later rabbinic authorities , and accepted normative practice within judaism , is that suicide and assisted suicide can not be sanctioned even for a terminal patient in intractable pain . . the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints . the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) is against euthanasia . anyone who takes part in euthanasia , including '' assisted suicide '' , is regarded as having violated the commandments of god . however the church recognizes that when a person is in the final stages of terminal illness there may be difficult decisions to be taken . the church states that 'when dying becomes inevitable , death should be looked upon as a blessing and a purposeful part of an eternal existence . members should not feel obligated to extend mortal life by means that are unreasonable . . neutrality . there have been calls for organisations representing medical professionals to take a neutral stance on assisted dying , rather than a position of opposition . the reasoning is that this would better reflect the views of medical professionals and that of wider society , and prevent those bodies from exerting undue influence over the debate . the uk royal college of nursing voted in july 2009 to move to a neutral position on assisted dying . the california medical association dropped its long-standing opposition in 2015 during the debate over whether an assisted dying bill should be introduced there , prompted in part by cancer sufferer brittany maynard . the california end of life option act was signed into law later that year . in december 2017 , the massachusetts medical society ( mms ) voted to repeal their opposition to physician-assisted suicide and adopt a position of neutrality . in october 2018 , the american academy of family physicians ( aafp ) voted to adopt a position of neutrality from one of opposition . this is contrary to the position taken by the american medical association ( ama ) , who oppose it . in january 2019 the british royal college of physicians announced it would adopt a position of neutrality until two-thirds of its members thinks it should either support or oppose the legalisation of assisted dying . . attitudes of healthcare professionals . it is widely acknowledged that physicians must play some role in the process of assisted suicide and voluntary euthanasia ( as evident in the name '' physician-assisted suicide '' ) , often putting them at the forefront of the issue . decades of opinion research shows that physicians in the us and several european countries are less supportive of legalization of pas than the general public . in the us , although '' about two-thirds of the american public since the 1970s '' have supported legalization , surveys of physicians '' rarely show as much as half supporting a move '' . however , physician and other healthcare professional opinions vary widely on the issue of physician-assisted suicide , as shown in the following tables . . see also . betty and george coumbias bioethics consensual homicide euthanasia device jack kevorkian right to die ? ( 2008 film ) brittany maynard philip nitschke senicide you do n't know jack ( film ) voluntary assisted dying act 2017 ( victoria ) suicide by cop a short stay in switzerland ( 2009 film ) . notes . references . external links .