Classical conditioning

definition . classical conditioning occurs when a conditioned stimulus ( cs ) is paired with an unconditioned stimulus ( us ) . usually , the conditioned stimulus is a neutral stimulus ( e.g . , the sound of a tuning fork ) , the unconditioned stimulus is biologically potent ( e.g . , the taste of food ) and the unconditioned response ( ur ) to the unconditioned stimulus is an unlearned reflex response ( e.g . , salivation ) . after pairing is repeated the organism exhibits a conditioned response ( cr ) to the conditioned stimulus when the conditioned stimulus is presented alone . ( a conditioned response may occur after only one pairing . ) thus , unlike the ur , the cr is acquired through experience , and it is also less permanent than the ur . usually the conditioned response is similar to the unconditioned response , but sometimes it is quite different . for this and other reasons , most learning theorists suggest that the conditioned stimulus comes to signal or predict the unconditioned stimulus , and go on to analyze the consequences of this signal . robert a . rescorla provided a clear summary of this change in thinking , and its implications , in his 1988 article '' pavlovian conditioning : it 's not what you think it is '' . despite its widespread acceptance , rescorla 's thesis may not be defensible . classical conditioning differs from operant conditioning : in classical conditioning , behaviors are modified through the association of stimuli as described above , whereas in operant conditioning behaviors are modified by the effect they produce ( i.e . , reward or punishment ) . . procedures . pavlov 's research . the best-known and most thorough early work on classical conditioning was done by ivan pavlov , although edwin twitmyer published some related findings a year earlier . ( the 1960 edition is not an unaltered republication of the 1927 translation by oxford university press ) during his research on the physiology of digestion in dogs , pavlov developed a procedure that enabled him to study the digestive processes of animals over long periods of time . he redirected the animal 's digestive fluids outside the body , where they could be measured . pavlov noticed that his dogs began to salivate in the presence of the technician who normally fed them , rather than simply salivating in the presence of food . pavlov called the dogs ' anticipatory salivation '' psychic secretion '' . putting these informal observations to an experimental test , pavlov presented a stimulus ( e.g . the sound of a metronome ) and then gave the dog food ; after a few repetitions , the dogs started to salivate in response to the stimulus . pavlov concluded that if a particular stimulus in the dog 's surroundings was present when the dog was given food then that stimulus could become associated with food and cause salivation on its own . terminology . in pavlov 's experiments the unconditioned stimulus ( us ) was the food because its effects did not depend on previous experience . the metronome 's sound is originally a neutral stimulus ( ns ) because it does not elicit salivation in the dogs . after conditioning , the metronome 's sound becomes the conditioned stimulus ( cs ) or conditional stimulus ; because its effects depend on its association with food . likewise , the responses of the dog follow the same conditioned-versus-unconditioned arrangement . the conditioned response ( cr ) is the response to the conditioned stimulus , whereas the unconditioned response ( ur ) corresponds to the unconditioned stimulus . pavlov reported many basic facts about conditioning ; for example , he found that learning occurred most rapidly when the interval between the cs and the appearance of the us was relatively short . as noted earlier , it is often thought that the conditioned response is a replica of the unconditioned response , but pavlov noted that saliva produced by the cs differs in composition from that produced by the us . in fact , the cr may be any new response to the previously neutral cs that can be clearly linked to experience with the conditional relationship of cs and us . it was also thought that repeated pairings are necessary for conditioning to emerge , but many crs can be learned with a single trial , especially in fear conditioning and taste aversion learning . thumb . forward conditioning . learning is fastest in forward conditioning . during forward conditioning , the onset of the cs precedes the onset of the us in order to signal that the us will follow . two common forms of forward conditioning are delay and trace conditioning . delay conditioning : in delay conditioning , the cs is presented and is overlapped by the presentation of the us . for example , if a person hears a buzzer for five seconds , during which time air is puffed into their eye , the person will blink . after several pairings of the buzzer and the puff , the person will blink at the sound of the buzzer alone . this is delay conditioning . trace conditioning : during trace conditioning , the cs and us do not overlap . instead , the cs begins and ends before the us is presented . the stimulus-free period is called the trace interval or the conditioning interval . if in the above buzzer example , the puff came a second after the sound of the buzzer stopped , that would be trace conditioning , with a trace or conditioning interval of one second . simultaneous conditioning . during simultaneous conditioning , the cs and us are presented and terminated at the same time . for example : if a person hears a bell and has air puffed into their eye at the same time , and repeated pairings like this led to the person blinking when they hear the bell despite the puff of air being absent , this demonstrates that simultaneous conditioning has occurred . second-order and higher-order conditioning . second-order or higher-order conditioning follow a two-step procedure . first a neutral stimulus ( '' cs1 '' ) comes to signal a us through forward conditioning . then a second neutral stimulus ( '' cs2 '' ) is paired with the first ( cs1 ) and comes to yield its own conditioned response . for example : a bell might be paired with food until the bell elicits salivation . if a light is then paired with the bell , then the light may come to elicit salivation as well . the bell is the cs1 and the food is the us . the light becomes the cs2 once it is paired with the cs1 . backward conditioning . backward conditioning occurs when a cs immediately follows a us . unlike the usual conditioning procedure , in which the cs precedes the us , the conditioned response given to the cs tends to be inhibitory . this presumably happens because the cs serves as a signal that the us has ended , rather than as a signal that the us is about to appear . for example , a puff of air directed at a person 's eye could be followed by the sound of a buzzer . temporal conditioning . in temporal conditioning , a us is presented at regular intervals , for instance every 10 minutes . conditioning is said to have occurred when the cr tends to occur shortly before each us . this suggests that animals have a biological clock that can serve as a cs . this method has also been used to study timing ability in animals ( see animal cognition ) . the example below shows the temporal conditioning , as us such as food to a hungry mouse is simply delivered on a regular time schedule such as every thirty seconds . after sufficient exposure the mouse will begin to salivate just before the food delivery . this then makes it temporal conditioning as it would appear that the mouse is conditioned to the passage of time . zero contingency procedure . in this procedure , the cs is paired with the us , but the us also occurs at other times . if this occurs , it is predicted that the us is likely to happen in the absence of the cs . in other words , the cs does not '' predict '' the us . in this case , conditioning fails and the cs does not come to elicit a cr . this finding – that prediction rather than cs-us pairing is the key to conditioning – greatly influenced subsequent conditioning research and theory . extinction . in the extinction procedure , the cs is presented repeatedly in the absence of a us . this is done after a cs has been conditioned by one of the methods above . when this is done , the cr frequency eventually returns to pre-training levels . however , extinction does not completely eliminate the effects of the prior conditioning . this is demonstrated by spontaneous recovery – when there is a sudden appearance of the ( cr ) after extinction occurs – and other related phenomena ( see '' recovery from extinction '' below ) . these phenomena can be explained by postulating accumulation of inhibition when a weak stimulus is presented . phenomena observed . acquisition . during acquisition , the cs and us are paired as described above . the extent of conditioning may be tracked by test trials . in these test trials , the cs is presented alone and the cr is measured . a single cs-us pairing may suffice to yield a cr on a test , but usually a number of pairings are necessary and there is a gradual increase in the conditioned response to the cs . this repeated number of trials increase the strength and/or frequency of the cr gradually . the speed of conditioning depends on a number of factors , such as the nature and strength of both the cs and the us , previous experience and the animal 's motivational state . the process slows down as it nears completion . . extinction . if the cs is presented without the us , and this process is repeated often enough , the cs will eventually stop eliciting a cr . at this point the cr is said to be '' extinguished . '' . external inhibition . external inhibition may be observed if a strong or unfamiliar stimulus is presented just before , or at the same time as , the cs . this causes a reduction in the conditioned response to the cs . recovery from extinction . several procedures lead to the recovery of a cr that had been first conditioned and then extinguished . this illustrates that the extinction procedure does not completely eliminate the effect of conditioning . these procedures are the following : reacquisition : if the cs is again paired with the us , a cr is again acquired , but this second acquisition usually happens much faster than the first one . spontaneous recovery : spontaneous recovery is defined as the reappearance of a previously extinguished conditioned response after a rest period . that is , if the cs is tested at a later time ( for example an hour or a day ) after extinction it will again elicit a cr . this renewed cr is usually much weaker than the cr observed prior to extinction . disinhibition : if the cs is tested just after extinction and an intense but associatively neutral stimulus has occurred , there may be a temporary recovery of the conditioned response to the cs . reinstatement : if the us used in conditioning is presented to a subject in the same place where conditioning and extinction occurred , but without the cs being present , the cs often elicits a response when it is tested later . renewal : renewal is a reemergence of a conditioned response following extinction when an animal is returned to the environment in which the conditioned response was acquired . stimulus generalization . stimulus generalization is said to occur if , after a particular cs has come to elicit a cr , a similar test stimulus is found to elicit the same cr . usually the more similar the test stimulus is to the cs the stronger the cr will be to the test stimulus . conversely , the more the test stimulus differs from the cs , the weaker the cr will be , or the more it will differ from that previously observed . stimulus discrimination . one observes stimulus discrimination when one stimulus ( '' cs1 '' ) elicits one cr and another stimulus ( '' cs2 '' ) elicits either another cr or no cr at all . this can be brought about by , for example , pairing cs1 with an effective us and presenting cs2 with no us . . latent inhibition . latent inhibition refers to the observation that it takes longer for a familiar stimulus to become a cs than it does for a novel stimulus to become a cs , when the stimulus is paired with an effective us . . conditioned suppression . this is one of the most common ways to measure the strength of learning in classical conditioning . a typical example of this procedure is as follows : a rat first learns to press a lever through operant conditioning . then , in a series of trials , the rat is exposed to a cs , a light or a noise , followed by the us , a mild electric shock . an association between the cs and us develops , and the rat slows or stops its lever pressing when the cs comes on . the rate of pressing during the cs measures the strength of classical conditioning ; that is , the slower the rat presses , the stronger the association of the cs and the us . ( slow pressing indicates a '' fear '' conditioned response , and it is an example of a conditioned emotional response ; see section below . ) . conditioned inhibition . typically , three phases of conditioning are used . phase 1 . a cs ( cs+ ) is paired with a us until asymptotic cr levels are reached . phase 2 . cs+/us trials are continued , but these are interspersed with trials on which the cs+ is paired with a second cs , ( the cs- ) but not with the us ( i.e . cs+/cs- trials ) . typically , organisms show crs on cs+/us trials , but stop responding on cs+/cs− trials . phase 3 . summation test for conditioned inhibition : the cs- from phase 2 is presented together with a new cs+ that was conditioned as in phase 1 . conditioned inhibition is found if the response is less to the cs+/cs- pair than it is to the cs+ alone . retardation test for conditioned inhibition : the cs- from phase 2 is paired with the us . if conditioned inhibition has occurred , the rate of acquisition to the previous cs− should be less than the rate of acquisition that would be found without the phase 2 treatment . blocking . this form of classical conditioning involves two phases . phase 1 . a cs ( cs1 ) is paired with a us . phase 2 . a compound cs ( cs1+cs2 ) is paired with a us . test . a separate test for each cs ( cs1 and cs2 ) is performed . the blocking effect is observed in a lack of conditional response to cs2 , suggesting that the first phase of training blocked the acquisition of the second cs . theories . data sources . experiments on theoretical issues in conditioning have mostly been done on vertebrates , especially rats and pigeons . however , conditioning has also been studied in invertebrates , and very important data on the neural basis of conditioning has come from experiments on the sea slug , aplysia . most relevant experiments have used the classical conditioning procedure , although operant conditioning experiments have also been used , and the strength of classical conditioning is often measured through its operant effects , as in conditioned suppression ( see phenomena section above ) and autoshaping . stimulus-substitution theory . according to pavlov , conditioning does not involve the acquisition of any new behavior , but rather the tendency to respond in old ways to new stimuli . thus , he theorized that the cs merely substitutes for the us in evoking the reflex response . this explanation is called the stimulus-substitution theory of conditioning . a critical problem with the stimulus-substitution theory is that the cr and ur are not always the same . pavlov himself observed that a dog 's saliva produced as a cr differed in composition from that produced as a ur . the cr is sometimes even the opposite of the ur . for example : the unconditional response to electric shock is an increase in heart rate , whereas a cs that has been paired with the electric shock elicits a decrease in heart rate . ( however , it has been proposed that only when the ur does not involve the central nervous system are the cr and the ur opposites . ) . rescorla–wagner model . the rescorla–wagner ( r–w ) model is a relatively simple yet powerful model of conditioning . the model predicts a number of important phenomena , but it also fails in important ways , thus leading to a number of modifications and alternative models . however , because much of the theoretical research on conditioning in the past 40 years has been instigated by this model or reactions to it , the r–w model deserves a brief description here . the rescorla-wagner model argues that there is a limit to the amount of conditioning that can occur in the pairing of two stimuli . one determinant of this limit is the nature of the us . for example : pairing a bell with a juicy steak is more likely to produce salivation than pairing the bell with a piece of dry bread , and dry bread is likely to work better than a piece of cardboard . a key idea behind the r–w model is that a cs signals or predicts the us . one might say that before conditioning , the subject is surprised by the us . however , after conditioning , the subject is no longer surprised , because the cs predicts the coming of the us . ( note that the model can be described mathematically and that words like predict , surprise , and expect are only used to help explain the model . ) here the workings of the model are illustrated with brief accounts of acquisition , extinction , and blocking . the model also predicts a number of other phenomena , see main article on the model . equation . \delta v \alpha\beta ( \lambda - \sigma v ) this is the rescorla-wagner equation . it specifies the amount of learning that will occur on a single pairing of a conditioning stimulus ( cs ) with an unconditioned stimulus ( us ) . the above equation is solved repeatedly to predict the course of learning over many such trials . in this model the degree of learning is measured by how well the cs predicts the us , which is given by the '' associative strength '' of the cs . in the equation , v represents the current associative strength of the cs , and ∆v is the change in this strength that happens on a given trial . σv is the sum of the strengths of all stimuli present in the situation . λ is the maximum associative strength that a given us will support ; its value is usually set to 1 on trials when the us is present , and 0 when the us is absent . α and β are constants related to the salience of the cs and the speed of learning for a given us . how the equation predicts various experimental results is explained in following sections . for further details , see the main article on the model . . r–w model : acquisition . the r–w model measures conditioning by assigning an '' associative strength '' to the cs and other local stimuli . before a cs is conditioned it has an associative strength of zero . pairing the cs and the us causes a gradual increase in the associative strength of the cs . this increase is determined by the nature of the us ( e.g . its intensity ) . the amount of learning that happens during any single cs-us pairing depends on the difference between the total associative strengths of cs and other stimuli present in the situation ( σv in the equation ) , and a maximum set by the us ( λ in the equation ) . on the first pairing of the cs and us , this difference is large and the associative strength of the cs takes a big step up . as cs-us pairings accumulate , the us becomes more predictable , and the increase in associative strength on each trial becomes smaller and smaller . finally , the difference between the associative strength of the cs ( plus any that may accrue to other stimuli ) and the maximum strength reaches zero . that is , the us is fully predicted , the associative strength of the cs stops growing , and conditioning is complete . r–w model : extinction . the associative process described by the r–w model also accounts for extinction ( see '' procedures '' above ) . the extinction procedure starts with a positive associative strength of the cs , which means that the cs predicts that the us will occur . on an extinction trial the us fails to occur after the cs . as a result of this “ surprising ” outcome , the associative strength of the cs takes a step down . extinction is complete when the strength of the cs reaches zero ; no us is predicted , and no us occurs . however , if that same cs is presented without the us but accompanied by a well-established conditioned inhibitor ( ci ) , that is , a stimulus that predicts the absence of a us ( in r-w terms , a stimulus with a negative associate strength ) then r-w predicts that the cs will not undergo extinction ( its v will not decrease in size ) . r–w model : blocking . the most important and novel contribution of the r–w model is its assumption that the conditioning of a cs depends not just on that cs alone , and its relationship to the us , but also on all other stimuli present in the conditioning situation . in particular , the model states that the us is predicted by the sum of the associative strengths of all stimuli present in the conditioning situation . learning is controlled by the difference between this total associative strength and the strength supported by the us . when this sum of strengths reaches a maximum set by the us , conditioning ends as just described . the r–w explanation of the blocking phenomenon illustrates one consequence of the assumption just stated . in blocking ( see '' phenomena '' above ) , cs1 is paired with a us until conditioning is complete . then on additional conditioning trials a second stimulus ( cs2 ) appears together with cs1 , and both are followed by the us . finally cs2 is tested and shown to produce no response because learning about cs2 was “ blocked ” by the initial learning about cs1 . the r–w model explains this by saying that after the initial conditioning , cs1 fully predicts the us . since there is no difference between what is predicted and what happens , no new learning happens on the additional trials with cs1+cs2 , hence cs2 later yields no response . theoretical issues and alternatives to the rescorla–wagner model . one of the main reasons for the importance of the r–w model is that it is relatively simple and makes clear predictions . tests of these predictions have led to a number of important new findings and a considerably increased understanding of conditioning . some new information has supported the theory , but much has not , and it is generally agreed that the theory is , at best , too simple . however , no single model seems to account for all the phenomena that experiments have produced . following are brief summaries of some related theoretical issues . . content of learning . the r–w model reduces conditioning to the association of a cs and us , and measures this with a single number , the associative strength of the cs . a number of experimental findings indicate that more is learned than this . among these are two phenomena described earlier in this article latent inhibition : if a subject is repeatedly exposed to the cs before conditioning starts , then conditioning takes longer . the r–w model can not explain this because preexposure leaves the strength of the cs unchanged at zero . recovery of responding after extinction : it appears that something remains after extinction has reduced associative strength to zero because several procedures cause responding to reappear without further conditioning . . role of attention in learning . latent inhibition might happen because a subject stops focusing on a cs that is seen frequently before it is paired with a us . in fact , changes in attention to the cs are at the heart of two prominent theories that try to cope with experimental results that give the r–w model difficulty . in one of these , proposed by nicholas mackintosh , the speed of conditioning depends on the amount of attention devoted to the cs , and this amount of attention depends in turn on how well the cs predicts the us . pearce and hall proposed a related model based on a different attentional principle both models have been extensively tested , and neither explains all the experimental results . consequently , various authors have attempted hybrid models that combine the two attentional processes . pearce and hall in 2010 integrated their attentional ideas and even suggested the possibility of incorporating the rescorla-wagner equation into an integrated model . . context . as stated earlier , a key idea in conditioning is that the cs signals or predicts the us ( see '' zero contingency procedure '' above ) . however , for example , the room in which conditioning takes place also '' predicts '' that the us may occur . still , the room predicts with much less certainty than does the experimental cs itself , because the room is also there between experimental trials , when the us is absent . the role of such context is illustrated by the fact that the dogs in pavlov 's experiment would sometimes start salivating as they approached the experimental apparatus , before they saw or heard any cs . such so-called '' context '' stimuli are always present , and their influence helps to account for some otherwise puzzling experimental findings . the associative strength of context stimuli can be entered into the rescorla-wagner equation , and they play an important role in the comparator and computational theories outlined below . . comparator theory . to find out what has been learned , we must somehow measure behavior ( '' performance '' ) in a test situation . however , as students know all too well , performance in a test situation is not always a good measure of what has been learned . as for conditioning , there is evidence that subjects in a blocking experiment do learn something about the '' blocked '' cs , but fail to show this learning because of the way that they are usually tested . '' comparator '' theories of conditioning are '' performance based '' , that is , they stress what is going on at the time of the test . in particular , they look at all the stimuli that are present during testing and at how the associations acquired by these stimuli may interact . to oversimplify somewhat , comparator theories assume that during conditioning the subject acquires both cs-us and context-us associations . at the time of the test , these associations are compared , and a response to the cs occurs only if the cs-us association is stronger than the context-us association . after a cs and us are repeatedly paired in simple acquisition , the cs-us association is strong and the context-us association is relatively weak . this means that the cs elicits a strong cr . in “ zero contingency ” ( see above ) , the conditioned response is weak or absent because the context-us association is about as strong as the cs-us association . blocking and other more subtle phenomena can also be explained by comparator theories , though , again , they can not explain everything . . computational theory . an organism 's need to predict future events is central to modern theories of conditioning . most theories use associations between stimuli to take care of these predictions . for example : in the r–w model , the associative strength of a cs tells us how strongly that cs predicts a us . a different approach to prediction is suggested by models such as that proposed by gallistel & gibbon ( 2000 , 2002 ) . here the response is not determined by associative strengths . instead , the organism records the times of onset and offset of css and uss and uses these to calculate the probability that the us will follow the cs . a number of experiments have shown that humans and animals can learn to time events ( see animal cognition ) , and the gallistel & gibbon model yields very good quantitative fits to a variety of experimental data . however , recent studies have suggested that duration-based models can not account for some empirical findings as well as associative models . . element-based models . the rescorla-wagner model treats a stimulus as a single entity , and it represents the associative strength of a stimulus with one number , with no record of how that number was reached . as noted above , this makes it hard for the model to account for a number of experimental results . more flexibility is provided by assuming that a stimulus is internally represented by a collection of elements , each of which may change from one associative state to another . for example , the similarity of one stimulus to another may be represented by saying that the two stimuli share elements in common . these shared elements help to account for stimulus generalization and other phenomena that may depend upon generalization . also , different elements within the same set may have different associations , and their activations and associations may change at different times and at different rates . this allows element-based models to handle some otherwise inexplicable results . the sop model . a prominent example of the element approach is the “ sop ” model of wagner . the model has been elaborated in various ways since its introduction , and it can now account in principle for a very wide variety of experimental findings . the model represents any given stimulus with a large collection of elements . the time of presentation of various stimuli , the state of their elements , and the interactions between the elements , all determine the course of associative processes and the behaviors observed during conditioning experiments . the sop account of simple conditioning exemplifies some essentials of the sop model . to begin with , the model assumes that the cs and us are each represented by a large group of elements . each of these stimulus elements can be in one of three states : primary activity ( a1 ) - roughly speaking , the stimulus is “ attended to . ” ( references to “ attention ” are intended only to aid understanding and are not part of the model . ) secondary activity ( a2 ) - the stimulus is “ peripherally attended to . ” inactive ( i ) – the stimulus is “ not attended to . ” of the elements that represent a single stimulus at a given moment , some may be in state a1 , some in state a2 , and some in state i . when a stimulus first appears , some of its elements jump from inactivity i to primary activity a1 . from the a1 state they gradually decay to a2 , and finally back to i . element activity can only change in this way ; in particular , elements in a2 can not go directly back to a1 . if the elements of both the cs and the us are in the a1 state at the same time , an association is learned between the two stimuli . this means that if , at a later time , the cs is presented ahead of the us , and some cs elements enter a1 , these elements will activate some us elements . however , us elements activated indirectly in this way only get boosted to the a2 state . ( this can be thought of the cs arousing a memory of the us , which will not be as strong as the real thing . ) with repeated cs-us trials , more and more elements are associated , and more and more us elements go to a2 when the cs comes on . this gradually leaves fewer and fewer us elements that can enter a1 when the us itself appears . in consequence , learning slows down and approaches a limit . one might say that the us is “ fully predicted ” or “ not surprising ” because almost all of its elements can only enter a2 when the cs comes on , leaving few to form new associations . the model can explain the findings that are accounted for by the rescorla-wagner model and a number of additional findings as well . for example , unlike most other models , sop takes time into account . the rise and decay of element activation enables the model to explain time-dependent effects such as the fact that conditioning is strongest when the cs comes just before the us , and that when the cs comes after the us ( “ backward conditioning ” ) the result is often an inhibitory cs . many other more subtle phenomena are explained as well . a number of other powerful models have appeared in recent years which incorporate element representations . these often include the assumption that associations involve a network of connections between “ nodes ” that represent stimuli , responses , and perhaps one or more “ hidden ” layers of intermediate interconnections . such models make contact with a current explosion of research on neural networks , artificial intelligence and machine learning . applications . neural basis of learning and memory . pavlov proposed that conditioning involved a connection between brain centers for conditioned and unconditioned stimuli . his physiological account of conditioning has been abandoned , but classical conditioning continues to be used to study the neural structures and functions that underlie learning and memory . forms of classical conditioning that are used for this purpose include , among others , fear conditioning , eyeblink conditioning , and the foot contraction conditioning of hermissenda crassicornis , a sea-slug . both fear and eyeblink conditioning involve a neutral stimulus , frequently a tone , becoming paired with an unconditioned stimulus . in the case of eyeblink conditioning , the us is an air-puff , while in fear conditioning the us is threatening or aversive such as a foot shock . '' available data demonstrate that discrete regions of the cerebellum and associated brainstem areas contain neurons that alter their activity during conditioning – these regions are critical for the acquisition and performance of this simple learning task . it appears that other regions of the brain , including the hippocampus , amygdala , and prefrontal cortex , contribute to the conditioning process , especially when the demands of the task get more complex . '' fear and eyeblink conditioning involve generally non overlapping neural circuitry , but share molecular mechanisms . fear conditioning occurs in the basolateral amygdala , which receives glutaminergic input directly from thalamic afferents , as well as indirectly from prefrontal projections . the direct projections are sufficient for delay conditioning , but in the case of trace conditioning , where the cs needs to be internally represented despite a lack of external stimulus , indirect pathways are necessary . the anterior cingulate is one candidate for intermediate trace conditioning , but the hippocampus may also play a major role . presynaptic activation of protein kinase a and postsynaptic activation of nmda receptors and its signal transduction pathway are necessary for conditioning related plasticity . creb is also necessary for conditioning related plasticity , and it may induce downstream synthesis of proteins necessary for this to occur . as nmda receptors are only activated after an increase in presynaptic calcium ( thereby releasing the mg2+ block ) , they are a potential coincidence detector that could mediate spike timing dependent plasticity . stdp constrains ltp to situations where the cs predicts the us , and ltd to the reverse . . behavioral therapies . some therapies associated with classical conditioning are aversion therapy , systematic desensitization and flooding . aversion therapy is a type of behavior therapy designed to make patients cease an undesirable habit by associating the habit with a strong unpleasant unconditioned stimulus . for example , a medication might be used to associate the taste of alcohol with stomach upset . systematic desensitization is a treatment for phobias in which the patient is trained to relax while being exposed to progressively more anxiety-provoking stimuli ( e.g . angry words ) . this is an example of counterconditioning , intended to associate the feared stimuli with a response ( relaxation ) that is incompatible with anxiety flooding is a form of desensitization that attempts to eliminate phobias and anxieties by repeated exposure to highly distressing stimuli until the lack of reinforcement of the anxiety response causes its extinction . '' flooding '' usually involves actual exposure to the stimuli , whereas the term '' implosion '' refers to imagined exposure , but the two terms are sometimes used synonymously . conditioning therapies usually take less time than humanistic therapies . . conditioned drug response . a stimulus that is present when a drug is administered or consumed may eventually evoke a conditioned physiological response that mimics the effect of the drug . this is sometimes the case with caffeine ; habitual coffee drinkers may find that the smell of coffee gives them a feeling of alertness . in other cases , the conditioned response is a compensatory reaction that tends to offset the effects of the drug . for example , if a drug causes the body to become less sensitive to pain , the compensatory conditioned reaction may be one that makes the user more sensitive to pain . this compensatory reaction may contribute to drug tolerance . if so , a drug user may increase the amount of drug consumed in order to feel its effects , and end up taking very large amounts of the drug . in this case a dangerous overdose reaction may occur if the cs happens to be absent , so that the conditioned compensatory effect fails to occur . for example , if the drug has always been administered in the same room , the stimuli provided by that room may produce a conditioned compensatory effect ; then an overdose reaction may happen if the drug is administered in a different location where the conditioned stimuli are absent . . conditioned hunger . signals that consistently precede food intake can become conditioned stimuli for a set of bodily responses that prepares the body for food and digestion . these reflexive responses include the secretion of digestive juices into the stomach and the secretion of certain hormones into the blood stream , and they induce a state of hunger . an example of conditioned hunger is the '' appetizer effect . '' any signal that consistently precedes a meal , such as a clock indicating that it is time for dinner , can cause people to feel hungrier than before the signal . the lateral hypothalamus ( lh ) is involved in the initiation of eating . the nigrostriatal pathway , which includes the substantia nigra , the lateral hypothalamus , and the basal ganglia have been shown to be involved in hunger motivation . conditioned emotional response . the influence of classical conditioning can be seen in emotional responses such as phobia , disgust , nausea , anger , and sexual arousal . a familiar example is conditioned nausea , in which the cs is the sight or smell of a particular food that in the past has resulted in an unconditioned stomach upset . similarly , when the cs is the sight of a dog and the us is the pain of being bitten , the result may be a conditioned fear of dogs . an example of conditioned emotional response is conditioned suppression . as an adaptive mechanism , emotional conditioning helps shield an individual from harm or prepare it for important biological events such as sexual activity . thus , a stimulus that has occurred before sexual interaction comes to cause sexual arousal , which prepares the individual for sexual contact . for example , sexual arousal has been conditioned in human subjects by pairing a stimulus like a picture of a jar of pennies with views of an erotic film clip . similar experiments involving blue gourami fish and domesticated quail have shown that such conditioning can increase the number of offspring . these results suggest that conditioning techniques might help to increase fertility rates in infertile individuals and endangered species . . pavlovian-instrumental transfer . pavlovian-instrumental transfer is a phenomenon that occurs when a conditioned stimulus ( cs , also known as a '' cue '' ) that has been associated with rewarding or aversive stimuli via classical conditioning alters motivational salience and operant behavior . in a typical experiment , a rat is presented with sound-food pairings ( classical conditioning ) . separately , the rat learns to press a lever to get food ( operant conditioning ) . test sessions now show that the rat presses the lever faster in the presence of the sound than in silence , although the sound has never been associated with lever pressing . pavlovian-instrumental transfer is suggested to play a role in the differential outcomes effect , a procedure which enhances operant discrimination by pairing stimuli with specific outcomes . in popular culture . in the 1932 novel brave new world by aldous huxley , conditioning plays a key role in the maintenance of social peace , especially in maintaining the caste system upon which society is based . another example is in anthony burgess ' 1962 dystopian novel a clockwork orange in which the novel 's anti-hero and protagonist , alex , undergoes a procedure called the ludovico technique , where he is fed a solution to cause severe nausea and then forced to watch violent acts . this renders him unable to perform any violent acts without inducing similar nausea . unintentionally , he also forms an aversion to classical music . some general examples that involve the classical conditioning theory in action include , in a lot of cases , advertising . this is a tactic used in order to elicit a response . advertising on game shows is one of many examples . with the exciting and positive environment of a game show , the viewer may then start to generate an exciting response to the advertisement because of the association with the environment . another example , very similar to pavlov 's experiment , involves food . every time a person goes into the kitchen , they begin to feel hungry . this can also relate to eating certain foods while watching a scary movie turning into associating terror with the food that was being consumed at the times of watching the movie . any type of music , such as christmas music , that triggers certain sweet memories are related to classical conditioning as well .