Samuel Smiles

early life and education . born in haddington , east lothian , scotland , smiles was the son of janet wilson of dalkeith and samuel smiles of haddington . he was one of eleven surviving children . while his family members were strict cameronian , he did not practice . he studied at a local school , leaving at the age of 14 . he apprenticed to be a doctor under dr . robert lewins . this arrangement enabled smiles to study medicine at the university of edinburgh in 1829 . there he furthered his interest in politics , and became a strong supporter of joseph hume . during this time , samuel junior contracted a lung disease , and his father was advised to send him on a long sea voyage . his father died in the 1832 cholera epidemic , but smiles was enabled to continue with his studies because he was supported by his mother . she ran the small family general store firm in the belief that the '' lord will provide '' . her example of working ceaselessly to support herself and his nine younger siblings strongly influenced smiles 's future life , but he developed a benign and tolerant outlook that was sometimes at odds with that of his reformed presbyterian forebears . career as a campaigner . in 1837 , he wrote articles for the edinburgh weekly chronicle and the leeds times , campaigning for reform act 1832 . in november 1838 , smiles was invited to become the editor of the leeds times , a position he accepted and filled until 1842 . in may 1840 , smiles became secretary to the leeds parliamentary reform association , an organisation that held to the six objectives of chartism : universal suffrage for all men over the age of 21 ; equal-sized electoral districts ; voting by secret ballot ; an end to the need of mps to qualify for parliament , other than by winning an election ; pay for mps ; and annual parliaments . as editor of the leeds times , he advocated radical causes ranging from women 's suffrage to free trade and parliamentary reform . by the late 1840s , however , smiles became concerned about the advocation of physical force by chartists feargus o'connor and george julian harney , although he seems to have agreed with them that the movement 's current tactics were not effective , saying that '' mere political reform will not cure the manifold evils which now afflict society '' . on 7 december 1843 , samuel married sarah ann holmes dixon in leeds . they had three daughters and two sons . in 1845 , he left the leeds times and became a secretary for the newly formed leeds & thirsk railway . after nine years , he worked for the south eastern railway . in the 1850s , smiles abandoned his interest in parliament and decided that self-help was the most important place of reform . in 1859 , he published his book self-help ( book ) . smiles wrote articles for the quarterly . in an article on railways , he argued that the railways should be nationalised and that third-class passengers should be encouraged . smiles , p . 99 . in 1861 smiles published an article from the quarterly , renamed workers earnings , savings , and strikes . he claimed poverty in many instances was caused by habitual improvidence : in 1866 , smiles became president of the national provident institution but left in 1871 , after suffering a debilitating stroke . writings . in 1875 , his book thrift was published . in it , he said that '' riches do not constitute any claim to distinction . it is only the vulgar who admire riches as riches '' . samuel smiles , thrift ( london : john murray , 1885 ) , p . 294 . he claimed that the poor law amendment act 1834 was '' one of the most valuable that has been placed on the statute-book in modern times '' . smiles , thrift , p . 330 . he also criticised laissez-faire : in 1877 , the letters young smiles wrote home during his teenage sea voyage , as well as the log he kept of his journey to australia and america between february 1869 and march 1871 , were published in london in book form , under the title a boy 's voyage round the world . in 1881 he claimed : . later life , death and descendants . sir george reid was commissioned to paint smiles 's portrait , completed in 1877 and now in the collection of the national gallery , london . copies of his handwriting can be found in the archives of east lothian council . when , in 1892 , william gladstone returned to power and , as prime minister , introduced his second irish home rule bill , smiles wrote to his son in ulster : '' do n't you rebel . keep quiet , though i see your name among the agitators & nbsp ; . your letter is frightfully alarming & nbsp ; . gladstone has come into power and we are threatened with civil war . this can not be the result of good statesmanship . yet there are liberal members to cheer on the maniac . alas , alas for liberalism ! & nbsp ; . must i give you six months notice to withdraw my loans to the b.r . co . , for i want to keep the little money i have for wife and bairns , not for arming the ulstermen '' . smiles , pp . 184–185 . smiles wrote to lucy smiles in 1893 , '' this home rule bill is horrid & nbsp ; & nbsp ; . i am quite appalled at that wretched hound , miscalled statesman , throwing the country into a state of turmoil . i can not understand how so many persons in this part of britain follow that maniac , just like a flock of sheep . he is simply bursting with self-conceit . alas ! alas for liberalism ! '' smiles , p . 185 . on 16 april 1904 , samuel smiles died in kensington , london and was buried in brompton cemetery . shortly before his death , he was reportedly offered a knighthood , which he declined to accept . smiles 's grandchildren include sir walter smiles , an ulster unionist party mp . through that branch of the family , smiles is also the great-great-grandfather of bear grylls , a well-known adventurer . self-help . smiles was not very successful in his careers as a doctor and journalist . he joined several cooperative ventures , but they failed for lack of capital . disillusioned , he turned away from middle-class utopianism . he finally found intellectual refuge and national fame in the isolation of self-help . robert j . morris , '' tommy smiles and the genesis of self-help ; the retreat to a petit bourgeois utopia . '' historical journal 24.1 ( 1981 ) : 89-109 online . the origins of his most famous book , self-help , lay in a speech he gave in march 1845 in response to a request by a mutual improvement society , published as , the education of the working classes . in it smiles said : bibliography sinnema , peter w . : 'introduction ' , in samuel smiles , self-help ( oxford : oxford university press , 2002 ) . . further reading . christopher clausen , '' how to join the middle classes with the help of dr . smiles and mrs . beeton '' , american scholar , 62 ( 1993 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 403–18 . k . fielden , '' samuel smiles and self-help '' , victorian studies , 12 ( 1968–69 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 155–76 . j . f . c . harrison , '' the victorian gospel of success '' , victorian studies , 1 ( 1957–58 ) . john hunter , '' the spirit of self-help - a life of samuel smiles '' , ( shepheard walwyn 2017 ) . adrian jarvis , samuel smiles and the construction of victorian values ( sutton , 1997 ) . thomas mackay ( ed . ) , the autobiography of samuel smiles ( john murray , 1905 ) . r . j . morris , '' samuel smiles and the genesis of self-help '' , historical journal , 24 ( 1981 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 89–109 . jeffrey richards , '' spreading the gospel of self-help : g . a . henty and samuel smiles '' , journal of popular culture , 16 ( 1982 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 52–65 . tim travers , '' samuel smiles and the origins of 'self-help ' : reform and the new enlightenment '' , albion , 9 ( 1977 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 161–87 . vladimir trendafilov , '' the origins of self-help : samuel smiles and the formative influences on an ex-seminal work '' , the victorian , 1 ( 2015 ) . alexander tyrrell , . “ class consciousness in early victorian britain : samuel smiles , leeds politics , and the self-help creed . ” journal of british studies , vol . 9 , no . 2 , 1970 , pp . & nbsp ; 102–125 . online . external links . character by samuel smiles in html format commentary on self-help by tom butler-bowdon