Star Control

gameplay . star control is a combination of a strategy game and real-time one-on-one ship combat simulator . the ship combat is inspired by the classic game spacewar ! , while the turn-based strategy is inspired by paul reiche iii 's 1983 game archon . players begin the game in one of 15 different scenarios on a rotating star map . the player has up to three actions per turn , which are used to explore new stars and colonize or fortify worlds . these colonies provide resources to the player 's ships , like currency and crew . the goal is to move your ships across the galaxy , claim planets along the way , and finally destroy your opponent ’ s star base . when two rival ships meet on the battlefield , an arcade-style combat sequence begins . the game offers different ships to pilot , which are deliberately imbalanced in ability . match-ups between these ships have a major influence over combat . there are 14 different ships , with unique abilities for each . ships typically have a unique firing attack , as well as some kind of secondary ability . both actions consume the ship 's battery , which recharges automatically ( with few exceptions ) . ships have a limited amount of crew , representing the total damage a ship can take before being destroyed . this ties into the strategic meta-game between combat , where the crew can be replenished at colonies . during combat , the screen frames the action between the two ships with an overhead view , zooming in as they approach each other . players try to outgun and outmaneuver each other . there is a planet in the middle of the battlefield , providing a centre of gravity , which players can either crash into , or glide nearby to gain momentum . the story framing the gameplay is minimal compared to the sequel , described mostly in the game 's scenario introductions . some background can be found in the manuals about two warring factions . the game can be played by one player against the computer , or two players head to head . . development . concept and origins . star control is the first collaboration between paul reiche iii and fred ford . reiche had started his career working for dungeons & dragons publisher tsr , before developing pc games for free fall associates . after releasing world tour golf , reiche created an advertising mock-up for what would become star control , showing a dreadnaught and some ships fighting . he pitched the game to electronic arts , before instead securing an agreement with accolade as a publisher , thanks to reiche 's former producer taking a job there . meanwhile , ford had started his career creating games for japanese personal computers before transitioning to more corporate software development . after a few years working at graphics companies in silicon valley , ford realized he missed working in the game industry . at this point , reiche needed a programmer-engineer and ford was seeking a designer-artist , so their mutual friends set up a gaming night to re-introduce them . the meeting was hosted at game designer greg johnson 's house , and one of the friends who encouraged the meeting was fantasy artist erol otus . originally called starcon , the game began as an evolution on concepts that reiche first created in archon : the light and the dark , as well as mail order monsters . the vision for the game was science-fiction archon , where asymmetric combatants fight using different abilities in space . according to ford , '' starcon is really just archon with an s-t in front of it '' , pointing to the one-on-one combat and strategic modes of both games . star control would base its combat sequences on the classic game spacewar ! , as well as the core experience of space combat game star raiders . as ford and reiche were still building their workflow as a team , the game took on a more limited scope compared to the sequel . . design and production . fred ford 's first prototype was a two-player action game where the vux and yehat ships blow up asteroids , which led them to build the entire universe around that simple play experience . the yehat ship was ford 's crescent-shaped design , and its shield-generator led them to optimize the ship for close combat . they built on the two original ships with many additional ships and character concepts , and playtested them with friends such as greg johnson and robert leyland . the team preferred to iterate on ship designs rather than plan them , as they discovered different play-styles during testing . the asymmetry between the combatants became essential to the experience . ford explains , '' our ships were n't balanced at all , one on one . but the idea was , your fleet of ships , your selection of ships in total was as strong as someone else 's , and then , it came down to which matchup did you find '' . still , the ships were still given some balance by having their energy recharge at different rates . although the story does not factor heavily into the game , the character concepts were created based on the ship designs . the team would begin with paper illustrations , followed by logical abilities for those ships , and a character concept that suited the ship 's look-and-feel . the first ship sketches were based on popular science fiction , such as spacewars ! or battlestar galactica , and slowly evolved into original designs as they discussed why the ships were fighting each other . paul reiche iii describes their character creation process , '' i know it probably sounds weird , but when i design a game like this , i make drawings of the characters and stare at them . i hold little conversations with them . 'what do you guys do ? ' and they tell me . '' by the end of this process , they wrote a short summary for each alien , describing their story and personality . having designed a larger ship that launches fighters on command , reiche and ford decided this would be a dominating race . these antagonists would be called the ur-quan , with a motivation to dominate the galaxy to hunt for slaves , and an appearance based on a national geographic image of a predatory caterpillar dangling over its prey . they decided to organize the characters into nominally '' good and bad '' factions , each with seven unique races and ships , with the humans on the good side . the cowardly personality of the spathi were inspired by their backwards-shooting missiles . after deciding that the game would need more humanoid characters , they created the syreen as a powerful and attractive humanoid female race . a more robotic ship inspired an alien race called the androsynth , whose appearance was imagined as devo flying a spaceship . the shofixti were inspired by concepts in david brin 's the uplift war . reiche and ford asked themselves who might be uplifted by the yehat , a fierce warrior race , and decided upon the shofixti as a ferocious super rodent . . porting and technology . a technological limitation at the time was the limited number of colors , which required that they create settings for cga , ega , and vga monitors . a separate team ported a stripped down version of the game to the commodore 64 , spectrum and amstrad , which meant reducing the number of ships to 8 , not to mention the introduction of new bugs and balance issues . additional problems were caused by the number of simultaneous key-presses required for a multiplayer game , which required ford to code a solution that would work across multiple different computer keyboards . the game was ultimately ported to the sega genesis , in a team led by fred ford . because the genesis port was a cartridge-based game with no battery backup , it lacked the scenario-creator of its pc cousin , but it came pre-loaded with a few additional scenarios not originally in the game . whereas the star control initially featured synthesized audio , they discovered the digital mod file format to help port the music to console , which would later become the core music format for their sequel . it took nearly 5 months to convert the code and color palates , leaving little time to optimize the game under accolade 's tight schedule , leading to slowdown issues . log of the 2007-06-13 irc session with toys for bob : '' the same goes for the genesis version of sc1 where we did a quick port with the intention of optimizing it for speed , but they though ( sic ) having a 12megabit cartridge was a much better selling point . '' also , the port was not authorized by sega , which led led to a lawsuit between accolade and sega of america . sega v . accolade became an important legal case , creating a precedent to allow reverse engineering under fair use . this led sega to settle the lawsuit in accolade 's favor , making them a licensed sega developer . released under accolade 's new '' ballistic '' label for high quality games , the game was touted as the first 12-megabit cartridge created for the system . the box art for the sega version was adapted from the original pc version , this time re-painted by famed artist boris vallejo . . reception . when stardock became the top bidder atari 's star control assets , paul reiche indicated that he still owned the copyright in the original star control games , so stardock must have purchased the star control trademark . stardock confirmed the split in the star control intellectual property . as stardock began developing their new star control game , they re-iterated that they did not acquire the copyright to the first two games , and that they would need a license from reiche and ford to use their content and lore . reiche and ford echoed this understanding in their 2015 game developer conference interview , stating that stardock 's game would use the star control trademark only . . notes and references . external links . creators of star control—developer blog the pages of now and forever—a fan site star control on classic reload