1st Armored Division (United States)

ready first . the division 's 1st brigade deployed again to iraq in january 2006 under the command of colonel sean b . macfarland after months of intensive training in grafenwöhr and hohenfels , germany . many of the soldiers who fought with units like 1–36 infantry ( '' spartans '' ) , 2–37 armor ( '' iron dukes '' ) , and 1–37 ( '' bandits '' ) during the invasion of iraq returned for a second tour . most of the 1st bct was initially deployed to northern iraq in nineveh province concentrating on the city of tal ' afar . in may 2006 , the main force of the 1st brigade received orders to move south to the city of ramadi in volatile al anbar province . since 2003 , al anbar served as a base of operations for the sunni insurgency and al qaeda . ramadi , its capital , had neither a government nor a police force when the brigade arrived . most military strategists inside and outside of the bush administration believed that the war in anbar had already concluded unsuccessfully . al qaeda in iraq publicly announced ramadi as the capital of their new caliphate and the city alone averaged more than twenty attacks per day ; the province was statistically the most dangerous location in the country , and the insurgency enjoyed free rein throughout much of the province . . ramadi . when the 1st brigade arrived in ramadi in june 2006 with more than 70 m1 abrams tanks and 84 bradley fighting vehicles , many locals believed the brigade was preparing for a fallujah-style block-by-block clearing assault on the city and many insurgents fled the city . following colonel h.r . mcmaster 's '' clear , hold , build '' strategy , the brigade developed a plan to isolate the insurgents , deny them sanctuary , and build iraqi security forces . the 1st brigade moved into some of ramadi 's dangerous neighborhoods and built four of what would eventually become eighteen combat outposts starting in july 2006 . the soldiers brought the territory under control and inflicted many casualties on the insurgents . on 24 july , the al-qaeda in iraq ( aqi ) launched a counterattack , initiating 24 assaults , each with about 100 fighters , on american positions . the insurgents failed in all of their attacks and lost about 30 men . . independence day . simultaneous with combat operations , the brigade worked on the '' hold '' portion of clear , hold , build . lieutenant colonel tony deane , commander of task force 1-35 armor , approached sheik abdul sattar bezia al-rishawi of the abu risha tribe in an attempt to recruit his tribesmen to the police force . in his book a chance in hell that focuses on the operation in al anbar , jim michaels wrote that the us had a flawed view on civil government which ignored the tribal history of iraq . '' the tribal system embraced elements of democracy . the sheik may not be elected , '' wrote michaels , '' but nor is he born into his job . sheiks are generally selected by a group of elders . throughout history , ignoring the tribes in iraq has never been a smart move . sheiks have wielded power for thousands of years and survived countless efforts to blunt their influence in the name of modernity . '' to facilitate sheik sittar , colonel macfarland 's deputy , lieutenant colonel jim lechner , and his police implementation officer , marine major teddy gates , changed the location for iraqi police recruiting . they wanted a more secure location close to sattar 's house , as this would enable them to build a police station north of the euphrates river in an area where many potential recruits lived . having already had his father and three brothers killed by aqi , sattar appreciated the idea . the residents ' response was overwhelming by standing in line to serve as ip 's at the next recruiting drive . in august , the new jazeera police station north of the river , manned mostly by abu ali jassim tribe members , was attacked and the sheikh of the tribe was killed . aqi hid the sheikh 's body so it was not found for several days , a violation of islam 's strict burial rules that call for internment within 24 hours . the attack on the station killed several iraqi police and created many burn casualties . macfarland offered to evacuate the police to camp blue diamond , an american army camp outside of ramadi , while they repaired the station . but the iraqis refused to abandon their post and instead put their flag back up and resumed patrolling that same day . . awakening . with the locals outraged by aqi 's disregard of islamic funeral laws , the charismatic sattar stepped forward to continue the push toward working with the americans . on 9 september 2006 , he organized a tribal council , attended by more than 50 sheiks as well as macfarland , where he officially declared an '' anbar awakening '' . it would convene an awakening council dedicated to driving the aqi out of ramadi and establish rule of law and local governance . the anbar awakening was realized with sittar as its leader . mcfarland , speaking later about the meeting , said , '' i told them that i now knew what it was like to be in independence hall on 4 july 1776 when the declaration of independence was signed . '' while attacks remained high through october 2006 , the awakening and sittar 's influence began to spread . the aqi , realized it was losing its influence over the citizens and launched a counterattack on the sufia tribal area on 25 november . the attack was intended to terrorize and insult the sufia tribe , though with the 1st bct 's m1a1 tanks reinforcing tribal defenders , the aqi was repelled and the relationship between the sufia tribe and the 1st armored division improved . by early 2007 , the combination of tribal engagement and combat outposts was defeating aqi 's in ramadi and throughout the province . president george w . bush , in his 23 january 2007 state of the union speech referred to al anbar as a place '' where al qaeda terrorists have gathered and local forces have begun showing a willingness to fight them . '' . '' the gettysburg of this war '' . by february 2007 , contact with insurgents dropped almost 70 percent in number since june 2006 as well as decreasing in complexity and effect . by the summer of 2007 , fighting in al anbar was mostly over . frederick kagan , resident scholar at the american enterprise institute , called al anbar '' the gettysburg of this war , to the extent that counterinsurgencies can have such turning points , '' writing '' progress in anbar and throughout the sunni community has depended heavily on a skillful balance between military force and political efforts at the local level . '' the tactics , techniques , and procedures used by 1st bct were groundbreaking at the time but came to serve as the philosophical basis for the surge in iraq . in nine months , 85 soldiers , sailors , and marines were killed , and over 500 were wounded . division headquarters redeploys . in september 2007 , amid a national debate about troop levels in iraq and , more broadly , about the us strategy in iraq , the 1st armored division headquarters was re-deployed to iraq . general david petraeus ' surge strategy was in effect , with major counterinsurgency operations across the country . '' this is a pivotal and historic time for the 1st ad , for the forces in iraq and for the nation , '' said brig . gen . james c . boozer , a deputy commanding general for 1st ad at the time of the division 's deployment . the division began its deployment the same day petraeus delivered his report to congress on the situation in iraq , concluding that '' the military objectives of the surge are , in large measure , being met . '' the division , commanded by then-major general mark hertling , conducted a relief in place with the 25th infantry division and assumed command of multi-national division north , headquartered in tikrit , iraq , on 28 october 2007 , just as macfarland 's anbar awakening was pushing aqi out of anbar . at the time in northern iraq , enemy attacks averaged 1,800 a month , the iraqis had little trust in their central government , and the unemployment rate was high . hertling assumed responsibility for all coalition forces in northern iraq . multi-national division north was composed of five maneuver brigade combat teams , a combat aviation brigade , a fires brigade , and an engineer brigade . the division had responsibility includes the iraqi provinces of ninawa , kirkuk ( formerly at tamin ) , salah ad din , and diyala along with dahuk , and as sulaymaniyah . the area included the critical cities of tal afar , mosul , bayji , tikrit , kirkuk , samarra , balad , baqubah , dahuk , and sulaymaniah . arbil province remained aligned as a separate multi-national division , north-east . the division area of operations included ethnic fault lines between arabs and kurds , religious fault lines between sunni and shia muslims , numerous tribal regions , and the complexities involving significant former regime elements . the 1st armored division immediately applied a mix of lethal and non-lethal counterinsurgency tactics , as maneuver battalions partnered with state department officials and provincial reconstruction teams . commanders applied a focused lethality , protecting the iraqi population while killing insurgents in large volumes . the division transferred responsibility to headquarters 25th infantry division on 8 december 2008 and returned to wiesbaden army airfield ( later renamed lucius d . clay kaserne ) in germany . on 17 april 2013 , us secretary of defense chuck hagel announced the deployment of elements of the 1st armored division headquarters to jordan in response to the crisis in syria . the elements from the 1st armored division joined forces in jordan and provided command and control in cooperation with jordan forces , which was used to establish a joint task force headquarters that provided command and control for chemical weapons response , humanitarian assistance efforts , and stability operations . the 1st armored division planners in jordan are facilitating the exchange of information with the jordanian armed forces . . move to fort bliss . in 2005 the base realignment and closure ( brac ) commission decided to move the 1st armored division to fort bliss no later than 2012 . as part of the current army-wide transformation , several division units were deactivated or converted to other units . the 1st armored division officially uncased its colors at fort bliss on 13 may 2011 . 1st brigade : the 1st brigade , 1st armored division cased its colors at friedberg , germany on 20 april 2007 , ending 62 years of military presence in germany . 1st brigade reactivated and uncased its colors on 27 october 2008 . it deployed as of 19 november 2010 in support of operation iraqi freedom . the brigade returned home in nov 2010 , and began reconfiguring as a stryker brigade combat team ( sbct ) after redeployment from iraq in november 2010 . denoted 1-1ad '' ready first '' , the 1st bct , 1st armored division deployed to afghanistan in december 2012 . mg dana j . h . pittard ( 28 november 2012 ) fort bliss monitor the first female engagement team to deploy from fort bliss was trained in 2012 before secretary of defense leon panetta 's order rescinding restrictions on women in combat roles . '' 'fet ' to fight : female engagement team makes history '' , fort bliss monitor , 11 july 2012 '' ready first '' brigade converted from a stryker bct to an abct 20 june 2019 . 2nd brigade : 2nd brigade , 1st armored division in baumholder , germany , remained assigned to usareur until 15 july 2009 , when it was reflagged as the separate 170th infantry brigade . it relocated to the u.s . in 2012 . as part of the grow the army plan announced on 19 december 2007 , the 170th is one of two infantry brigades to be activated and retained in germany until 2012 and 2013 . ( the other brigade is the 172nd infantry brigade in schweinfurt , germany , which reflagged from 2nd brigade , 1st infantry division on 16 march 2008 . ) in 2010 , the u.s . army attached the 2nd brigade , 1st armored division to the brigade modernization command , assigning it the evaluation mission previously held by the 5th brigade , 1st armored division , aetf . in 2016 , 2nd brigade moved to the ready pool for deployment . 3rd brigade : on 28 march 2008 , the 3rd brigade , 1st armored division ( hbct ) deactivated at fort riley and reflagged as 2d ( dagger ) brigade , 1st infantry division ( hbct ) . the 3rd brigade was reactivated as an infantry brigade combat team on 2 july 2009 at fort bliss . 4th brigade : on 4 march 2008 , 4th brigade , 1st armored division activated at fort bliss as a hbct and reflagged from the 4th brigade , 1st cavalry division . 5th brigade : in 2007 , a new unit , 5th brigade , 1st armored division , activated at fort bliss as an army evaluation task force . 5th bct tested the future force warrior system . it evaluated multiple types of spin out equipment and prepared them for fielding to the rest of the army . 5th brigade was deactivated in 2010 . aviation brigade : the aviation brigade , 1st armored division deactivated on 7 june 2006 at fliegerhorst kaserne , hanau , germany and moved to fort riley , kansas to reflag as the modular combat aviation brigade , 1st infantry division . the combat aviation brigade , 4th id was reflagged to cab , 1st armored division . 4–501st aviation ( 4th battalion '' pistoleros '' , 501st regiment , combat aviation brigade , 1st armored division ) deployed to kuwait in november 2012 . engineer brigade : the engineer brigade , 1st armored division , the last of its kind in the army , cased its colors and inactivated at giessen , germany on 26 april 2007 . division artillery : division artillery , 1st armored division cased its colors and was deactivated at baumholder , germany on 1 may 2007 . the 1st ad divarty was the last standing division artillery unit in the army . the divarty reactivated in 2014 at fort bliss . the division 's colors were officially moved from germany to fort bliss on 13 may 2011 . patton , mark , '' 'old ironsides ' bids farewell to germany '' , stars and stripes , 13 may 2011 . on 25 june 2013 , army force restructuring plans were announced . as part of the plan , the division deactivated its 3rd brigade combat team following its 2014 deployment to afghanistan . the 4th bct was reflagged as the 3rd brigade combat team in april 2015 . the 1st armored division 's sustainment brigade deployed 200 of its soldiers to afghanistan on 11 may 2015 . 1st ad sustainment brigade deploys to afghanistan . operation freedom 's sentinel . in late december 2016 , armytimes reported that about 1,500 soldiers from the 1st stryker brigade combat team and about 800 soldiers from the 16th combat aviation brigade to afghanistan as part of operation freedom 's sentinel . in march 2017 , stars and stripes reported that , according to an army statement , 200 soldiers from the 1st sustainment brigade will deploy throughout afghanistan to lead logistical operations , particularly providing supply , to support the us counter terrorism mission and afghan-led operations against the taliban . . operation inherent resolve . in march 2017 , stars and stripes reported that 400 soldiers from the division 's headquarters element will deploy to iraq in summer 2017 , where it led the coalition 's ground efforts as part of operation inherent resolve . . honors . hhc , 1st armored division . ; campaign participation credit world war ii gulf war global war on terrorism iraq war ; decorations meritorious unit commendation ( army ) for southwest asia army superior unit award for tf eagle from 10 april 1994 to 7 november 1996 valorous unit award for operation iraqi freedom i presidential unit citation for operation iraqi freedom i joint meritorious unit award for operation iraqi freedom i meritorious unit commendation ( army ) for operation iraqi freedom 07–09 meritorious unit commendation ( army ) for operation iraqi freedom 10–11/ operation new dawn . hhc , 1st brigade , 1st armored division . ; campaign participation credit world war ii : tunisia ; naples-foggia ; anzio ; rome-arno ; north apennines ; po valley ; decorations army superior unit award for tf eagle from 10 april 1994 to 7 november 1996 presidential unit citation for operation iraqi freedom joint meritorious unit award for operation iraqi freedom valorous unit citation for operation iraqi freedom navy unit commendation for operation iraqi freedom . hhc , 2nd brigade , 1st armored division . ; campaign participation credit world war ii : algeria-french morocco ( with arrowhead ) ; tunisia ; naples-foggia ; anzio ; rome-arno ; north apennines ; po valley southwest asia : defense of saudi arabia ; liberation and defense of kuwait ; cease-fire ; decorations presidential unit citation for oif 1 ( 2003–2004 ) valorous unit award , iraq 1991 meritorious unit commendation , southwest asia 2005–2006 meritorious unit commendation , iraq 2008–2009 army superior unit award for 1995–1996 . hhc , 3rd brigade , 1st armored division . ; campaign participation credit world war ii : rome-arno ; north apennines ; po valley southwest asia : defense of saudi arabia ; liberation and defense of kuwait ; cease-fire ; decorations valorous unit award for iraq-kuwait valorous unit award for operation iraqi freedom ( oif 1 ) . hhb , 1st armored division artillery . ; campaign participation credit world war ii : tunisia ; naples-foggia ; rome-arno ; anzio ; north apennines ; po valley southwest asia : defense of saudi arabia ; liberation and defense of kuwait ; decorations meritorious unit commendation ( army ) for southwest asia . hhc , 1st armored division support command . ; campaign participation credit world war ii : tunisia ; naples-foggia ; rome-arno ; north apennines ; po valley southwest asia : defense of saudi arabia ; liberation and defense of kuwait ; cease-fire ; decorations meritorious unit commendation ( army ) for southwest asia . hhc , aviation brigade , 1st armored division . ; campaign participation credit ; southwest asia : defense of saudi arabia ; liberation and defense of kuwait ; cease-fire ; decorations ; valorous unit award for iraq-kuwait army superior unit award for 1995–1996 . references . covers its first ( world war ii era ) incarnation . formerly the ebct , now army evaluation task force . external links . 1st armored division official twitter