The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers

comic strips . the freak brothers first appeared in the rag , an underground press published in austin , texas , beginning in may 1968 . their debut was in an advertising flyer for a winter 1968 film short called the texas hippies march on the capitol . additional on december 19 , 2016 . freak brothers strips soon became popular and were regularly reprinted in underground papers around the united states and in other parts of the world . the freak brothers ' first comic book appearance was in feds ' n ' heads , self-published by shelton in the spring of 1968 ( and later re-issued in multiple printings by berkeley 's the print mint ) . they also appeared in the first two issues of jay lynch 's bijou funnies . in 1969 shelton and three friends from texas founded rip off press in san francisco , which took over publication of all subsequent freak brothers comics . the first compilation of their adventures , the collected adventures of the fabulous furry freak brothers , had its first printing in 1971 and has been continually in print ever since . in addition to underground and college weekly newspapers , new adventures appeared in magazines such as playboy , high times , and rip off comix ; these too were collected in comic book form . shelton continued to write and draw the series until 1992 , in collaboration with dave sheridan ( 1974–1982 , his death ) and paul mavrides ( 1978-1992 ) . the majority of the comic books consist of one or more multi-page stories together with a number of one-page strips ; many of the latter have a one-row skit featuring fat freddy 's cat at the bottom of the page . issues 8-10 contained only the long-form story '' the idiots abroad '' , which the comics journal listed as 44 of the '' 100 greatest comics of the century . '' the uk newspaper the guardian said of a 2003 reprint of the story that , '' the graphic quality is , even in slightly muddy reproduction , astonishing . depictions of various european cities recall hergé in their accuracy and detail . as for the subject matter , considering the dates of composition , it has hardly dated . '' . characters . the freak brothers are not siblings . they are a threesome of freaks ( similar to , but distinct from , hippies ) from san francisco . freewheelin ' franklin freek , although laid-back , is the most street-smart of the trio . apparently he has always been on the streets and it appears that he is several years older than the others . he is certainly old enough to be troubled at times by impotence . in one story he reveals that he grew up in an orphanage and never knew his parents . tall and skinny , he has a big bulbous nose , a waterfall mustache and a ponytail . he wears cowboy boots and a cowboy hat . in one strip , he runs into an ex-girlfriend who has a child that bears a striking resemblance to him . he does his best to evade them and is relieved when she does not recognize him . in another strip , when he meets his own ( possible ) father , the same plot is inverted . depending on the level of colorization used in the strip in question , franklin 's hair is red , blonde , or light brown . phineas t . phreak is the intellectual and idealist of the group . he has enough mastery of chemistry to create new drugs and takes an avid interest in politics . of the three , he is the most committed to social change and environmental issues . he is from texas and while his mother is relaxed and open-minded , his father is a card-carrying member of the john birch society . he is the hairiest of the brothers—tall and skinny with a thick bush of black hair , a beard , a nose bearing more than a passing resemblance to a joint , and glasses . he is the stereotypical left-wing radical , bearing a superficial resemblance to abbie hoffman or jerry rubin . fat freddy freekowtski is the least intelligent of the trio and is most likely to be preoccupied with food . he is fat , with curly yellow hair and a mustache . his compulsion to eat is the subject of several of the adventures of the group . fat freddy frequently gets '' burned '' during drug transactions ; when he does '' score '' he typically contrives to lose the drugs in various ways , such as by dumping them out of a shopping bag in front of a cooling fan , which then blows them out the window onto a police car . fat freddy comes from an unexceptional large family in cleveland . in the idiots abroad , freddy visits the polish village of gfatsk , where everybody happens to look like him . he is driven away by an angry mob as soon as they hear the name freekowtski . other recurring characters include : fat freddy 's cat appears mainly in his own , separate strip at the bottom of the one-page freak brothers strips ( getting his start just as krazy kat did ) . he also has several multi-page stories devoted to him . many of his strips parallel a storyline in the corresponding freak brothers story , and often have themes of a scatology nature . he has several '' nephews '' who refer to him as '' uncle f . '' and sometimes finds himself confronting an organized army of cockroaches or a huge tribe of mice who share the apartment with the freak brothers . he is far smarter than his owner ( whom he frequently refers to as '' the obese one '' ) and regards the freak brothers with amused contempt , sometimes using their headphones as a litter box . he is also the subject of several spin-off collections of stories . norbert the nark , an inept dea agent who is continually trying , and failing , to arrest the freak brothers . hiram '' country '' cowfreak , a hippy who grows vast quantities of marijuana at his isolated farmstead . he is referred to as the freak brothers ' '' cousin '' . dealer mcdope , one of the trio 's dealers . he is often mentioned in the strips but rarely appears in person . the character was initially created by dave sheridan for the rip off press title mother 's oats comix . tricky prickears , a blind , deaf and reactionary detective , sometimes billed as '' the freak brothers ' favorite law enforcement officer '' . the character is a parody of dick tracy , to the extent that shelton drew his appearances in a different style , resembling that of tracy 's creator chester gould . governor rodney richpigge , a stereotypically rich , corrupt politician whom the freak brothers hold in general contempt . the governor 's son is a cocaine dealer . storylines and themes . drug use is the predominant theme that runs throughout all volumes of this title . the protagonists '' live in a state of blissful torpor relieved only by bursts of paranoia or stimulant-induced frenzy . '' additional on december 19 , 2016 marijuana is the most frequently mentioned , but numerous other stimulants and hallucinogens are mentioned as well . heroin is usually missing from the list . in one adventure , franklin is shown to turn down an offer of '' smack '' when hitching a ride . food is a recurring subject . these stories most often involve fat freddy and his marijuana-induced '' munchies '' ( increased appetite ) . the squalor engendered by the brothers ' indolence is often highlighted ; several strips feature the household 's cockroach population , ruled over by a fascist monarchy . several stories satirize governments , particularly the u.s . government . these stories invariably show politicians and their agents as corrupt , incompetent , or both . the theme of foreign travel is sometimes explored , most notably in the three-part idiots abroad series . it is common for the story-lines to begin with an air of realism , but rapidly descend into comic pantomime . classic freak brothers stories include : grass roots : the brothers find a year 's supply of cocaine and move to the country with the proceeds . they snort it all in two days . the brothers are joined by a trio of hippie women who join them in their misadventures : the dilapidated farmhouse , freddy 's run in with a hillbilly drug dealer , the rumor of gold on the property , and phineas running for sheriff . the fabulous furry freak brothers 5 ( rip off press , may 1977 ) . chariot of the globs : fat freddy 's cat is alien abduction . the fabulous furry freak brothers 4 ( rip off press , nov . 1975 ) . the fabulous furry freak brothers in the 21st century : the brothers experience life in the future . knock 'em dead : the brothers form a punk band . the 7th voyage of the fabulous furry freak brothers : a mexican odyssey : the brothers holiday in mexico , are thrown in jail and escape with the help of shaman don longjuan , in an oblique parody of the carlos castaneda books . the idiots abroad : the brothers are split up attempting to travel to colombia hoping to score cheap dope down there , yet none of them manages to reach bogotá ; fat freddy accidentally joins a group of nuclear terrorists in scotland before disrupting the international workers ' day military parade in moscow , ussr and being subsequently sold to slavery in africa ; franklin is almost killed by a native apocalyptic south american cult before joining a group of pirates ; while phineas ends up in mecca and becomes the world 's richest man after founding a new religion . serialized in the fabulous furry freak brothers issues 8–10 ( rip off press , 1984 , 1985 , and 1989 ) . . catchphrases . the freak brothers comics include several catchphrases : dope will get you through times of no money better than money will get you through times of no dope . : —freewheelin ' franklin . the los angeles public library featured anne herbert 's modification of the original quote written by gilbert shelton : '' books will get you through times of no money better than money will get you through times of no books '' ; this was used on a in-library poster featuring the likeness of the freewheelin ' franklin character . '' do n't get burned ! '' ( usually aimed at fat freddy as he sets out to purchase drugs ) smoking grass and drinking beer is like pissing into the wind . while you 're out there smashing the state , do n't forget to keep a smile on your lips and a song in your heart ! . other appearances . in film . in 1973 , without permission from gilbert shelton , the fabulous furry freak brothers appeared in the full-length pornographic film up in flames . the story involved the brothers ' attempts to raise cash to make their rent deadline ( the trio being in danger of being evicted from their apartment ) . fat freddy gains employment at a local food store run by graphic artist robert crumb 's character mr . natural ( also used without permission ) . director paul thomas anderson said the look of joaquin phoenix 's lead character , larry '' doc '' sportello , in anderson 's 2014 adaptation of the thomas pynchon novel inherent vice , was based in part on characters in the comics . '' there 's this documentary on daniel ellsberg , called the most dangerous man in america . there 's a great picture of a buddy of his who has this great set of glasses , a floppy hat and these mutton chops . i took a still frame from that and i sent it to phoenix , along with the omnibus collection of the fabulous furry freak brothers comic , by gilbert shelton—and that 's probably the most we really talked about phoenix 's portrayal of the character . '' in 2006 , the company grass roots films began production on a feature-length clay-animation film based on the series , called grass roots , co-produced by german distribution company x filme . a three-minute piece of test animation can be seen here . in 2013 , work on the film stopped . animated tv show . an animated series based on the characters , set in modern san francisco , is being developed for release in 2020 . the show features woody harrelson , tiffany haddish , pete davidson , and john goodman as voice actors for the three freaks and the cat . courtney solomon and mark canton will serve as executive producers , alongside adam devine and blake anderson who will also provide voice acting . a mini-episode was released may 6 , 2020 , titled '' kentucky fried freaks '' . greenmarketreport : 'new york comic con appearance ' according to the 2019 announcement it will be animated by starburns industries studio , which did rick & morty . places . fat freddy 's restaurant , in galway , ireland , has arcana and other memorabilia relating to the fabulous furry freak brothers and fat freddy 's cat . the fabulous furry freak brothers stagger inn , olongapo , philippines . bibliography . the fabulous furry freak brothers series . almost all of the titles in the series have a title in words . issues 0–7 and 12–13 are in black and white ; issues 8–11 were produced in both color and black-and-white editions . freak brothers no . 0 : underground classics 1 ( jan . 1985 ) freak brothers no . 1 : the collected adventures of . ( 1971 ) freak brothers no . 2 : further adventures of those . ( mar . 1972 ) freak brothers no . 3 : a year passes like nothing ( 1973 ) freak brothers no . 4 : brother , can you spare 75¢ for the . ( nov . 1975 ) freak brothers no . 5 : grass roots ( may 1977 ) freak brothers no . 6 : six snappy sockeroos ( june 1980 ) freak brothers no . 7 : several short stories ( 1982 ) freak brothers no . 8 : the idiots abroad , part i ( 1984 ) freak brothers no . 9 : the idiots abroad , part ii ( 1985 ) freak brothers no . 10 : the idiots abroad , part iii ( 1989 ) freak brothers no . 11 ( 1990 ) freak brothers no . 12 ( 1992 ) freak brothers no . 13 ( 1997 ) —black-and-white reprints of stories from thoroughly ripped ( rip off press , 1978 ) plus a new cover and one story never before printed in the u.s . : '' the plant '' fifty freakin ' years with the fabulous furry freak brothers ( knockabout comics , 2017 ) —new strips by shelton , as well as his written introduction . compilations and collections . several compilation titles have been published that merge several of the original titles into one book . thoroughly ripped with the fabulous furry freak brothers and fat freddy 's cat ! ( rip off press , 1978 ) —full-color collection of stories from high times magazine published from dec . 1976 to sept . 1978 ( as well as one story from playboy magazine ) . book came in two editions , one of which included a board game called '' it 's a raid '' . the fabulous furry freak brothers in grass roots ( rip off press , 1984 ) —full-color reprints of material from comic book issues 5 and 7 . the complete fabulous furry freak brothers , volume one ( knockabout comics , 2001 ) —reprints comic book issues 0–7 and 12 the complete fabulous furry freak brothers , volume two ( knockabout comics , 2004 ) —color reprints comic books issues 8-11 and 13 . ( note : according to the reverse title pages , the second volume has the same the fabulous furry freak brothers omnibus ( knockabout comics , 2008 ) —collection of the entire series , including some stories and covers done after publication of the '' complete '' books . includes everything from the two books above , except for the covers of rip off comics 15 and 21 , which do not show the freak brothers .