Sitting

prevalence . the british chiropractic association said in 2006 that 32 % of the british population spent more than ten hours per day sitting down . . positions . on the floor . the most common ways of sitting on the floor involve bending the knees . one can also sit with the legs unbent , using something solid as support for the back or leaning on one 's arms . sitting with bent legs can be done with the legs mostly parallel or by crossing them over each other . a common cross-legged position is with the lower part of both legs folded towards the body , crossing each other at the ankle or calf , with both ankles on the floor , sometimes with the feet tucked under the knees or thighs . the position is known in several european languages as tailor style , from the traditional working posture of tailors ; compare tailor 's bunion . it is also named after various plains-dwelling nomads : in american english indian style , in many european languages '' turkish style '' , and in japanese . in yoga it is known as sukhasana . on a raised seat . various raised surfaces at the appropriate height can be used as seats for humans , whether they are made for the purpose , such as chairs , chairs and benches , or not . while the buttocks are nearly always rested on the raised surface , there are many differences in how one can hold one 's legs and back . there are two major styles of sitting on a raised surface . the first has one or two of the legs in front of the sitting person ; in the second , sitting astride something , the legs incline outwards on either side of the body . the feet can rest on the floor or on a footrest , which can keep them vertical , horizontal , or at an angle in between . they can also dangle if the seat is sufficiently high . legs can be kept right to the front of the body , spread apart , or one crossed over the other . the upper body can be held upright , recline to either side or backward , or one can lean forward . yoga , traditions and spirituality . there are many seated positions in various traditions and rituals . four examples are : 正座 ( zhengzuo ) is a chinese word which describes the traditional formal way of sitting in ancient china . a related position is 跪座 , which differs in the tops of the feet being raised off the ground . vajrasana ( diamond pose ) is a yoga posture ( asana ) similar to seiza . the lotus position involves resting each foot on the opposite thigh so that the soles of the feet face upwards . the burmese position , named so because of its use in buddhist sculptures in burma , places both feet in front of the pelvis with knees bent and touching the floor to the sides . the heels are pointing toward pelvis or upward , and toes are pointed so that the tops of the feet lie on the ground . this looks similar to the cross-legged position , but the feet are not placed underneath the thigh of the next leg , therefore the legs do not cross . instead , one foot is placed in front of the other . in various mythology and folk magic , sitting is a magical act that connects the person who sits with other persons , states or places . . kneeling chairs . the kneeling chair ( often just referred to as '' ergonomic chair '' ) was designed to encourage better posture than the conventional chair . to sit in a kneeling chair , one rests one 's buttocks on the upper sloping pad and rests the front of the lower legs atop the lower pad , i.e . , the human position as both sitting and kneeling at the same time . health risks . in 1700 , de morbis artificum diatriba , listed sitting in odd postures as a cause of diseases in “ chair-workers ” . current studies indicate there is a significantly higher mortality rate among people who regularly sit for prolonged periods , and the risk is not negated by regular exercise , though it is lowered . the causes of mortality and morbidity include heart disease , obesity , type 2 diabetes and cancer , specifically , breast , endometrial , colorectal , lung , and epithelial ovarian cancer . the link between heart disease and diabetes mortality and sitting is well-established , but the risk of cancer mortality is unclear . sedentary time is also associated with an increased risk of depression in children and adolescents . a correlation between occupational sitting specifically and higher body mass index has been demonstrated , but causality has not yet been established . there are several hypotheses explaining why sitting is a health risk . these include changes in cardiac output , vitamin d , inflammation , sex hormone activity , lipoprotein lipase activity , and glut4 activity due to long periods of muscular unloading , among others . sitting may occupy up to half of an adult 's workday in developed countries . workplace programs to reduce sitting vary in method . they include sit-stand desks , counseling , workplace policy changes , walking or standing meetings , treadmill desks , breaks , therapy ball chairs , and stepping devices . results of these programs are mixed , but there is moderate evidence to show that changes to chairs ( adjusting the biomechanics of the chair or using different types of chairs ) can effectively reduce musculoskeletal symptoms in workers who sit for most of their day . public health programs typically focus on increasing physical activity rather than reducing sitting time . one major target for these public health programs is sitting in the workplace . for example , who europe recommended in september 2015 the provision of adjustable desks in the workplace . in general , there is conflicting evidence regarding the precise risks of sitting for long periods . a 2018 cochrane review found low-quality evidence that providing employees with a standing desk option may reduce the length of time some people sit at work in the first year . this reduction in sitting may decrease with time , and there is no evidence that standing desks are effective in the long term . in addition , a 2018 british journal of medicine systematic review concluded that interventions aimed at reducing sitting outside of work were only modestly effective . it is not clear how standing desks compare to other work-place interventions to reduce the length of time employees are sitting during the work day . . relationship between posture and health conditions . though most studies even until early 21st century relate human body postures to various musculoskeletal disorder , recent researches show no potential causal relationship between postures and these conditions like back pain ; other causes like sleep deprivation , stress and long-term physical inactivity or prolonged static unnatural postural stress could be significant confounders for various health conditions . however some research show that prolonged slouched position may be a cause for minor breathing disorders . though still a large proportion of the clinical practitioners attribute absence of a neutral spine posture as one of the main causes of conditions like back pain and neck pain , the relationship is not thoroughly established . it is also thought that much of so-called “ poor posture ” is actually just postural stress and being stuck with bad ergonomics that could be causing the pain — not really a postural problem . ihunch is an example of postural stress which could cause upper back pain and neck pain , which is prevalent in younger generations and people whose occupation involves prolonged usage of computers . sedentary behaviour . sedentary behaviour is any waking behaviour , whether in sitting or reclining posture , by an energy expenditure less or equal to 1.5 metabolic equivalents of task ( mets ) . met , beside the watt and kilojoules , is the unit for expressing the energy cost of physical activities . one met is defined as resting metabolic rate – as energy used with a person at rest , sitting quietly in a chair or as the amount of o2 consumed with that person . met for an adult weighing 70 & nbsp ; kg equals 3.5 ml o2 per kg body weight per min . sedentary behaviour should be distinguished from being inactive – performing insufficient amounts of mvpa ( moderate to vigorous physical activity ) . the world health organisation recommends at least 60 min of daily mvpa for children and adolescents aged 5–17 years , and 150 min of weekly mvpa for adults . sedentary behaviour can not be equated with screen time , although some researchers found out that a large share of waking time by children and adolescents in a sedentary position is accumulated by media consumption in front of a screen .