Raoul Wallenberg

present day attempts . in 2012 , russian lieutenant-general vasily khristoforov , head of the registration branch of the russian federal security service , said that the wallenberg case was still open . he also dismissed any allegation of a continuing cover-up , saying that '' this is another state and a different special service '' from the soviet union and the services in charge of holding wallenberg . . declared dead in absentia . on 29 march 2016 , an announcement was made by the swedish tax agency that a petition to have wallenberg declared dead in absentia was submitted . it stated that if he did not report to the tax agency before 14 october 2016 , he would be legally declared dead . wallenberg was declared dead legally in october 2016 , as announced through the petition . consistent with the approach used in other cases where the circumstances of death were not known , the swedish tax agency recorded the date of his death as 31 july 1952 , five years after he went missing . . connection to us intelligence . in may 1996 , the central intelligence agency ( cia ) released thousands of previously classified documents regarding raoul wallenberg , in response to requests filed under the freedom of information act . the documents , along with an investigation conducted by the newsmagazine us news and world report , appeared to confirm the long-held suspicion that wallenberg was an american intelligence asset during his time in hungary . wallenberg 's name appeared on a roster found in the national archives which listed the names of operatives associated with the cia 's wartime predecessor , the office of strategic services ( oss ) . the documents also included a 1954 memo from an anonymous cia source that identified a hungarian-exile living in stockholm who , according to the author , assisted in inserting wallenberg into hungary during wwii as an agent of oss . another declassified memorandum written in 1990 by the curator of the cia 's cia library , william henhoeffer , characterized the conclusion that wallenberg was working for the oss while in budapest as being '' essentially correct '' . more telling was a communique sent on 7 november 1944 by the oss 's secret intelligence branch in bari , italy , which apparently acknowledged that wallenberg was acting as an unofficial liaison between the oss and the anti-fascism ( mfm ) , an underground resistance during world war ii . the oss message notes wallenberg 's contacts with geza soos , a high-ranking mfm leader and further explains that soos '' may only be contacted '' through the swedish legation in budapest , which was wallenberg 's workplace and also served as the operational center for his attempts to aid the hungarian jews . the same message 's assertion that wallenberg '' will know if he ( soos ) is not in budapest '' is also curious , in that by november 1944 soos was in hiding and knowledge of his whereabouts would only have been available to individuals closely involved with the mfm . this conclusion is given further weight by additional evidence suggesting that communications from the mfm to us intelligence were transmitted first to stockholm and then relayed to washington via iver c . olsen , the american oss operative who initially recruited wallenberg to go to budapest in june 1944 . this particular disclosure has given rise to speculation as to whether , in addition to his efforts to rescue the hungarian jews , wallenberg may have also been pursuing a parallel clandestine mission aimed at politically destabilizing hungary 's pro-nazi government on behalf of the oss . this would also seem to add some credence to the potential explanation that it was his association with us intelligence that led to wallenberg being targeted by soviet authorities in january 1945 . several other humanitarians who had helped refugees during world war ii disappeared behind the iron curtain in the period 1949/50 , several years after wallenberg 's disappearance . oss ties may have been of interest to the soviets , but are not a complete explanation because some of those detained , i.e . hermann field and herta field , had not worked for the oss . all of these humanitarians , however , like wallenberg , had interacted with a large number of anti-fascist and socialist refugees during the war , and this experience was used in the stalin regime 's factional politics and show trials . . family . in 2009 , reporter joshua prager wrote an article in the wall street journal profiling the long-term toll that raoul wallenberg 's disappearance had on his family . his mother , maj , and his stepfather , fredrik von dardel , spent the rest of their lives searching for their son . they both committed suicide by overdosing on pills two days apart in 1979 . their daughter , nina lagergren , raoul 's half-sister , attributed their suicide to their despair about never finding their son . lagergren and raoul 's half-brother guy von dardel established organizations and worked to find their brother or confirmation of his death . at the request of their parents , they were to assume he was alive until the year 2000 . during the war , the wallenberg bank , stockholms enskilda bank , collaborated with the german government . the secretary of the us treasury , henry morgenthau jr . considered jacob wallenberg strongly pro-german , and in 1945 , the us federal bureau of investigation subjected the bank to a blockade from engaging in business in the united states that was only lifted in 1947 . author alan lelchuk who interviewed , amongst others , wallenberg 's kgb interrogator , wrote a novel that imagines the more powerful of the family may have chosen not to use their influence to locate raoul as it could have drawn attention to their misdeeds , and they may have considered him an embarrassment , not only for being a man of morality , but his possible homosexuality . nina 's daughter , nane maria lagergren , married kofi annan , former secretary general of the united nations , and is active in many humanitarian efforts . another of wallenberg 's nieces , louise von dardel , is the main activist in the family and dedicates much of her time to speaking about wallenberg and lobbying various countries to help uncover information about her uncle . louise von dardel 's february 2005 talks in the knesset and the jerusalem begin center and her interviews at the time to israel tv english news , jerusalem post , vesty ( russian ) and makor rishon ( hebrew ) . the extended wallenberg family remains an influential part of swedish society as major shareholders in banks and corporations including saab and scandinavian airlines . . legacy . wallenberg myth . in a 2004 paper , hungarian historian and holocaust survivor randolph l . braham discussed the mythologizing of wallenberg 's rescue activities . braham notes that wallenberg 's rescue activities did not start in earnest until the arrow cross coup in october 1944 , and reached their greatest proportions during the siege . he found that through personal heroism and diplomatic support , wallenberg managed to save about 7,000 to 9,000 jews . however , during the cold war , his death was exploited in western anti-soviet propaganda ; in order to make the '' soviet crime '' seem worse , his rescue operations were greatly exaggerated . wallenberg was incorrectly identified as the savior of all jews in budapest , or at least 100,000 of them , in official statements as well as many popular books and documentaries . as a result , the rescue efforts of other agents in budapest have been marginalized or ignored . israeli historian yehuda bauer , who puts the number of lives saved by wallenberg at 4,500 , states lutz and other neutral emissaries saved more jews , but wallenberg was the only one who frequently confronted the nazis and their arrow cross accomplices . although '' fact and fiction mixed '' in the testimony of jewish survivors about wallenberg after the war , bauer writes , wallenberg 's '' fame was certainly justified by his extraordinary exploits '' . bauer also points out that the focus on heroic actions taken by wallenberg and other non-jewish rescuers obscures the heroism of jews who also carried out rescue actions in budapest in the final months and were forgotten after liberation . according to bauer , wallenberg had a modest personality and would have rejected fictionalized anecdotes and exaggerated totals . . honours . a considerable number of honours and memorials have been dedicated to the memory of wallenberg . in popular culture . . film . a number of films have been made of wallenberg 's life , including the 1985 made-for-television movie wallenberg : a hero 's story ( 1985 ) , starring richard chamberlain , the 1990 swedish production good evening , mr . wallenberg , featuring stellan skarsgård , and various documentaries , such as raoul wallenberg : buried alive ( 1984 ) , the afi award-winning raoul wallenberg , between the lines ( 1985 ) and searching for wallenberg ( 2003 ) . he also appears in the spanish television series el ángel de budapest and is played by iván fenyő . in 2006 , the film '' raoul wallenberg-l'ange de budapest '' ( translated by nigel spencer as '' raoul wallenberg : the angel of budapest '' ) , featuring relatives and the winnipeg lawyer still piloting inquiries into his case , was released in canada and broadcast on the bravo ! network . art . wallenberg is featured prominently in the work of painter and holocaust survivor alice lok cahana whose father was saved by wallenberg . opera . wallenberg . opera premiered at the opernhaus dortmund on 5 may 2001 . composer erkki-sven tüür , libretto of lutz hübner raoul . opera premiered at the theater bremen on 21 february 2008 . composer gershon kingsley , libretto of michael kunze . see also . list of unsolved deaths . notes .