Over-the-counter drug

usage . as of 2011 , around a third of older adults in the u.s . reportedly used otc drugs . by 2018 , the prevalence of use by adults in the u.s . as first-line treatment for minor illnesses had reached 81 % . . regulation by country . canada . in canada , there are four drug schedules : schedule 1 : requires a prescription for sale and is provided to the public by a licensed pharmacist . schedule 2 : does not require a prescription but requires an assessment by a pharmacist prior to sale . these drugs are kept in an area of the pharmacy where there is no public access and may also be referred to as '' behind-the-counter '' drugs . schedule 3 : does not require a prescription but must be kept in an area under the supervision of a pharmacist . these drugs are kept in an area of the retail outlet where self-selection is possible , but a pharmacist must be available to assist in the self-selection of medication if required . unscheduled : does not require a prescription and may be sold in any retail outlet . all medications other than schedule 1 may be considered an otc drug , as they do not require prescriptions for sale . while the national association of pharmacy regulatory authorities provides recommendations on the scheduling of drugs for sale in canada , each province may determine its own scheduling . the drugs found in each schedule may vary from province to province . india . in november 2016 , india 's drug consultative committee announced it was embarking on establishing a definition of drugs which could be dispensed without a prescription . prior to this , the general assumption was that any drug which did not fall into a prescription schedule could be purchased without a prescription . however , the needed definition had not been enacted by early 2018 . the lack of a legal definition for otc drugs has led to this market segment being effectively unregulated . . netherlands . in the netherlands , there are four categories : geneesmiddelenwet ur ( uitsluitend recept ) : prescription only ua ( uitsluitend apotheek ) : pharmacist only uad ( uitsluitend apotheek of drogist ) : pharmacist or drugstore only av ( algemene verkoop ) : may be sold in general stores a drug that is ua may be sold otc but only by pharmacists . the drug can be on the shelves like any other product . examples are domperidone , 400 & nbsp ; mg ibuprofen up to 50 tablets and dextromethorphan . a drug that is uad can also be sold at drugstores , stores where no prescription can be filed and there is only a relatively small selection of popular drugs like painkillers and cough medicine . the drugs are usually on the shelves , and the store also sells items like toys , gadgets , perfumes and homeopathic products . the drugs in this category have limited risk and addiction potential . examples are naproxen and diclofenac in small amounts , cinnarizine , 400 & nbsp ; mg ibuprofen up to 20 tablets and also 500 & nbsp ; mg paracetamol up to 50 tablets . drugs in the av category can be sold at supermarkets , gas stations , etc . and include only drugs with minimal risk to the public , like paracetamol up to 20 tablets , 200 & nbsp ; mg ibuprofen up to 10 tablets , cetirizine and loperamide . united states . in the united states , the manufacture and sale of otc substances are regulated by the food and drug administration . the fda requires that all '' new drugs '' obtain a new drug application ( nda ) before entering interstate commerce , but the act exempts any drugs generally recognized as safe and effective ( gras/e ) . drug development and review definitions . fda.gov ( 2015-08-20 ) . retrieved on 2019-08-26 . to deal with the vast number of otc drugs that were already on the market before the requirement that all drugs obtain an nda , the fda created the otc monograph system to review classes of drugs and to categorize them as gras/e after review by expert panels . certain classes of otc drugs would not be required to obtain an nda and could remain on the market if they conformed to the monograph guidelines for doses , labeling , and warnings finalized in the code of federal regulations drug applications for over-the-counter ( otc ) drugs . fda.gov ( 2015-01-07 ) . retrieved on 2019-08-26 . thus , an otc drug product is allowed to be marketed either ( 1 ) pursuant to an fda monograph or ( 2 ) pursuant to an nda for products that do not fit within a specific monograph . there is also the possibility that certain otc drug products are marketed under the grandfathering provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , but the fda has never formally acknowledged that any legitimate grandfathered otc drug exists . examples of otc substances approved in the united states are sunscreens , anti-microbial and anti-fungal products , external and internal analgesics such as lidocaine and aspirin , psoriasis and eczema topical treatments , anti-dandruff shampoos containing coal tar , and other topical products with a therapeutic effect . the federal trade commission regulates advertising of otc products , in contrast to prescription drug advertising , which is regulated by the fda . regulation of nonprescription drug products fda.gov . retrieved on 2014-04-24 . the fda requires otc products to be labeled with an approved '' drug facts '' label to educate consumers about their medications . the labels comply to a standard format and are intended to be easy for typical consumers to understand . drug facts labels include information on the product 's active ingredient , indications and purpose , safety warnings , directions for use , and inactive ingredients . otc drug facts label . fda.gov ( 2015-06-05 ) . retrieved on 2019-08-26 . the 2020 cares act ( cares act ) includes reforms that modernize the way certain otc drugs are regulated in the united states . many otc monographs need to be updated but updating or changing an otc monograph requires the slow and burdensome notice-and-comment rulemaking process . the cares act includes otc monograph reform provisions that replace the rulemaking process with an administrative order process . . restricted over-the-counter substances . an ill-defined third category of substances is products having over-the-counter status from the fda while being simultaneously subject to other restrictions on sale . while they are legally classified as otc drugs , they are typically stored behind the counter and are sold only in stores that are registered with their state . they may be unavailable in convenience and grocery stores that stock other non-restricted otc medications . for example , many drugstores have moved products containing pseudoephedrine , an otc product , into locations where customers must ask a pharmacist for them . a prescription is not required ; the change has been made in an effort to reduce methamphetamine production . since the passage of the illinois methamphetamine precursor control act and the subsequent federal combat methamphetamine epidemic act of 2005 , the purchase of pseudoephedrine is restricted . sellers of pseudoephedrine must obtain and record the identity of the purchaser and enforce quantity restrictions . some states may have more stringent requirements ( such as oregon , where a medical prescription is required to purchase any quantity of pseudoephedrine ) . after initial attempts to control methamphetamine use ( by requiring documentation of sale with government issued id as well as limits on the quantity an individual could purchase ) failed to realize meaningful reductions in methamphetamine use and production , mississippi passed house bill 512 in the state senate on february 2 , 2010 '' to require a prescription from a licensed medical professional to purchase over-the-counter medicines with pseudoephedrine , ephedrine , or any other precursor chemical that can readily and illicitly be converted into methamphetamine , methcathinone or any active/scheduled analogs of phenylethylamines/ amphetamine . '' however , products containing the substance are still otc in most states , since no prescription is required . a similar regulation once applied to some forms of emergency contraception . however , on february 25 , 2014 , the fda approved generic one-pill emergency contraception products for unrestricted sale on the shelf . there is no age limit or need for id to purchase . princeton university furthermore , some schedule v controlled substances may be classified as otc products in certain states . such drugs are sold without a prescription but are subject to record-keeping rules and quantity and/or age restrictions , and they must be dispensed by a pharmacy . controlled substances listed in schedules iii , iv , and v . us department of justice - drug enforcement administration . retrieved on 2019-08-26 . finally , pharmacies frequently require a prescription for schedule v drugs as a matter of policy , despite their otc status according to applicable laws and regulations . citation needed . . united kingdom . in the united kingdom , medication is governed by the medicines regulations 2012 . medication falls into one of three categories : prescription only medication ( pom ) , which are legally available only with a valid prescription from a prescriber . a pharmacist has to be on the premises for pom medicines to be dispensed , required by law . the medicine has been specifically prescribed for the patient holding the prescription , so it is considered safe for only the recipient to take . just a small example of these include most antibiotics and all antidepressants or antidiabetic medications . drugs included as pom are high-strength painkillers such as oxycodone and tramadol , medications such as zolpidem ( ambien ) , diazepam ( valium ) , and certain topical preparations such as corticosteroids . these medicines are often sold by drug dealers , especially those marked as '' cd pom , '' which are controlled due to abuse risk such as dipipanone , temazepam , and methadone . general sales list ( gsl ) , available off the shelf with no pharmacy training required to sell ( so they can be sold anywhere , such as supermarkets ) . in general , they are considered safe for most people when taken correctly . examples of these include 16-packs ( or less ) of painkillers such as paracetamol and ibuprofen as well as a host of other safe medications such as small pack sizes of antiallergy tablets , laxative medication , and skin creams . pharmacy medicines ( p ) are medicines that are legally neither a pom or gsl medication . these can be sold from a registered pharmacy but should not be available for self-selection ( although directions to discuss a ' p ' product may be allocated shelf space with associated gsl items ) . ' p ' medications are reserved from the gsl list as they are either associated with a need for advice on use , or used in conditions which may require referral to a medical prescriber . suitable trained counter assistants may sell a ' p ' medication under the supervision of a pharmacist and will ask questions to determine if the customer needs to be referred for a discussion with a pharmacist . some 'pom ' medicines are available for use in certain situations and doses as ' p ' medicines . if it is not appropriate to sell a ' p ' medication – i.e . the condition is not suitable for self-management and requires referral to a medical prescriber – then a sale should not occur and the pharmacist has a legal and professional obligation to refer this on to an appropriate service . examples of these include some sleep aid tablets such as nytol , human deworming tablets such as mebendazole , painkillers with small amounts of codeine ( up to 12.8 & nbsp ; mg per tablet ) , and pseudoephedrine . medication available only with a prescription is marked somewhere on the box/container with pom . pharmacy-only products are marked with p . a prescription is not required for p medicines , and pharmacy sales assistants are required by royal pharmaceutical society codes to ask certain questions , which varies for what the customer says . if they ask for a specific product , the pharmacy assistant must ask '' who is it for , '' '' how long have you had the symptoms , '' '' are you allergic to any medication , '' '' are you taking any medication '' ( 'wham ' questions ) . if a customer asks for a remedy , e.g . , hay fever , then the two wham questions must be followed '' who is it for , '' '' what are the symptoms , '' '' how long have you had the symptoms , '' '' have you taken any action towards your symptoms , '' and '' are you taking any other medication . '' it is with this information that the pharmacist can halt the sale , if need be . no pom , p or gsl products that are stocked in a pharmacy can be sold , dispensed , or pre-made until a responsible pharmacist is signed in and on the premises . some medication available in supermarkets and petrol stations is sold only in smaller packet sizes . often , larger packs will be marked as p and available only from a pharmacy . frequently , customers buying larger-than-usual doses of p medicines ( such as dxm , promethazine , codeine or gee 's linctus ) will be queried , due to the possibility of abuse . availability of medicines . mhra . retrieved on 2012-07-04 . . transitions between prescription and otc . as a general rule , over-the-counter drugs have to be used primarily to treat a condition that does not require the direct supervision of a doctor and must be proven to be reasonably safe and well tolerated . otc drugs are usually also required to have little or no abuse potential , although in some areas drugs such as codeine are available otc ( usually in strictly limited formulations or requiring paperwork or identification to be submitted during purchase ) . over time , often 3–6 years , drugs that prove themselves safe and appropriate as prescription medicines may be switched from prescription to otc . an example of this is diphenhydramine ( benadryl ) , an anti-histamine which once required a prescription but now is available otc nearly everywhere . more recent examples are cimetidine and loratadine in the united states , and ibuprofen in australia . it is somewhat unusual for an otc drug to be withdrawn from the market as a result of safety concerns , rather than market forces , though it does happen occasionally . for example , phenylpropanolamine was removed from sale in the united states over concern regarding strokes in young women . a study has been done examining consumer 's perceptions about the risk of and access to nonprescription medication . the study concluded that a small percentage of consumers prefer having access to medication over potential risks of taking non-prescribed medication . ranitidine was withdrawn from multiple markets due to concerns over the carcinogen n-nitrosodimethylamine ( ndma ) . in the united kingdom , it was announced in february 2007 that boots the chemist would try over-the-counter sales of viagra in stores in manchester ( previous available as prescription only ) . men aged between 30 and 65 could buy four tablets after a consultation with a pharmacist .