Automation

recent and emerging applications . automated power production . technologies like solar panels , wind farm , and other renewable energy sources—together with smart grids , micro-grids , battery storage—can automate power production . retail . many supermarkets and even smaller stores are rapidly introducing self-checkout systems reducing the need for employing checkout workers . in the united states , the retail industry employs 15.9 million people as of 2017 ( around 1 in 9 americans in the workforce ) . globally , an estimated 192 million workers could be affected by automation according to research by eurasia group . . food and drink the food retail industry has started to apply automation to the ordering process ; mcdonald 's has introduced touch screen ordering and payment systems in many of its restaurants , reducing the need for as many cashier employees . the university of texas at austin has introduced fully automated cafe retail locations . automation comes to the coffeehouse with robotic baristas . singularity hub . retrieved on 12 july 2013 . some cafes and restaurants have utilized mobile and tablet '' apps '' to make the ordering process more efficient by customers ordering and paying on their device . new pizza express app lets diners pay bill using iphone . bighospitality.co.uk . retrieved on 12 july 2013 . some restaurants have automated food delivery to tables of customers using a conveyor belt sushi . the use of robots is sometimes employed to replace waiting staff . wheelie : toshiba 's new robot is cute , autonomous and maybe even useful ( video ) . techcrunch ( 12 march 2010 ) . retrieved on 12 july 2013 . . construction . . mining . automated mining involves the removal of human labor from the mining process . '' rio to trial automated mining . '' the australian . the mining industry is currently in the transition towards automation . currently , it can still require a large amount of human capital , particularly in the third world where labor costs are low so there is less incentive for increasing efficiency through automation . video surveillance . the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) started the research and development of automated visual surveillance and monitoring ( vsam ) program , between 1997 and 1999 , and airborne video surveillance ( avs ) programs , from 1998 to 2002 . currently , there is a major effort underway in the vision community to develop a fully-automated tracking surveillance system . automated video surveillance monitors people and vehicles in real-time within a busy environment . existing automated surveillance systems are based on the environment they are primarily designed to observe , i.e . , indoor , outdoor or airborne , the number of sensors that the automated system can handle and the mobility of sensors , i.e . , stationary camera vs . mobile camera . the purpose of a surveillance system is to record properties and trajectories of objects in a given area , generate warnings or notify the designated authorities in case of occurrence of particular events . javed , o , & shah , m . ( 2008 ) . automated multi-camera surveillance . city of publication : springer-verlag new york inc . . highway systems . as demands for safety and mobility have grown and technological possibilities have multiplied , interest in automation has grown . seeking to accelerate the development and introduction of fully automated vehicles and highways , the united states congress authorized more than 650 million over six years for intelligent transport systems ( its ) and demonstration projects in the 1991 intermodal surface transportation efficiency act ( istea ) . congress legislated in istea that : intermodal surface transportation efficiency act 1991 , part b , section 6054 ( b ) the secretary of transportation shall develop an automated highway and vehicle prototype from which future fully automated intelligent vehicle-highway systems can be developed . such development shall include research in human factors to ensure the success of the man-machine relationship . the goal of this program is to have the first fully automated highway roadway or an automated test track in operation by 1997 . this system shall accommodate the installation of equipment in new and existing motor vehicles . full automation commonly defined as requiring no control or very limited control by the driver ; such automation would be accomplished through a combination of sensor , computer , and communications systems in vehicles and along the roadway . fully automated driving would , in theory , allow closer vehicle spacing and higher speeds , which could enhance traffic capacity in places where additional road building is physically impossible , politically unacceptable , or prohibitively expensive . automated controls also might enhance road safety by reducing the opportunity for driver error , which causes a large share of motor vehicle crashes . other potential benefits include improved air quality ( as a result of more-efficient traffic flows ) , increased fuel economy , and spin-off technologies generated during research and development related to automated highway systems . menzies , thomas r . , ed . 1998 . '' national automated highway system research program : a review . '' transportation research board 253 . washington , dc : national academy press . pp . 2–50 . . waste management . automated waste collection trucks prevent the need for as many workers as well as easing the level of labor required to provide the service . hepker , aaron . ( 27 november 2012 ) automated garbage trucks hitting cedar rapids streets kcrg-tv9 cedar rapids , iowa news , sports , and weather local news . kcrg.com . retrieved on 12 july 2013 . . business process . business process automation ( bpa ) is the technology-enabled automation of complex business processes . it can help to streamline a business for simplicity , achieve digital transformation , increase service quality , improve service delivery or contain costs . bpa consists of integrating applications , restructuring labor resources and using software applications throughout the organization . robotic process automation ( rpa ; or rpaai for self-guided rpa 2.0 ) is an emerging field within bpa and uses artificial intelligence . bpas can be implemented in a number of business areas including marketing , sales and workflow . home . home automation ( also called domotics ) designates an emerging practice of increased automation of household appliances and features in residential dwellings , particularly through electronic means that allow for things impracticable , overly expensive or simply not possible in recent past decades . the rise in the usage of home automation solutions has taken a turn reflecting the increased dependency of people on such automation solutions . however , the increased comfort that gets added through these automation solutions is remarkable . . laboratory . automation is essential for many scientific and clinical applications . therefore , automation has been extensively employed in laboratories . from as early as 1980 fully automated laboratories have already been working . however , automation has not become widespread in laboratories due to its high cost . this may change with the ability of integrating low-cost devices with standard laboratory equipment . autosamplers are common devices used in laboratory automation . logistics automation . . industrial automation . industrial automation deals primarily with the automation of manufacturing , quality control , and material handling processes . general-purpose controllers for industrial processes include programmable logic controllers , stand-alone i/o modules , and computers . industrial automation is to replace the decision making of humans and manual command-response activities with the use of mechanized equipment and logical programming commands . one trend is increased use of machine vision to provide automatic inspection and robot guidance functions , another is a continuing increase in the use of robots . industrial automation is simply required in industries . energy efficiency in industrial processes has become a higher priority . semiconductor companies like infineon technologies are offering 8-bit microcontroller applications for example found in motor controls , general purpose pumps , fans , and ebikes to reduce energy consumption and thus increase efficiency . industrial automation and industry 4.0 . the rise of industrial automation is directly tied to the “ fourth industrial revolution ” , which is better known now as industry 4.0 . originating from germany , industry 4.0 encompasses numerous devices , concepts , and machines , as well as the advancement of the industrial internet of things ( iiot ) . an '' internet of things is a seamless integration of diverse physical objects in the internet through a virtual representation . '' these new revolutionary advancements have drawn attention to the world of automation in an entirely new light and shown ways for it to grow to increase productivity and efficiency in machinery and manufacturing facilities . industry 4.0 works with the iiot and software/hardware to connect in a way that ( through communication technologies ) add enhancements and improve manufacturing processes . being able to create smarter , safer , and more advanced manufacturing is now possible with these new technologies . it opens up a manufacturing platform that is more reliable , consistent , and efficient than before . implementation of systems such as scada is an example of software that takes place in industrial automation today . scada is a supervisory data collection software , just one of the many used in industrial automation . industry 4.0 vastly covers many areas in manufacturing and will continue to do so as time goes on . . industrial robotics . industrial robotics is a sub-branch in industrial automation that aids in various manufacturing processes . such manufacturing processes include machining , welding , painting , assembling and material handling to name a few . industrial robots use various mechanical , electrical as well as software systems to allow for high precision , accuracy and speed that far exceed any human performance . the birth of industrial robots came shortly after world war ii as the united states saw the need for a quicker way to produce industrial and consumer goods . servos , digital logic and solid-state electronics allowed engineers to build better and faster systems and over time these systems were improved and revised to the point where a single robot is capable of running 24 hours a day with little or no maintenance . in 1997 , there were 700,000 industrial robots in use , the number has risen to 1.8m in 2017 in recent years , artificial intelligence ( ai ) with robotics is also used in creating an automatic labeling solution , using robotic arms as the automatic label applicator , and ai for learning and detecting the products to be labelled . . programmable logic controllers . industrial automation incorporates programmable logic controllers in the manufacturing process . programmable logic controllers ( plcs ) use a processing system which allows for variation of controls of inputs and outputs using simple programming . plcs make use of programmable memory , storing instructions and functions like logic , sequencing , timing , counting , etc . using a logic-based language , a plc can receive a variety of inputs and return a variety of logical outputs , the input devices being sensors and output devices being motors , valves , etc . plcs are similar to computers , however , while computers are optimized for calculations , plcs are optimized for control tasks and use in industrial environments . they are built so that only basic logic-based programming knowledge is needed and to handle vibrations , high temperatures , humidity , and noise . the greatest advantage plcs offer is their flexibility . with the same basic controllers , a plc can operate a range of different control systems . plcs make it unnecessary to rewire a system to change the control system . this flexibility leads to a cost-effective system for complex and varied control systems . thumb plcs can range from small '' building brick '' devices with tens of i/o in a housing integral with the processor , to large rack-mounted modular devices with a count of thousands of i/o , and which are often networked to other plc and scada systems . they can be designed for multiple arrangements of digital and analog inputs and outputs ( i/o ) , extended temperature ranges , immunity to electrical noise , and resistance to vibration and impact . programs to control machine operation are typically stored in battery-backed-up or non-volatile memory . it was from the automotive industry in the usa that the plc was born . before the plc , control , sequencing , and safety interlock logic for manufacturing automobiles was mainly composed of relays , cam timers , drum sequencers , and dedicated closed-loop controllers . since these could number in the hundreds or even thousands , the process for updating such facilities for the yearly model changeover was very time-consuming and expensive , as electricians needed to individually rewire the relays to change their operational characteristics . when digital computers became available , being general-purpose programmable devices , they were soon applied to control sequential and combinatorial logic in industrial processes . however , these early computers required specialist programmers and stringent operating environmental control for temperature , cleanliness , and power quality . to meet these challenges this the plc was developed with several key attributes . it would tolerate the shop-floor environment , it would support discrete ( bit-form ) input and output in an easily extensible manner , it would not require years of training to use , and it would permit its operation to be monitored . since many industrial processes have timescales easily addressed by millisecond response times , modern ( fast , small , reliable ) electronics greatly facilitate building reliable controllers , and performance could be traded off for reliability . e . a . parr , industrial control handbook , industrial press inc . , 1999 . agent-assisted automation . agent-assisted automation refers to automation used by call center agents to handle customer inquiries . the key benefit of agent-assisted automation is compliance and error-proofing . agents are sometimes not fully trained or they forget or ignore key steps in the process . the use of automation ensures that what is supposed to happen on the call actually does , every time . there are two basic types : desktop automation and automated voice solutions . desktop automation refers to software programming that makes it easier for the call center agent to work across multiple desktop tools . the automation would take the information entered into one tool and populate it across the others so it did not have to be entered more than once , for example . automated voice solutions allow the agents to remain on the line while disclosures and other important information is provided to customers in the form of pre-recorded audio files . specialized applications of these automated voice solutions enable the agents to process credit cards without ever seeing or hearing the credit card numbers or cvv codes . see also . automated storage and retrieval system automation technician cognitive computing control engineering cybernetics data-driven control system dirty , dangerous and demeaning feedforward control futures studies industrial revolution ludditism machine to machine mobile manipulator multi-agent system post-work society process control productivity improving technologies robot tax robotic process automation semi-automation industry 4.0 technological unemployment