Vortex

properties . vorticity . image : crow instability contrail.jpg thumb the crow instability of a jet aeroplane 's contrail visually demonstrates the vortex created in the atmosphere ( gas fluid medium ) by the passage of the aircraft . a key concept in the dynamics of vortices is the vorticity , a vector that describes the local rotary motion at a point in the fluid , as would be perceived by an observer that moves along with it . conceptually , the vorticity could be observed by placing a tiny rough ball at the point in question , free to move with the fluid , and observing how it rotates about its center . the direction of the vorticity vector is defined to be the direction of the axis of rotation of this imaginary ball ( according to the right-hand rule ) while its length is twice the ball 's angular velocity . mathematically , the vorticity is defined as the curl ( or rotational ) of the velocity field of the fluid , usually denoted by \vec \omega and expressed by the vector analysis formula \nabla \times \vec , where is the limiting pressure infinitely far from the axis . this formula provides another constraint for the extent of the core , since the pressure can not be negative . the free surface ( if present ) dips sharply near the axis line , with depth inversely proportional to . the shape formed by the free surface is called a hyperboloid , or '' gabriel 's horn '' ( by evangelista torricelli ) . the core of a vortex in air is sometimes visible because water vapor condenses as the low pressure of the core causes adiabatic cooling ; the funnel of a tornado is an example . when a vortex line ends at a boundary surface , the reduced pressure may also draw matter from that surface into the core . for example , a dust devil is a column of dust picked up by the core of an air vortex attached to the ground . a vortex that ends at the free surface of a body of water ( like the whirlpool that often forms over a bathtub drain ) may draw a column of air down the core . the forward vortex extending from a jet engine of a parked airplane can suck water and small stones into the core and then into the engine . evolution . vortices need not be steady-state features ; they can move and change shape . in a moving vortex , the particle paths are not closed , but are open , loopy curves like helix and cycloids . a vortex flow might also be combined with a radial or axial flow pattern . in that case the streamlines and pathlines are not closed curves but spirals or helices , respectively . this is the case in tornadoes and in drain whirlpools . a vortex with helical streamlines is said to be solenoidal . as long as the effects of viscosity and diffusion are negligible , the fluid in a moving vortex is carried along with it . in particular , the fluid in the core ( and matter trapped by it ) tends to remain in the core as the vortex moves about . this is a consequence of helmholtz 's second theorem . thus vortices ( unlike surface waves and pressure waves ) can transport mass , energy and momentum over considerable distances compared to their size , with surprisingly little dispersion . this effect is demonstrated by smoke rings and exploited in vortex ring toys and guns . two or more vortices that are approximately parallel and circulating in the same direction will attract and eventually merge to form a single vortex , whose circulation will equal the sum of the circulations of the constituent vortices . for example , an airplane wing that is developing lift will create a sheet of small vortices at its trailing edge . these small vortices merge to form a single wingtip vortex , less than one wing chord downstream of that edge . this phenomenon also occurs with other active airfoils , such as propeller blades . on the other hand , two parallel vortices with opposite circulations ( such as the two wingtip vortices of an airplane ) tend to remain separate . vortices contain substantial energy in the circular motion of the fluid . in an ideal fluid this energy can never be dissipated and the vortex would persist forever . however , real fluids exhibit viscosity and this dissipates energy very slowly from the core of the vortex . it is only through dissipation of a vortex due to viscosity that a vortex line can end in the fluid , rather than at the boundary of the fluid . further examples . in the hydrodynamic interpretation of the behaviour of electromagnetic fields , the acceleration of electric fluid in a particular direction creates a positive vortex of magnetic fluid . this in turn creates around itself a corresponding negative vortex of electric fluid . exact solutions to classical nonlinear magnetic equations include the landau–lifshitz model , the continuum heisenberg model , the ishimori equation , and the nonlinear schrödinger equation . bubble rings are underwater vortex rings whose core traps a ring of bubbles , or a single donut-shaped bubble . they are sometimes created by dolphins and whales . the lifting force of aircraft wings , propeller blades , sails , and other airfoils can be explained by the creation of a vortex superimposed on the flow of air past the wing . aerodynamic drag can be explained in large part by the formation of vortices in the surrounding fluid that carry away energy from the moving body . large whirlpools can be produced by ocean tides in certain straits or bays . examples are charybdis of classical mythology in the straits of messina , italy ; the naruto whirlpools of nankaido , japan ; and the maelstrom at lofoten , norway . vortices in the earth 's atmosphere are important phenomena for meteorology . they include mesocyclones on the scale of a few miles , tornadoes , waterspouts , and hurricanes . these vortices are often driven by temperature and humidity variations with altitude . the sense of rotation of hurricanes is influenced by the earth 's rotation . another example is the polar vortex , a persistent , large-scale cyclone centered near the earth 's poles , in the middle and upper troposphere and the stratosphere . vortices are prominent features of the atmospheres of other planets . they include the permanent great red spot on jupiter , the intermittent great dark spot on neptune , the polar vortices of venus , the martian dust devils and the saturn 's hexagon of saturn . sunspots are dark regions on the sun 's visible surface ( photosphere ) marked by a lower temperature than its surroundings , and intense magnetic activity . the accretion disks of black holes and other massive gravitational sources . taylor–couette flow occurs in a fluid between two nested cylinders , one rotating , the other fixed . summary . in the dynamics of fluid , a vortex is fluid that revolves around the axis line . this fluid might be curved or straight . vortices form from stirred fluids : they might be observed in smoke rings , whirlpools , in the wake of a boat or the winds around a tornado or dust devil . vortices are an important part of turbulent flow . vortices can otherwise be known as a circular motion of a liquid . in the cases of the absence of forces , the liquid settles . this makes the water stay still instead of moving . when they are created , vortices can move , stretch , twist and interact in complicated ways . when a vortex is moving , sometimes , it can affect an angular position . for an example , if a water bucket is rotated or spun constantly , it will rotate around an invisible line called the axis line . the rotation moves around in circles . in this example the rotation of the bucket creates extra force . the reason that the vortices can change shape is the fact that they have open particle paths . this can create a moving vortex . examples of this fact are the shapes of tornadoes and drain whirlpools . when two or more vortices are close together they can merge to make a vortex . vortices also hold energy in its rotation of the fluid . if the energy is never removed , it would consist of circular motion forever . see also . references . notes . . other . . external links . optical vortices video of two water vortex rings colliding ( mpeg ) chapter 3 rotational flows : circulation and turbulence vortical flow research lab ( mit ) – study of flows found in nature and part of the department of ocean engineering .