Chris Watson

early life . birth and family background . watson was born johan cristian tanck on 9 april 1867 in valparaíso , chile . he was the only child of martha ( née minchin ) and johan cristian tanck senior . his father was also born in valparaíso , a german chilean who ancestors had immigrated from the kingdom of hanover and established an import–export firm . he worked as a merchant seaman , possibly a ship 's carpenter , on trade routes across the pacific . he arrived in new zealand aboard la joven julia on 24 december 1865 and married martha minchin in port chalmers less than a month later , on 19 january 1866 . their marriage was later registered at valparaíso 's iglesia de la matriz . watson 's mother was born in county tipperary , ireland , and was 16 years old at the time of her first marriage . she joined tanck on board the julia , which eventually returned to chile and docked in valparaíso a few days before watson 's birth . in the months after his birth the ship worked a regular route carrying timber between valparaíso and chiloé island . in 1868 , watson moved to new zealand with his mother , returning to her family on the south island . the fate of his father is uncertain , as no records of his death have been found . on 15 february 1869 , his mother married george thomas watson at the registry office in waipori , describing herself as a widow . her second husband was a 30-year-old miner born in ballymoney , ireland , who had come to new zealand after several years working in scotland . watson came to have nine half-siblings from his mother 's second marriage , born between 1869 and 1887 . he was treated as the biological child of george watson , adopting his step-father 's surname ; his given names were also anglicised . as an adult , watson gave incorrect and contradictory information about the circumstances of his birth and the identity of his parents . he allowed some biographical profiles to list him as born in new zealand , while his second wife and daughter understood that he had been born to british parents in international waters outside valparaíso . on legal documents he listed george watson as his biological father and provided an incorrect maiden name for his mother . watson 's biographers have suggested he may have originally concealed his background for convenience , but later deliberately did so for political reasons , including concerns over parliamentary eligibility and possible xenophobia . birth overseas to a non-british father would make him an alien ineligible for election to federal parliament under section 44 ( i ) of the constitution . . childhood and move to australia . watson attended the state school in oamaru , north otago , new zealand until ten years of age when he left to become a rail nipper . then after a period of helping on the family farm , at thirteen years of age he was apprenticed as a compositor at the north otago times , a newspaper run by prominent reformist politician william steward , with the public affairs exposure augmenting his minor formal schooling . following the death of his mother and the loss of his job , he migrated to sydney in 1886 at nineteen years of age . he worked for a month as a stablehand at government house , then found employment as a compositor for a number of newspapers including the daily telegraph , the sydney morning herald and the australian star . through this proximity to newspapers , books and writers he furthered his education and developed an interest in politics and became active in the printing union . he married ada watson , a british-born sydney seamstress , at the unitarianism on liverpool street in sydney on 27 november 1889 . . colonial parliament . in the months prior to the 1891 new south wales colonial election , watson was a founding member of the labour electoral league of new south wales which stemmed from the nascent australian labour movement and would later develop into the australian labour ( later labor ) party . in the election , labour won the balance of power and provided confidence and supply to the protectionist party minority government led by premier george dibbs which brought down the incumbent majority government of the free trade party led by premier henry parkes . watson was an active trade unionist , and became vice-president of the labor council of new south wales in january 1892 . in june 1892 , he settled a dispute between the trades and labour council and the labour party and as a result became the president of the council and chairman of the party . in 1893 and 1894 , he worked hard to resolve the debate over the solidarity pledge and established the labour party 's basic practices , including the sovereignty of the party conference , caucus solidarity , the pledge required of parliamentarians and the powerful role of the extra-parliamentary executive . at the 1894 colonial election which saw the defeat of the protectionist party government , watson was elected to the new south wales legislative assembly for the country seat of young . at the 1895 colonial election the incumbent free trade party minority government led by premier george reid increased their support but remained several seats short of a majority . labour at this time had a policy of '' support in return for concessions '' , and watson voted with his colleagues to strategically provide such legislative support to the incumbent government . following the 1898 colonial election , despite a significant swing against the incumbent government , watson and labour leader james mcgowen decided to allow the incumbent government to remain so that it could complete the work of establishing the federation of australia . . federation . watson was involved in shaping party policy regarding the movement for federation from 1895 , and was one of ten labour opposed it , with watson prominent in the campaign , and saw the referendum rejected . watson was devoted to the idea of the referendum as an ideal feature of democracy . to ensure that reid might finally bring new south wales into national union on an amended draft constitution , watson helped to negotiate a deal , involving the party executive , that included the nomination of four labour members to the new south wales legislative council . at the march 1899 annual party conference , billy hughes and holman moved to have those arrangements nullified and party policy on federation changed , thus thwarting reid 's plans . although rarely known to resort to anger , on this occasion watson 'jumped to his feet in a most excited manner and in heated tones . contended . that they should not interfere with the referendum ' . the motion was lost and the four party men were nominated to the council on 4 april . the bill approving the second referendum , to be held on 20 june 1899 , was passed on 20 april . labour leaders , including watson opposed the final terms of the constitution of australia . nonetheless , they could not stop it from going ahead , and watson , unlike holman and hughes , believed that it should be submitted to the people . nevertheless , watson joined all but two of the labour parliamentarians in campaigning against the 'yes ' vote at the referendum . when the constitution was accepted , he agreed that 'the mandate of the majority will have to be obeyed' . . federal parliament . watson was elected to the new parliament of australia at the inaugural 1901 federal election , representing the rural house of representatives rural seat of bland . watson arrived in melbourne , which at the time served as the temporary seat of government , in may 1901 . watson was elected the first leader of the federal parliamentary labour party ( usually known as the caucus ) on 8 may 1901 , the day before the opening of the parliament . watson pursued the same policy as labour had done in the colonial parliaments in the federal parliament , where labour was the smallest of the three parties , but held the balance of power . under watson , labour provided confidence and supply to the protectionist party minority governments of edmund barton and alfred deakin in exchange for legislation enacting the labour platform , such as the immensely popular white australia policy which left the free trade party led by george reid to form the opposition . watson , as a labour moderate , genuinely admired deakin and shared his liberal views on many subjects . deakin reciprocated this sentiment . deakin wrote in one of his anonymous articles in a london newspaper that '' the labour section has much cause for gratitude to mr watson , the leader whose tact and judgement have enabled it to achieve many of its parliamentary successes . '' . prime minister in 1904 . labour prime minister of australia , the world 's first labour head of government at a national level ( anderson dawson had led a short-lived labour government in queensland in december 1899 ) , indeed the world 's first socialist or social democratic government at a national level . he was aged only 37 , and remains the youngest prime minister in australia 's history . billy hughes later recalled the first meeting of the labour cabinet with characteristic sharp wit : despite the apparent fitness of the new prime minister for his role , the government hung on the fine thread of deakin 's promise of 'fair play ' . the triumph of the historic first australian labour government was a qualified one – labour did not have the numbers to implement key policies . the 'three elevens ' – the lack of a definite majority in the parliament after the second federal election – dogged watson just as it had deakin . six bills were enacted during watson 's brief government . all but one – an amended acts interpretation act 1904 – were money bill . the most significant legislative achievement of the watson government was the advancement of the troublesome conciliation and arbitration bill . another accomplishment was the appointing of a royal commission on a bill related to navigation and shipping , whose report ( presented a couple of years later ) led to '' major redrafting of the navigation act '' and improvements in conditions for australian seamen . once he became the prime minister watson recognized the limitations of his position in the labour caucus and endorsed the concept of a deputy leader . andrew fisher won the position by one vote over the more dynamic billy hughes . julian fitzgerald on message : political communications of australian prime ministers 1901 & ndash ; 2014 clareville press 2014 p 54 . defeat and final years as leader . although watson sought a dissolution of parliament so that an election could be held , the governor-general lord northcote refused . unable to command a majority in the house of representatives , watson resigned the premiership less than four months after taking office , his term ending on 18 august 1904 ( deakin was later defeated on a similar bill ) . reid became prime minister and four months later his government managed to pass the conciliation and arbitration bill after compromising to extend the scope to state public servants as watson had proposed . deakin again became prime minister after reid lost confidence of the parliament in july 1905 . watson led labour leadership in favour of andrew fisher . watson retired from politics , aged only 42 , prior to the 1910 federal election , at which labour won with 50 percent of the primary vote . it was the first time a party had been elected to majority government in the house of representatives , it was also the first time a party won a senate majority , and it was the world 's first labour party majority government at a national level . the alp vote had risen rapidly , going from 15 percent against two larger and more established parties in 1901 , to 50 percent in 1910 , after a majority of the protectionist party merged with the anti-socialist party , creating the commonwealth liberal party which received 45 percent . . later life . political activities . in the australian labor party split of 1916 , numerous labor mps were expelled from the party for supporting world war i conscription in australia . watson sided with ex-labor prime minister billy hughes and the conscriptionists and had his party membership terminated as a result . watson remained active in the affairs of hughes ' nationalist party until 1922 , but after that he drifted out of politics altogether . in 1931 he was state president of the australian industries protection league and supported the james scullin 's high-tariff policies . business activities . in december 1910 , watson was recruited by a syndicate of sydney businessmen to lead a gold-seeking expedition in south africa . he also engaged in land speculation in sutherland , but development did not occur rapidly enough . he was appointed as a director of labor papers limited , the publisher of the awu 's official newspaper the australian worker . watson joined the council of the newly established national roads association ( nra ) in march 1920 , and in august was elected as the association 's inaugural president . the nra was intended as a peak body for new south wales motorists , lobbying the state government to create a main roads board and borrow money to improve local highways . it was initially hampered by its small membership and lack of financial resources , with a budget of only ₤15 per week . watson was able to attract publicity through the launch of a magazine and a successful campaign to raise speed limits . he was again chosen as president in 1923 when the nra was reorganised into the national roads and motorists ' association ( nrma ) , and would retain the position for the rest of his life . by the end of the following year the organisation had grown from 550 to 5,000 members . it subsequently expanded into vehicle insurance and road trip , acquiring a series of properties for camping . as well as his involvement with the nrma , watson also served as a director of a taxi company , yellow cabs of australia ltd . , and as chairman of the state government 's traffic advisory committee . in 1936 he became the inaugural chairman of petrol retailer ampol . personal life . watson 's first wife ada died in 1921 . on 30 october 1925 he married antonia mary gladys dowlan in the same church as his first wedding . she was a 23-year-old waitress from western australia whom he had met when she served his table at a sydney club . in 1927 , they had one daughter , jacqueline dunn née watson . watson and his second wife moved to a villa in double bay in 1934 . in retirement he became a keen bridge player and was also a regular attendee at randwick racecourse and the sydney cricket ground , serving on the scg trust . he visited the united states for business reasons and also returned to new zealand on a number of occasions in a private capacity . after several weeks of ill health , watson died at his home in double bay on 18 november 1941 , aged 74 . he was granted a state funeral at st andrew 's cathedral , with joseph cook , albert gardiner , john curtin and william mckell serving as pallbearers . his ashes were interred at the northern suburbs crematorium . honours . in april 2004 the labor party marked the centenary of the watson government with a series of public events in canberra and melbourne , attended by then party leader mark latham and former alp prime ministers gough whitlam , bob hawke and paul keating.watson 's daughter , jacqueline dunn , 77 , was guest of honour at these functions . the canberra suburb watson and the federal electorate of watson are named after him . in 1969 he was honoured on a postage stamp bearing his portrait issued by australia post . . see also . watson government watson ministry . references . further reading . . external links . the last page of a secret despatch from australia 's governor-general to britain 's colonial secretary 23 april 1904 , detailing circumstances that created the first labor prime minister in the british empire ( and the world ) . & nbsp ;