Nick Leeson

early life . nick leeson was born in watford , hertfordshire and attended parmiter 's school in nearby garston . born to working-class parents on a council estate , his father was a self-employed plasterer , his mother a nurse . after finishing sixth form in 1985 with six o levels and two a level passes in english literature and history with c and d grades respectively ( failing his third subject , mathematics ) , leeson was hired as a clerk with the lombard street branch of the coutts private bank . there , leeson was settling paper cheques , crediting and debiting client accounts . in 1987 , leeson moved to morgan stanley 's futures and options back office , clearing and settling listed derivatives transactions . with few prospects for a front office role , leeson joined barings bank two years later , on a salary of £12,000 a year . with four other settlement specialists , he was briefly seconded to hong kong to troubleshoot barings ' back office in the indonesian capital of jakarta . leeson returned to london in september 1991 to investigate a case of fraud between a client and a barings employee . the employee had used the client 's account to trade on a proprietary basis until margin calls from the clearinghouses unraveled the scheme . . career . in april 1992 , barings decided to open a future and options office in singapore , executing and clearing transactions on the singapore international monetary exchange ( simex ) . barings had held a seat on simex for some time , but did not activate it until leeson , appointed general manager , was sent over to head both front office and back office operations . prior to leaving , leeson was denied a broker 's licence in the uk because of committing fraud on his application . he had failed to report a judgment against him entered by the natwest . neither leeson nor barings disclosed this denial when he applied for his licence in singapore . from 1992 , leeson made unauthorised speculation trades that at first made large profits for barings : £10 million , which accounted for 10 % of barings ' annual profit . he earned a bonus of £130,000 on his salary of £50,000 for that year . leeson 's luck soon went sour and he used one of barings ' error accounts ( accounts used to correct mistakes made in trading ) to hide his losses . he says that this account was first used to hide an error made by one of his colleagues . she had been assigned to buy twenty futures contracts for fuji bank , but had sold them instead , costing barings £20,000 . however , leeson used this error account to cover further bad trades by himself and others . for example , he used it to cover a number of mistakes made by one of his traders who frequently came to work after long nights of partying . leeson believes that he first crossed into out-and-out criminal conduct when he forgot to reconcile a discrepancy of 500 contracts , costing barings us 1.7 million . he concluded that the only way to hide such a massive error and keep his job was to hide it in the error account . leeson insists that he never used the account for his own gain , but in 1996 the new york times quoted '' british press reports '' as saying that investigators had located approximately 35 million in various bank accounts tied to him . management at barings also allowed leeson to remain general manager and chief trader while also being responsible for settling his trades . in the latter role , he was responsible for ensuring accurate accounting for the trading operation . these jobs were usually held by two different people , and allowing leeson to do both made it much simpler for him to hide his losses from his superiors in singapore and london . downfall and imprisonment . by the end of 1992 , the error account 's losses exceeded £2 million , increasing to £23 million in late 1993 . this amount ballooned to £208 million by the end of 1994 . leeson had followed a '' doubling '' strategy : every time he lost money , he would bet double the amount that was lost in order to recoup the amount . this had been successful for him in the past , including once in 1993 where he was able to cover a £6 million negative balance in the error account and after which he vowed not to use the account again . however , leeson had to maintain his reputation as a trading genius and soon found himself hiding his losses there again . as the losses grew higher and higher , leeson fabricated cover stories to explain why he needed more cash from london . his sterling reputation protected him from close scrutiny . the beginning of the end occurred on 16 january 1995 , when leeson placed a short straddle in the singapore and tokyo stock exchanges , essentially betting that the japanese stock market would not move significantly overnight . however , the kobe earthquake hit early in the morning on 17 january , sending asian markets , and leeson 's trading positions , into a tailspin . leeson attempted to recoup his losses by making a series of increasingly risky new trades ( using a long-long future arbitrage ) , this time betting that the nikkei stock average would make a rapid recovery . however , the recovery failed to materialise . leeson left a note reading , '' i 'm sorry '' and fled singapore on 23 february . losses eventually reached £827 million ( us 1.4 billion ) , twice barings ' available trading capital . after a failed bailout attempt , barings , which had been the uk 's oldest merchant bank , was declared insolvent on 26 february . after fleeing to malaysia , thailand and finally germany , leeson was arrested in frankfurt and extradited back to singapore on 20 november 1995 , though his wife lisa was allowed to return to england . while he had authorisation for the 16 january short straddle , leeson was charged with fraud for deceiving his superiors about the riskiness of his activities and the scale of his losses . although leeson committed continuous and large-scale fraud over the years , barings were responsible for the deficient internal auditing and risk management practices which allowed the fraud to continue and multiply . leeson pleaded guilty to two counts of '' deceiving the bank 's auditors and of cheating the singapore exchange '' , including forgery documents . he was sentenced to six and a half years in changi prison in singapore , he was released in july 1999 after serving at least two-thirds of his sentence ( 4 years and 4 months ) for good behaviour , and having been diagnosed with colon cancer , which he survived despite grim forecasts at the time . in 1996 , leeson published an autobiography , rogue trader , detailing his acts . a review in the financial columns of the new york times stated , '' this is a dreary book , written by a young man very taken with himself , but it ought to be read by banking managers and auditors everywhere . '' in 1999 , the book was made into a rogue trader ( film ) starring ewan mcgregor and anna friel . the events also form the subject matter of a 1996 television documentary made by adam curtis , titled £830,000,000 – nick leeson and the fall of the house of barings . . later life . while leeson was in prison , his first wife , lisa , divorced him . in 2003 , as a mature student , leeson completed a bsc in psychology at middlesex university , and then married leona tormay , an irish beautician . they now live in barna , county galway , ireland . leeson is a regular guest on the after-dinner and keynote speaking circuit and an occasional guest lecturer at the nearby national university of ireland . galway united f.c . leeson was appointed commercial manager of galway united f.c . in april 2005 , rising to the position of general manager in late november 2005 . by july 2007 he had become the club 's ceo but in february 2011 , after the club entered severe financial difficulties he resigned his position . he still deals in the stock markets , but only with his own money . . media appearances . in june 2005 , leeson released a new book , back from the brink : coping with stress . it picks up his story where rogue trader left off , including in-depth conversations with psychologist ivan tyrrell . in 2013 he appeared in celebrity apprentice ireland on tv3 . in july 2015 , singapore 's national daily newspaper the straits times published an e-book titled guilty as charged : 25 crimes that have shaken singapore since 1965 , which included the nick leeson case as one of the top 25 crimes that shocked the nation since its independence in 1965 . the book was borne out of collaboration between the singapore police force and the newspaper itself . the e-book was edited by st news associate editor abdul hafiz bin abdul samad . the paperback edition of the book was published and first hit the bookshelves in end-june 2017 . the paperback edition first entered the st bestseller list on 8 august 2017 , a month after its publication . . trading jacket . on 5 april 2007 , the guardian reported that kpmg , the liquidators of barings , had sold a trading jacket thought to have been worn by leeson while trading on simex in singapore . the jacket was offered for sale on ebay but it failed to reach its reserve price despite a highest bid of £16,100 . it was subsequently sold for £21,000 . in october 2007 a similar jacket used by leeson 's team but not thought to have been worn by leeson himself sold at auction for £4,000 . . publications . . see also . clarence hatry speculation in financial markets list of trading losses jérôme kerviel kweku adoboli toshihide iguchi galway united citic group white collar crime . notes . external links .