Hoodoo (spirituality)

god as conjurer . not only is yahweh 's providence a factor in hoodoo practice , but hoodoo thought understands the deity as the archetypal hoodoo doctor . on this matter zora neale hurston stated , '' the way we tell it , hoodoo started way back there before everything . six days of magic spells and mighty words and the world with its elements above and below was made . '' hurston . 1935 . mules and men . pp . 183 . from this perspective , biblical figures are often recast as hoodoo doctors and the bible becomes a source of spells and is , itself , used as a protective talisman . smith . 1994 . conjuring culture . p . 6 . see also , hurston 's , mules and men . in the appendix she lists the '' paraphernalia of conjure , '' the last on the list being the christian bible . this can be understood as a syncretic adaptation for the religion . by blending the ideas laid out by the christian bible , the faith is made more acceptable . this combines the teachings of christianity that africans brought to america were given and the traditional beliefs they brought with them . a recent work on hoodoo lays out a model of hoodoo origins and development . mojo workin : the old african american hoodoo system by katrina hazzard-donald discusses what the author calls the arc or african religion complex which was a collection of eight traits which all the enslaved africans had in common and were somewhat familiar to all held in the agricultural slave labor camps known as plantations communities . those traits included naturopathic medicine , ancestor reverence , counter clockwise sacred circle dancing , blood sacrifice , divination , supernatural source of malady , water immersion and spirit possession . these traits allowed culturally diverse africans to find common culturo-spiritual ground . according to the author , hoodoo developed under the influence of that complex , the african divinities moved back into their natural forces , unlike in the caribbean and latin america where the divinities moved into catholic saints . this work also discusses the misunderstood '' high john the conqueror root '' and myth as well as the incorrectly-discussed '' nature sack '' . . moses as conjurer . hoodoo practitioners often understand the biblical figure moses in similar terms . hurston developed this idea in her novel moses , man of the mountain , in which she calls moses , '' the finest hoodoo man in the world . '' hurston . moses , man of the mountain . p . ? ? . obvious parallels between moses and intentional paranormal influence ( such as magic ) occur in the biblical accounts of his confrontation with pharaoh . moses conjures , or performs magic '' miracles '' such as turning his staff into a snake . however , his greatest feat of conjure was using his powers to help free the hebrews from slavery . this emphasis on moses-as-conjurer led to the introduction of the pseudonymous work the sixth and seventh books of moses into the corpus of hoodoo reference literature . one observer at the time called the sixth and seventh books '' the hoodoo bible '' . yvonne chireau . black magic : religion and the african american conjuring tradition . university of california press , ( 2006 ) . bible as talisman . in hoodoo , '' all hold that the bible is the great conjure book in the world . '' hurston . mules and men . p . 280 it has many functions for the practitioner , not the least of which is a source of spells . this is particularly evident given the importance of the book secrets of the psalms in hoodoo culture . selig , godfrey . secrets of the psalms this book provides instruction for using psalms for things such as safe travel , headache , and marital relations . the bible , however , is not just a source of spiritual works but is itself a conjuring talisman . it can be taken '' to the crossroads '' , carried for protection , or even left open at specific pages while facing specific directions . this informant provides an example of both uses : whenevah ah 'm afraid of someone doin ' me harm ah read the 37 psalms an ' co'se ah leaves the bible open with the head of it turned to the east as many as three days . hyatt . hoodoo . vol . 1 . p . 417 . quoted in smith . conjuring culture . p . 14 . n . 8 . . spirits . it is believed one 's soul returns to god after death , however their spirit may still remain on earth . spirits can interact with the world by providing good fortune or bringing bad deeds . a spirit that torments the living is known as a boo hag . spirits can also be conjured to cure or kill people , and predict the future . also wearing a silver dime worn around the ankle or neck can protect someone from evil spirits and conjure . . differences from voodoo religions . hoodoo shows evident links to the practices and beliefs of fon and ewe vodun spiritual folkways . the folkway of vodun is a more standardized and widely dispersed spiritual practice than hoodoo . vodun 's modern form is practiced across west africa in the nations of benin , togo , and burkina faso , among others . in the americas , the worship of the vodoun loa is syncretized with catholicism saints . the vodou of haiti , voodoo of louisiana , vodú of cuba , and the vudú of the dominican republic are related more to vodun than to hoodoo . archeologists unearthed hoodoo artifacts on slave plantations in maryland showing evidence of west african practices in the united states brought over by african slaves . on another plantation in maryland archeologists unearthed artifacts that showed a blend of west african and christian spiritual practices among the slaves . this was ezekial 's wheel in the bible that blended with the central african kongo cosmogram . the kongo_cosmogram is an x sometimes enclosed in a circle that resembles the christian cross . this may explain the connection enslaved black americans had with the christian symbol the cross as it resembled their african symbol . also , the kongo cosmogram is evident in hoodoo practice among black americans . archeologists unearthed on a former slave plantation in south carolina clay pots made by enslaved africans that had the kongo cosmogram engraved onto clay pots . the kongo cosmogram symbolize the birth , life , death and rebirth cycle of the human soul , and the rising and setting of the sun . '' the basic form of this cosmogram is a simple cross with one line representing the boundary between the living world and that of the dead , and the other representing the path of power from below to above , as well as the vertical path across the boundary . marks on the bases of colono ware bowls found in river bottoms and slave quarter sites in south carolina suggest that more than one hundred and fifty years ago african american priests used similar symbols of the cosmos . while cataloging thousands of colono ware sherds , south carolina archaeologists began noticing marks on the bases of some bowls . most of these marks were simple crosses . in some cases a circle or rectangle enclosed the cross ; in others , 'arms ' extended counterclockwise from the ends of the cross . on one there was a circle without a cross , and on a few others we found more complicated marks . '' the kongo cosmogram in hoodoo is also represented in physical form called the crossroads . in the practice of hoodoo , there is much kongo spiritual beliefs and practices , because the majority of africans taken from africa during the slave trade came from the kongo region .