Japanese diaspora

early history . painted tea-leaf jar , used as a tea canister , with wisteria designs by nonomura ninsei , edo period japanjapanese emigration to the rest of asia was noted as early as the 15th century to the philippines ; philippines history , culture , civilization and technology , filipino . asiapacificuniverse.com . retrieved on 2013-08-24 . early japanese settlements included those in lingayen gulf , manila , the coasts of ilocos and in the visayas when the philippines was under the srivijaya and majapahit empire . in the 16th century the japanese settlement was established in ayutthaya , thailand , and in early 17th century japanese settlers was first recorded to stay in dutch east indies ( now indonesia ) . a larger wave came in the 17th century , when red seal ships traded in southeast asia , and kirishitan fled from the religious persecution imposed by the shōguns , and settled in the philippines , among other destinations . many of them also intermarried with the local filipina women ( including those of pure or mixed chinese and spanish descent ) , thus forming the new japanese-mestizo community . in the 16th and 17th centuries , thousands of traders from japan also migrated to the philippines and assimilated into the local population . in the 15th century ad , shimamono tea-jars were bought by the shōguns to uji in kyoto from the philippines by merchants such as luzon sukezaemon which was used in the japanese tea ceremony . after the portuguese empire first made contact with japan in 1543 , a large scale of slave trade developed in which portuguese purchased japanese as slaves in japan and sold them to various locations overseas , including portugal itself , throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries . many documents mention the large slave trade along with protests against the enslavement of japanese . japanese slaves are believed to be the first of their nation to end up in europe , and the portuguese purchased large numbers of japanese slave girls to bring to portugal for sexual purposes , as noted by the church in 1555 . king sebastian feared that it was having a negative effect on catholic proselytization since the slave trade in japanese was growing to massive proportions , so he commanded that it be banned in 1571 . hideyoshi was so disgusted that his own people were being sold en masse into slavery on kyushu , that he wrote a letter to jesuit vice-provincial gaspar coelho on 24 july 1587 to demand the portuguese , siamese ( thai ) , and cambodians stop purchasing and enslaving japanese and return those slaves who had been removed to places as far as india . hideyoshi blamed the portuguese and jesuits for this slave trade and banned christian proselytizing as a result . some korean slaves in japan who had been among the thousands of prisoners of war taken during the japanese invasions of korea ( 1592–98 ) were bought by the portuguese and taken to portugal . fillippo sassetti saw some chinese and japanese slaves in lisbon among the large slave community in 1578 , although most of the slaves were african . the portuguese '' highly regarded '' asian slaves like chinese and japanese , much more '' than slaves from sub-saharan africa '' . the portuguese attributed qualities like intelligence and industriousness to chinese and japanese slaves which is why they favored them more . luis cerqueira , a portuguese jesuit , reported in a 1598 document that japanese women were sold as concubines to african and european crewmembers on portuguese ships trading in japan . japanese slaves were brought by the portuguese to macau , where some of them were enslaved to portuguese , but could also be bought by other slaves . thus , the portuguese might own african and malay slaves , who in turn possessed japanese slaves of their own . in 1595 a law was passed by portugal banning the sale of chinese and japanese slaves . from the 15th through the early 17th century , japanese seafarers traveled to china and southeast asia countries , in some cases establishing early japantowns . this activity ended in the 1640s , when the tokugawa shogunate imposed sakoku which forbade japanese from leaving the country , and from returning if they were already abroad . this policy would not be lifted for over two hundred years . travel restrictions were eased once japan convention of kanagawa with western nations . in 1867 , the shōgun began issuing travel documents for overseas travel and emigration . before 1885 , fewer and fewer japanese people emigrated from japan , in part because the meiji government was reluctant to allow emigration , both because it lacked the political power to adequately protect japanese emigrants , and because it believed that the presence of japanese as unskilled laborers in foreign countries would hamper its ability to revise the unequal treaties . a notable exception to this trend was a group of 153 contract laborers who immigrated—without official passports—to hawai ' i and guam in 1868 . known as the gannen-mono ( 元年者 ) , or '' first year people '' because they left japan in the first year of the meiji era . jonathan dresner , '' instructions to emigrant laborers , 1885–1894 : 'return in triumph ' or 'wander on the verge of starvation , ' '' in japanese diasporas : unsung pasts , conflicting presents , and uncertain futures , ed . nobuko adachi ( london : routledge , 2006 ) , 53 . a portion of this group stayed on after the expiration of the initial labor contract , forming the nucleus of the nikkei community in hawai ' i . in 1885 , the meiji government began to turn to officially sponsored emigration programs to alleviate pressure from overpopulation and the effects of the matsukata deflation in rural areas . for the next decade , the government was closely involved in the selection and pre-departure instruction of emigrants . the japanese government was keen on keeping japanese emigrants well-mannered while abroad in order to show the west that japan was a dignified society , worthy of respect . by the mid-1890s , immigration companies ( imin-kaisha 移民会社 ) , not sponsored by the government , began to dominate the process of recruiting emigrants , but government-sanctioned ideology continued to influence emigration patterns . dresner , 52-68 . . asia . through 1945 . in 1898 the dutch east indies colonial government statistics showed 614 japanese in the dutch east indies ( 166 men , 448 women ) . during the american colonial era in the philippines , the japanese population of davao , most of whom first started out as laborers working in abacá plantations in davao , were recorded in statistics as only numbering 30 in 1903 , then 5,533 by 1920 , then 12,469 by 1930 , then later increased to 20,000 by 1941 . the number of japanese laborers working in plantations rose so high that in the early 20th century , davao city soon became dubbed as davaokuo ( in philippine and american media ) or ( in with a japanese school , a shinto shrine , and a diplomatic mission from japan . the place that used to be '' little tokyo '' in davao was mintal . there is even a popular restaurant called '' the japanese tunnel '' , which includes an actual tunnel made by the japanese in time of the war . there was also a significant level of emigration to the overseas territories of the empire of japan during the japanese colonial period , including korea , taiwan , manchukuo , and karafuto . japanese immigration statistics , discovernikkei.org unlike emigrants to the americas , japanese going to the colonies occupied a higher rather than lower social niche upon their arrival . in 1938 about 309,000 japanese lived in taiwan . by the end of world war ii , there were over 850,000 japanese in korea and more than 2 million in china , killing of chinese in japan concerned , china daily most of them farmers in manchukuo ( the japanese had a plan to bring in 5 million japanese settlers into manchukuo ) . prasenjit duara : the new imperialism and the post-colonial developmental state : manchukuo in comparative perspective over 400,000 people lived on karafuto ( southern sakhalin ) when the soviet offensive began in early august 1945 . most were of japanese or korean descent . when japan lost the kuril islands , 17,000 japanese were expelled , most from the southern islands . . after 1945 . after and during world war ii , most of these overseas japanese repatriated to japan . like the colonization of british , so of japanese moved to the overseas countries during world war ii . the allied powers repatriated over 6 million japanese nationals from colonies and battlefields throughout asia . when empire comes home : repatriation and reintegration in postwar japan by lori watt , harvard university press only a few remained overseas , often involuntarily , as in the case of orphans in china or prisoners of war captured by the red army and forced to work in siberia . during the 1950s and 1960s , an estimated 6,000 japanese accompanied zainichi korean spouses repatriating to north korea , while another 27,000 prisoners-of-war are estimated to have been sent there by the soviet union ; see japanese people in north korea . there is a community of japanese people in hong kong largely made up of expatriate businessmen . there are about 4,018 japanese people in india who are mostly expatriate engineers and company executives and they are based mainly in haldia , bangalore and kolkata . additionally , there are 903 japanese people in pakistan based mostly in the cities of islamabad and karachi . . americas . people from japan began migrating to the u.s . and canada in significant numbers following the political , cultural , and social changes stemming from the 1868 meiji restoration . ( see japanese americans and japanese canadians ) in canada , small multi-generational communities of japanese immigrants developed and adapted to life outside japan . in the united states , particularly after the chinese exclusion act of 1882 , japanese immigrants were sought by industrialists to replace chinese immigrants . in the early years of the 20th century , anxiety about the rapid growth of cheap japanese labor in california came to a head when in 1906 , when the school board of san francisco passed a resolution barring children of japanese heritage from attending regular public schools . president roosevelt intervened to rescind the resolution , but only on the understanding that steps would be taken to put a stop to further japanese immigration . in 1907 , in the face of japanese government protests , the so-called '' gentlemen 's agreement '' between the governments of japan and the united states ended immigration of japanese workers ( i.e . , men ) , but permitted the immigration of spouses of japanese immigrants already in the us . the immigration act of 1924 banned the immigration of all but a token few japanese , until the immigration act of 1965 , there was very little further japanese immigration . that which occurred was mostly in the form of war brides . the majority of japanese settled in hawaii , where today japanese in hawaii , and the rest in the west coast ( california , oregon , washington , and alaska ) , but other significant communities are found in the northeast ( maine , new york , new jersey , vermont , massachusetts , rhode island , connecticut , new hampshire and pennsylvania ) and midwest ( illinois , indiana , iowa , kansas , michigan , minnesota , missouri , nebraska , north dakota , ohio , south dakota , and wisconsin ) states . the japanese diaspora has been unique in the absence of new emigration flows in the second half of the 20th century . maidment , richard et all . ( 1998 ) . culture and society in the asia-pacific , p . 80 . however , research reports that during the post-war many japanese migrated individually to join existing communities abroad . with the restrictions on entering the united states , the level of japanese immigration to latin america began to increase . mexico was the first latin american country to receive japanese mexican in 1897 , when the first thirty five arrived in chiapas to work on coffee farms . immigration into mexico died down in the following years , but was eventually spurred again in 1903 due to the acceptance of mutually recognized contracts on immigration by both countries . immigrants coming in the first four years of these contracts worked primarily on sugar plantations , coal mines , and railroads . unfortunately , japanese immigrants in mexico proved to have far less continuity than those in other south american countries , as disease , mining accidents , and discrimination caused many japanese to pass away or simply leave without seeing their contracts through to completion . less than 27 % of the total number of japanese who immigrated into mexico before 1941 remained there 40 years later . japanese immigrants ( particularly from the okinawa prefecture , including okinawans ) arrived in small numbers during the early 20th century . japanese brazilians are the largest ethnic japanese community outside japan ( numbering about 1.5 million , japan-brazil relations . mofa . retrieved on 2013-08-24 . compared to about 1.2 million in the united states ) , and são paulo contains the largest concentration of japanese outside japan . paraná and mato grosso do sul also have a large japanese community . the first japanese immigrants ( 791 people , mostly farmers ) came to brazil in 1908 on the kasato maru from the japanese port of kobe , moving to brazil in search of better living conditions . many of them ended up as laborers on coffee farms ( for testimony of kasato maru 's travelers that continued to argentina see : es : café el japonés , see also shindo renmei ) . immigration of japanese workers in brazil was actually subsidized by são paulo up until 1921 , with around 40,000 japanese emigrating to brazil between the years of 1908 and 1925 , and 150,000 pouring in during the following 16 years . the most immigrants to come in one year peaked in 1933 at 24,000 , but restrictions due to ever growing anti-japanese sentiment caused it to die down and then eventually halt at the start of world war ii . japanese immigration into brazil actually saw continued traffic after it resumed in 1951 . around 60,000 entered the country during 1951 and 1981 , with a sharp decline happening in the 1960s due to a resurgence of japan 's domestic economy . japanese peruvians form another notable ethnic japanese community with an estimated 6,000 issei and 100,000 japanese descendants ( nisei , sansei , yonsei ) , and including a former peruvian president , alberto fujimori . japanese food known as nikkei cuisine is a rich part of peruvian-japanese culture , which includes the use of seaweed broth and sushi-inspired versions of ceviche . '' salmon with chenin blanc '' wine spectator ( march 31 , 2020 ) , p . 100 there was a small amount of japanese settlement in the dominican republic between 1956 and 1961 , in a program initiated by dominican republic leader rafael trujillo . protests over the extreme hardships and broken government promises faced by the initial group of migrants set the stage for the end of state-supported labor emigration in japan . the japanese colombian colony migrated between 1929 and 1935 in three waves . their community is unique in terms of their resistance against the internal conflict occurring in colombia during the decade of the 1950s , a period known as la violencia . . europe . the japanese in britain form the largest japanese community in europe with well over 100,000 living all over the united kingdom ( the majority being in london ) . in recent years , many young japanese have been migrating from japan to britain to engage in cultural production and to become successful artists in london . there are also small numbers of japanese people in russia some whose heritage date back to the times when both countries shared the territories of sakhalin and the kuril islands ; some japanese communists settled in the soviet union , including mutsuo hakamada , the brother of former japanese communist party chairman satomi hakamada whose daughter irina hakamada is a notable russian political figure . the 2002 russian census showed 835 people claiming japanese ethnicity ( nationality ) . there is a sizable japanese community in düsseldorf , germany of nearly 8,000 . . oceania . early japanese immigrants were particularly prominent in broome , western australia , where until the second world war they were the largest ethnic group , who were attracted to the opportunities in pearling . several streets of broome have japanese names , and the town has one of the largest japanese cemeteries outside japan . other immigrants were involved in the sugar cane industry in queensland . during the world war ii , the japanese population was detained and later expelled at the cessation of hostilities . the japanese population in australia was later replenished in the 1950s by the arrival of 500 japanese war brides , who had married aif soldiers stationed in occupied japan.in recent years , japanese migration to australia , largely consisting of younger age females , has been on the rise . there is also a small but growing japanese community in new zealand , primarily in auckland and wellington . in the census of december 1939 , the total population of the south seas mandate was 129,104 , of which 77,257 were japanese . by december 1941 , saipan had a population of more than 30,000 people , including 25,000 japanese . a go : another battle for sapian there are japanese people in palau , guam and northern mariana islands . return migration to japan . in the 1980s , with japan 's growing economy facing a shortage of workers willing to do so-called three k jobs kitsui difficult , kitanai dirty , and kiken dangerous ) , japan 's ministry of labor began to grant visas to ethnic japanese from south america to come to japan and work in factories . the vast majority—estimated at roughly 300,000—were from brazil , but there is also a large population from peru and smaller populations from argentina and other latin american countries . in response to the recession as of 2009 , the japanese government offered ¥300,000 ( 3,300 ) for unemployed japanese descendants from latin america to return to their country of origin with the stated goal of alleviating the country 's soaring unemployment . another ¥200,000 ( 2,200 ) is offered for each additional family member to leave . perry , joellen . '' the czech republic pays for immigrants to go home unemployed guest workers and their kids receive cash and a one-way ticket as the country fights joblessness , '' wall street journal . 28 april 2009 . emigrants who take this offer are not allowed to return to japan with the same privileged visa with which they entered the country . arudou debito , columnist for the japan times , an english language newspaper in japan , denounced the policy as '' racist '' as it only offered japanese-blooded foreigners who possessed the special '' person of japanese ancestry '' visa the option to receive money in return for repatriation to their home countries . some commentators also accused it of being exploitative since most nikkei had been offered incentives to immigrate to japan in 1990 , were regularly reported to work 60+ hours per week , and were finally asked to return home when the japanese became unemployed in large numbers . at the same time , return migration to japan , along with repatriation to their home countries , has also created complex relationships with both their homeland and hostland , a condition which has been called a '' 'squared diaspora ' in which the juxtaposition of homeland and hostland itself becomes questionable , instable and fluctuating . '' this has also taken on new forms of '' circular migration '' as first and second generation nikkei travel back and forth between japan and their home countries . . major cities with significant populations of japanese nationals . são paulo , brazil : 693,495 los angeles , united states : 68,744 bangkok , thailand : 52,871 new york city , united states : 46,137 shanghai , china : 43,455 singapore : 36,423 greater london , united kingdom : 34,298 sydney , australia : 32,189 vancouver , canada : 26,910 hong kong , china : 25,004 londrina , brazil : 25,000 melbourne , australia : 19,878 san francisco , united states : 18,862 honolulu , united states : 16,306 paris , france : 15,684 san jose , united states : 14,761 toronto , canada : 13,725 seoul , south korea : 12,655 seattle , united states : 12,548 kuala lumpur , malaysia : 12,539 chicago , united states : 11,928 manila , philippines davao city , philippines note : the above data shows the number of japanese nationals living overseas as of october 1 , 2017 , according to the ministry of foreign affairs ( japan ) . . see also . issei , nisei , sansei , yonsei & gosei buddhist churches of america honpa hongwanji mission of hawaii & hawaii shingon mission gedatsu church of america jodo shinshu buddhist temples of canada south america hongwanji mission list of shinto shrines in the united states saipan katori shrine . references . bibliography . maidment , richard a . and colin mackerras . ( 1998 ) . culture and society in the asia-pacific . london : routledge . sakai , junko . ( 2000 ) . japanese bankers in the city of london : language , culture and identity in the japanese diaspora . london : routledge . fujita , yuiko ( 2009 ) cultural migrants from japan : youth , media , and migration in new york and london . md : lexington books , rowman & littlefield , masterson , daniel m . and sayaka funada-classen . ( 2004 ) , the japanese in latin america : the asian american experience . urbana , illinois : university of illinois press . ; niiya , brian , ed . encyclopedia of japanese american history : an a-to-z reference from 1868 to the present . ( 2001 ) . online free to borrow . external links . discover nikkei , a site co-ordinated with the japanese american national museum and affiliated with academic , community programs , and scholars . ministry of foreign affairs ( japan ) ( mofa ) : future policy regarding cooperation with overseas communities of nikkei apj , a non-profit organization representing japanese citizens living in peru and their descendants . nikkeicity , information of the nikkei in peru . nikkei youth network , a network of nikkei leaders around the world . japanese canadians photograph collection – a photo album from the ubc library digital collections depicting the life of japanese canadians in british columbia during world war ii ハルとナツ , a tv drama based on historical events aired by nhk in october 2005 . hoji shinbun digital collection , hoover institution library & archives japanese diaspora initiative .