Falsetto

anatomical process . the modal voice , or modal register , and falsetto register differ primarily in the action of the vocal cords . production of the normal voice involves vibration of the entire vocal cord , with the glottis opening first at the bottom and then at the top . production of falsetto , on the other hand , vibrates only the ligamentous edges of the vocal folds while leaving each fold 's body relatively relaxed . transition from modal voice to falsetto occurs when each vocal cord 's main body , or vocalis muscle , relaxes , enabling the arytenoid cartilage to stretch the vocal ligaments . william vennard describes this process as follows : in the modal register , the vocal folds ( when viewed with a stroboscope ) are seen to contact with each other completely during each vibration , closing the gap between them fully , if just for a very short time . this closure cuts off the escaping air . when the air pressure in the trachea rises as a result of this closure , the folds are blown apart , while the vocal processes of the arytenoid cartilages remain in apposition . this creates an oval gap between the folds and some air escapes , lowering the pressure inside the trachea . rhythmic repetition of this movement creates the note . in falsetto , however , the vocal folds are seen to be blown apart and in untrained falsetto singers a permanent oval orifice is left in the middle between the edges of the two folds through which a certain volume of air escapes continuously as long as the register is engaged ( the singer is singing using the voice ) . in skilled countertenors , however , the mucous membrane of the vocal folds contact with each other completely during each vibration cycle . the arytenoid cartilages are held in firm apposition in this voice register also . the length or size of the oval orifice or separation between the folds can vary , but it is known to get bigger as the pressure of air pushed out is increased . the folds are made up of elastic and fatty tissue . the folds are covered on the surface by larynx mucous membrane which is supported deeper down underneath by the innermost fibres of the thyroarytenoid muscle . in falsetto the extreme membranous edges , i.e . the edges furthest away from the middle of the gap between the folds , appear to be the only parts vibrating . the mass corresponding to the innermost part of the thyro-arytenoid muscle remains still and motionless . some singers feel a sense of muscular relief when they change from the modal register to the falsetto register . research has revealed that not all speakers and singers produce falsetto in exactly the same way . some speakers and singers leave the cartilaginous portion of the glottis open ( sometimes called 'mutational chink ' ) , and only the front two-thirds of the vocal ligaments enter the vibration . the resulting sound , which is typical of many adolescents , may be pure and flutelike , but is usually soft and anemic in quality . in others , the full length of the glottis opens and closes in each cycle . in still others , a phenomenon known as damping appears , with the amount of glottal opening becoming less and less as the pitch rises , until only a tiny slit appears on the highest pitches . the mutational chink type of falsetto is considered inefficient and weak , but there is little information available about the relative strengths and weaknesses of the other two types . . female falsetto . both sexes are physically capable of phonating in the falsetto register . prior to research done by scientists in the 1950s and 1960s , it was widely believed that only men were able to produce falsetto . one possible explanation for this failure to recognize the female falsetto sooner is that when men phonate in the falsetto register there is a much more pronounced change in timbre and dynamic level between the modal and falsetto registers than there is in female voices . this is due in part to the difference in the length and mass of the vocal folds and to the difference in frequency ranges . however , motion picture and video studies of larynx action prove that women can and do produce falsetto , and electromyography studies by several leading speech pathologists and vocal pedagogists provide further confirmation . while scientific evidence has proven that women have a falsetto register , the issue of 'female falsetto ' has been met with controversy among teachers of singing . this controversy does not exist within the sciences and arguments against the existence of female falsetto do not align with current physiological evidence . some pioneers in vocal pedagogy , like margaret green and william vennard , were quick to adopt current scientific research in the 1950s , and pursued capturing the biological process of female falsetto on film . they went further to incorporate their research into their pedagogical method of teaching female singers . others refused to accept the idea , and opposition to the concept of female falsetto has continued among some teachers of singing long after scientific evidence had proven the existence of female falsetto . celebrated opera singer and voice teacher richard miller pointed out in his 1997 publication national schools of singing : english , french , german , and italian that while the german school of voice teachers had largely embraced the idea of a female falsetto into pedagogical practice , there is division within the french and english schools and a complete rejection of the idea of female falsetto in the italian school of singing . in his 2004 book , solutions for singers : tools for performers and teachers , miller said , '' it is illogical to speak of a female falsetto , because the female is incapable of producing a timbre in the upper range that is radically different from its mezza voce or voce piena in testa qualities '' . miller , richard . solutions for singers : tools for performers and teachers ( oxford university press , 2004 ) , page 148 however , other writers of singing have warned about the dangers of failing to recognize that women have a falsetto register . mckinney , who expressed alarm that many books on the art of singing completely ignore or gloss over the issue of female falsetto or insist that women do not have falsetto , argues that many young female singers substitute falsetto for the upper portion of the modal voice . he believes that this failure to recognize the female falsetto voice has led to the misidentification of young contraltos and mezzo-sopranos as sopranos , as it is easier for these lower voice types to sing in the soprano tessitura using their falsetto register . . musical history . use of falsetto voice in western music is very old . its origins are difficult to trace because of ambiguities in terminology . possibly when 13th century writers distinguished between chest , throat and head registers ( pectoris , guttoris , capitis ) they meant capitis to refer to what would be later called falsetto . the new grove dictionary of music & musicians . edited by stanley sadie , volume 6 . edmund to fryklund . , copyright macmillan 1980 . by the 16th century the term falsetto was common in italy . the physician , giovanni camillo maffei , in his book discorso della voce e del modo d'apparare di cantar di garganta in 1562 , explained that when a bass singer sang in the soprano range , the voice was called '' falsetto '' . in a book by gb mancini , called pensieri e riflessioni written in 1774 , falsetto is equated with '' voce di testa '' ( translated as 'head voice ' ) . the falsetto register is used by male countertenors to sing in the alto and occasionally the soprano range and was the standard before women sang in choirs . falsetto is occasionally used by early music specialists today and regularly in british cathedral choirs by men who sing the alto line . sadie , stanley . 2001 . '' alto . '' new grove dictionary of music and musicians , second edition , edited by stanley sadie and john tyrrell . london : macmillan publishers . there is a difference between the modern usage of the '' head voice '' term and its previous meaning in the renaissance as a type of falsetto , according to many singing professionals . these days , head voice is typically defined as a mix of chest and head voice , therefore created a stronger sound than falsetto . the falsetto can be coloured or changed to sound different . it can be given classical styling to sound as male classical countertenors make it sound , or be sung in more contemporary musical styles . review of justin timberlake : futuresex/lovesounds - '' timberlake 's falsetto layering on top of one other as the songs build to their crescendos . '' in opera , it is believed that the chest voice , middle voice and head voice occur in women . the oxford dictionary of opera . john warrack and ewan west , the head voice of a man is , according to david a . clippinger most likely equivalent to the middle voice of a woman . project gutenberg etext . this may mean the head voice of a woman is a man 's falsetto equivalent . although , in contemporary teaching , some teachers no longer talk of the middle voice , choosing to call it the head voice as with men . falsetto is not generally counted by classical purists as a part of the vocal range of anyone except countertenors . there are exceptions , however , such as the baryton-martin which uses falsetto ( see baritone article ) . the new grove dictionary of music & musicians . edited by stanley sadie , volume 2 . back to bolivia . , copyright macmillan publishers limited 1980 . . in popular music . smokey robinson used falsetto voice . one of the soulful falsettos is philip bailey of earth , wind , and fire . brian wilson of the beach boys sang falsetto on multiple beach boys tunes providing a dose of saccharine for the band 's signature harmonies . the pop disco group bee gees had strong commercial success using barry and robin gibb 's falsetto in the 1970s , most notably within the disco genre . frankie valli usually sang in falsetto in the 1960s , as did many other singers in the doo wop style , in the 1950s . falsetto has been used in mexican songs for many generations . in mexico , one of the famous singers of falsete was miguel aceves mejía , a singer and actor in the golden age of mexican cinema , known as the '' rey de falsete '' , or '' falsetto king '' . he sang over a thousand songs , such as '' la malagueña , el jinete , la noche y tú , and la del rebozo blanco '' , many of which utilized falsetto . many hawaiian songs feature falsetto . in hawaiian-style falsetto—called '' ka leo ki'eki ' e '' —the singer , usually male , emphasizes the break between registers . sometimes the singer exaggerates the break through repetition , as a yodel . as with other aspects of hawaiian music , falsetto developed from a combination of sources , including pre-european hawaiian chanting , early christian hymn singing and the songs and yodeling of immigrant cowboys , called '' paniolos '' in the hawaiian language , during the kamehameha reign in the 1800s when cowboys were brought from mexico to teach hawaiians how to care for cattle . falsetto is also common in african folk music , especially the south african style called mbube , traditionally performed by an all-male a cappella chorus . the united states release of muse 's origin of symmetry album was delayed for four years because maverick records wanted the group to rerecord the album with less falsetto . muse refused , and left maverick records due to the incident . . use in singing . falsetto is more limited in dynamic variation and tone quality than the modal voice . falsetto does not connect to modal voice except at very low volumes , leading to passaggio when transitioning from modal voice . in the absence of modern vocal training to hold back the volume of modal voice , in this overlapping area a given pitch in modal voice will be louder than the same pitch sung in falsetto . the type of vocal cord vibration that produces the falsetto voice precludes loud singing except in the highest tones of that register ; it also limits the available tone colors because of the simplicity of its waveform . modal voice is capable of producing much more complex waveforms and infinite varieties of tone color . falsetto , however , does involve less physical effort by the singer than the modal voice and , when properly used , can make possible some desirable tonal effects . the falsetto voice has a number of highly specialized uses within a musical context . the following list includes the most common ones : popular music in r & b/soul music in doo wop in gospel music in rock music in reggae in a cappella music in blues in yodeling in country music in bluegrass in folk music in irish music in barbershop music for the tenor voice ( not always necessary ) and occasionally with the lead and baritone voices in certain arrangements . classical music for comic effect in both operas and musicals by falsettists , sopranists , male altos or countertenors in tessitura for pitches which are above the range of the modal register for pianissimo tones that would be difficult to execute in the modal register . use in speech . the ability to speak within the falsetto register is possible for almost all men and women . the use of falsetto is considered uncommon in normal western speech and is most often employed within the context of humor . however , the use of falsetto speech varies by culture and its use has been studied in african americans and gay men in certain contexts . its use has also been noted in the u.s . south . pitch changes ranging to falsetto are also characteristic of british english . some people who speak frequently or entirely in the falsetto register are identified by speech pathologists as suffering from a functional dysphonia . falsetto also describes the momentary , but often repeated , fluctuations in pitch emitted by both sexes while undergoing voice change during adolescence . these changes , however , are more apparent and occur with greater frequency in boys than they do in girls . failure to undergo proper voice-change is called puberphonia . see also . creaky voice human voice . references . further reading . . external links . glossary definition of falsetto at virginia tech 's web site story about the falsetto in rock music in the boston globe video : vocal coach kevin richards explains the difference between falsetto and head voice