Animal welfare

history , principles and practice . animal protection laws were enacted as early as 13th century ad by genghis khan in mongolia , where they protected wildlife during breeding season ( march to october ) . early legislation in the western world on behalf of animals includes the ireland parliament ( thomas wentworth ) '' an act against plowing by the tayle , and pulling the wooll off living sheep '' , 1635 , and the massachusetts colony ( nathaniel ward ) '' off the bruite creatures '' liberty 92 and 93 in the '' massachusetts body of liberties '' of 1641 . in 1776 , english clergyman humphrey primatt authored a dissertation on the duty of mercy and sin of cruelty to brute animals , one of the first books published in support of animal welfare . niven , charles d . ( 1967 ) . history of the humane movement . transatlantic arts . p . 53 levitt , lacey ; patronek , gary ; grisso , thomas . ( 2016 ) . animal maltreatment : forensic mental health issues and evaluations . oxford university press . p . 19 . marc bekoff has noted that '' primatt was largely responsible for bringing animal welfare to the attention of the general public . '' bekoff , marc . ( 2010 ) . encyclopedia of animal rights and animal welfare , 2nd edition . abc-clio . pp . 484-485 . since 1822 , when irish mp richard martin brought the '' cruel treatment of cattle act 1822 '' through parliament offering protection from cruelty to cattle , horses , and sheep , an animal welfare movement has been active in england . martin was among the founders of the world 's first animal welfare organization , the society for the prevention of cruelty to animals , or spca , in 1824 . in 1840 , queen victoria gave the society her blessing , and it became the rspca . the society used members ' donations to employ a growing network of inspectors , whose job was to identify abusers , gather evidence , and report them to the authorities . in 1837 , the german minister albert knapp founded the first german animal welfare society . one of the first national laws to protect animals was the uk '' cruelty to animals act 1835 '' followed by the '' protection of animals act 1911 '' . in the us it was many years until there was a national law to protect animals—the '' animal welfare act of 1966 '' —although there were a number of states that passed anti-cruelty laws between 1828 and 1898 . in india , animals are protected by the '' prevention of cruelty to animals act , 1960 '' . significant progress in animal welfare did not take place until the late 20th century . phillips 2009 . p 56 . in 1965 , the uk government commissioned an investigation—led by professor roger brambell—into the welfare of intensively farmed animals , partly in response to concerns raised in ruth harrison 's 1964 book , animal machines . on the basis of professor brambell 's report , the uk government set up the farm animal welfare advisory committee in 1967 , which became the farm animal welfare council in 1979 . the committee 's first guidelines recommended that animals require the freedoms to '' stand up , lie down , turn around , groom themselves and stretch their limbs . '' the guidelines have since been elaborated upon to become known as the five freedoms . in the uk , the '' animal welfare act 2006 '' consolidated many different forms of animal welfare legislation . a number of animal welfare organisations are campaigning to achieve a universal declaration on animal welfare ( udaw ) at the united nations . in principle , the universal declaration would call on the united nations to recognise animals as sentient beings , capable of experiencing pain and suffering , and to recognise that animal welfare is an issue of importance as part of the social development of nations worldwide . the campaign to achieve the udaw is being co-ordinated by world animal protection , with a core working group including compassion in world farming , the rspca , and the humane society international ( the international branch of hsus ) . universal declaration on animal welfare compassion in world farming back a universal declaration on animal welfare world animal protection . animal welfare science . animal welfare science is an emerging field that seeks to answer questions raised by the keeping and use of animals , such as whether hens are frustrated when confined in cages , whether the psychological well-being of animals in laboratories can be maintained , and whether zoo animals are stressed by the transport required for international conservation . ireland leads research into farm animal welfare with the recently published research report on farm animal welfare . animal welfare issues . animal testing abandoned pets behavioral enrichment blood sport cruelty to animals feral cat hunting overpopulation in companion animals overview of discretionary invasive procedures on animals poaching puppy mills whaling . farm animals . welfarism is often contrasted with the animal rights and animal liberation positions , which hold that animals should not be used by humans and should not be regarded as human property . garner 2005 , p . 15 ; however , it has been argued that both welfarism and animal liberation only make sense if it is assumed that animals have '' subjective welfare '' . . new welfarism . new welfarism was coined by gary l . francione in 1996 . it is a view that the best way to prevent animal suffering is to abolish the causes of animal suffering , but advancing animal welfare is a goal to pursue in the short term . thus , for instance , new welfarists want to phase out fur farms and animal experiments but in the short-term they try to improve conditions for the animals in these systems , so they lobby to make cages less constrictive and to reduce the numbers of animals used in laboratories . within the context of animal testing , many scientific organisations believe that improved animal welfare will provide improved scientific outcomes . if an animal in a laboratory is suffering stress or pain it could negatively affect the results of the research . increased affluence in many regions for the past few decades afforded consumers the disposable income to purchase products from high welfare systems . phillips 2009 . pp 60-63 . the adaptation of more economically efficient farming systems in these regions were at the expense of animal welfare and to the financial benefit of consumers , both of which were factors in driving the demand for higher welfare for farm animals . a 2006 survey concluded that a majority ( 63 % ) of eu citizens '' show some willingness to change their usual place of shopping in order to be able to purchase more animal welfare-friendly products . '' the volume of scientific research on animal welfare has also increased significantly in some countries . phillips 2009 . p 60 . . criticisms . denial of duties to animals . some individuals in history have , at least in principle , rejected the view that humans have duties of any kind to animals . augustine of hippo seemed to take such a position in his writings against those he saw as heretics : '' for we see and hear by their cries that animals die with pain , although man disregards this in a beast , with which , as not having a rational soul , we have no community of rights . '' . animal rights . animal rights advocates , such as gary l . francione and tom regan , argue that the animal welfare position ( advocating for the betterment of the condition of animals , but without abolishing animal use ) is inconsistent in logic and ethically unacceptable . however , there are some animal right groups , such as peta , which support animal welfare measures in the short term to alleviate animal suffering until all animal use is ended . interview with ingrid newkirk , david shankbone , wikinews , 20 november 2007 . according to peta 's ingrid newkirk in an interview with wikinews , there are two issues in animal welfare and animal rights . '' if i only could have one thing , it would be to end suffering '' , said newkirk . '' if you could take things from animals and kill animals all day long without causing them suffering , then i would take it . everybody should be able to agree that animals should not suffer if you kill them or steal from them by taking the fur off their backs or take their eggs , whatever . but you should n't put them through torture to do that . '' abolitionism holds that focusing on animal welfare not only fails to challenge animal suffering , but may actually prolong it by making the exercise of property rights over animals appear less unattractive . the abolitionists ' objective is to secure a moral and legal paradigm shift , whereby animals are no longer regarded as property . in recent years documentaries such as watchdominion.com have been produced , exposing the suffering occurring in animal agriculture facilities that are marketed as having high welfare standards . animal welfare organizations . global . world organisation for animal health ( oie ) : the intergovernmental organisation responsible for improving animal health worldwide . the oie has been established '' for the purpose of projects of international public utility relating to the control of animal diseases , including those affecting humans and the promotion of animal welfare and animal production food safety . '' world animal protection : protects animals across the globe . world animal protection 's objectives include helping people understand the critical importance of good animal welfare , encouraging nations to commit to animal-friendly practices , and building the scientific case for the better treatment of animals . they are global in a sense that they have consultative status at the council of europe and collaborate with national governments , the united nations , the food and agriculture organization and the world organization for animal health . . non-government organizations . canadian council on animal care : the national organization responsible for overseeing the care and use of animals involved in canadian science . canadian federation of humane societies ( cfhs ) : the only national organization representing humane societies and spcas in canada . they provide leadership on animal welfare issues and spread the message across canada . the canadian veterinary medical association : brings in veterinary involvement to animal welfare . their objective is to share this concern of animals with all members of the profession , with the general public , with government at all levels , and with other organizations such as the cfhs , which have similar concerns . compassion in world farming : founded over 40 years ago in 1967 by a british farmer who became horrified by the development of modern , intensive factory farming . '' today we campaign peacefully to end all cruel factory farming practices . we believe that the biggest cause of cruelty on the planet deserves a focused , specialised approach – so we only work on farm animal welfare . '' the movement for compassionate living : exists to- '' promote simple vegan living and self-reliance as a remedy against the exploitation of humans , animals and the earth . promote the use of trees and vegan-organic farming to meet the needs of society for food and natural resources . promote a land-based society where as much of our food and resources as possible are produced locally . '' national animal interest alliance : an animal welfare organization in the united states founded in 1991 promotes the welfare of animals , strengthens the human-animal bond , and safeguards the rights of responsible animal owners , enthusiasts and professionals through research , public information and sound public policy . they host an online library of information about various animal-related subjects serving as a resource for groups and individuals dedicated to responsible animal care and well-being . national farm animal care council : their objectives are to facilitate collaboration among members with respect to farm animal care issues in canada , to facilitate information sharing and communication , and to monitor trends and initiatives in both the domestic and international market place . national office of animal health : a british organisation that represents its members drawn from the animal medicines industry . ontario society for the prevention of cruelty to animals : a registered charity comprising over 50 communities . royal society for the prevention of cruelty to animals : a well-known animal welfare charity in england and wales , founded in 1824 . universities federation for animal welfare : a uk registered charity , established in 1926 , that works to develop and promote improvements in the welfare of all animals through scientific and educational activity worldwide . links to animal welfare and rights by country . animal welfare and rights in brazil animal welfare and rights in china animal rights in colombia animal welfare in egypt animal welfare and rights in india animal welfare and rights in israel animal welfare and rights in japan animal welfare and rights in malaysia animal welfare in nazi germany animal welfare in new zealand animal welfare and rights in south korea animal welfare in thailand animal welfare in the united kingdom animal welfare in the united states . see also . animal consciousness animal law animal welfare science cambridge declaration on consciousness cultured meat eurogroup for animals francis of assisi , associated with patronage of animals intrinsic value ( animal ethics ) list of abnormal behaviours in animals list of animal rights advocates list of animal welfare groups list of animal welfare parties pain in animals pain in invertebrates wild animal suffering women and animal advocacy world animal day . references . external links . animal welfare science centre in australia department for the environment , food and rural affairs page on animal welfare legislation farm animal welfare : philosophical aspects from the encyclopedia of animal science dr . temple grandin 's web page welfare for all . adam fisher for jacobin . 7 october 2015 . revolution on the animal farm . the huffington post . 23 september 2016 . animal welfare information center , usda national agricultural library