Tsetse fly

etymology . the word tsetse means '' fly '' in tswana , a bantu language of southern africa . recently , tsetse without the fly has become more common in english , particularly in the scientific and development communities . the word is pronounced tseh-tseh in the sotho languages and is easily rendered in other african languages . during world war ii , a de havilland antisubmarine aircraft was known as the 'tsetse ' mosquito . anti-submarine warfare : an illustrated history , 2007 , by david owen . page 170 . seaforth publishing . . biology . the biology of tsetse is relatively well understood by entomology . they have been extensively studied because of their medical , veterinary , and economic importances , because the flies can be raised in a laboratory , and because they are relatively large , facilitating their analysis . morphology . tsetse flies can be seen as independent individuals in three forms : as third-instar larvae , pupae and as adults . tsetse first become separate from their mothers during the third larval instar , during which they have the typical appearance of maggots . however , this life stage is short , lasting at most a few hours , and is almost never observed outside of the laboratory . tsetse next develop a hard external case , the puparium , and become pupae & mdash ; small , hard-shelled , oblongs with two distinctive , small , dark lobes at the tail ( breathing ) end . tsetse pupae are under long . within the puparial shell , tsetse complete the last two larval instars and the pupal stage . at the end of the pupal stage , tsetse emerge as adult flies . the adults are relatively large flies , with lengths of , and have a recognizable shape or bauplan which makes them easy to distinguish from other flies . tsetse have large heads , distinctly separated eyes , and unusual antennae . the thorax is quite large , while the abdomen is wide rather than elongated and shorter than the wings . four characteristics definitively separate adult tsetse from other kinds of flies : the infection progresses into the blood stream and eventually crosses into the central nervous system and invades the brain leading to extreme lethargy and eventually to death . the species trypanosoma brucei , which causes the disease , has often been subdivided into three subspecies that were identified based either on the vertebrate hosts which the strain could infect or on the virulence of the disease in humans . the trypanosomes infectious to animals and not to humans were named trypanosoma brucei brucei . strains that infected humans were divided into two subspecies based on their different virulences : trypanosoma brucei gambiense was thought to have a slower onset and trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense refers to strains with a more rapid , virulent onset . this characterization has always been problematic but was the best that could be done given the knowledge of the time and the tools available for identification . a recent molecular study using restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis suggests that the three subspecies are polyphyletic , so the elucidation of the strains of t . brucei infective to humans requires a more complex explanation . procyclins are proteins developed in the surface coating of trypanosomes whilst in their tsetse fly vector . other forms of human trypanosomiasis also exist but are not transmitted by tsetse . the most notable is american trypanosomiasis , known as chagas disease , which occurs in south america , caused by trypanosoma cruzi , and transmitted by certain insects of the reduviidae , members of the hemiptera . in domestic animals . animal trypanosomiasis , also called nagana when it occurs in cattle or horses or sura when it occurs in domestic pigs , is caused by several trypanosome species . these diseases reduce the growth rate , milk productivity , and strength of farm animals , generally leading to the eventual death of the infected animals . certain species of cattle are called trypanotolerant because they can survive and grow even when infected with trypanosomes although they also have lower productivity rates when infected . the course of the disease in animals is similar to the course of sleeping sickness in humans . trypanosoma congolense and trypanosoma vivax are the two most important species infecting bovine cattle in sub-saharan africa . trypanosoma simiae causes a virulent disease in swine . other forms of animal trypanosomiasis are also known from other areas of the globe , caused by different species of trypanosomes and transmitted without the intervention of the tsetse fly . the tsetse fly vector ranges mostly in the central part of africa . trypanosomiasis poses a considerable constraint on livestock agricultural development in tsetse fly infested areas of sub saharan africa , especially in west and central africa . international research conducted by ilri in nigeria , the democratic republic of the congo and kenya has shown that the n'dama is the most resistant breed . . control . the conquest of sleeping sickness and nagana would be of immense benefit to rural development and contribute to poverty alleviation and improved food security in sub-saharan africa . human african trypanosomosis ( hat ) and animal african trypanosomosis ( aat ) are sufficiently important to make virtually any intervention against these diseases beneficial . fao . 2003 . economic guidelines for strategic planning of tsetse and trypanosomiasis control in west africa , by a.p.m . shaw . paat technical and scientific series no . 5 . rome . the disease can be managed by controlling the vector and thus reducing the incidence of the disease by disrupting the transmission cycle . another tactic to manage the disease is to target the disease directly using surveillance and curative or prophylactic treatments to reduce the number of hosts that carry the disease . economic analysis indicates that the cost of managing trypanosomosis through the elimination of important populations of major tsetse vectors will be covered several times by the benefits of tsetse-free status . area-wide interventions against the tsetse and trypanosomosis problem appear more efficient and profitable if sufficiently large areas , with high numbers of cattle , can be covered . vector control strategies can aim at either continuous pest control of target populations . tsetse fly eradication programmes are complex and logistically demanding activities and usually involve the integration of different control tactics , such as trypanocidal drugs , impregnated treated targets ( itt ) , insecticide-treated cattle ( itc ) , aerial spraying ( sequential aerosol technique - sat ) and in some situations the release of sterile males ( sterile insect technique – sit ) . to ensure sustainability of the results , it is critical to apply the control tactics on an area-wide basis , i.e . targeting an entire tsetse population that is preferably genetic isolation . control techniques . many techniques have reduced tsetse populations , with earlier , crude methods recently replaced by methods that are cheaper , more directed , and ecologically better . slaughter of wild animals . one early technique involved slaughtering all the wild animals tsetse fed on . for example , the island of principe off the west coast of africa was entirely cleared of feral pigs in the 1930s , which led to the extirpation of the fly . while the fly eventually re-invaded in the 1950s , the new population of tsetse was free from the disease . . land clearing . another early technique involved complete removal of brush and woody vegetation from an area . tsetse tend to rest on the trunks of trees so removing woody vegetation made the area inhospitable to the flies . however , the technique was not widely used and has been abandoned . preventing regrowth of woody vegetation requires continuous clearing efforts , which is only practical where large human populations are present . also , the clearing of woody vegetation has come to be seen as an environmental problem more than a benefit . pesticide campaigns . pesticides have been used to control tsetse starting initially during the early part of the twentieth century in localized efforts using the inorganic metal-based pesticides , expanding after the second world war into massive aerial- and ground-based campaigns with organochlorine pesticides such as ddt applied as aerosol sprays at ultra-low volume rates . later , more targeted techniques used pour-on formulations in which advanced organic pesticides were applied directly to the backs of cattle . trapping . right tsetse populations can be monitored and effectively controlled using simple , inexpensive traps . these often use electric blue cloth , since this color attracts the flies . early traps mimicked the form of cattle but this seems unnecessary and recent traps are simple sheets or have a biconical form . the traps can kill by channeling the flies into a collection chamber or by exposing the flies to insecticide sprayed on the cloth . tsetse are also attracted to large dark colors like the hides of cow and buffaloes . some scientists put forward the idea that zebra have stripes , not as a camouflage in long grass , but because the black and white bands tend to confuse tsetse and prevent attack . the use of chemicals as attractants to lure tsetse to the traps has been studied extensively in the late 20th century , but this has mostly been of interest to scientists rather than as an economically reasonable solution . attractants studied have been those tsetse might use to find food , like carbon dioxide , octenol , and acetone & mdash ; which are given off in animals ' breath and distributed downwind in an odor plume . synthetic versions of these chemicals can create artificial odor plumes . a cheaper approach is to place cattle urine in a half gourd near the trap . for large trapping efforts , additional traps are generally cheaper than expensive artificial attractants . a special trapping method is applied in ethiopia , where the biofarm consortium ( icipe , biovision foundation , bea , helvetas , dlco-ea , praxis ethiopia ) applies the traps in a sustainable agriculture and rural development context ( sard ) . the traps are just the entry point , followed by improved farming , human health and marketing inputs . this method is in the final stage of testing ( as of 2006 ) . sterile insect technique . the sterile insect technique ( sit ) is a form of pest control that uses ionizing radiation ( gamma ray or x ray ) to sterilize male flies that are mass-produced in special rearing facilities . the sterile males are released systematically from the ground or by air in tsetse-infested areas , where they mate with wild females , which do not produce offspring . as a result , this technique can eventually eradicate populations of wild flies . sit is among the most environmentally friendly control tactics available , and is usually applied as the final component of an integrated campaign . it has been used to subdue the populations of many other fly species including the medfly , ceratitis capitata . the sustainable removal of the tsetse fly is in many cases the most cost-effective way of dealing with the t & t problem resulting in major economic benefits for subsistence farmers in rural areas . insecticide-based methods are normally very ineffective in removing the last remnants of tsetse populations , while , on the contrary , sterile males are very effective in finding and mating the last remaining females . therefore , the integration of the sit as the last component of an area-wide integrated approach is essential in many situations to achieve complete eradication of the different tsetse populations , particularly in areas of more dense vegetation . a project that was implemented from 1994 to 1997 on the island of unguja , zanzibar ( united republic of tanzania ) , demonstrated that , after suppression of the tsetse population with insecticides , sit completely removed the glossina austeni newstead population from the island . the eradication of the tsetse fly from unguja island in 1997 was followed by the disappearance of the aat which enabled farmers to integrate livestock keeping with cropping in areas where this had been impossible before . the increased livestock and crop productivity and the possibility of using animals for transport and traction significantly contributed to an increase in the quality of people 's lives . tambi , e.n . , maina , o.w . , mukhebi , a.w . & randolph , t.f . 1999 . economic impact assessment of rinderpest control in africa , oie rev . sci . tech.18 ( 2 ) : 458-77 mdoe , n . s . y . 2003 . livestock and agriculture development in zanzibar , post-tsetse eradication : a follow-up socio-economic study . report prepared for the international atomic energy agency . iaea , vienna , austria . a recent entomological survey ( 2015 ) jointly carried out by independent experts and the department of veterinary services of zanzibar has confirmed the tsetse-free status of the island , 18 years after eradication was declared . in the niayes region of senegal , a coastal area close to dakar , livestock keeping was difficult due to the presence of a population of glossina palpalis gambiensis . feasibility studies indicated that the fly population was confined to very fragmented habitats and a population genetics study indicated that the population was genetically isolated from the main tsetse belt in the south eastern part of senegal . after completion of the feasibility studies ( 2006–2010 ) , an area-wide integrated eradication campaign that included an sit component was started in 2011 , and by 2015 , the niayes region had become almost tsetse fly free . the entire target area ( block 1 , 2 and 3 ) has a total surface of 1000 km2 , and the first block ( northern part ) can be considered free of tsetse , as intensive monitoring has failed to detect since 2012 a single wild tsetse fly . the prevalence of aat has decreased from 40 to 50 % before the project started to less than 10 % to date in blocks 1 and 2 . although insecticides are being used for fly suppression , they are applied for short periods on traps , nets and livestock , and are not spread into the environment . after the suppression activities are completed , no more insecticide is applied in the area . the removal of trypanosomosis will eliminate the need for constant prophylactic treatments of the cattle with trypanocidal drugs , therefore reducing residues of these drugs in the dung , meat and milk . the main beneficiaries of the project are the many small holder farmers , the larger commercial farms and the consumers of meat and milk . according to a socio-economic survey and benefit cost analysis , after eradication of the tsetse farmers will be able to replace their local breeds with improved breeds and increase their annual income by €2.8 million . in addition , it is expected that the number of cattle will be reduced by 45 % , which will result in reduced environmental impacts . effect on societal development . in the literature of environmental determinism , the tsetse has been linked to difficulties during early state formation for areas where the fly is prevalent . a 2012 study used population growth models , physiological data , and ethnographic data to examine pre-colonial agricultural practices and isolate the effects of the fly . a '' tsetse suitability index '' was developed from insect population growth , climate and geospatial data to simulate the fly 's population steady state . an increase in the tsetse suitability index was associated with a statistically significant weakening of the agriculture , levels of urbanization , institutions and subsistence strategies . results suggest that the tsetse decimated livestock populations , forcing early states to rely on slave labor to clear land for farming , and preventing farmers from taking advantage of natural animal fertilizers to increase crop production . these long-term effects may have kept population density low and discouraged cooperation between small-scale communities , thus preventing stronger nations from forming . the authors also suggest that under a lower burden of tsetse , africa would have developed differently . agriculture ( measured by the usage of large domesticated animals , intensive agriculture , plow use and female participation rate in agriculture ) as well as institutions ( measured by the appearance of indigenous slavery and levels of centralization ) would have been more like those found in eurasia . qualitative support for this claim comes from archaeological findings ; e.g . , great zimbabwe is located in the african highlands where the fly does not occur , and represented the largest and technically most advanced precolonial structure in sub-sahara africa . other authors are more skeptical that the tsetse fly had such an immense influence on african development . one conventional argument is that the tsetse fly made it difficult to use draught animals . hence , wheeled forms of transportations were not used as well . while this is certainly true for areas with high densities of the fly , similar cases outside tsetse-suitable areas exist . while the fly definitely had a relevant influence on the adoption of new technologies in africa , it has been contended that it does not represent the single root cause . . resistance of tsetse flies to trypanosome infection . tsetse flies have an arsenal of immune defenses to resist each stage of the trypanosome infectious cycle , and thus are relatively refractory to trypanosome infection among the host flies ' defenses is the production of hydrogen peroxide , a reactive oxygen species that damages dna . these defenses limit the population of infected flies . see also . david bruce ( microbiologist ) g.d . hale carpenter joined the london school of hygiene and tropical medicine , and took the dm in 1913 with a dissertation on the tsetse fly ( glossina palpalis ) and sleeping sickness . he published : a naturalist on lake victoria , with an account of sleeping sickness and the tse-tse fly ; 1920 . t.f . unwin ltd , london ; biodiversity archive muriel robertson , who conducted early 20th century research on the insect use of dna in forensic entomology