Kenneth Grahame

personal life . early life . kenneth grahame was born on 8 march 1859 in edinburgh . when he was a little more than a year old , his father , an advocate , received an appointment as sheriff-substitute in argyllshire , at inveraray on loch fyne . when he was five , his mother died of puerperal fever , peter hunt , '' grahame , kenneth ( 1859–1932 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography ( oxford , uk : oup , 2004 ) retrieved 8 july 2016 . and his father , who had a drinking problem , assigned care of kenneth , his brother willie , his sister helen and the new baby roland to granny ingles , the children 's grandmother , in cookham dean in the village of cookham in berkshire . there the children lived in a spacious , dilapidated house called the mount , in expansive grounds , and were introduced to the riverside and boating by their uncle , david ingles , who was a curate at cookham dean church . this ambience , particularly quarry wood and the river thames , is believed by grahame 's biographer peter green to have inspired the setting for the wind in the willows . grahame was an outstanding pupil at st edward 's school , oxford . in his early years there , no sports regimen had been established and the boys were free to explore the old city and its surroundings . . career . grahame wanted to attend oxford university , but was not allowed to do so by his guardian on grounds of cost . instead he was sent to work at the bank of england in 1879 , and rose through the ranks until retiring as its secretary in 1908 due to ill health , which may have been precipitated by a possibly political shooting incident at the bank in 1903 . grahame was shot at three times , but all the shots missed him . an alternative explanation , given in a letter on display in the bank museum , is that he had quarrelled with walter cunliffe , one of the bank 's directors , who would later become governor of the bank of england , in the course of which he was heard to say that cunliffe was '' no gentleman '' . his retirement was enforced ostensibly on health grounds . he was awarded an annual pension of £400 , but a worked example on display indicates he was actually due to receive £710 . . marriage and fatherhood . grahame married elspeth thomson , the daughter of robert william thomson in 1899 . they had one child , a boy named alastair ( nicknamed '' mouse '' ) , who was born blind in one eye and plagued by health problems throughout a short life . on grahame 's retirement , the family returned to cookham , his childhood home , where they lived at mayfield , now herries preparatory school . there grahame produced bedtime stories that he told alastair and turned into the wind in the willows . alastair took his own life on a railway track while an undergraduate at oxford university , five days before his 20th birthday on 7 may 1920 . his demise was recorded as an accidental death out of respect for his father . according to cardiff university professor emeritus peter hunt , grahame shared a house in london with a set designer , w . graham robertson , while grahame 's wife and son lived in berkshire . . death . grahame died in pangbourne , berkshire , in 1932 . he is buried in holywell cemetery , oxford . grahame 's cousin anthony hope , also a successful author , wrote him an epitaph : '' to the beautiful memory of kenneth grahame , husband of elspeth and father of alastair , who passed the river on the 6th of july , 1932 , leaving childhood and literature through him the more blest for all time . '' file : kenneth grahame 16 phillimore place blue plaque.jpg blue plaque , 16 phillimore place , london , home during 1901–1908 image : grahamegrave.jpg grahame 's headstone in holywell cemetery , oxford file : grave of kenneth grahame at holywell.jpg grahame 's grave at holywell cemetery , oxford . writing . while still a young man in his twenties , grahame began to publish light stories in london periodicals such as the st . james gazette . some of these were collected and published as pagan papers in 1893 , and two years later the golden age . these were followed by dream days in 1898 , which contains the reluctant dragon . there is a ten-year gap between grahame 's penultimate book and the publication of his triumph , the wind in the willows . during that decade , grahame became a father . the wayward , headstrong nature he saw in his little son alastair he transformed into the swaggering mr . toad , one of its four principal characters . the character in the book known as ratty was inspired by his good friend , and writer , sir arthur quiller-couch . grahame mentions this in a signed copy he gave to quiller-couch 's daughter , foy felicia . auctioned by bonhams on tuesday 23 march 2010 for £32,400 : despite its success , he never attempted a sequel . the book is still widely enjoyed by adults and children . it has given rise to many film and television adaptations , while toad remains one of the most celebrated and beloved characters in children 's literature . in 1929 , a . a . milne wrote the play toad of toad hall , which is based on part of the wind in the willows , which won the lewis carroll shelf award in 1958 . in the 1990s , william horwood produced a series of sequels . works . pagan papers ( 1893 ) the golden age ( 1895 ) dream days ( 1898 ) , including '' the reluctant dragon '' ( 1898 ) the headswoman ( 1898 ) the wind in the willows ( 1908 ) , illustrated by ernest h shepard bertie 's escapade ( 1949 ) , illustrated by ernest h . shepard . references . further reading . green , peter , the historian of hellenistic greece , wrote a biography of grahame , kenneth grahame 1859–1932 . a study of his life , work and times in 1959 , with black and white illustrations , and subsequently wrote the introduction to the oxford world 's classics edition of the wind in the willows . several abridged versions of the biography with added color illustrations were published in the united states and britain 1982 to 1993 under the title beyond the wild wood : the world of kenneth grahame author of the wind in the willows and k . grahame , the annotated wind in the willows , edited with preface and notes by annie gauger and brian jacques , norton , . k . grahame , the wind in the willows : an annotated edition , edited by seth lerer . belknap press/harvard university press , . alison prince : kenneth grahame : an innocent in the wild wood , london : allison & busby , 1994 , . external links . www.kennethgrahamesociety.net – online literary society focusing on the life and works of kenneth grahame the killing of mr toad – play by david gooderson about the moving grahame family story and its resonances with the wind in the willows plaque to kenneth grahame at blewbury ( oxfordshire blue plaques board ) messing about in boats – amateur boating and boat-building magazine whose name quotes a well-known remark by ratty to mole in the wind in the willows : '' believe me , my young friend , there is nothing – absolutely nothing – half so much worth doing as simply messing about in boats . ''