Alison Moyet

early life . moyet was born geneviève alison jane moyet in the essex town of billericay to a french father and english mother . feedreader : full issue . alison moyet biography . retrieved 28 september 2012 . she grew up in the nearby town of basildon , where she attended janet duke junior school and then james hornsby school at secondary level . after leaving school at 16 , she worked as a shop assistant and trained as a piano tuner . she was involved in a number of punk rock , pub rock and blues bands in the south east essex area during the late 1970s and early 1980s , including the vandals , the screamin ' ab dabs , the vicars and the little roosters ( the latter featuring garrie lammin , formerly of cock sparrer ) . music career . 1980s : yazoo and solo beginnings . at the age of 21 , moyet 's mainstream pop career began in 1982 with the formation of the synthpop duo yazoo with former depeche mode member vince clarke . in the united states , the band operated under the name yaz , due to trademark issues with the yazoo records record label already operating in the region . yazoo had several hits , including '' only you '' , '' do n't go '' , '' situation '' and '' nobody 's diary '' , and recorded two albums , upstairs at eric 's and you and me both . in 1983 , clarke decided to disband yazoo . while clarke went on to form the assembly ( another duo , this time with eric radcliffe ) and then erasure ( a duo again , with andy bell ) , moyet signed to cbs , and began her solo career . in 1984 , moyet released her debut solo album alf ( titled after her punk-era nickname ) . alf was produced by the record producing and songwriting team of jolley & swain . the album was co-written by the duo and moyet , with the exception of '' invisible '' , which was written for moyet by lamont dozier . the record was a hit in britain , reaching no . & nbsp ; 1 in the album chart . alf spawned three international hit singles , '' love resurrection '' ( uk no . & nbsp ; 10 ) , '' invisible '' ( uk no . & nbsp ; 21 ) and '' all cried out '' ( uk no . & nbsp ; 8 ) . in the us , '' invisible '' was a top 40 hit . in some european territories , a fourth single , '' for you only '' , was also released . in 1985 , moyet performed at live aid alongside paul young and later returned unscheduled to the stage ( alongside bob geldof , david bowie and pete townshend ) to provide vocals on '' let it be '' when paul mccartney 's vocal microphone at his piano failed , leaving him unable to be heard for the first stanza of the song . ( twenty years later , he overdubbed his vocal for the live aid dvd release . ) moyet also released a single not featured on alf , a cover of the standard '' that ole devil called love '' , which climbed to no . & nbsp ; 2 on the uk singles chart ( it remains moyet 's highest-charting uk single ) . moyet had another big uk hit the following year with '' is this love ? '' ( co-written by eurythmics ' dave stewart , under the pseudonym jean guiot ) , followed in 1987 by her second lp , raindancing . raindancing spawned further hit singles , including a cover of floy joy 's '' weak in the presence of beauty '' and '' ordinary girl '' . in 1987 , she scored another cover hit with '' love letters '' , which peaked at uk no . & nbsp ; 4 . the video for the song featured comedy duo french & saunders . 1990s : further recordings and hiatus . following a period of personal and career evaluation , hoodoo was released in 1991 . the album sold respectably in the uk , and moyet was nominated for a grammy for the single '' it wo n't be long '' . however , the release of hoodoo marked the beginning of an eight-year fight for moyet to secure complete control of her artistic direction . like many similar artists ( including aimee mann and the late kirsty maccoll ) , moyet was reluctant to record a radio-friendly '' pop '' album simply for the sake of creating chart hits . moyet 's next album , essex ( 1994 ) , was also a source of controversy for her ; in order for the album to be released , her label ( now sony ) insisted that certain essex tracks be re-recorded and re-produced , and that there be additional material remixed to create a more 'commercial ' package . the video for the single '' whispering your name '' again featured dawn french . following the release of essex , sony released a greatest hits compilation of moyet 's work . singles entered the uk charts at no . & nbsp ; 1 and , following a uk tour , was re-issued as a double cd set which included '' live ( no overdubs ) '' , a bonus live cd . upon re-issue , singles charted again , this time in the top 20 . due to prolonged litigation with sony , moyet did not record or release a new studio album for over eight years after the release of essex . during this time , however , she recorded vocals for tricky , sylk-130 , ocean colour scene , the lightning seeds , and king britt , and was featured on the british leg of the lilith fair tour . 2001 saw the release of the essential alison moyet cd , and in 2002 the essential alison moyet dvd . in 1995 , she sang back-up vocals with sinéad o'connor for one of dusty springfield 's last television appearances , singing '' where is a woman to go ? '' on the music show later with jools holland . 2000s : return to recording and touring . in august 2002 , moyet was released from her sony contract . moyet signed to sanctuary records and released her first studio album in eight years . hometime was produced by the insects , who had also produced works by massive attack and madonna . the release of the cd launched moyet into the top five best-selling female uk artists of 2002 , and resulted in a brit awards nomination for best female vocalist , as well as a nomination for the mercury music prize . hometime was certified gold in the uk for sales in excess of 100,000 copies , with little promotion . voice , a collection of cover versions , was released on 6 september 2004 and entered the uk charts at no . & nbsp ; 7 . scored and produced by moyet 's neighbour ( and academy award winner ) anne dudley , the album was later re-issued with a bonus track , '' alfie '' . a companion dvd , one blue voice , was released in 2006 . voice was certified gold in the uk within four weeks of its release . in december 2006 , moyet signed a recording contract with w14 music , a universal music group imprint . the deal saw moyet reunited with label head john williams , who was a & r man for her previous two albums , hometime and voice . moyet 's album , the turn , was released on 15 october 2007 , preceded by the single '' one more time '' a week earlier . the album featured self-penned songs , including the three numbers she wrote for the stage play , smaller in which she starred with dawn french . for these songs , again moyet worked alongside producer/songwriter and frequent moyet collaborator pete glenister . the turn debuted at no . & nbsp ; 21 on the uk albums chart on 22 october 2007 . moyet left w14 shortly after the release of the turn . during mid-2008 , moyet reunited with vince clarke as yazoo for a series of live dates . sony music released the best of alison moyet on 19 october 2009 . it was moyet 's personal selection of tracks from her seven solo albums . the deluxe edition of the album , the best of : 25 years revisited , contained an extra disc , with re-recorded versions of older songs . moyet supported the release with a tour of the uk and ireland during november and december 2009 . also in 2009 , she provided vocals to my robot friend 's single '' waiting . '' . 2010s : return to synthpop roots . moyet appeared with jools holland throughout his tour of the uk in 2010 . in the same year she contributed vocals to '' the man that got away '' on holland 's album rocking horse . news , my robot friend website . retrieved 6 may 2013 . moyet appeared with heather peace in january 2012 on the final concert of peace 's first studio album , fairytales . heather peace and alison moyet – whispering your name heather peace official youtube channel moyet announced on bbc radio 6 music that her new album with guy sigsworth would be released in 2012 , but in february that year she stated '' i appear to have forfeited my recording deal because i wo n't do reality tv . no-one needs to make an album that badly . tea anyone ? '' in an interview with touchbase the following june , moyet confirmed that she was still recording her album and that she was not rushing it . on 22 january 2013 the singer announced on her facebook page that she had signed a worldwide deal with london-based record label cooking vinyl . sony music had earlier announced that moyet 's four solo albums on the label ( alf , raindancing , hoodoo and essex ) were being digitally remastered and would be reissued with b-sides and bonus material . in february 2013 , moyet said of the remastered albums : '' the project was sony 's – some initial work was done and then the project was suspended . '' the minutes was released in the uk on 6 may 2013 . the first single , '' when i was your girl '' , was released on 1 april 2013 . a tour of the uk and ireland to promote the album was announced for october . describing the album , moyet said : '' i avoided listening to anything during the process of writing and recording this album , choosing instead to be led by my own melodic voice , the one i now find myself with 30-years-in . guy sigsworth returns me to a programmer 's world and marries it with perfect musicality . i have been waiting for him . we have made an album mindless of industry mores that apply to middle-aged women and have shunned all talk of audiences , demographics and advert jazz covers . this has easily been my happiest studio experience . '' the minutes debuted at number 5 on the uk albums chart , her highest debut since 1987 's raindancing . in july 2013 , moyet said that she has begun writing new material for the follow-up to the minutes . on 16 october 2013 , moyet appeared as a guest performer on itv 1 's the one and only cilla black celebrating cilla black 's 50 years in show business . moyet sang '' anyone who had a heart '' . on 10 november 2014 , moyet released a live album , minutes and seconds – live , taken from the minutes tour . on 30 july 2015 , it was announced that moyet would be releasing deluxe editions of her albums hometime , voice , and the turn . according to her official web site : '' each album will feature plenty of bonus material – including some rare and previously unreleased material . '' on 21 september 2015 , moyet performed at the burberry show at london fashion week . her set was released as a digital ep , live for burberry on 23 september . on 27 september 2016 , it was announced that moyet 's first four studio albums alf , raindancing , hoodooo and essex would be reissued as deluxe editions after having been remastered by bmg on 25 november 2016 . each double-disc set comes in a casebound book with the original album remastered from the original tapes along with 12-inch remixes , b-sides and previously unreleased songs . moyet 's ninth studio album other , described as '' intelligent , adventurous electronic pop , '' co-produced by guy sigsworth , was released 16 june 2017 on cooking vinyl . from september through december that same year , she will embark on a world tour , the other tour . in october 2017 , moyet featured as guest artist on the norwegian band a-ha 's acoustic album , mtv unplugged – summer solstice , singing '' summer moved on '' . the performance was recorded at giske island in norway in june 2017 . on 20 april 2018 , moyet released her second live album , the other live collection , taken from the other tour . theatre . moyet made her stage debut in the london west end production of the musical chicago in 2001 . she played the part of matron 'mama ' morton , and although it had initially been intended to be a short run , it eventually ran for six months . in 2006 , she appeared in the play smaller , which undertook a regional tour before a stint at london 's lyric theatre . personal life . moyet 's first marriage , to hairdresser and retired london firefighter malcolm lee with whom she has a son , joe ( born 1985 ) , ended in divorce . moyet has a daughter , alex ( born 1987 ) , with former partner kim mccarthy , and a daughter , caitlin ( born 1996 ) , with her current husband david ballard . in 2013 , moyet moved from radlett , hertfordshire , to brighton . moyet has been candid about her battles with weight , bipolar disorder and agoraphobia . she said she had breast reduction surgery prior to embarking on a weight loss programme , because she did not want to become '' an obese old woman '' . on 14 october 2014 , moyet was presented with a gold badge award by professional music writers association the ivors academy . she is a supporter of southend united . . discography . alf ( 1984 ) raindancing ( 1987 ) hoodoo ( 1991 ) essex ( 1994 ) hometime ( 2002 ) voice ( 2004 ) the turn ( 2007 ) the minutes ( 2013 ) other ( 2017 ) . references . external links . biography on allmusic