List of unsolved problems in physics

general physics/quantum physics . theory of everything : is there a theory which explains the values of all fundamental physical constants , i.e . , of all coupling constants , all elementary particle masses and all mixing angles of elementary particles ? is there a theory which explains why the gauge groups of the standard model are as they are , and why observed spacetime has 3 spatial dimensions and 1 temporal dimension ? are '' fundamental physical constants '' really fundamental or do they vary over time ? are any of the fundamental particles in the standard model of particle physics actually composite particles too tightly bound to observe as such at current experimental energies ? are there elementary particles that have not yet been observed , and , if so , which ones are they and what are their properties ? are there fifth force ? arrow of time ( e.g . entropy ( arrow of time ) ) : why does time have a direction ? why did the universe have such low entropy in the past , and time correlates with the universal ( but not local ) increase in entropy , from the past and to the future , according to the second law of thermodynamics ? why are cp violations observed in certain weak force decays , but not elsewhere ? are cp violations somehow a product of the second law of thermodynamics , or are they a separate arrow of time ? are there exceptions to the principle of causality ? is there a single possible past ? is the present moment physically distinct from the past and future , or is it merely an emergent property of consciousness ? what links the quantum arrow of time to the thermodynamic arrow ? interpretation of quantum mechanics : how does the quantum description of reality , which includes elements such as the superposition of states and wavefunction collapse or quantum decoherence , give rise to the reality we perceive ? another way of stating this question regards the measurement problem : what constitutes a '' measurement '' which apparently causes the wave function to collapse into a definite state ? unlike classical physical processes , some quantum mechanical processes ( such as quantum teleportation arising from quantum entanglement ) can not be simultaneously '' local '' , '' causal '' , and '' real '' , but it is not obvious which of these properties must be sacrificed , or if an attempt to describe quantum mechanical processes in these senses is a category error such that a proper understanding of quantum mechanics would render the question meaningless . can a multiverse resolve it ? yang–mills theory : given an arbitrary compact gauge group , does a non-trivial quantum yang–mills theory with a finite mass gap exist ? ( this problem is also listed as one of the millennium prize problems in mathematics . ) color confinement : the quantum chromodynamics ( qcd ) color confinement conjecture is that color charged particles ( such as quarks and gluons ) can not be separated from their parent hadron without producing new hadrons . is it possible to provide an analytic proof of color confinement in any non-abelian gauge theory ? dimensionless physical constant : at the present time , the values of the dimensionless physical constants can not be calculated ; they are determined only by physical measurement . what is the minimum number of dimensionless physical constants from which all other dimensionless physical constants can be derived ? are dimensional physical constants necessary at all ? fine-tuned universe : the values of the fundamental physical constants are in a narrow range necessary to support carbon-based life . gribbin . j and rees . m , cosmic coincidences : dark matter , mankind , and anthropic cosmology p . 7 , 269 , 1989 , is this because there exist multiverse with different constants , or are our universe 's constants the result of chance , or some other factor or process ? in particular , tegmark 's mathematical universe hypothesis of abstract mathematics parallel universe formalized models , and the string theory landscape of spacetime regions having different formalized sets of laws and physical constants from that of the surrounding space—require formalization . quantum field theory : is it possible to construct , in the mathematically rigorous framework of algebraic qft , a theory in 4-dimensional spacetime that includes interactions and does not resort to perturbative methods ? locality : are there non-local phenomena in quantum physics ? if they exist , are non-local phenomena limited to the entanglement revealed in the violations of the bell 's theorem , or can information and conserved quantities also move in a non-local way ? under what circumstances are non-local phenomena observed ? what does the existence or absence of non-local phenomena imply about the fundamental structure of spacetime ? how does this elucidate the proper interpretation of the fundamental nature of quantum physics ? . cosmology and general relativity . problem of time : in quantum mechanics time is a classical background parameter and the flow of time is universal and absolute . in general relativity time is one component of four-dimensional spacetime , and the flow of time changes depending on the curvature of spacetime and the spacetime trajectory of the observer . how can these two concepts of time be reconciled ? cosmic inflation : is the theory of cosmic inflation in the very early universe correct , and , if so , what are the details of this epoch ? what is the hypothetical scalar field that gave rise to this cosmic inflation ? if inflation happened at one point , is it chaotic inflation , and thus ongoing in some extremely distant place ? horizon problem : why is the distant universe so homogeneous when the big bang theory seems to predict larger measurable anisotropy of the night sky than those observed ? cosmological inflation is generally accepted as the solution , but are other possible explanations such as a variable speed of light more appropriate ? origin and future of the universe : big_bang pre–big_bang_cosmology is the universe heading towards a big freeze , a big rip , a big crunch , or a big bounce ? or is it part of an infinitely recurring cyclic model ? size of universe : the diameter of the observable universe is about 93 billion light-years , but what is the size of the whole universe ? baryon asymmetry : why is there far more matter than antimatter in the observable universe ? ( this may be solved due to the apparent asymmetry in neutrino-antineutrino oscillations . ) cosmological constant problem : why does the zero-point energy of the vacuum not cause a large cosmological constant ? what cancels it out ? dark matter : what is the identity of dark matter ? is it a particle ? is it the lightest superpartner ( lsp ) ? or , do the galaxy rotation curve point not to some form of matter but actually to an extension of gravity ? dark energy : what is the cause of the observed accelerated expansion ( de sitter phase ) of the universe ? why is the energy density of the dark energy component of the same magnitude as the density of matter at present when the two evolve quite differently over time ; could it be simply that we are observing at exactly the right time ? is dark energy a pure cosmological constant or are models of quintessence such as phantom energy applicable ? dark flow : is a non-spherically symmetric gravitational pull from outside the observable universe responsible for some of the observed motion of large objects such as galactic clusters in the universe ? axis of evil : some large features of the microwave sky at distances of over 13 billion light years appear to be aligned with both the motion and orientation of the solar system . is this due to systematic errors in processing , contamination of results by local effects , or an unexplained violation of the copernican principle ? shape of the universe : what is the 3-manifold of comoving space , i.e . of a comoving spatial section of the universe , informally called the '' shape '' of the universe ? neither the curvature nor the topology is presently known , though the curvature is known to be '' close '' to zero on observable scales . the cosmic inflation hypothesis suggests that the shape of the universe may be unmeasurable , but , since 2003 , jean-pierre luminet , et al . , and other groups have suggested that the shape of the universe may be the homology sphere cosmology . is the shape unmeasurable ; the poincaré space ; or another 3-manifold ? the largest structures in the universe are larger than expected . current cosmological models say there should be very little structure on scales larger than a few hundred million light years across , due to the expansion of the universe trumping the effect of gravity . stephen battersby ( 21 june 2011 ) . '' largest cosmic structures 'too big ' for theories '' . new scientist . retrieved 5 july 2019 but the sloan great wall is 1.38 billion light-years in length . and the largest structure currently known , the hercules–corona borealis great wall , is up to 10 billion light-years in length . are these actual structures or random density fluctuations ? if they are real structures , they contradict the 'end of greatness ' hypothesis which asserts that at a scale of 300 million light-years structures seen in smaller surveys are randomized to the extent that the smooth distribution of the universe is visually apparent . extra dimensions : does nature have more than four spacetime dimensions ? if so , what is their size ? are dimensions a fundamental property of the universe or an emergent result of other physical laws ? can we experimentally observe evidence of higher spatial dimensions ? . quantum gravity . vacuum catastrophe : why does the predicted mass of the vacuum state have little effect on the expansion of the universe ? quantum gravity : can quantum mechanics and general relativity be realized as a fully consistent theory ( perhaps as a quantum field theory ) ? is spacetime fundamentally continuous or discrete ? would a consistent theory involve a force mediated by a hypothetical graviton , or be a product of a discrete structure of spacetime itself ( as in loop quantum gravity ) ? are there deviations from the predictions of general relativity at very small or very large scales or in other extreme circumstances that flow from a quantum gravity mechanism ? black holes , black hole information paradox , and black hole radiation : do black holes produce thermal radiation , as expected on theoretical grounds ? does this radiation contain information about their inner structure , as suggested by gauge–gravity duality , or not , as implied by hawking 's original calculation ? if not , and black holes can evaporate away , what happens to the information stored in them ( since quantum mechanics does not provide for the destruction of information ) ? or does the radiation stop at some point leaving black hole remnants ? is there another way to probe their internal structure somehow , if such a structure even exists ? the cosmic censorship hypothesis and the chronology protection conjecture : can singularities not hidden behind an event horizon , known as '' naked singularities '' , arise from realistic initial conditions , or is it possible to prove some version of the '' cosmic censorship hypothesis '' of roger penrose which proposes that this is impossible ? similarly , will the closed timelike curves which arise in some solutions to the equations of general relativity ( and which imply the possibility of backwards time travel ) be ruled out by a theory of quantum gravity which unites general relativity with quantum mechanics , as suggested by the '' chronology protection conjecture '' of stephen hawking ? . high-energy physics/particle physics . hierarchy problem : why is gravity such a weak force ? it becomes strong for particles only at the planck mass , around 10 gev , much above the electroweak scale ( 100 gev , the energy scale dominating physics at low energies ) . why are these scales so different from each other ? what prevents quantities at the electroweak scale , such as the higgs boson mass , from getting renormalization on the order of the planck scale ? is the solution supersymmetry , extra dimensions , or just anthropic fine-tuning ? planck particle : the planck mass plays an important role in parts of mathematical physics . a series of researchers have suggested the existence of a fundamental particle with mass equal to or close to that of the planck mass . the planck mass is however enormous compared to any detected particle . it is still an unsolved problem if there exist or even have existed a particle with close to the planck mass . this is indirectly related to the hierarchy problem . magnetic monopoles : did particles that carry '' magnetic charge '' exist in some past , higher-energy epoch ? if so , do any remain today ? ( paul dirac showed the existence of some types of magnetic monopoles would explain charge quantization . ) paul dirac , '' quantised singularities in the electromagnetic field '' . proceedings of the royal society a 133 , 60 ( 1931 ) . neutron lifetime puzzle : while the neutron lifetime has been studied for decades , there currently exists a lack of consilience on its exact value , due to different results from two experimental methods ( '' bottle '' versus '' beam '' ) . proton decay and spin crisis : is the proton fundamentally stable ? or does it decay with a finite lifetime as predicted by some extensions to the standard model ? how do the quarks and gluons carry the spin of protons ? supersymmetry : is spacetime supersymmetry realized at tev scale ? if so , what is the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking ? does supersymmetry stabilize the electroweak scale , preventing high quantum corrections ? does the lightest superpartner ( lsp ) comprise dark matter ? generations of matter : why are there three generations of quarks and leptons ? is there a theory that can explain the masses of particular quarks and leptons in particular generations from first principles ( a theory of yukawa couplings ) ? neutrino mass : what is the mass of neutrinos , whether they follow dirac or majorana statistics ? is the mass hierarchy normal or inverted ? is the cp violating phase equal to 0 ? strong cp problem and axions : why is the strong nuclear interaction invariant to parity and charge conjugation ? is peccei–quinn theory the solution to this problem ? could axions be the main component of dark matter ? anomalous magnetic dipole moment : why is the experimentally measured value of the muon 's anomalous magnetic dipole moment ( '' muon g−2 '' ) significantly different from the theoretically predicted value of that physical constant ? proton radius puzzle : what is the electric charge radius of the proton ? how does it differ from gluonic charge ? pentaquarks and other exotic hadrons : what combinations of quarks are possible ? why were pentaquarks so difficult to discover ? are they a tightly-bound system of five elementary particles , or a more weakly-bound pairing of a baryon and a meson ? mu problem : problem of supersymmetry theories , concerned with understanding the parameters of the theory . koide formula : an aspect of the generation ( particle physics ) . the sum of the masses of the three charged leptons , divided by the square of the sum of the roots of these masses , to within one standard deviation of observations , is q \frac 2 3 . it is unknown how such a simple value comes about , and why it is the exact arithmetic average of the possible extreme values of ( equal masses ) and 1 ( one mass dominates ) . astronomy and astrophysics . solar cycle : how does the sun generate its periodically reversing large-scale magnetic field ? how do other solar-like stars generate their magnetic fields , and what are the similarities and differences between stellar activity cycles and that of the sun ? what caused the maunder minimum and other grand minima , and how does the solar cycle recover from a minima state ? coronal heating problem : why is the sun 's corona ( atmosphere layer ) so much hotter than the sun 's surface ? why is the magnetic reconnection effect many orders of magnitude faster than predicted by standard models ? astrophysical jet : why do only certain accretion discs surrounding certain astronomical objects emit relativistic jets along their polar axes ? solution ( 2019 ) why are there quasi-periodic oscillations in many accretion discs ? why does the period of these oscillations scale as the inverse of the mass of the central object ? why are there sometimes overtones , and why do these appear at different frequency ratios in different objects ? diffuse interstellar bands : what is responsible for the numerous interstellar absorption lines detected in astronomical spectra ? are they molecular in origin , and if so which molecules are responsible for them ? how do they form ? supermassive black holes : what is the origin of the m-sigma relation between supermassive black hole mass and galaxy velocity dispersion ? how did the most distant quasars grow their supermassive black holes up to 10 solar masses so early in the history of the universe ? kuiper cliff : why does the number of objects in the solar system 's kuiper belt fall off rapidly and unexpectedly beyond a radius of 50 astronomical units ? flyby anomaly : why is the observed energy of satellites gravity assist sometimes different by a minute amount from the value predicted by theory ? galaxy rotation problem : is dark matter responsible for differences in observed and theoretical speed of stars revolving around the centre of galaxies , or is it something else ? supernovae : what is the exact mechanism by which an implosion of a dying star becomes an explosion ? solution ( 2015 ) p-nuclei : what astrophysical process is responsible for the nucleogenesis of these rare isotopes ? ultra-high-energy cosmic ray : why is it that some cosmic rays appear to possess energies that are impossibly high , given that there are no sufficiently energetic cosmic ray sources near the earth ? why is it that ( apparently ) some cosmic rays emitted by distant sources have energies above the greisen–zatsepin–kuzmin limit ? rotation rate of saturn : why does the magnetosphere of saturn exhibit a ( slowly changing ) periodicity close to that at which the planet 's clouds rotate ? what is the true rotation rate of saturn 's deep interior ? origin of magnetar magnetic field : what is the origin of magnetar magnetic field ? large-scale anisotropy : is the universe at very large scales anisotropy , making the cosmological principle an invalid assumption ? the number count and intensity dipole anisotropy in radio , nrao vla sky survey ( nvss ) catalogue is inconsistent with the local motion as derived from cosmic microwave background and indicate an intrinsic dipole anisotropy . the same nvss radio data also shows an intrinsic dipole in polarization density and degree of polarization in the same direction as in number count and intensity . there are several other observations revealing large-scale anisotropy . the optical polarization from quasars shows polarization alignment over a very large scale of gpc . the cosmic-microwave-background data shows several features of anisotropy , which are not consistent with the big bang model . age–metallicity relation in the galactic disk : is there a universal age–metallicity relation ( amr ) in the galactic disk ( both '' thin '' and '' thick '' parts of the disk ) ? although in the local ( primarily thin ) disk of the milky way there is no evidence of a strong amr , a sample of 229 nearby '' thick '' disk stars has been used to investigate the existence of an age–metallicity relation in the galactic thick disk , and indicate that there is an age–metallicity relation present in the thick disk . stellar ages from asteroseismology confirm the lack of any strong age–metallicity relation in the galactic disc . the lithium problem : why is there a discrepancy between the amount of lithium-7 predicted to be produced in big bang nucleosynthesis and the amount observed in very old stars ? ultraluminous x-ray sources ( ulxs ) : what powers x-ray sources that are not associated with active galactic nuclei but exceed the eddington limit of a neutron star or stellar black hole ? are they due to intermediate mass black holes ? some ulxs are periodic , suggesting non-isotropic emission from a neutron star . does this apply to all ulxs ? how could such a system form and remain stable ? fast radio bursts ( frbs ) : what causes these transient radio pulses from distant galaxies , lasting only a few milliseconds each ? why do some frbs repeat at unpredictable intervals , but most do not ? dozens of models have been proposed , but none have been widely accepted . . nuclear physics . quantum chromodynamics : what are the phases of strongly interacting matter , and what roles do they play in the evolution of cosmos ? what is the detailed partonic structure of the nucleons ? what does qcd predict for the properties of strongly interacting matter ? what determines the key features of qcd , and what is their relation to the nature of gravity and spacetime ? do glueballs exist ? do gluons acquire mass dynamically despite having a zero rest mass , within hadrons ? does qcd truly lack cp violations ? quark–gluon plasma : where is the onset of deconfinement : 1 ) as a function of temperature and chemical potentials ? 2 ) as a function of relativistic heavy-ion collision energy and system size ? what is the mechanism of energy and baryon number stopping leading to creation of quark-gluon plasma in relativistic heavy-ion collisions ? why is sudden hadronization and the statistical hadronization model a near-to-perfect description of hadron production from quark-gluon plasma ? is quark flavor conserved in quark-gluon plasma ? are strangeness and charm in chemical equilibrium in quark-gluon plasma ? does strangeness in quark-gluon plasma flow at the same speed as up and down quark flavours ? why does deconfined matter show qgp flow ? strangelet : does strange quark matter ( strangelet ) exist as stable state ? specific models of quark-gluon plasma formation : do gluon saturate when their occupation number is large ? do gluons form a dense system called color glass condensate ? what are the signatures and evidences for the balitsky–fadin–kuarev–lipatov , balitsky–kovchegov , catani–ciafaloni–fiorani–marchesini evolution equations ? nuclei and nuclear astrophysics : why is there a lack of convergence in estimates of the mean lifetime of a free neutron based on two separate—and increasingly precise—experimental methods ? what is the nature of the nuclear force that binds protons and neutrons into stable nuclei and rare isotopes ? what is the nature of exotic excitations in nuclei at the frontiers of stability and their role in stellar processes ? what is the nature of neutron stars and dense nuclear matter ? what is the origin of the elements in the cosmos ? what are the nuclear reactions that drive stars and stellar explosions ? what is the extended periodic table ? . atomic , molecular and optical physics . abraham–minkowski controversy : what is the momentum of light in optical media ? which ( abraham 's or minkowski 's ) momentum is right ? bose–einstein condensation : how do we rigorously prove the existence of bose–einstein condensates for general interacting systems ? gauge block wringing : what is the mechanism that allows gauge blocks to be wrung together ? scharnhorst effect : can light signals travel slightly faster than c between two closely spaced conducting plates , exploiting the casimir effect ? a more recent follow-up paper is . fluid dynamics . under what conditions do navier–stokes existence and smoothness , which are the equations that describe the flow of an incompressible fluid ? this problem is also listed as one of the millennium prize problems in mathematics . turbulence : is it possible to make a theoretical model to describe the statistics of a turbulent flow ( in particular , its internal structures ) ? upstream contamination : when pouring water from a higher container to a lower one , particles floating in the latter can climb upstream into the upper container . a definitive explanation for this phenomenon is still lacking . condensed matter physics . high-temperature superconductors : what is the mechanism that causes certain materials to exhibit superconductivity at temperatures much higher than around 25 kelvins ? is it possible to make a material that is a superconductor at room temperature and atmospheric pressure ? amorphous solids : what is the nature of the glass transition between a fluid or regular solid and a glassy phase ? what are the physical processes giving rise to the general properties of glasses and the glass transition ? cryogenic electron emission : why does the electron emission in the absence of light increase as the temperature of a photomultiplier is decreased ? cryogenic electron emission phenomenon has no known physics explanation . physorg.com . retrieved on 20 october 2011 . sonoluminescence : what causes the emission of short bursts of light from imploding bubbles in a liquid when excited by sound ? topological order : is topological order stable at non-zero temperature ? equivalently , is it possible to have three-dimensional stabilizer code qubit ? fractional hall effect : what mechanism explains the existence of the u 5/2 state in the fractional quantum hall effect ? does it describe quasiparticles with non-abelian fractional statistics ? thumb liquid crystals : can the nematic to smectic ( a ) phase transition in liquid crystal states be characterized as a universal phase transition ? a . yethiraj , '' recent experimental developments at the nematic to smectic-a liquid crystal phase transition '' , thermotropic liquid crystals : recent advances , ed . a . ramamoorthy , springer 2007 , chapter 8 . semiconductor nanocrystals : what is the cause of the nonparabolicity of the energy-size dependence for the lowest optical absorption transition of quantum dots ? metal whiskering : in electrical devices , some metallic surfaces may spontaneously grow fine metallic whiskers , which can lead to equipment failures . while compressive mechanical stress is known to encourage whisker formation , the growth mechanism has yet to be determined . lambda point : explain the discrepancy between the experimental and theoretical determinations of the heat capacity critical exponent . . plasma physics . plasma physics and fusion power : fusion energy may potentially provide power from abundant resource ( e.g . hydrogen ) without the type of radioactive waste that fission energy currently produces . however , can ionized gases ( plasma ) be tokamak long enough and at a high enough temperature to create fusion power ? what is the physical origin of h-mode ? . the injection problem : fermi acceleration is thought to be the primary mechanism that accelerates astrophysical particles to high energy . however , it is unclear what mechanism causes those particles to initially have energies high enough for fermi acceleration to work on them . alfvénic turbulence : in the solar wind and the turbulence in solar flares , coronal mass ejections , and magnetospheric substorms are major unsolved problems in space plasma physics . . biophysics . stochasticity and robustness to noise in gene expression : how do genes govern our body , withstanding different external pressures and internal stochasticity ? certain models exist for genetic processes , but we are far from understanding the whole picture , in particular in development where gene expression must be tightly regulated . memory : how is long-term memory stored on a biological substrate undergoing constant turnover ? quantitative study of the immune system : what are the quantitative properties of immune responses ? what are the basic building blocks of immune system networks ? homochirality : what is the origin of the preponderance of specific enantiomers in biochemical systems ? magnetoreception : how do animals ( e.g . migratory birds ) sense the earth 's magnetic field ?