Consumerism

in the 21st century . madeline levine criticized what she saw as a large change in american culture – '' a shift away from values of community , spirituality , and integrity , and toward competition , materialism and disconnection . '' levine , madeline . '' challenging the culture of affluence '' . independent school . 67.1 ( 2007 ) : 28–36 . businesses have realized that wealthy consumers are the most attractive targets of marketing . the upper class 's tastes , lifestyles , and preferences trickle down to become the standard for all consumers . the not-so-wealthy consumers can '' purchase something new that will speak of their place in the tradition of affluence '' . miller , eric . attracting the affluent . naperville , illinois : financial sourcebooks , 1990 . a consumer can have the instant gratification of purchasing an expensive item to improve social status . emulation is also a core component of 21st century consumerism . as a general trend , regular consumers seek to emulate those who are above them in the social hierarchy . the poor strive to imitate the wealthy and the wealthy imitate celebrities and other icons . the celebrity endorsement of products can be seen as evidence of the desire of modern consumers to purchase products partly or solely to emulate people of higher social status . this purchasing behavior may co-exist in the mind of a consumer with an image of oneself as being an individualist . cultural capital , the intangible social value of goods , is not solely generated by cultural pollution . subcultures also manipulate the value and prevalence of certain commodities through the process of bricolage . bricolage is the process by which mainstream products are adopted and transformed by subcultures . sturken , marita and cartwright , lisa . '' practices of looking : an introduction to visual culture '' . oxford up , 2001 , p.78 these items develop a function and meaning that differs from their corporate producer 's intent . in many cases , commodities that have undergone bricolage often develop political meanings . for example , doc martens , originally marketed as workers boots , gained popularity with the punk movement and aids activism groups and became symbols of an individual 's place in that social group . sturken , marita and cartwright , lisa . '' practices of looking : an introduction to visual culture '' . oxford up , 2001 , p . 79 when corporate america recognized the growing popularity of doc martens they underwent another change in cultural meaning through counter-bricolage . the widespread sale and marketing of doc martens brought the boots back into the mainstream . while corporate america reaped the ever-growing profits of the increasingly expensive boot and those modeled after its style , doc martens lost their original political association . mainstream consumers used doc martens and similar items to create an '' individualized '' sense identity by appropriating statement items from subcultures they admired . when consumerism is considered as a movement to improve rights and powers of buyers in relation to sellers , there are certain traditional rights and powers of sellers and buyers . american dream has long been associated with consumerism . according to sierra club 's dave tilford , '' with less than 5 percent of world population , the u.s . uses one-third of the world ’ s paper , a quarter of the world ’ s oil , 23 percent of the coal , 27 percent of the aluminum , and 19 percent of the copper . '' china is the world 's fastest-growing consumer market . according to biologist paul r . ehrlich , '' if everyone consumed resources at the us level , you will need another four or five earths . '' biologists say half of all species could be extinct by end of the century . the guardian . 25 february 2017 . . criticism . overview . since consumerism began , various individuals and groups have consciously sought an alternative lifestyle . these movements range on a spectrum from moderate '' simple living '' , see for example : janet luhrs 's the simple living guide ( ny : broadway books , 1997 ) ; joe dominquez , vicki robin et al . , your money or your life ( ny : penguin group usa , 2008 ) environmentally friendly , see for example : alan durning , how much is enough : the consumer society and the future of the earth ( new york : w . w . norton , 1992 ) and local food/ '' buying local '' , see for example : paul roberts , the end of food ( new york : houghton mifflin , 2008 ) ; michael shuman , the small-mart revolution ( san francisco : berrett-koehler publishers , 2007 ) to freeganism on the extreme end . building on these movements , the discipline of ecological economics addresses the macro-economic , social and ecological implications of a primarily consumer-driven economy . in many critical contexts , consumerism is used to describe the tendency of people to identify strongly with products or services they consume , especially those with commercial brand-names and perceived status symbol appeal , e.g . a luxury car , designer clothing , or expensive jewelry . consumerism can take extreme forms – such that consumers sacrifice significant time and income not only to purchase but also to actively support a certain firm or brand . as stated by gary cross in his book '' all consuming century : why consumerism won in modern america '' , he states '' consumerism succeeded where other ideologies failed because it concretely expressed the cardinal political ideals of the century – liberty and democracy – and with relatively little self-distructive behavior or personal humiliation . '' he discusses how consumerism won in its forms of expression . however , many people are skeptical of this over-romanticised outlook . opponents of consumerism argue that many luxuries and unnecessary consumer-products may act as a social mechanism allowing people to identify like-minded individuals through the display of similar products , again utilizing aspects of status-symbolism to judge socioeconomic status and social stratification . some people believe relationships with a product or brand name are substitutes for healthy human relationships lacking in societies , and along with consumerism , create a cultural hegemony , and are part of a general process of social control in modern society . critics of consumerism point out that consumerist societies are more prone to damage the environment , contribute to global warming and use resources at a higher rate than other societies . global climate change and energy co 2 production—an international perspective dr . jorge majfud says that '' trying to reduce environmental pollution without reducing consumerism is like combatting drug trafficking without reducing the drug addiction . '' in 1955 , economist victor lebow stated : figures who arguably do not wholly buy into consumerism include pope benedict xvi , web log . 17 july 2008 . pope francis , '' loss of biodiversity '' . laudato si ' : on care for our common home : encyclical letter , by pope francis , our sunday visitor , 2015 , pp . 27–27 . german historian oswald spengler ( 1880–1936 ) , who said : '' life in america is exclusively economic in structure and lacks depth '' stearns , peter . consumerism in world history . routledge ) , and french writer georges duhamel ( 1884–1966 ) , who held american materialism up as '' a beacon of mediocrity that threatened to eclipse french civilization '' . pope francis also critiques consumerism in his book '' laudato si ' on care for our common home . '' he critiques the harm consumerism does to the environment and states , '' the analysis of environmental problems can not be separated from the analysis of human , family , work-related and urban contexts , nor from how individuals relate to themselves , which leads in turn to how they relate to others and to the environment . '' pope francis believes obsession with consumerism leads individuals further away from their humanity and obscures the interrelated nature between humans and the environment . francis fukuyama blames consumerism for moral compromises . another critic is james gustave speth . he argues that the growth imperative represents the main goal of capitalistic consumerism . in his book the bridge at the edge of the world he notes , '' basically , the economic system does not work when it comes to protecting environmental resources , and the political system does not work when it comes to correcting the economic system '' . in an opinion segment of new scientist magazine published in august 2009 , reporter andy coghlan cited william rees of the university of british columbia and epidemiology warren hern of the university of colorado at boulder saying that human beings , despite considering themselves civilized thinkers , are '' subconsciously still driven by an impulse for survival , domination and expansion . an impulse which now finds expression in the idea that inexorable economic growth is the answer to everything , and , given time , will redress all the world 's existing inequalities . '' according to figures presented by rees at the annual meeting of the ecological society of america , human society is in a '' global overshoot '' , consuming 30 % more material than is sustainable from the world 's resources . rees went on to state that at present , 85 countries are exceeding their domestic '' bio-capacities '' , and compensate for their lack of local material by depleting the stocks of other countries , which have a material surplus due to their lower consumption . not only that , but mccraken indicates that the ways in which consumer goods and services are bought , created and used should be taken under consideration when studying consumption . furthermore , some theorists have concerns with the place commodity takes in the definition of one 's self . media theorists straut ewen coined the term '' commodity self '' to describe an identity built by the goods we consume . sturken , marita and cartwright , lisa . '' practices of looking : an introduction to visual culture '' . oxford up , 2001 , p . 279 for example , people often identify as pc or mac users , or define themselves as a coke drinker rather than pepsi . the ability to choose one product out of an apparent mass of others allows a person to build a sense '' unique '' individuality , despite the prevalence of mac users or the nearly identical tastes of coke and pepsi . by owning a product from a certain brand , one 's ownership becomes a vehicle of presenting an identity that is associated with the attitude of the brand . the idea of individual choice is exploited by corporations that claim to sell '' uniqueness '' and the building blocks of an identity . the invention of the commodity self is a driving force of consumerist societies , preying upon the deep human need to build a sense of self . not all anti-consumerists oppose consumption in itself , but they argue against increasing the consumption of resources beyond what is sustainability . jonathan porritt writes that consumers are often unaware of the negative environmental impacts of producing many modern goods and services , and that the extensive advertising-industry only serves to reinforce increasing consumption . likewise , other ecological economists such as herman daly and tim jackson recognize the inherent conflict between consumer-driven consumption and planet-wide ecological degradation . consumerism as cultural ideology . in the 21st century 's globalized economy , consumerism has become a noticeable part of the culture . critics of the phenomenon not only criticized it against what is environmentally sustainable , but also the spread of consumerism in cultural aspects . however , several scholars have written about the intersection of consumer culture and the environment . discussions of the environmental implications of consumerist ideologies in work by economists gustave speth and naomi klein , and consumer cultural historian gary cross . leslie sklair proposes the criticism through the idea of culture-ideology of consumerism in his works . he says that , as of today , people are exposed to mass consumerism and product placement in the media or even in their daily lives . the line between information , entertainment , and promotion of products has been blurred so people are more reformulated into consumerist behaviour . leslie sklair , from chapter 5 of globalization : capitalism and its alternatives , 3rd edn , oxford university press , 2002 . reprinted with permission of oxford university press shopping centers are a representative example of a place where people are explicitly exposed to an environment that welcomes and encourages consumption as some of them are open for 24 hours . goss says that the shopping center designers '' strive to present an alternative rationale for the shopping center 's existence , manipulate shoppers ' behavior through the configuration of space , and consciously design a symbolic landscape that provokes associative moods and dispositions in the shopper '' . jon goss ( 1993 ) , the '' magic of the mall '' : an analysis of form , function , and meaning in the contemporary retail built environment , annals of the association of american geographers , vol . 83 , no . 1 . ( mar . 1993 ) , pp . 18–47 on the prevalence of consumerism in daily life , historian gary cross says that '' the endless variation of clothing , travel , and entertainment provided opportunity for practically everyone to find a personal niche , no matter their race , age , gender or class . '' cross , gary s . an all-consuming century : why commercialism won in modern america . columbia university press , 2002 . pp.233 arguably , the success of the consumerist cultural ideology can be witnessed all around the world . people who rush to the mall to buy products and end up spending money with their credit cards could become entrenched in the financial system of capitalist globalization .