Harry Worth

early life . worth was born in hoyland , west riding of yorkshire , the youngest child of a miner . he had ten siblings . when he was only five months old , his father died from injuries resulting from an industrial accident . he left school at 14 and was a miner for eight years . he earned 2 shillings 2½ pence a day and worked near the lift in the mine ; he said he hated every minute of it . he joined the royal air force ( raf ) in 1941 . daily mirror , 15 august 1971 , page 11 : '' harry lands a scoop '' as a teenager , he was in the tankersley amateur dramatics society and taught himself ventriloquism from a book he borrowed from the local library , buying his first dummy in 1936 . during the world war ii , he performed in an raf variety show in india and had extra material written for him by the show 's director , wallie okin . worth warned his audience beforehand that he was not very good : according to itma impressionist peter cavanagh , this was the start of his apologetic and inept style . he was a variety act for many years before he became well known and was often at the bottom of any 'bill ' . having left the raf , and adamant he would never go down the mines again , he started in show business with his first booking at the bradford mechanics ' institute in 1946 . in 1947 he married his wife kay and in 1948 , like many other comedians from the forces , he got an audition at london 's windmill theatre . of 40 in the audition , he passed , along with morecambe and wise and tony hancock . he did six shows a day as comedian between fan dancers . in 1948 he also made his first radio appearance in a show new to you . he now had two dummies for his ventriloquist act , fotheringay and clarence , but meanwhile developed his performing voice . he toured for two years with laurel and hardy towards the end of their careers . he said he could always go in and talk with them and they told him about hollywood and their work there . when oliver hardy watched his show in nottingham in 1952 , he persuaded worth to drop the ventriloquist routine and concentrate on becoming a comedian , which he then did . his first stage act without ventriloquism was in newcastle . he continued to include ventriloquism in his cabaret act through his career , performing much of the material that he had used during the war . this included three appearances in the royal variety show . after appearing a number of times on variety bandbox , worth gained his own radio show , thirty minutes worth . he took his scripts seriously and did not ad lib . he said he built a style of dithering in his shows without even realising it . television career . worth 's first television appearance was a five-minute standup on henry hall ( bandleader ) in 1955 . he became well known to the public and even appeared at the london palladium , after which he took the show to manchester , the main place for variety in those days , for 8 weeks . in 1960 , the television programme the trouble with harry was broadcast . john ammonds and worth wrote the pilot script in three to four weeks . a series of six programmes was commissioned , and was written by vince powell , ronnie taylor and frank roscoe . he made this style his own by creating a character with whom the public could connect . he once said , '' if harry ( the character ) ever looked directly at the camera , or the audience , it would all be over '' . the character was harry and everyone saw harry as harry . he is now best remembered for his 1960s series here 's harry , later re-titled harry worth , which ran for 10 years and over 100 episodes ( the longest running british sitcom of the time , and still one of only a handful to run for over 100 episodes ) . the opening titles of harry worth featured worth stopping in the street to perform an optical trick involving a shop window : raising one arm and one leg which were reflected in the window , thus giving the impression of levitation . reproducing this effect was popularly known as '' doing a harry worth '' . the shop window sequence first used in here 's harry was filmed at st ann 's church , manchester , at hector powes tailor 's shop . the idea for this was suggested by vince powell , who had done it himself as a child . one famous comic sketch involved worth and his family preparing for a royal visit to the area , during which the queen was to visit his house . his fussing about the house drove his family mad . just before the queen was due to arrive , a beggar arrived at the door and kept coming back as an increasingly frustrated worth tried to get him to go away . when a knock came on the door one more time worth grabbed a bucket of filthy water and threw it out of the door at the caller , only to find that it was not the beggar but the queen standing there , and he had just soaked her . another sketch involved worth complaining to a policeman outside the houses of parliament that big ben clock was slow because jimmy young , the bbc radio 2 presenter known for '' always being right '' had said that it was ten minutes past ten , while the clock said it was 10am . after pestering the policeman , worth had the clock moved forward by ten minutes . just as the clock was changed , young appeared on the radio to apologise that the studio clock was wrong by ten minutes . a mortified worth was seen speeding away in his car , to furious shouts from the angry policeman . following the assassination of president kennedy on 22 november 1963 , the bbc screened here 's harry as part of its regular programming , a decision which led to the broadcaster receiving complaints through over 2,000 phone calls and 500 letters and telegrams . although never scripted , his catchphrase was generally known as '' my name is harry worth . i do n't know why – but , there it is ! '' it was really invented by impressionists of the day to give a common ground tag line to work with . one running joke in the television show involved references to harry 's never seen aunt known only as '' auntie '' , the popular nickname for the bbc itself . in one show , harry commissioned a portrait of auntie , only to receive a head-and-shoulders print of a woman with no face . he was the subject of this is your life in october 1963 when he was surprised by eamonn andrews at manchester 's gaumont cinema . by the early to mid-1980s worth was forced by health problems to retire early from his shows , but he continued working in radio ( and made television guest appearances from time to time for either interviews or pop-up guest appearances on some shows ) until a few months before he died . gro register of deaths : jul 1989 10 135 dacorum , hertfordshire – harry worth , dob 20 november 1917 , aged 72 . among the last regular appearances of his career were leading roles in the sitcoms how 's your father ? ( yorkshire tv 1979–81 ) and oh happy band ! ( bbc tv 1980 ) . personal life . worth married kay ( daisy ) née flynn ( 1947 ) , who was a principal girl . they decided early on that he would continue with his act whilst kay became a housewife . they had a long and happy marriage and she cared for him during his long illness with cancer . during this time , he referred to her as '' maggie thatcher '' for diligently watching his daily medication intake and exercises . after several short-lived recoveries , worth finally succumbed to spinal cancer . he died at his home in berkhamsted , hertfordshire , with his wife , daughter ( jobyna ) and grandchildren ( dane-allen and emma-jo ) at his side . kay lived on for another 10 years . worth resisted attempts by publishers to write his biography ; it was over 16 years after his death before a book , my name is harry worth , was published . legacy . at his memorial service , sir harry secombe said '' harry has left a legacy of laughter and we have all been enriched by his presence here on earth '' . in october 2015 , barnsley-born actor , playwright and director jack land noble ( born 1989 ) brought worth 's life and career to the stage in the world premiere of my name is harry worth . the show was billed as '' a one-man tour-de-force written by and featuring jack land noble as the forgotten son of british comedy . hilarious yet poignant , my name is harry worth celebrates a pioneering comic talent in style . '' the play - which had the support of the harry worth estate - was first staged to great acclaim in harry 's hometown of barnsley at the town 's lamproom theatre , ahead of a prospective 2017 uk tour and run at the edinburgh festival fringe marking harry 's centenary . speaking to bbc radio sheffield , jack land noble explained , '' the time is ripe to bring harry 's distinct talent back into the public arena . the play is my humble tribute to my comedy idol : a dithering , surreal comic genius and , arguably , yorkshire 's finest comic son . '' . memorials . on 20 july 2010 a british comedy society blue plaque was unveiled by comedian jimmy cricket , a friend of worth 's , on the house where he was born in hoyland . the unveiling was arranged in conjunction with worth 's biographer , roy baines , and the event was sponsored by revelation films , who released a dvd of worth 's work the same week . he has also been commemorated by plaques elsewhere , including those at teddington studios , bbc television centre and blackpool comedy carpet . television . the trouble with harry ( 1960 ) - himself here 's harry ( 1960-1965 ) - himself the harry worth show ( 1966-1970 ) - harry worth scoop ( 1972 ) - william boot thirty minutes worth ( 1972-1973 ) my name is harry worth ( 1974 ) - harry the mikado how 's your father ? ( 1979-1980 ) - harry matthews oh happy band ! ( 1980 ) - himself ( final appearance ) . theatre . here 's harry harvey pardon me , prime minister ( based on the popular yes minister television sitcom ) rockefeller and the red indians see how they run norman , is that you ? . radio . thirty minutes worth harry worth in things could be worse we 're in business . references . external links . harry worth : the man in the window bbc radio 4 programme jo batchelor recalls her father 's appearance on this is your life the official harry worth website