John Rogers (Bible editor and martyr)

biography of john rogers . early life . rogers was born in deritend , an area of birmingham then within the parish of aston . his father was also called john rogers and was a lorimer – a maker of bits and spurs – whose family came from aston ; his mother was margaret wyatt , the daughter of a tanner with family in erdington and sutton coldfield . rogers was educated at the the old crown , birmingham in deritend , and at pembroke hall , cambridge university , where he graduated b.a . in 1526 . between 1532 and 1534 he was rector of holy trinity the less in the city of london . antwerp and the matthew bible . in 1534 , rogers went to antwerp as chaplain to the english merchants of the company of the merchant adventurers . here he met william tyndale , under whose influence he abandoned the roman catholic faith , and married antwerp native adriana de weyden ( b . 1522 , anglicised to adrana pratt in 1552 ) in 1537 . after tyndale 's death , rogers pushed on with his predecessor 's english version of the old testament , which he used as far as 2 chronicles , employing myles coverdale 's translation ( 1535 ) for the remainder and for the apocrypha . although it is claimed that rogers was the first person to ever print a complete english bible that was translated directly from the original greek and hebrew , there was also a reliance upon a latin translation of the hebrew bible by sebastian münster and published in 1534/5 . tyndale 's new testament had been published in 1526 . the matthew bible was put out under the pseudonym of thomas matthew in 1537 ; it was printed in paris and antwerp by adriana 's uncle , sir jacobus van meteren . richard grafton published the sheets and got leave to sell the edition ( 1500 copies ) in england . at the insistence of archbishop cranmer , the '' king 's most gracious license '' was granted to this translation . previously in the same year , the 1537 reprint of the myles coverdale 's translation had been granted such a licence . the pseudonym '' matthew '' is associated with rogers , but it seems more probable that matthew stands for tyndale 's own name , which , back then , was dangerous to employ in england . rogers had at least some involvement with the translation , although he most likely used large parts of the tyndale and the coverdale versions . john rogers and the matthew bible p 18-20 some historians declare rogers '' produced '' the matthew bible . one source states that he '' assembled '' the bible . p ix other sources suggest that his share in that work was probably confined to translating the prayer of manasses ( inserted here for the first time in a printed english bible ) , the general task of editing the materials at his disposal , and preparing the marginal notes collected from various sources . these are often cited as the first original english language commentary on the bible . rogers also contributed the song of manasses in the apocrypha , p 113 which he found in a french bible printed in 1535 . his work was largely used by those who prepared the great bible ( 1539–40 ) , and this eventually led to the bishops ' bible ( 1568 ) and the king james version . rogers matriculated at the university of wittenberg on 25 november 1540 , where he remained for three years , becoming a close friend of philipp melanchthon and other leading figures of the early protestant reformation . on leaving wittenberg he spent four and a half years as a superintendent of a lutheran church in meldorf , dithmarschen , near the mouth of the river elbe in the north of germany . rogers returned to england in 1548 , where he published a translation of philipp melanchthon 's considerations of the augsburg interim . in 1550 he was presented to the crown livings of st margaret moses and st sepulchre in london , and in 1551 was made a prebendary of st . paul 's , where the dean and chapter soon appointed him divinity lecturer . he courageously denounced the greed shown by certain courtiers with reference to the property of the suppressed monasteries and defended himself before the privy council . he also declined to wear the prescribed vestments , donning instead a simple round cap . on the accession of mary he preached at paul 's cross commending the '' true doctrine taught in king edward 's days , '' and warning his hearers against '' pestilent popery , idolatry and superstition . '' defamatory pamphlets littered the streets exhorting protestants to take up arms against mary tudor . ‘ nobles and gentlemen favouring the word of god ’ were asked to overthrow the ‘ detestable papists ’ , especially ‘ the great devil ’ , stephen gardiner , bishop of winchester . a number of leading protestant figures , including john rogers , were arrested and leading reformist bishops such as john hooper and hugh latimer were imprisoned weeks later . thomas cranmer was sent to the tower for his role in lady jane 's attempted coup . rogers was also against radical protestants . after joan bocher was imprisoned in 1548 and convicted in april 1549 , john foxe , one of the few protestants opposed to burnings , approached rogers to intervene to save joan , but he refused with the comment that burning was '' sufficiently mild '' for a crime as grave as heresy . imprisonment and martyrdom . on 16 august 1553 he was summoned before the council and bidden to keep within his own house . his emoluments were taken away and his prebend was filled in october . in january 1554 , bonner , the new bishop of london , sent him to newgate prison , where he lay with john hooper , laurence saunders , john bradford and others for a year . their petitions , whether for less rigorous treatment or for opportunity of stating their case , were disregarded . in december 1554 , parliament re-enacted the penal statutes against lollards , and on 22 january 1555 , two days after they took effect , rogers ( with ten other people ) came before the council at gardiner 's house in southwark , and defended himself in the examination that took place . on 28 and 29 january he came before the commission appointed by reginald pole , and was sentenced to death by gardiner for heretically denying the christian character of the church of rome and the real presence in the sacrament . he awaited and met death cheerfully , though he was even denied a meeting with his wife . shortly before the execution , rogers was offered a pardon if he were to recant but refused . he was burned at the stake on 4 february 1555 at smithfield . p 33 bishop thomas cranmer who had encouraged the matthew bible , was executed in 1556 also by queen mary i of england . antoine de noailles , the french ambassador , said in a letter that rogers ' death confirmed the alliance between the pope and england . he also spoke of the support given to rogers by the greatest part of the people : '' even his children assisted at it , comforting him in such a manner that it seemed as if he had been led to a wedding . '' a bust in his memory was erected at st john 's church , deritend in 1853 , by public subscription . john rogers , vicar of st . sepulchre 's , and reader of st . paul 's , london . the quotation that follows is from foxe 's book of martyrs , chapter 16 . it is included here because of its historical significance , being the vehicle by which the story of rev . john rogers has been most widely disseminated . p 267 '' john rogers was educated at cambridge , and was afterward many years chaplain to the merchant adventurers at antwerp in brabant . here he met with the celebrated martyr william tyndale , and miles coverdale , both voluntary exiles from their country for their aversion to popish superstition and idolatry . they were the instruments of his conversion ; and he united with them in that translation of the bible into english , entitled '' the translation of thomas matthew . '' from the scriptures he knew that unlawful vows may be lawfully broken ; hence he married , and removed to wittenberg in saxony , for the improvement of learning ; and he there learned the dutch language , and received the charge of a congregation , which he faithfully executed for many years . on king edward 's accession , he left saxony to promote the work of reformation in england ; and , after some time , nicholas ridley , then bishop of london , gave him a prebend in st . paul 's cathedral , and the dean and chapter appointed him reader of the divinity lesson there . here he continued until queen mary 's succession to the throne , when the gospel and true religion were banished , and the antichrist of rome , with his superstition and idolatry , introduced . the circumstance of mr . rogers having preached at paul 's cross , after queen mary arrived at the tower , has been already stated . he confirmed in his sermon the true doctrine taught in king edward 's time , and exhorted the people to beware of the pestilence of popery , idolatry , and superstition . for this he was called to account , but so ably defended himself that , for that time , he was dismissed . the proclamation of the queen , however , to prohibit true preaching , gave his enemies a new handle against him . hence he was again summoned before the council , and commanded to keep to his house . he did so , though he might have escaped ; and though he perceived the state of the true religion to be desperate . he knew he could not want a living in germany ; and he could not forget a wife and ten children , and to seek means to succor them . but all these things were insufficient to induce him to depart , and , when once called to answer in christ 's cause , he stoutly defended it , and hazarded his life for that purpose . after long imprisonment in his own house , the restless bonner , bishop of london , caused him to be committed to newgate , there to be lodged among thieves and murderers . after mr . rogers had been long and straitly imprisoned , and lodged in newgate among thieves , often examined , and very uncharitably entreated , and at length unjustly and most cruelly condemned by stephen gardiner , bishop of winchester , the fourth day of february , in the year of our lord 1555 , being monday in the morning , he was suddenly warned by the keeper of newgate 's wife , to prepare himself for the fire ; who , being then sound asleep , could scarce be awaked . at length being raised and awaked , and bid to make haste , then said he , '' if it be so , i need not tie my points . '' and so was had down , first to bishop bonner to be degraded : which being done , he craved of bonner but one petition ; and bonner asked what that should be . mr . rogers replied that he might speak a few words with his wife before his burning , but that could not be obtained of him . when the time came that he should be brought out of newgate to smithfield , the place of his execution , mr . woodroofe , one of the sheriffs , first came to mr . rogers , and asked him if he would revoke his abominable doctrine , and the evil opinion of the sacrament of the altar . mr . rogers answered , '' that which i have preached i will seal with my blood . '' then mr . woodroofe said , '' thou art an heretic . '' '' that shall be known , '' quoth mr . rogers , '' at the day of judgment . '' '' well , '' said mr . woodroofe , '' i will never pray for thee . '' '' but i will pray for you , '' said mr . rogers ; and so was brought the same day , the fourth of february , by the sheriffs , towards smithfield , saying the psalm miserere by the way , all the people wonderfully rejoicing at his constancy ; with great praises and thanks to god for the same . and there in the presence of mr . rochester , comptroller of the queen 's household , sir richard southwell , both the sheriffs , and a great number of people , he was burnt to ashes , washing his hands in the flame as he was burning . a little before his burning , his pardon was brought , if he would have recanted ; but he utterly refused it . he was the first martyr of all the blessed company that suffered in queen mary 's time that gave the first adventure upon the fire . his wife and children , being eleven in number , ten able to go , and one sucking at her breast , met him by the way , as he went towards smithfield . this sorrowful sight of his own flesh and blood could nothing move him , but that he constantly and cheerfully took his death with wonderful patience , in the defence and quarrel of the gospel of christ . '' . notes . references .