Thomas De Quincey

life and work . child and student . thomas penson de quincey was born at 86 cross street , manchester , lancashire . the later building on the site ( adjoining john dalton street ) bears a stone inscription referring to de quincey . his father , a successful merchant with an interest in literature , died when de quincey was quite young . soon after his birth the family went to the farm and then later to greenheys , a larger country house in chorlton-on-medlock near manchester . in 1796 , three years after the death of his father , thomas quincey , his mother – the erstwhile elizabeth penson – took the name '' de quincey . '' morrison , robert . '' thomas de quincey : chronology '' tdq homepage . kingston : queen 's university , 2013 . that same year , de quincey 's mother moved to bath and enrolled him at king edward 's school . he was a weak and sickly child . his youth was spent in solitude , and when his elder brother , william , came home , he wrought havoc in the quiet surroundings . de quincey 's mother was a woman of strong character and intelligence , but seems to have inspired more awe than affection in her children . she brought them up strictly , taking de quincey out of school after three years because she was afraid he would become big-headed , and sending him to an inferior school at wingfield , wiltshire . eaton , pp . 1–40 ; lindop , pp . 2–43 . around this time , in 1799 , de quincey first read lyrical ballads by william wordsworth and coleridge . in 1800 , de quincey , aged 15 , was ready for the university of oxford ; his scholarship was far in advance of his years . '' that boy could harangue an athenian mob better than you or i could address an english one '' , his master at bath had said . morrison , robert . '' thomas de quincey : biography '' tdq homepage . kingston : queen 's university , 2013 . he was sent to manchester grammar school , in order that after three years ' stay he might obtain a scholarship to brasenose college , oxford , but he took flight after 19 months . lindop , pp . 25 , 46–62 , and ff . his first plan had been to reach wordsworth , whose lyrical ballads ( 1798 ) had consoled him in fits of depression and had awakened in him a deep reverence for the poet . but for that de quincey was too timid , so he made his way to chester , where his mother dwelt , in the hope of seeing a sister ; he was caught by the older members of the family , but , through the efforts of his uncle , colonel penson , received the promise of a guinea ( £1.05 ) a week to carry out his later project of a solitary tramp through wales . from july to november 1802 , de quincey lived as a wayfarer . he soon lost his guinea by ceasing to keep his family informed of his whereabouts , and had difficulty making ends meet . still , apparently fearing pursuit , he borrowed some money and travelled to london , where he tried to borrow more . having failed , he lived close to starvation rather than return to his family . eaton , pp . 57–87 . discovered by chance by his friends , de quincey was brought home and finally allowed to go to worcester college , oxford , on a reduced income . here , we are told , '' he came to be looked upon as a strange being who associated with no one . '' in 1804 , while at oxford , he began the occasional use of opium . he completed his studies , but failed to take the oral examination leading to a degree ; he left the university without graduating . eaton , pp . 106–29 . he became an acquaintance of coleridge and wordsworth , having already sought out charles lamb in london . his acquaintance with wordsworth led to his settling in 1809 at grasmere , in the lake district . he lived for ten years in dove cottage , which wordsworth had occupied and which is now a popular tourist attraction , and for another five years at foxghyll country house , ambleside . de quincey was married in 1816 , and soon after , having no money left , he took up literary work in earnest . eaton , pp . 255–308 . his wife margaret bore him eight children before her death in 1837 . three of de quincey 's daughters survived him . one of his sons , paul frederick de quincey ( 1828–1894 ) , emigrated to new zealand . . journalist . in july 1818 de quincey became editor of the westmorland gazette , a tory newspaper published in kendal , after its first editor had been dismissed . he was unreliable at meeting deadlines , and in june 1819 the proprietors complained about '' their dissatisfaction with the lack of 'regular communication between the editor and the printer ' '' , and he resigned in november 1819 . online edition available by subscription de quincey 's political sympathies tended towards the right . he was '' a champion of aristocratic privilege , '' reserved '' jacobin '' as his highest term of opprobrium , held reactionary views on the peterloo massacre and the sepoy rebellion , on catholic emancipation and the enfranchisement of the common people . translator and essayist . in 1821 he went to london to dispose of some translations from german authors , but was persuaded first to write and publish an account of his opium experiences , which that year appeared in the london magazine . this new sensation eclipsed lamb 's essays of elia , which were then appearing in the same periodical . the confessions of an english opium-eater were soon published in book form . confessions was first published in london magazine in 1821 . it was published in book form the following year . ( morrison , robert . '' thomas de quincey : chronology . '' tdq homepage . kingston : queen 's university , 2013 . de quincey then made literary acquaintances . thomas hood found the shrinking author '' at home in a german ocean of literature , in a storm , flooding all the floor , the tables and the chairs – billows of books & nbsp ; … '' lindop . pp . & nbsp ; 259–60 . de quincey was famous for his conversation ; richard woodhouse wrote of the '' depth and reality , as i may so call it , of his knowledge & nbsp ; … his conversation appeared like the elaboration of a mine of results & nbsp ; … '' eaton , pp . & nbsp ; 280 . from this time on , de quincey maintained himself by contributing to various magazines . he soon exchanged london and the lakes for edinburgh , the nearby village of polton , and glasgow ; he spent the remainder of his life in scotland . eaton , pp . & nbsp ; 309–33 and ff . in the 1830s he is listed as living at 1 forres street , a large townhouse on the edge of the moray estate in edinburgh . blackwood 's edinburgh magazine and its rival tait 's magazine received numerous contributions . suspiria de profundis ( 1845 ) appeared in blackwood 's , as did the english mail-coach ( 1849 ) . joan of arc ( 1847 ) was published in tait 's . between 1835 and 1849 , tait 's published a series of de quincey 's reminiscences of wordsworth , coleridge , robert southey and other figures among the lake poets – a series that taken together constitutes one of his most important works . thomas de quincey , recollections of the lake poets , david wright , ed . , new york , penguin books , 1970 . . financial pressures . along with his opium addiction , debt was one of the primary constraints of de quincey 's adult life . lindop , pp . & nbsp ; 246 , 255 , 257 , 269 , 271 and ff . , especially 319-39 . he pursued journalism as the one way available to him to pay his bills ; and were it not for financial need it is an open question how much writing he would ever have done . de quincey came into his patrimony at the age of 21 , when he received £2,000 from his late father 's estate . he was unwisely generous with his funds , making loans that could not or would not be repaid , including a £300 loan to coleridge in 1807 . after leaving oxford without a degree , he made an attempt to study law , but desultorily and unsuccessfully ; he had no steady income and spent large sums on books ( he was a lifelong collector ) . by the 1820s he was constantly in financial difficulties . more than once in his later years , de quincey was forced to seek protection from arrest in the debtors ' sanctuary of holyrood in edinburgh . lindop , pp . & nbsp ; 310–11 ; eaton , pp . & nbsp ; 342–3 . ( at the time , holyrood park formed a debtors ' sanctuary ; people could not be arrested for debt within those bounds . the debtors who took sanctuary there could emerge only on sundays , when arrests for debt were not allowed . ) yet de quincey 's money problems persisted ; he got into further difficulties for debts he incurred within the sanctuary . eaton , p . & nbsp ; 372 . his financial situation improved only later in his life . his mother 's death in 1846 brought him an income of £200 per year . when his daughters matured , they managed his budget more responsibly than he ever had himself . eaton , pp . & nbsp ; 429–30 . . medical issues . medical practitioners have speculated on the physical ailments that inspired and underlay de quincey 's resort to opium , and searched the corpus of his autobiographical works for evidence . one possibility is '' a mild & nbsp ; … case of infantile paralysis '' that he may have contracted from wordsworth 's children . c . h . hendricks , cited in : judson s . lyon , thomas de quincey , new york , twayne publishers , 1969 ; p . & nbsp ; 57 . de quincey certainly had intestinal problems , and problems with his vision & nbsp ; – which could have been related : '' uncorrected myopic astigmatism & nbsp ; … manifests itself as digestive problems in men . '' george m . gould , cited in lyon , p . & nbsp ; 55 . de quincey also suffered neuralgic facial pain , '' trigeminal neuralgia '' & nbsp ; – '' attacks of piercing pain in the face , of such severity that they sometimes drive the victim to suicide . '' philip sandblom , creativity and disease , seventh edition , new york , marion boyars , 1992 ; p . & nbsp ; 49 . as with many addicts , de quincey 's opium addiction may have had a '' self-medication '' aspect for real physical illnesses , as well as a psychological aspect . lyon , pp . & nbsp ; 57–8 . by his own testimony , de quincey first used opium in 1804 to relieve his neuralgia ; he used it for pleasure , but no more than weekly , through 1812 . it was in 1813 that he first commenced daily usage , in response to illness and his grief over the death of wordsworth 's young daughter catherine . during 1813–1819 his daily dose was very high , and resulted in the sufferings recounted in the final sections of his confessions . for the rest of his life his opium use fluctuated between extremes ; he took '' enormous doses '' in 1843 , but late in 1848 he went for 61 days with none at all . there are many theories surrounding the opium and romanticism , and notably , his periods of low use were literarily unproductive . alethea hayter , opium and the romantic imagination , revised edition , wellingborough , northamptonshire , crucible , 1988 ; pp . & nbsp ; 229–31 . he died in edinburgh and is buried in st cuthbert 's churchyard at the west end of princes street . his stone , in the southwest section of the churchyard on a west facing wall , is plain and says nothing of his work . collected works . during the final decade of his life , de quincey labored on a collected edition of his works . eaton , pp . & nbsp ; 469–82 . ticknor and fields , a boston publishing house , first proposed such a collection , and solicited de quincey 's approval and co-operation . it was only when de quincey , a chronic procrastinator , failed to answer repeated letters from james thomas fields eaton , pg . 472 . that the american publisher proceeded independently , reprinting the author 's works from their original magazine appearances . twenty-two volumes of de quincey 's writings were issued from 1851–59 . the existence of the american edition prompted a corresponding british edition . since the spring of 1850 de quincey had been a regular contributor to an edinburgh periodical called hogg 's weekly instructor , whose publisher , james hogg , undertook to publish selections grave and gay from writings published and unpublished by thomas de quincey . de quincey edited and revised his works for the hogg edition ; the 1856 second edition of the confessions was prepared for inclusion in selections grave and gay… . the first volume of that edition appeared in may 1853 , and the fourteenth and last in january 1860 , a month after the author 's death . both of these were multi-volume collections , yet made no pretense to be complete . scholar and editor david masson attempted a more definitive collection : the works of thomas de quincey appeared in fourteen volumes in 1889 and 1890 . yet de quincey 's writings were so voluminous and widely dispersed that further collections followed : two volumes of the uncollected writings ( 1890 ) , and two volumes of posthumous works ( 1891–93 ) . de quincey 's 1803 diary was published in 1927 . eaton , pg . 525 . another volume , new essays by de quincey , appeared in 1966 . influence . his immediate influence extended to edgar allan poe , fitz hugh ludlow , charles baudelaire and nikolai gogol , but even major 20th-century writers such as jorge luis borges admired and claimed to be partly influenced by his work . berlioz also loosely based his symphonie fantastique on confessions of an english opium-eater , drawing on the theme of the internal struggle with one 's self . dario argento used de quincey 's suspiria , particularly '' levana and our ladies of sorrow '' , as an inspiration for his '' three mothers '' trilogy of films , which include suspiria , inferno and the mother of tears . this influence carried over into luca guadagnino 's suspiria ( 2018 film ) . shelby hughes created jynxies natural habitat , an online archive of stamp art on glassine heroin bags , under the pseudonym '' dequincey jinxey , '' in reference to de quincey . she also used the pseudonym in interviews related to the archive . major publications . confessions of an english opium-eater ( 1822 ) on the knocking at the gate in macbeth ( 1823 ) walladmor ( 1825 ) on murder considered as one of the fine arts ( 1827 ) klosterheim , or the masque ( 1832 ) lake reminiscences ( 1834–40 ) revolt of the tartars ( 1837 ) the logic of the political economy ( 1844 ) suspiria de profundis ( 1845 ) the english mail-coach ( 1849 ) autobiographic sketches ( 1853 ) . references . further reading . abrams , m.h . ( 1971 ) . natural supernaturalism : tradition and revolution in romantic literature . new york : norton . agnew , lois peters ( 2012 ) . thomas de quincey : british rhetoric 's romantic turn . carbondale : southern illinois university press . barrell , john ( 1991 ) . the infection of thomas de quincey . new have : yale university press . bate , jonathan ( 1993 ) . '' the literature of power : coleridge and de quincey . '' in : coleridge ’ s visionary languages . bury st . edmonds : brewer , pp . & nbsp ; 137–50 . baxter , edmund ( 1990 ) . de quincey 's art of autobiography . edinburgh : edinburgh university press . berridge , virginia and griffith edwards ( 1981 ) . opium and the people : opiate use in nineteenth-century england . london : allen lane . clej , alina ( 1995 ) . a genealogy of the modern self : thomas de quincey and the intoxication of writing . stanford : stanford university press . de luca , v.a . ( 1980 ) . thomas de quincey : the prose of vision . toronto : university of toronto press . devlin , d.d . ( 1983 ) . de quincey , wordsworth and the art of prose . london : macmillan . goldman , albert ( 1965 ) . the mine and the mint : sources for the writings of thomas de quincey . carbondale : southern illinois university press . richard le gallienne ( 1898 ) . '' introduction . '' in : the opium eater and essays . london : ward , lock & co . , pp . vii–xxv . mcdonagh , josephine ( 1994 ) . de quincey 's disciplines . oxford : clarendon press . north , julian ( 1997 ) . de quincey reviewed : thomas de quincey ’ s critical reception , 1821-1994 . london : camden house . margaret oliphant ( 1877 ) . '' the opium-eater , '' blackwood 's magazine , vol . 122 , pp . & nbsp ; 717–41 . roberts , daniel s . ( 2000 ) . reviosionary gleam : de quincey , coleridge and the high romantic argument . liverpool : liverpool university press . russett , margaret ( 1997 ) . de quincey ’ s romanticism : canonical minority and the forms of transmission . cambridge : cambridge university press . rzepka , charles ( 1995 ) . sacramental commodities : gift , text and the sublime in de quincey . amherst : university of massachusetts press . george saintsbury ( 1923 ) . '' de quincey . '' in : the collected essays and papers , vol . 1 . london : dent , pp . & nbsp ; 210–38 . snyder , robert lance , ed . ( 1985 ) . thomas de quincey : bicentenary studies . norman : university of oklahoma press . leslie stephen ( 1869 ) . '' the decay of murder , '' the cornhill magazine , vol . 20 , pp . & nbsp ; 722–33 . utz , richard ( 2018 ) . '' the cathedral as time machine : art , architecture , and religion . '' in : the idea of the gothic cathedral . interdisciplinary perspectives on the meanings of the medieval edifice in the modern period , ed . stephanie glaser ( turnhout : brepols , 2018 ) . pp . & nbsp ; 239–59 . on '' the glory of motion '' 1849 james hutchison stirling ( 1867 ) . '' de quincey and coleridge upon kant , '' fortnightly review , vol . 8 , pp . & nbsp ; 377–97 . frances , wilson ( 2016 ) . guilty thing : a life of thomas de quincey . farrar , straus and giroux . new york . rené wellek ( 1944 ) . '' de quincey ’ s status in the history of ideas , ” philological quarterly , vol . 23 , pp . & nbsp ; 248–72 . woodhouse , richard ( 1885 ) . '' notes of conversation with thomas de quincey . '' in : confessions of an english opium-eater . london : kegan paul , pp . & nbsp ; 191–233 . external links . thomas de quincey homepage , maintained by dr robert morrison works by thomas de quincey at hathi trust thomas de quincey elibrary pdfs of confessions of an english opium-eater , on murder considered as one of the fine arts , and the literature of knowledge and the literature of power '' the fascinating life of an english writer , essayist and 'opium eater ' '' , michael dirda , washington post , 30 december 2010 '' drugs and words '' , laura marsh , the new republic , 15 february 2011 . archival material at finding aid to de quincey family papers at columbia university . rare book & manuscript library .