Les Fleurs du mal

overview . the initial publication of the book was arranged in six thematically segregated sections : spleen et idéal ( spleen and ideal ) tableaux parisiens ( parisian scenes ) le vin ( wine ) fleurs du mal ( flowers of evil ) révolte ( revolt ) la mort ( death ) baudelaire dedicated the book to the poet théophile gautier , describing him as a parfait magicien des lettres françaises ( '' a perfect magician of french letters '' ) . baudelaire , les fleurs du mal , le livre de poche , page 345 . . foreword . the foreword to the volume , au lecteur ( '' to the reader '' ) , identifying satan with the pseudonymous alchemist hermes trismegistus and calling boredom the worst of miseries , sets the general tone of what is to follow : si le viol , le poison , le poignard , l'incendie , n'ont pas encore brodé de leurs plaisants dessins le canevas banal de nos piteux destins , c'est que notre âme , hélas ! n'est pas assez hardie . : if rape , poison , dagger and fire , : have still not embroidered their pleasant designs : on the banal canvas of our pitiable destinies , : it 's because our soul , alas , is not bold enough ! the preface concludes with the following malediction : c'est l'ennui ! —l'œil chargé d'un pleur involontaire , il rêve d'échafauds en fumant son houka . tu le connais , lecteur , ce monstre délicat , hypocrite lecteur , —mon semblable , —mon frère ! : it 's boredom ! —eye brimming with an involuntary tear : he dreams of gallows while smoking his hookah . : you know him , reader , this delicate monster , : hypocritical reader , my likeness , my brother ! . tableaux parisiens ( parisian scenes ) . baudelaire 's section tableaux parisiens , added in the second edition ( 1861 ) , is considered one of the most formidable criticisms of 19th-century french modernity . this section contains 18 poems , most of which were written during haussmann 's renovation of paris . together , the poems in tableaux parisiens act as 24-hour cycle of paris , starting with the second poem le soleil ( the sun ) and ending with the second to last poem le crépuscule du matin ( morning twilight ) . the poems featured in this cycle of paris all deal with the feelings of anonymity and estrangement from a newly modernized city . baudelaire is critical of the clean and geometrically laid out streets of paris which alienate the unsung anti-heroes of paris who serve as inspiration for the poet : the beggars , the blind , the industrial worker , the gambler , the prostitute , the old and the victim of imperialism . these characters whom baudelaire once praised as the backbone of paris are now eulogized in his nostalgic poems . for baudelaire , the city has been transformed into an anthill of identical bourgeois that reflect the new identical structures that litter a paris he once called home but can now no longer recognize . chambers , ross . the writing of melancholy : modes of opposition in early french modernism . chicago : university of chicago , 1993 . print . thompson , william j . understanding les fleurs du mal : critical readings . nashville : vanderbilt up , 1997 . print . . literary significance and criticism . the author and the publisher were prosecuted under the regime of the second empire as an outrage aux bonnes mœurs ( '' an insult to public decency '' ) . as a consequence of this prosecution , baudelaire was fined 300 francs . six poems from the work were suppressed and the ban on their publication was not lifted in france until 1949 . these poems were '' lesbos '' ; '' femmes damnées ( à la pâle clarté ) '' ( or '' women doomed ( in the pale glimmer . ) '' ) ; '' le léthé '' ( or '' lethe '' ) ; '' à celle qui est trop gaie '' ( or '' to her who is too joyful '' ) ; '' les bijoux '' ( or '' the jewels '' ) ; and '' les métamorphoses du vampire '' ( or '' the vampire 's metamorphoses '' ) . these were later published in brussels in a small volume entitled les épaves ( scraps or jetsam ) . on the other hand , upon reading '' the swan '' ( or '' le cygne '' ) from les fleurs du mal , victor hugo announced that baudelaire had created '' un nouveau frisson ( a new shudder , a new thrill ) in literature . in the wake of the prosecution , a second edition was issued in 1861 which added 35 new poems , removed the six suppressed poems , and added a new section entitled tableaux parisiens . among the new poems was the widely-studied '' l'albatros '' ( '' the albatross '' ) . a posthumous third edition , with a preface by théophile gautier and including 14 previously unpublished poems , was issued in 1868 . legacy . the book monger character , wren , refers to special agent aloysius pendergast as ‘ hypocrite lecteur ’ in the pendergast book series authored by douglas preston and lincoln child in many of their interactions . t.s . eliot 's poem the waste land ( 1922 ) references '' au lecteur '' with the line : '' you ! hypocrite lecteur ! —mon semblable , —mon frère ! '' alban berg 's '' der wein '' ( 1929 ) is a concert aria setting stefan george 's translation of three poems from '' le vin '' . baudelaire 's flowers of evil ( les fleurs du mal ) is a 1968 recording by yvette mimieux and ali akbar khan originally issued on lp by connoisseur society . mimeux reads excerpts of cyril scott 's 1909 translation with original music by khan . in 1969 , american composer ruth white released the album flowers of evil . it features electroacoustic composition with baudelaire 's poetry recited over it . the album was published by limelight records . henri dutilleux 's tout un monde lointain . for cello and orchestra ( 1970 ) is strongly influenced by les fleurs du mal . each of its five movements is prefaced by a quotation from the volume and the title itself comes from one of its poems , '' xxiii . la chevelure '' . in roger zelazny 's book roadmarks the protagonist red dorakeen travels with a sentient speaking computer disguised as a cybernetic extension of the book les fleurs du mal named '' flowers of evil '' . it befriends another computer which has disguised itself as leaves of grass by walt whitman . '' flor de mal '' ( larriva , hufsteter ) is a song in the 1985 eponymous album by the cruzados . rock band buck-tick named their 1990 album aku no hana , as well as its title track , after les fleurs du mal . the movie immortal ( 2004 , dominique brunner ) ; in the scene on the eiffel tower , jill ( linda hardy ) is reading from the book les fleurs du mal . she recites the third stanza from the poem '' xlix . le poison '' . in a january 1997 episode of the hit sitcom friends , monica ( courtney cox ) asks her coworker julio about his book . he says it 's '' '' flowers of evil '' by baudelaire '' and when monica asks if he enjoyed it he replies '' i thought i would , but the translation 's no good . '' it is the twelfth episode of the third season and is titled : '' the one with all the jealousy '' . an episode of the television show the batman was named '' fleurs du mal '' in homage to the poem . in addition to this , a florist 's shop in the episode is named baudelaire 's , in honor of the author . sopor aeternus & the ensemble of shadows released an album named les fleurs du mal and also an 8 and half minute song too . '' the funeral of hearts '' is a song by the finland band him , released in 2003 . it is the second track and first single from the album love metal . the opening verse contains the lyric '' when angels cry blood on flowers of evil in bloom . '' french songwriter and musician neige used poems from les fleurs du mal as lyrics for several songs that he wrote with different bands . '' élévation '' ( with alcest ) '' recueillement '' ( with amesoeurs ) '' le revenant '' and '' ciel brouillé '' ( with mortifera ) geographer and political economist david harvey includes the poem '' the eyes of the poor '' in a book chapter called '' the political economy of public space '' . french black metal band peste noire used poems as lyrics for their songs '' le mort joyeux '' and '' spleen '' from their album la sanie des siècles – panégyrique de la dégénérescence the 2009 manga aku no hana is named after les fleurs du mal . the main character , takao kasuga , is enamored with the book and the adult depravity that it represents . he steals the gym clothes of his crush , nanako saeki , after being inspired by the book . the manga was in 2013 adapted into an animated series and in 2019 a live-action film adaptation was released . industrial metal band marilyn manson released a song entitled '' the flowers of evil '' on their 2012 album born villain . symphonic metal band therion released an album named les fleurs du mal in 2012 . in episode 13 of saving hopes first season ( 2012 ) , a copy of the flowers of evil is among the personal effects of a patient . later in the episode a doctor briefly discusses baudelaire and a phrase from the book with that patient . chicago-based artistic collective theater oobleck produced a series of cantastoria using baudelaire 's les fleurs du mal as text . the music is written by a series of different artists , and the shows are presented across the united states , though primarily in chicago . the collective is scheduled to present episode 8 in its series on october 1 , 2015 . the intention is to convert the entirety of les fleurs du mal to cantastoria in seven years . the swedish folk singer sofia karlsson sang versions of '' le vin des amants '' and '' moesta et errabunda '' , translated by the poet dan andersson , on her 2007 album visor från vinden ( songs from the wind ) . . references . notes further reading . external links . fleursdumal.org – collection of the various french editions and accompanying translations in english