Radiology

diagnostic imaging modalities . projection ( plain ) radiography . radiography ( originally called roentgenographs , named after the discoverer of x-rays , wilhelm röntgen ) are produced by transmitting x-rays through a patient . the x-rays are projected through the body onto a detector ; an image is formed based on which rays pass through ( and are detected ) versus those that are absorbed or scattered in the patient ( and thus are not detected ) . röntgen discovered x-rays on november 8 , 1895 and received the first nobel prize in physics for their discovery in 1901 . in film-screen radiography , an x-ray tube generates a beam of x-rays , which is aimed at the patient . the x-rays that pass through the patient are filtered through a device called a grid or x-ray filter , to reduce scatter , and strike an undeveloped film , which is held tightly to a screen of light-emitting phosphors in a light-tight cassette . the film is then developed chemically and an image appears on the film . film-screen radiography is being replaced by phosphor plate radiography but more recently by digital radiography ( dr ) and the eos imaging . in the two latest systems , the x-rays strike sensors that converts the signals generated into digital information , which is transmitted and converted into an image displayed on a computer screen . in digital radiography the sensors shape a plate , but in the eos system , which is a slot-scanning system , a linear sensor vertically scans the patient . plain radiography was the only imaging modality available during the first 50 years of radiology . due to its availability , speed , and lower costs compared to other modalities , radiography is often the first-line test of choice in radiologic diagnosis . also despite the large amount of data in ct scans , mr scans and other digital-based imaging , there are many disease entities in which the classic diagnosis is obtained by plain radiographs . examples include various types of arthritis and pneumonia , bone tumors ( especially benign bone tumors ) , fractures , congenital skeletal anomalies , and certain kidney stones . mammography and dxa are two applications of low energy projectional radiography , used for the evaluation for breast cancer and osteoporosis , respectively . fluoroscopy . fluoroscopy and angiography are special applications of x-ray imaging , in which a fluorescent screen and image intensifier tube is connected to a closed-circuit television system . this allows real-time imaging of structures in motion or augmented with a radiocontrast agent . radiocontrast agents are usually administered by swallowing or injecting into the body of the patient to delineate anatomy and functioning of the blood vessels , the genitourinary system , or the gastrointestinal tract ( gi tract ) . two radiocontrast agents are presently in common use . barium sulfate ( baso 4 ) is given orally or rectally for evaluation of the gi tract . iodine , in multiple proprietary forms , is given by oral , rectal , vaginal , intra-arterial or intravenous routes . these radiocontrast agents strongly absorb or scatter x-rays , and in conjunction with the real-time imaging , allow demonstration of dynamic processes , such as peristalsis in the digestive tract or blood flow in arteries and veins . iodine contrast may also be concentrated in abnormal areas more or less than in normal tissues and make abnormalities ( tumors , cysts , inflammation ) more conspicuous . additionally , in specific circumstances , air can be used as a contrast agent for the gastrointestinal system and carbon dioxide can be used as a contrast agent in the venous system ; in these cases , the contrast agent attenuates the x-ray radiation less than the surrounding tissues . computed tomography . ct imaging uses x-rays in conjunction with computing algorithms to image the body . in ct , an x-ray tube opposite an x-ray detector ( or detectors ) in a ring-shaped apparatus rotate around a patient , producing a computer-generated cross-sectional image ( tomogram ) . ct is acquired in the axial plane , with coronal and sagittal images produced by computer reconstruction . radiocontrast agents are often used with ct for enhanced delineation of anatomy . although radiographs provide higher spatial resolution , ct can detect more subtle variations in attenuation of x-rays ( higher contrast resolution ) . ct exposes the patient to significantly more ionizing radiation than a radiograph . spiral multidetector ct uses 16 , 64 , 254 or more detectors during continuous motion of the patient through the radiation beam to obtain fine detail images in a short exam time . with rapid administration of intravenous contrast during the ct scan , these fine detail images can be reconstructed into three-dimensional ( 3d ) images of carotid , cerebral , coronary or other arteries . the introduction of computed tomography in the early 1970s revolutionized diagnostic radiology by providing clinicians with images of real three-dimensional anatomic structures . ct scanning has become the test of choice in diagnosing some urgent and emergent conditions , such as cerebral hemorrhage , pulmonary embolism ( clots in the arteries of the lungs ) , aortic dissection ( tearing of the aortic wall ) , appendicitis , diverticulitis , and obstructing kidney stones . continuing improvements in ct technology , including faster scanning times and improved resolution , have dramatically increased the accuracy and usefulness of ct scanning , which may partially account for increased use in medical diagnosis . ultrasound . medical ultrasonography uses ultrasound ( high-frequency sound waves ) to visualize soft tissue structures in the body in real time . no ionizing radiation is involved , but the quality of the images obtained using ultrasound is highly dependent on the skill of the person ( ultrasonographer ) performing the exam and the patient 's body size . examinations of larger , overweight patients may have a decrease in image quality as their subcutaneous fat absorbs more of the sound waves . this results in fewer sound waves penetrating to organs and reflecting back to the transducer , resulting in loss of information and a poorer quality image . ultrasound is also limited by its inability to image through air pockets ( lungs , bowel loops ) or bone . its use in medical imaging has developed mostly within the last 30 years . the first ultrasound images were static and two-dimensional ( 2d ) , but with modern ultrasonography , 3d reconstructions can be observed in real time , effectively becoming '' 4d '' . because ultrasound imaging techniques do not employ ionizing radiation to generate images ( unlike radiography , and ct scans ) , they are generally considered safer and are therefore more common in obstetrical imaging . the progression of pregnancies can be thoroughly evaluated with less concern about damage from the techniques employed , allowing early detection and diagnosis of many fetal anomalies . growth can be assessed over time , important in patients with chronic disease or pregnancy-induced disease , and in multiple pregnancies ( twins , triplets , etc . ) . color-flow doppler ultrasound measures the severity of peripheral vascular disease and is used by cardiologists for dynamic evaluation of the heart , heart valves and major vessels . stenosis , for example , of the carotid arteries may be a warning sign for an impending stroke . a clot , embedded deep in one of the inner veins of the legs , can be found via ultrasound before it dislodges and travels to the lungs , resulting in a potentially fatal pulmonary embolism . ultrasounds is useful as a guide to performing biopsy to minimise damage to surrounding tissues and in drainages such as thoracentesis . small , portable ultrasound devices now replace peritoneal lavage in trauma wards by non-invasively assessing for the presence of internal bleeding and any internal organ damage . extensive internal bleeding or injury to the major organs may require surgery and repair . magnetic resonance imaging . mri uses strong magnetic fields to align atomic nuclei ( usually hydrogen protons ) within body tissues , then uses a radio signal to disturb the axis of rotation of these nuclei and observes the radio frequency signal generated as the nuclei return to their baseline states . the radio signals are collected by small antennae , called coils , placed near the area of interest . an advantage of mri is its ability to produce images in axial , coronal , sagittal and multiple oblique planes with equal ease . mri scans give the best soft tissue contrast of all the imaging modalities . with advances in scanning speed and spatial resolution , and improvements in computer 3d algorithms and hardware , mri has become an important tool in musculoskeletal radiology and neuroradiology . one disadvantage is the patient has to hold still for long periods of time in a noisy , cramped space while the imaging is performed . claustrophobia ( fear of closed spaces ) severe enough to terminate the mri exam is reported in up to 5 % of patients . recent improvements in magnet design including stronger magnetic fields ( 3 teslas ) , shortening exam times , wider , shorter magnet bores and more open magnet designs , have brought some relief for claustrophobic patients . however , for magnets with equivalent field strengths , there is often a trade-off between image quality and open design . mri has great benefit in imaging the brain , spine , and musculoskeletal system . the use of mri is currently contraindicated for patients with pacemakers , cochlear implants , some indwelling medication pumps , certain types of cerebral aneurysm clips , metal fragments in the eyes and some metallic hardware due to the powerful magnetic fields and strong fluctuating radio signals to which the body is exposed . areas of potential advancement include functional imaging , cardiovascular mri , and mri-guided therapy . nuclear medicine . nuclear medicine imaging involves the administration into the patient of radiopharmaceuticals consisting of substances with affinity for certain body tissues labeled with radioactive tracer . the most commonly used tracers are technetium-99m , iodine-123 , iodine-131 , gallium-67 , indium-111 , thallium-201 and fludeoxyglucose ( 18f ) ( 18f-fdg ) . the heart , lungs , thyroid , liver , brain , gallbladder , and bones are commonly evaluated for particular conditions using these techniques . while anatomy detail is limited in these studies , nuclear medicine is useful in displaying physiology function . the excretory function of the kidneys , iodine-concentrating ability of the thyroid , blood flow to heart muscle , etc . can be measured . the principal imaging devices are the gamma camera and the pet scanner , which detect the radiation emitted by the tracer in the body and display it as an image . with computer processing , the information can be displayed as axial , coronal and sagittal images ( single-photon emission computed tomography - spect or positron-emission tomography - pet ) . in the most modern devices , nuclear medicine images can be fused with a ct scan taken quasisimultaneously , so the physiology information can be overlaid or coregistered with the anatomical structures to improve diagnostic accuracy . positron emission tomography ( pet ) scanning deals with positrons instead of gamma rays detected by gamma cameras . the positrons annihilate to produce two opposite traveling gamma rays to be detected coincidentally , thus improving resolution . in pet scanning , a radioactive , biologically active substance , most often 18f-fdg , is injected into a patient and the radiation emitted by the patient is detected to produce multiplanar images of the body . metabolically more active tissues , such as cancer , concentrate the active substance more than normal tissues . pet images can be combined ( or '' fused '' ) with anatomic ( ct ) imaging , to more accurately localize pet findings and thereby improve diagnostic accuracy . the fusion technology has gone further to combine pet and mri similar to pet and ct . pet/mri fusion , largely practiced in academic and research settings , could potentially play a crucial role in fine detail of brain imaging , breast cancer screening , and small joint imaging of the foot . the technology recently blossomed after passing the technical hurdle of altered positron movement in strong magnetic field thus affecting the resolution of pet images and attenuation correction . interventional radiology . interventional radiology ( ir or sometimes vir for vascular and interventional radiology ) is a subspecialty of radiology in which minimally invasive procedures are performed using image guidance . some of these procedures are done for purely diagnostic purposes ( e.g . , angiogram ) , while others are done for treatment purposes ( e.g . , angioplasty ) . the basic concept behind interventional radiology is to diagnose or treat pathology , with the most minimally invasive technique possible . minimally invasive procedures are currently performed more than ever before . these procedures are often performed with the patient fully awake , with little or no sedation required . interventional radiologists and interventional radiographers diagnose and treat several disorders , including peripheral vascular disease , renal artery stenosis , inferior vena cava filter placement , gastrostomy tube placements , biliary stents and liver interventions . radiographic images , fluoroscopy , and ultrasound modalities are used for guidance , and the primary instruments used during the procedure are specialized needles and catheters . the images provide maps that allow the clinician to guide these instruments through the body to the areas containing disease . by minimizing the physical trauma to the patient , peripheral interventions can reduce infection rates and recovery times , as well as hospital stays . to be a trained interventionalist in the united states , an individual completes a five-year residency in radiology and a one- or two-year fellowship in ir . . analysis of images . plain , or general , radiography . the basic technique is optical density evaluation ( i.e . histogram analysis ) . it is then described that a region has a different optical density , e.g . a cancer metastasis to bone causes radiolucency . the development of this is the digital radiological subtraction . it consists in overlapping two radiographs of the same examined region and subtracting the optical densities the resultant image only contains the time-dependent differences between the two examined radiographs . the advantage of this technique is the precise determination of the dynamics of density changes and the place of their occurrence . however , beforehand the geometrical adjustment and general alignment of optical density should be done another possibility of radiographic image analysis is to study second order features , e.g . digital texture analysis or fractal dimension on this basis , it is possible to assess the places where bio-materials are implanted into the bone for the purpose of guided bone regeneration . they take an intakt bone image sample ( region of interest , roi , reference site ) and a sample of the implantation site ( second roi , test site ) can be assessed numerically/objectively to what extent the implantation site imitates a healthy bone and how advanced is the process of bone regeneration it is also possible to check whether the bone healing process is influenced by some systemic factors . teleradiology . teleradiology is the transmission of radiographic images from one location to another for interpretation by an appropriately trained professional , usually a radiologist or reporting radiographer . it is most often used to allow rapid interpretation of emergency room , icu and other emergent examinations after hours of usual operation , at night and on weekends . in these cases , the images can be sent across time zones ( e.g . to spain , australia , india ) with the receiving clinician working his normal daylight hours . however , at present , large private teleradiology companies in the u.s . currently provide most after-hours coverage employing night-working radiologists in the u.s . teleradiology can also be used to obtain consultation with an expert or subspecialist about a complicated or puzzling case . in the u.s . , many hospitals outsource their radiology departments to radiologists in india due to the lowered cost and availability of high speed internet access . teleradiology requires a sending station , a high-speed internet connection , and a high-quality receiving station . at the transmission station , plain radiography are passed through a digitizing machine before transmission , while ct , mri , ultrasound and nuclear medicine scans can be sent directly , as they are already digital data . the computer at the receiving end will need to have a high-quality display screen that has been tested and cleared for clinical purposes . reports are then transmitted to the requesting clinician . the major advantage of teleradiology is the ability to use different time zones to provide real-time emergency radiology services around-the-clock . the disadvantages include higher costs , limited contact between the referrer and the reporting clinician , and the inability to cover for procedures requiring an onsite reporting clinician . laws and regulations concerning the use of teleradiology vary among the states , with some requiring a license to practice medicine in the state sending the radiologic exam . in the u.s . , some states require the teleradiology report to be preliminary with the official report issued by a hospital staff radiologist . lastly , the major benefit of teleradiology is that it can be automated with modern machine learning techniques . the benefits of artificial intelligence include efficiency , accuracy , and the ability to surpass human ability . . professional training . united states . radiology is a field in medicine that has expanded rapidly after 2000 due to advances in computer technology , which is closely linked to modern imaging techniques . applying for residency positions in radiology is relatively competitive . applicants are often near the top of their medical school classes , with high usmle ( board ) examination scores . diagnostic radiologists must complete prerequisite undergraduate education , four years of medical school to earn a medical degree ( d.o . or m.d . ) , one year of internship , and four years of residency training . after residency , radiologists may pursue one or two years of additional specialty fellowship training . the american board of radiology ( abr ) administers professional certification in diagnostic radiology , radiation oncology and medical physics as well as subspecialty certification in neuroradiology , nuclear radiology , pediatric radiology and vascular and interventional radiology . '' board certification '' in diagnostic radiology requires successful completion of two examinations . the core exam is given after 36 months of residency . this computer-based examination is given twice a year in chicago and tucson . it encompasses 18 categories . a pass of all 18 is a pass . a fail on one to five categories is a conditioned exam and the resident will need to retake and pass the failed categories . a fail on over five categories is a failed exam . the certification exam , can be taken 15 months after completion of the radiology residency . this computer-based examination consists of five modules and graded pass-fail . it is given twice a year in chicago and tucson . recertification examinations are taken every 10 years , with additional required continuing medical education as outlined in the maintenance of certification document . certification may also be obtained from the american osteopathic board of radiology ( aobr ) and the american board of physician specialties . following completion of residency training , radiologists may either begin practicing as a general diagnostic radiologist or enter into subspecialty training programs known as fellowships . examples of subspeciality training in radiology include abdominal imaging , thoracic imaging , cross-sectional/ultrasound , mri , musculoskeletal imaging , interventional radiology , neuroradiology , interventional neuroradiology , paediatric radiology , nuclear medicine , emergency radiology , breast imaging and women 's imaging . fellowship training programs in radiology are usually one or two years in length . some medical schools in the us have started to incorporate a basic radiology introduction into their core md training . new york medical college , the wayne state university school of medicine , weill cornell medicine , the uniformed services university , and the university of south carolina school of medicine offer an introduction to radiology during their respective md programs . campbell university school of osteopathic medicine also integrates imaging material into their curriculum early in the first year . radiographic exams are usually performed by radiographers . qualifications for radiographers vary by country , but many radiographers now are required to hold a degree . veterinary radiologists are veterinarians who specialize in the use of x-rays , ultrasound , mri and nuclear medicine for diagnostic imaging or treatment of disease in animals . they are certified in either diagnostic radiology or radiation oncology by the american college of veterinary radiology . united kingdom . radiology is an extremely competitive speciality in the uk , attracting applicants from a broad range of backgrounds . applicants are welcomed directly from the foundation programme , as well as those who have completed higher training . recruitment and selection into training post in clinical radiology posts in england , scotland and wales is done by an annual nationally coordinated process lasting from november to march . in this process , all applicants are required to pass a specialty recruitment assessment ( sra ) test . those with a test score above a certain threshold are offered a single interview at the london and the south east recruitment office . at a later stage , applicants declare what programs they prefer , but may in some cases be placed in a neighbouring region . the training programme lasts for a total of five years . during this time , doctors rotate into different subspecialities , such as paediatrics , musculoskeletal or neuroradiology , and breast imaging . during the first year of training , radiology trainees are expected to pass the first part of the fellowship of the royal college of radiologists ( frcr ) exam . this comprises a medical physics and anatomy examination . following completion of their part 1 exam , they are then required to pass six written exams ( part 2a ) , which cover all the subspecialities . successful completion of these allows them to complete the frcr by completing part 2b , which includes rapid reporting , and a long case discussion . after achieving a certificate of completion of training ( cct ) , many fellowship posts exist in specialities such as neurointervention and vascular intervention , which would allow the ioctor to work as an interventional radiologist . in some cases , the cct date can be deferred by a year to include these fellowship programmes . uk radiology registrars are represented by the society of radiologists in training ( srt ) , which was founded in 1993 under the auspices of the royal college of radiologists . the society is a nonprofit organisation , run by radiology registrars specifically to promote radiology training and education in the uk . annual meetings are held by which trainees across the country are encouraged to attend . currently , a shortage of radiologists in the uk has created opportunities in all specialities , and with the increased reliance on imaging , demand is expected to increase in the future . radiographers , and less frequently nurses , are often trained to undertake many of these opportunities in order to help meet demand . radiographers often may control a '' list '' of a particular set of procedures after being approved locally and signed off by a consultant radiologist . similarly , radiographers may simply operate a list for a radiologist or other physician on their behalf . most often if a radiographer operates a list autonomously then they are acting as the operator and practitioner under the ionising radiation ( medical exposures ) regulations 2000 . radiographers are represented by a variety of bodies ; most often this is the society and college of radiographers . collaboration with nurses is also common , where a list may be jointly organised between the nurse and radiographer . germany . after obtaining medical licensure , german radiologists complete a five-year residency , culminating with a board examination ( known as facharztprüfung ) . italy . the radiology training program in italy increased from four to five years in 2008 . further training is required for specialization in radiotherapy or nuclear medicine . the netherlands . dutch radiologists complete a five-year residency program after completing the six-year md program . india . the radiology training course is a post graduate 3-year program ( md/dnb radiology ) or a 2-year diploma ( dmrd ) . . singapore . radiologists in singapore complete a five-year undergraduate medicine degree followed by a one-year internship and then a five-year residency program . some radiologists may elect to complete a one or two-year fellowship for further sub-specialization in fields such as interventional radiology . specialty training for interventional radiology . . united states . training for interventional radiology occurs in the residency portion of medical education , and has gone through developments . in 2000 , the society of interventional radiology ( sir ) created a program named '' clinical pathway in ir '' , which modified the '' holman pathway '' that was already accepted by the american board of radiology to including training in ir ; this was accepted by abr but was not widely adopted . in 2005 sir proposed and abr accepted another pathway called '' direct ( diagnostic and interventional radiology enhanced clinical training ) pathway '' to help trainees coming from other specialities learn ir ; this too was not widely adopted . in 2006 sir proposed a pathway resulting in certification in ir as a speciality ; this was eventually accepted by the abr in 2007 and was presented to the american board of medical specialities ( abms ) in 2009 , which rejected it because it did not include enough diagnostic radiology ( dr ) training . the proposal was reworked , at the same time that overall dr training was being revamped , and a new proposal that would lead to a dual dr/ir specialization was presented to the abms and was accepted in 2012 and eventually was implemented in 2014 . by 2016 the field had determined that the old ir fellowships would be terminated by 2020 . a handful of programs have offered interventional radiology fellowships that focus on training in the treatment of children . . europe . in europe the field followed its own pathway ; for example in germany the parallel interventional society began to break free of the dr society in 2008 . in the uk , interventional radiology was approved as a sub-specialty of clinical radiology in 2010 . while many countries have an interventional radiology society , there is also the european-wide cardiovascular and interventional radiological society of europe , whose aim is to support teaching , science , research and clinical practice in the field by hosting meetings , educational workshops and promoting patient safety initiatives . furthermore , the society provides an examination , the european board of interventional radiology ( ebir ) , which is a highly valuable qualification in interventional radiology based on the european curriculum and syllabus for ir .