Saturday-morning cartoon

history . early cartoons . although the saturday-morning timeslot had always featured a great deal of children 's television series beginning in the early 1950s , the idea of commissioning new animated series for broadcast on saturday mornings caught on in the mid-1960s , when the networks realized that they could concentrate kids ' viewing on that one morning to appeal to advertising . furthermore , limited animation , such as that produced by such studios as filmation , depatie–freleng enterprises , total television , jay ward productions and hanna-barbera , was economical enough to produce in sufficient quantity to fill the four-hour time slot , as compared to live-action programming . while production times and costs were undeniably higher with animated programming , the cost of talent was far less ( voice actors became known for their ability to hold several characters at once , sometimes even on the same show ) and networks could rerun children 's animated programming more frequently than most live-action series , negating the financial disadvantages . the experiment proved successful , and the time slot was filled with profitable programming . until the late 1960s , a number of saturday-morning cartoons were rerun of animated series originally made for prime time during a brief flurry of such series a few years earlier . these included hanna-barbera 's the flintstones , top cat , the jetsons and jonny quest , ross bagdasarian 's the alvin show , and bob clampett 's beany and cecil . some saturday-morning programs consisted of telecasts of older cartoons originally made for movie theaters , such as the looney tunes and merrie melodies cartoons produced by warner bros . cartoons , the tom and jerry cartoons produced by metro-goldwyn-mayer and directed by william hanna and joseph barbera for that studio prior to establishing their own company ; the mighty mouse and heckle and jeckle cartoons produced by paul terry 's terrytoons , and walter lantz 's woody woodpecker cartoons . during the 1960s and 1970s , it was not uncommon to have animated shorts produced with both film and television in mind ( depatie-freleng was particularly associated with this business model ) , so that by selling the shorts to theaters , the studios could afford a higher budget than would otherwise be available from television alone , which at the time was still a free medium for the end-user . some of these legacy characters later appeared in '' new '' versions by other producers ( tom and jerry by hanna and barbera for their own company , and later by filmation ; mighty mouse by filmation and later by ralph bakshi ; the pink panther show by hanna-barbera with friz freleng as a consultant ) . the remainder of the networks ' saturday-morning schedules were filled by reruns of black-and-white live-action series made in the 1950s , usually with a western background ( the lone ranger , the roy rogers show , sky king , fury , the adventures of rin tin tin , my friend flicka , etc . ) and occasional first-run live-action series such as the magic land of allakazam , the later color episodes of howdy doody , the shari lewis show , shenanigans , and watch mr . wizard . independent station ( tv stations not affiliated with networks ) often did not show cartoons on saturday mornings , instead running feature films ( usually western or low-budget series movies such as the bowery boys or bomba , the jungle boy ) , chapters of '' cliffhanger '' serial film , comedy short film originally made for movie theatres ( laurel and hardy , the three stooges , and our gang ) , older live-action syndicated series like the adventures of superman , the cisco kid , ramar of the jungle , the abbott and costello show , the adventures of robin hood , hopalong cassidy , flash gordon , and sheena , queen of the jungle , and regional sports shows , often wrestling or bowling programs . 1960s–1980s . . 1960s . the mid-1960s brought a boom in superhero cartoon series , some adapted from comic book , ( superman , aquaman , spider-man , fantastic four ) , and others original ( space ghost , the herculoids , birdman and the galaxy trio , etc . ) . also included were parodies of the superhero genre ( underdog , the super 6 , and george of the jungle , among others ) . another development was the popular music-based cartoon , featuring both real-life groups ( the beatles , the jackson 5ive , and the osmonds ) as well as anonymous studio musicians ( the archies , josie and the pussycats ) . live-action series continued to some extent with sid and marty krofft 's h.r . pufnstuf and sigmund and the sea monsters , hanna-barbera 's the banana splits , stan burns and mike marmer 's lancelot link , secret chimp , abc 's curiosity shop ( produced by chuck jones ) , don kirshner 's widely popular the monkees , and the british-made slapstick comedy here come the double deckers . 1970s . with the 1970s came a wave of animated versions of popular live-action prime time series , mainly with the voices of the original casts , including the brady bunch ( the brady kids ) , star trek ( star trek : the animated series ) , emergency ! ( emergency+4 ) , gilligan 's island ( the new adventures of gilligan and later gilligan 's planet in the 1980s ) , happy days ( the fonz and the happy days gang ) , laverne & shirley ( laverne & shirley in the army ) , mork & mindy ( mork & mindy/laverne & shirley/fonz hour ) , the partridge family ( partridge family 2200 a.d . ; the cast was also semi-regulars on goober and the ghost chasers ) , and the dukes of hazzard ( the dukes ) . less literally adapted was the oddball couple , which turned neil simon 's mismatched roommates into a sloppy dog and a fastidious cat . many of these animated spin-offs featured storylines and settings that would not be feasible in most live-action series ( such as trips around the world and/or into space ) . the ties between the animated spin-offs and their live-action origins varied widely , depending on how much input the original cast and crew were willing to contribute ( and how much the animation companies were willing to pay for that talent ) ; in retrospect , animated versions of tv series are generally not treated as canon . other adaptations of familiar characters and properties included tarzan ( tarzan , lord of the jungle ) , planet of the apes ( return to the planet of the apes ) , lassie ( lassie 's rescue rangers ) and godzilla . at this same time , the great success of scooby-doo spawned numerous imitations , combining the archie show-style teen characters and funny animals with light-weight mystery stories ( speed buggy , jabberjaw , etc . ) comedian bill cosby successfully blended educational elements with both comedy and music in the popular , long-running fat albert and the cosby kids . filmation , primarily a cartoon producer , also turned out several live-action saturday-morning series in the 1970s , including shazam ! ( with animated sequences ) and the secret of isis , jason of star command , the ghost busters ( not related to the ghostbusters , but a vehicle for former f troop stars larry storch and forrest tucker ) and uncle croc 's block . 1980s . the success of star wars toys convinced toy companies of the enormous profit potential in developing their own intellectual properties to base toys on . along with the fcc 's looser interpretation of programming regulations under president reagan , this led to the era of '' half-hour toy commercials '' that became almost synonymous with '80s cartoons . the first were masters of the universe and g.i . joe : a real american hero in 1983 , followed by the transformers , visionaries , m.a.s.k . , jem and the holograms , thundercats , silverhawks , visionaries : knights of the magical light , my little pony , and others . defining cartoons of the '80s that had associated toy lines , but which were not created specifically for the purpose of selling toys , included teenage mutant ninja turtles , which began as an independent comic-book series , and the real ghostbusters , based on the live-action movie from 1984 ; both continued to be produced into the '90s , and in fact ninja turtles lasted so long that most of its episodes were produced and aired in the '90s , though it is still associated more with the '80s . a hanna-barbera adaptation of the belgian comic strip the smurfs became a huge success in the 1980s , bringing with it other series with fairy tale-like settings ( my little pony , monchichis , the biskitts , trollkins , snorks , etc . ) most of the genres made popular in previous generations ( funny animals , superheroes , teen mysteries , science fiction and live-action adaptations ) continued to appear as well , with the exception of the musical band cartoons ( only one of note , the syndicated jem , emerged in the 1980s ) . cbs and the producing team of lee mendelson and bill melendez , acclaimed for their emmy award-winning prime time specials adapted from charles m . schulz 's comic strip peanuts , brought schulz 's characters to saturday mornings in the charlie brown and snoopy show ; later in the 1980s , the successful garfield comic strip and tv specials were adapted into the long-running garfield and friends , also on cbs . other adaptations of familiar characters and properties included lone ranger , star wars ( star wars : droids and ewoks ) and zorro ( the new adventures of zorro ) . during the mid-1980s through the early 1990s , series featuring younger and junior versions of characters from the 1970s and earlier were introduced , such as muppet babies , a pup named scooby-doo , and the flintstone kids . watchgroup backlash . parents ' lobby groups such as action for children 's television appeared in the late 1960s . they voiced concerns about the presentation of commercialism , violence , anti-social attitudes and stereotype in saturday-morning cartoons . by the 1970s , these groups exercised enough influence that the television networks felt compelled to lay down more stringent content rules for the animation houses . by 1978 , the federal trade commission was openly considering a ban on all advertising during television programming targeting preschoolers , and severe restrictions on other children 's program advertising , which would have effectively killed off the format ; the commission ultimately dropped the proposal . the networks were encouraged to create educational spots that endeavored to use animation and/or live-action for enriching content . the schoolhouse rock ! series on abc became a television classic ; abc also had several other short-form animated featurettes , including time for timer and the bod squad , that had long runs . just as notable were cbs 's news segments for children , in the news and nbc 's ask nbc news and one to grow on , which featured skits of everyday problems with advice from the stars of nbc prime time programs . decline . the decline of the timeslot somewhat began in the early 1990s for a variety of reasons , including : creative declines and stagnation at the major television animation studios ; by the late 1980s , major saturday-morning producers such as hanna-barbera and filmation had already recycled a limited number of common tropes and poorly developed stock characters numerous times over the previous two decades . the rise of first-run syndicated animated programs , which usually had a greater artistic freedom and looser standards than those that were mandated by a network . these programs included g.i . joe , the transformers , voltron , thundercats , he-man and the masters of the universe , ducktales , the first two seasons of tiny toon adventures , and the first three seasons of teenage mutant ninja turtles . increasing regulation of children 's programming content , including the federal communications commission 's introduction of the e/i mandate in 1990 and later made more explicit in 1996 . this required all broadcast networks to air '' educational and informational '' children 's programs for at least three hours a week . concurrent with this , the federal trade commission outlawed the advertising of both premium-rate telephone numbers and tie-in merchandise during children 's hours . both of these factors limited creative options and cut off large revenue sources for children 's programs on network television , and would overrun saturday-morning cartoons . the rise of cable television networks such as the disney channel , nickelodeon and cartoon network , which provided appealing animated entertainment throughout the week at nearly all hours , making saturday-morning timeslots far less important to viewers and advertisers . cable channels had the additional advantage of being beyond fcc content regulations and did not have to abide by educational and advertising regulations ; within a year of the e/i mandate being imposed , nickelodeon shot ahead of all of the broadcast networks in saturday-morning viewership ratings . currently , there are at least 10 channels specializing in children 's programming . cable television was also better positioned to rerun children 's programming as another source of revenue in an increasingly fractured marketplace . the increased availability of home video services ( both hard-copy and later through the internet in the form of video on demand ) , which , just like cable , allowed children to watch their favorite cartoons at any given time . an increase in children 's participation in saturday activities outside the home . the gradual legalization of no-fault divorce in the united states over the course of the 1970s and 1980s , which prompted a spike in divorces , and a desire for parents to make more productive use of their time with their children . visitation periods for the secondary custodial parent often occurred on saturday mornings and afternoons , changing the routines of these children from a steady schedule every weekend . the strongly continuous growth of home video game systems made by atari , nintendo , sega and others . the decline of saturday-morning cartoons coincided with a rise in adult animation and a wave of new , creator-driven animation studios , which experienced a revival ( much of it on prime time television ) in the 1990s as the saturday-morning cartoons were in decline , as did animated feature films ( see , for example , the disney renaissance ) . fueled by the continued requirement for educational programming , networks continued to carry some cartoons well into the 2000s ; by this point , these consisted either of re-purposed rerun from cable or outsourced blocks of cartoons imported from outside the united states . as the popularity of these blocks continued to decline and no hit shows emerged from them , by the early 2010s cartoons began an outright phaseout , with the major networks opting to fill their educational mandates by commissioning live-action , mostly documentary/human interest series that were far less labor-intensive and expensive to produce ( and , more importantly for the networks , less restrictive in regard to commercials ) . some of the space formerly filled by saturday-morning cartoons would be occupied by infomercials and expanded coverage of college football on television , both of which greatly expanded as the result of separate government rulings in 1984 . state of saturday-morning cartoons since the 1990s . a 1996 federal communications commission mandate , issued in the wake of the regulations on children 's television programming in the united states , requires that stations program a minimum of three hours of children 's regulations on children 's television programming in the united states ( '' e/i '' ) programming per week . to help their network affiliates comply with the regulations , broadcast networks began to reorganize their efforts to adhere to the mandates , so their affiliates would not bear the burden of scheduling the shows themselves on their own time , thus eliminating the risk of having network product preempted by the mandates . this almost always meant that the educational programming was placed during the saturday-morning cartoon block . nbc abandoned its original saturday-morning cartoon lineup in 1992 , replacing it with a saturday-morning edition of today and adding an all live-action teen-oriented block , tnbc , which featured saved by the bell , california dreams and other teen sitcoms . even though the educational content was minimal to non-existent , nbc labeled all the live-action shows with an e/i rating and provided the legal fiction of a blanket educational summary boilerplate text provided to stations to place in their quarterly educational effort reports for the fcc . cartoons returned to the network in the fall of 2002 , after cable network discovery kids ( now discovery family ) won the rights to the timeslot in an auction , beating out other children 's television companies ( notably nickelodeon , which already programmed cbs 's saturday-morning block as nickelodeon on cbs ) . cbs followed nbc 's lead in 1997 by producing cbs news saturday morning for the first two hours of its lineup and an all live-action block of children 's programming . the experiment lasted a few months , and cbs brought back its animated series cbs storybreak . in the 1990s , television in japan shows targeted towards children and teenagers were introduced to american television , including live-action tokusatsu superhero shows such as power rangers ( super sentai ) and vr troopers ( metal hero series ) , and anime shows such as pokémon , dragon ball , sailor moon , digimon and yu-gi-oh ! this led to a transition in the saturday-morning slot from traditional american saturday-morning cartoons towards japanese anime , which have dominated the saturday-morning timeslot since the 1990s . yu-gi-oh in particular was the most popular saturday-morning cartoon during the 2000s . in 2004 , abc was the last of the broadcast networks to add a saturday-morning edition of its morning news program ( in their case , good morning america ) in the first hour of its lineup , mainly due to internal affiliate criticism of the lack of network coverage for the february 2003 space shuttle columbia disaster which occurred on a saturday morning , forcing them to take coverage from other video news agency . prior to that , and particularly in the early 1990s , it was not uncommon for affiliates to preempt part or all of abc 's cartoon lineup with local programming . fox carried little or no e/i programming , leaving the responsibility of scheduling the e/i shows to the affiliates themselves ( although the network did eventually add daily reruns of the magic school bus to meet the e/i mandates from 1998 to 2001 ) . following the closure of its 4kids tv block in 2008 , fox would not carry any children 's programming at all for five years until the launch of xploration station . the wb was far more accommodating ; for several years , the network aired the history-themed histeria ! five days a week , leaving only a half-hour of e/i programs up to the local affiliates to program . several channels , while not offering original animated series , do air reruns of older saturday-morning cartoons . boomerang , a spin-off channel of cartoon network , specialized primarily in rerun of saturday-morning cartoons from the 1960s and 1970s ( the majority of which come from hanna-barbera , which , like boomerang , is owned by warnermedia ) . in the 2010s , the channel 's focus shifted toward airing reruns of cancelled animated series from the 1990s and 2000s ( many of which were never intended for the saturday-morning programming block ) , and as of 2014 , all earlier cartoons are relegated to graveyard slots . hub network owned the broadcast rights to rerun several of fox kids ' most popular programs ( this was a byproduct of former fox kids head margaret loesch working as head of the hub network at the time ) ; the majority of that programming was dropped or relegated to early morning time slots when loesch left the network and the channel was relaunched as discovery family in 2014 . a handful of digital subchannels also make use of saturday-morning cartoon reruns , including reach high media group 's pbj and ion media 's qubo . in 2011 , the major networks began to phase out weekend-morning educational programming aimed towards preteen audiences , in favor of live-action reality and docuseries outsourced to other producers . litton entertainment took over programming the saturday-morning children 's blocks from abc , cbs , the cw , and nbc in 2011 , 2013 , 2014 , and 2016 , respectively . these programs are ostensibly aimed at teenagers and families , and networks have legally declared these new programs to be oriented towards viewers between the ages of 13 and 16 . this distinction is important from a legal basis , as it removes the requirement for the programs to comply with the advertising limits imposed by the children 's television act . . by network . abc . by the mid-1990s , broadcast networks were now becoming units of larger entertainment companies . abc was bought by the walt disney company in 1996 , which began airing all disney-produced programming by 1997 and cancelled programs produced by companies other than disney ( with the notable exceptions of two shows the bugs bunny show , which continued to air until warner bros . discontinued the show in 2000 ) and science court ( which was produced by burns & burns ) also ran until 2000 . after being purchased by disney , abc 's saturday-morning cartoons became part of a block called abc kids before switching to a block of live-action and animated programs under the banner abc kids in 2002 . many of the block 's shows were produced by disney and also aired on the disney channel and/or toon disney . at one point , abc kids had only two animated shows on its schedule , while the remainder of the lineup consisted of live-action entertainment shows . by late 2008 , most shows that were part of the abc kids block ( except for power rangers ) were reruns of older episodes that originally aired a few years earlier ; this remained the case for the next three years , with no episodes added into rotation ( thus , for instance , the first season of hannah montana was still running on abc kids in constant repeats , even though several further seasons had aired on disney channel by the time the block ended ) . the disney channel ( which , like abc , is owned by the walt disney company ) launched a saturday-morning block of its popular animated programming , initially named disney channel saturday morning block , in june 2011 . on august 27 , 2011 , abc ended the abc kids block . abc was the first network to outsource its e/i liabilities and saturday-morning program block to litton ; litton 's abc block is known as the litton 's weekend adventure . the disney channel quietly ended its saturday-morning cartoon block in 2014 , then brought it back in 2017 as '' get animated ! '' . cbs . in 1999 , cbs was purchased by viacom , bringing it under the same ownership as popular children 's network nickelodeon . cbs in turn ran programming from nickelodeon and nick jr . from 2000 to 2006 , nearly a year after viacom split into two separate companies ( nickelodeon went to a newly created company under the viacom name and cbs became the flagship property of the cbs corporation ) . the two parties ended the nickelodeon/nick jr.-branded block , which was replaced by the dic entertainment ( now cookie jar group ) and produced cookie jar tv in september 2006 . the block was rebranded as cookie jar tv , featuring an increased amount of animated series , in september 2007 . on september 19 , 2009 , kewlopolis was re-branded as cookie jar tv , with its target audience shifted toward preschoolers . cookie jar tv ended its run on september 21 , 2013 , at which point litton also took over programming cbs ' e/i liabilities and saturday-morning programming . litton 's cbs block is known as the cbs dream team . this is the second time cbs has dropped animated children 's programming from its lineup ; the network had previously gone with an all-live-action programming lineup for the 1997–98 season when the e/i rules took effect , but reverted to animated programming the following season . the dream team block was also unusual among the other litton blocks , as it included litton 's only scripted program ( the block carried the federally subsidized police procedural the inspectors from 2016 to 2019 ) . fox . from 1990 to 2002 , fox ran the fox kids block , which featured both animated and live-action series in the after school hours on weekday afternoons from 3:00 & nbsp ; p.m . to 5:00 & nbsp ; p.m . ( out-competing with syndicated afternoon children 's programs on independent stations and affiliates of smaller networks ) . among its notable series included animated series such as taz-mania , batman : the animated series , x-men ( 1992 tv series ) , eek ! the cat , bobby 's world , spider-man : the animated series , and animaniacs , live action shows like power rangers ( the american adaptation of super sentai ) , goosebumps , and big bad beetleborgs , and japanese anime series such as digimon and transformers : robots in disguise . fox sold its children 's division as part of its 2001 sale of history of freeform ( now freeform ) to the walt disney company ; the network then leased its remaining saturday-morning block to 4licensing corporation in 2002 . the 4kids-produced block , which by that point had become 4kids tv , ended its run on december 27 , 2008 , fox opted to drop children 's programming altogether rather than lease the block to another company , becoming the third broadcast network ( after ion television ( then known as pax tv , which discontinued its pax kids lineup in 2000 , before reviving children 's programming as i : independent television through the 2006 launch of qubo ) and upn ) to completely abandon children 's programming , and replaced 4kids tv with a two-hour infomercial block called weekend marketplace ; as with 4kids tv and its predecessors , fox has allowed several stations the option to decline to carry the block and lease it to another station in the market , especially those stations which had never carried fox kids following the 1994–1996 united states broadcast television realignment resulting from fox 's 1994 affiliation agreement with new world pictures . fox 's owned-and-operated station and affiliates instead hold the responsibility of carrying children 's programming ( generally through programs purchased off the syndication market ) . on september 13 , 2014 , fox 's owned-and-operated stations ( among some of their other affiliates , such as those owned by tribune media ) picked up a new block entitled xploration station from steve rotfeld productions . the three-hour block features e/i programs focused on science and space . . the cw . . origins . kids ' wb debuted on the wb on september 9 , 1995 , as a block on weekday mornings , weekday afternoons and saturday mornings . during the run of the weekday morning blocks , the network aired the animated series histeria ! to meet regulations on children 's television programming in the united states content quotas for the network 's affiliates . the kids ' wb weekday morning block ended in 2001 , while the weekday afternoon block was discontinued on december 30 , 2005 with the wb retaining the two afternoon hours to run a lineup of off-network syndicated reruns . the cw begins airing children 's programming . kids ' wb , now reduced to just the saturday-morning block that was expanded to five hours from four with the removal of the weekday afternoon lineup , moved to the cw ( which is part-owned by the wb 's former parent warnermedia ) on september 23 , 2006 ( cw owned-and-operated station wupa in atlanta debuted the block the following day , as it opted to carry the block on sundays ) . the kids ' wb block ended its run on may 17 , 2008 , and was replaced on may 24 , 2008 by the 4kids entertainment-produced toonzai ( 4kids already produced fox 's 4kids tv block at that time , which would not end for another seven months due to a dispute with the network over distribution on fox stations and compensation for the time lease ) . the cw4kids was renamed toonzai on august 14 , 2010 ( with the former brand being retained as a sub-brand to fulfill branding requirements imposed by 4kids ) , toonzai was replaced by vortexx , produced under a time lease agreement with saban capital group ( which had acquired some of 4kids ' assets , including certain programs , in an auction earlier in the year ) on august 25 , 2012 . vortexx ended its run on september 27 , 2014 , at which point the cw turned over its e/i liability and saturday-morning programming to litton as well . litton 's cw block is known as one magnificent morning and at five hours in length , it is two hours longer than the blocks that litton programs for abc and cbs . . nbc . nbc entered into a partnership with digital cable and satellite network discovery kids to provide original programming from the channel on nbc 's saturday-morning lineup in 2002 , discovery kids on nbc ran on the network from september 14 , 2002 to september 2 , 2006 . nbc replaced that block with qubo , a three-hour '' educational entertainment '' block that debuted on september 9 , 2006 ( with accompanying blocks on co-owned spanish network telemundo on weekend mornings and on ion television once weekly ) , as part of a programming partnership between parent company nbcuniversal , ion media , scholastic corporation , nelvana and dreamworks classics , that resulted in the creation of a companion digital multicast network on ion television 's stations ; the qubo blocks on nbc and telemundo ended on june 30 , 2012 , leaving only the ion block and standalone qubo channel . on july 7 , 2012 , nbc launched a new saturday-morning block aimed at preschool-aged children , nbc kids , under a time lease agreement with co-owned cable network sprout ( which nbc , through corporate parent comcast , also owned a minority interest before purchasing it outright in 2013 ) . nbc kids , which was the only and final saturday-morning programming block to air animated programming , ended its run on september 25 , 2016 . on february 24 , 2016 , nbc announced a new e/i block produced by litton entertainment , the more you know—a brand extension of nbc 's public service announcement brand '' the more you know '' , and it launched on october 8 , 2016 , resulting in nbc removing all cartoons from its saturday-morning lineups for the first time since september 1992 . . thistv . on november 1 , 2008 , this tv launched airing a daily children 's program block called cookie jar toons , which was programmed by cookie jar group . the block featured mainly scripted animated and live action series ; cookie jar-produced programs that did not count towards regulations on children 's television programming in the united states quotas aired under the sub-block this is for kids . cookie jar toons/this is for kids was discontinued on october 31 , 2013 , effectively removing saturday children 's programming from the network ; after tribune broadcasting assumed part-ownership of thistv from weigel broadcasting the following day , tribune replaced the block with a three-hour sunday morning lineup of exclusively e/i-compliant programs from various syndication distributors . on may 2 , 2017 , sinclair broadcast group announced that it would introduce a new children 's programming block named kidsclick , which airs on mainly cw and mynetworktv affiliates , and nationally on this tv , beginning on july 1 , 2017 . the block was transferred from this tv to tbd nationally starting on july 1 , 2018 , ahead of the collapse of the attempted acquisition of tribune media by sinclair broadcast group . at the time of its closure , it aired no e/i programming . kidsclick aired for the last time on march 31 , 2019 , after being on the air for just 20 months . . dic kids network/cookie jar kids network . in 2003 , dic entertainment launched a syndicated children 's programming block titled the dic kids network ( branded as the incredible world of dic on-screen ) , which aired select animated series from the dic entertainment catalog ( and later some third-party programming ) on fox , upn and the wb ( later the cw and mynetworktv ) affiliated stations , alongside independent station to allow these stations to meet required e/i programming quotas . the block was distributed by tribune entertainment and later by ascent capital group . with the purchase of dic entertainment by cookie jar group in 2008 , the block was later relaunched as the cookie jar kids network in 2009 and various additional programs from the cookie jar group catalog were added to the lineup . the block ended on september 18 , 2011 . pbs kids . pbs has run daytime children 's programming targeted at children between the ages of 4 and 12 since the network debuted on october 5 , 1970 . its afternoon and saturday morning children 's programming was folded into a daily block called ptv ( which aired weekdays from 2:00 & nbsp ; p.m . to 5:00 & nbsp ; p.m . and saturdays from 9:00 & nbsp ; a.m . to noon local time ) . on september 6 , 1999 , the block was rebranded as '' pbs kids '' and spun off into a 24-hour cable channel using the same name , which was turned into a joint venture with comcast , hit entertainment , and sesame workshop in 2005 , called pbs kids sprout , which later became simply sprout due to comcast buying full ownership of the network via nbcuniversal , eventually becoming universal kids in 2017 . the pbs kids cable channel was provided by directv . then , pbs kids was divided into two sub-blocks and they were : pbs kids go ! and the pbs kids preschool block . an additional three-hour weekend morning block for preschool-aged children that was produced in conjunction with the canada-based animation studio nelvana called the pbs kids bookworm bunch debuted in september 30 , 2000 and ended in 2004 . pbs kids go ! debuted in 2004 and ended in 2013 , alongside the preschool block that same year . the network continues to offer saturday-morning programming as of 2015 , though as with most pbs programming , local member stations retain the right to refuse it outright for other programming such as instructional/diy/cooking programming , carrying it on sundays instead , or placing it on a subchannel . also , other pbs member stations maintain full-time or half-time subchannels with self-programmed and slotted pbs kids content which may share channel space with other networks such as create or a local state political proceedings coverage network . retro tv . retro television network 's saturday-morning lineup consisted of classic cartoons from the 1960s through the 1990s , most of which were produced by filmation licensed via dreamworks classics . due to corporate consolidation which led to the dreamworks library being owned by nbcuniversal in 2016 , this lineup was eventually pulled for low-cost barter e/i content and other newer cartoons unable to find distribution otherwise . as of 2019 , retro carries the houndcats and the barkleys , two depatie–freleng enterprises cartoons from the 1970s , on its saturday-morning lineup in addition to its e/i liabilities . telexitos . telexitos airs both cartoons and three-hour children 's programming ; however , only two non-regulations on children 's television programming in the united states programming airs in the early morning and afternoon hours such as he-man and the masters of the universe and she-ra : princess of power . like retro television network and mundomax , it does not air commercials aimed at children . it is the only spanish-language subchannel to air cartoons on saturdays . metv . starting january 2 , 2021 , metv began airing saturday morning cartoons , a block featuring looney tunes , tom and jerry , and popeye . previously , metv had aired other older saturday morning children 's programming , including he-man and the masters of the universe , she-ra : princess of power , gumby , mr . magoo , and sid and marty krofft programs such as h.r . pufnstuf and sigmund and the sea monsters . . see also . animation in the united states in the television era lists of united states network television schedules list of weekday cartoons saturday morning preview specials animation . references . external links . saturday-morning grid of 1967 , year of debut of fantastic four and spider-man tv party presents the schedules and program profiles for every series the networks broadcast on saturday mornings from the mid-sixties all through the seventies . st . james encyclopedia of pop culture : saturday morning cartoons