Marsh

basic information . marshes provide a habitat for many species of plants , animals , and insects that have adapted to living in flooded conditions . the plants must be able to survive in wet mud with low oxygen levels . many of these plants , therefore , have aerenchyma , channels within the stem that allow air to move from the leaves into the rooting zone . marsh plants also tend to have rhizome s for underground storage and reproduction . common examples include typha , sedges , papyrus and cladium . aquatic animals , from fish to salamander , are generally able to live with a low amount of oxygen in the water . some can obtain oxygen from the air instead , while others can live indefinitely in conditions of low oxygen . the ph in marshes tends to be neutral to alkaline , as opposed to bogs , where peat accumulates under more acid conditions . values and ecosystem services . marshes provide habitats for many kinds of invertebrates , fish , amphibians , waterfowl and aquatic mammals . marshes have extremely high levels of biological production , some of the highest in the world , and therefore are important in supporting fisheries . marshes also improve water quality by acting as a sink to filter pollutants and sediment from the water that flows through them . marshes partake in water purification by providing nutrient and pollution consumption . marshes ( and other wetlands ) are able to absorb water during periods of heavy rainfall and slowly release it into waterways and therefore reduce the magnitude of flooding . marshes also provide the services of tourism , recreation , education , and research . . types of marshes . marshes differ depending mainly on their location and salinity . both of these factors greatly influence the range and scope of animal and plant life that can survive and reproduce in these environments . the three main types of marsh are salt marshes , freshwater tidal marshes , and freshwater marshes . these three can be found worldwide and each contains a different set of organisms . salt marshes . saltwater marshes are found around the world in mid to high latitudes , wherever there are sections of protected coastline . they are located close enough to the shoreline that the motion of the tides affects them , and , sporadically , they are covered with water . they flourish where the rate of sediment buildup is greater than the rate at which the land level is sinking . salt marshes are dominated by specially adapted rooted vegetation , primarily salt-tolerant grasses . keddy , p.a . 2010 . wetland ecology : principles and conservation ( 2nd edition ) . cambridge university press , cambridge , uk . 497 p . salt marshes are most commonly found in lagoons , estuaries , and on the sheltered side of shingle or sandspit . the currents there carry the fine particles around to the quiet side of the spit and sediment begins to build up . these locations allow the marshes to absorb the excess nutrients from the water running through them before they reach the oceans and estuaries . these marshes are slowly declining . coastal development and urban sprawl has caused significant loss of these essential habitats . b.r . silliman , e.d . grosholz , and m.d . bertness ( eds . ) 2009 . human impacts on salt marshes . a global perspective . university of california press , berkeley , california . . freshwater tidal marshes . although considered a freshwater marsh , this form of marsh is affected by the ocean tides . however , without the stresses of salinity at work in its saltwater counterpart , the diversity of the plants and animals that live in and use freshwater tidal marshes is much higher than in salt marshes . the most serious threats to this form of marsh are the increasing size and pollution of the cities surrounding them . . freshwater marshes . ranging greatly in both size and geographic location , freshwater marshes make up the most common form of wetland in north america . they are also the most diverse of the three types of marsh . some examples of freshwater marsh types in north america are : . wet meadows . wet meadows occur in areas such as shallow lake basins , low-lying depressions , and the land between shallow marshes and upland areas . they also occur on the edges of large lakes and rivers . wet meadows often have very high plant diversity and high densities of buried seeds . keddy , p.a . and a . a . reznicek . 1986 . great lakes vegetation dynamics : the role of fluctuating water levels and buried seeds . journal of great lakes research 12 : 25-36 . they are regularly flooded but are often dry in the summer . vernal pools . vernal pools are a type of marsh found only seasonally in shallow depressions in the land . they can be covered in shallow water , but in the summer and fall , they can be completely dry . in western north america , vernal pools tend to form in open grasslands , bauder , e . t . 1989 . drought stress and competition effects on the local distribution of pogogyne abramsii . ecology 70 : 1083–9 . whereas in the east they often occur in forested landscapes . calhoun , a.j.k . and p.g . demaynadier . 2008 . science and the conservation of vernal pools in northeastern north america . crc press , boca raton , florida . further south , vernal pools form in pine savannas and flatwoods . many amphibian species depend upon vernal pools for spring breeding ; these ponds provide habitat free from fish which eat the eggs and young of amphibians . an example is the endangered gopher frog ( rana sevosa ) . richter , s . c . and seigel , r . a . 2002 . annual variation in the population ecology of the endangered gopher frog , rana sevosa goin and netting . copeia , 2002 , 962–72 . similar temporary ponds occur in other world ecosystems , where they may have local names . however , the term vernal pool can be applied to all such temporary pool ecosystems . . playa lakes . playa lakes are a form of shallow freshwater marsh that occurs in the southern high plains of the united states . smith , l . m . 2003 . playas of the great plains . austin , tx : university of texas press . like vernal pools , they are only present at certain times of the year and generally have a circular shape . as the playa dries during the summer , conspicuous plant zonation develops along the shoreline . bolen , e . g . , smith , l . m . , and schramm , h . l . , jr . 1989 . playa lakes : prairie wetlands of the southern high plains . bioscience 39 : 615–23 . . prairie potholes . prairie potholes are found in the northern parts of north america as the prairie pothole region . these landscapes were once covered by glaciers , and as a result shallow depressions were formed in great numbers . these depressions fill with water in the spring . they provide important breeding habitats for many species of waterfowl . some pools only occur seasonally while others retain enough water to be present all year . van der valk , a . g . 1989 . northern prairie wetlands . ames , ia : iowa state university press . . riverine wetlands . many kinds of marsh occur along the fringes of large rivers . the different types are produced by factors such as water level , nutrients , ice scour , and waves . day , r . , p.a . keddy , j . mcneill and t . carleton . 1988 . fertility and disturbance gradients : a summary model for riverine marsh vegetation . ecology 69 : 1044-1054 . embanked marshlands . large tracts of tidal marsh have been embanked and artificially drained . they are usually known by the dutch name of polders . in northern germany and scandinavia they are called marschland , marsch or marsk , in france marais maritime . in the netherlands and belgium they are designated as marine clay districts . in east-anglia the embanked marshes are also known as fens . restoration . some areas of the world have already lost 90 % of their wetlands , including marshes . they have been drained to create agricultural land or filled to accommodate urban sprawl . restoration is the process of returning marshes to the landscape to replace those lost in the past . restoration can be done on a large scale , such as by allowing rivers to flood naturally in the spring , or on a small scale by returning wetlands to urban landscapes . see also . . references . external links . marshes of the lowcountry ( south carolina ) – beaufort county library tr : sazlık