Wikipedia:Testimonials

published articles . john c . dvorak , '' why wikipedia just gets better '' pc magazine ( february 1 , 2008 ) : : you do n't think i 'm here as a wikipedia booster without some deeper commentary , do you ? there has to be something wrong with it , since the idea is utopian , and utopian ideas are bound to fail in the long term . dan tynan . '' winners and losers of 2005 '' . tech tuesday - yahoo ! news . ( december 16 2005 ) . rated as both the '' winner '' and '' loser of the year '' . : you ca n't do a web search on any major topic without this wiki popping up near the top of the results page . heavily linked , authoritative , and constantly updated , the world 's largest interactive encyclopedia came into its own this year . popular , yes . accurate ? not necessarily . because its entries can be edited by anyone , the wikipedia can be the source of dubious or biased information . [ . ( citing the swiftboat controversy and seigenthaler incident ) . ] with more than 800,000 articles in english and well over 1 million in 15 other languages , foolproof policing is well nigh impossible . crispin sartwell , '' see 'information , ' 'amazing , ' 'anarchy ' '' , los angeles times p . b15 ( 4 may 2005 ) . : so is it to be trusted ? does it have the credibility of britannica ? well , i have monitored over a decent period a number of entries on matters about which i know something and have found them almost invariably accurate . and i have watched some of them grow , becoming ever more elaborate and interlinked . wynn quon , '' wikipedia : the new know-it-all '' , national post , p . fp19 ( 26 feb . 2005 ) . : are traditional encyclopedia publishers aware of wikipedia 's threat ? here 's a clue : try looking for the '' wikipedia '' article in the online version of britannica . you wo n't find it . nor will you find it in any of the half a dozen or so mainstream encyclopedias currently on the market . these folks should be busy brainstorming a survival strategy . instead , the range of reaction has run in a comically limited range from denial to derision . even britannica , with its prestigious reputation , needs to figure out how it will thrive in what will increasingly be a wikipedia world . in the final analysis , wikipedia is more than just the raising of a new barn . it 's the tearing down of the old ones . simon waldman , '' who knows ? '' , the guardian ( oct . 26 , 2004 ) : : it has no editors , no fact checkers and anyone can contribute an entry - or delete one . it should have been a recipe for disaster , but instead wikipedia became one of the internet 's most inspiring success stories . '' open source '' , the economist print edition , ( june 10th 2004 ) : wikipedia . is a . force for good . bill thompson , '' a question of trust online '' , bbc news online , ( apr . 23 , 2004 ) : and there is the wikipedia , a community-written encyclopedia that has evolved over the years . into one of the most reliably useful sources of information around , on or off-line . bill bailey , '' big night in '' the times , ( feb . 21 , 2004 ) : if i 'm writing a show i spend a lot of time researching it on the net . i use wikipedia ( www.wikipedia.org ) a lot . it ’ s a brilliant online encyclopaedia , invaluable for historical stuff , and probably the most accurate of all those sites . sean carroll , '' site of the week '' , pc magazine ( jun . 6 , 2003 ) : : this may sound like a recipe for disaster , but the results are impressive . while many of the site 's 130,000-plus articles are definitely works in progress , many are rich , concise , and polished . surprisingly , our time spent on wikipedia turned up no junk entries and no defacements . a few of the articles seemed a bit dated , and we came across many red links or blue links that led to single-sentence placeholders . but for the most part , the items were useful and thoughtful . and the typos and awkward constructions we found ? as editors , we plan to return to those pages , on the subjects we care about , and tweak them a bit . ben hammersley , '' common knowledge '' , guardian ( jan . 30 , 2003 ) : : the wikipedia is perhaps one of the greatest testaments to the generosity on the web . what makes the wikipedia so compelling & mdash ; and this article so hard to finish & mdash ; is the way everything is so massively linked . you read one entry , and before you know it , you 're reading up on anne boleyn or italian greyhounds . john jerney , '' the wikipedia : the encyclopedia for the rest of us '' , the daily yomiuri ( oct . 22 , 2002 ) : : in particular , the goal of the wikipedia is to produce the best encyclopedia encapsulating the sum total of human knowledge . and a quick run through some of the articles shows that this community based approach can indeed work . the wikipedia , and hopefully other services similar to it , offers the possibility of everything being written into history , with all of mankind sharing knowledge and information in a way that enables everyone to profit from it . mary ellen quinn , '' wikipedia '' , booklist ( sep . 15 , 2002 ) : : what about authority and reliability and all the other things we 've been taught to look for in an encyclopedia ? we were prepared to hate wikipedia , but were disarmed when we got to the section wikipedia : our replies to our critics , which answered all these questions and more . wikipedians believe that their process of continuous editing means that articles can only improve . bad content will be edited out , and good content will rise to the top , like cream : as further edits accumulate , the quality of the article moves asymptomatically towards perfection , and likewise the quality of the encyclopedia as a whole . maybe . we 'll keep an open mind . steven johnson , '' populist editing '' , new york times ( dec . 9 , 2001 ) : : but an intriguing new subgenre of sites , called wikiwikiwebs , really are interactive : users can both read and write . the most ambitious wiki project to date applies this governing principle to the encyclopedia , that enlightenment-era icon of human intelligence . with a total of 16,000 articles in the database , the wikipedia is already large enough to be a source of generally reliable information , though stronger in some areas ( '' star trek '' spinoffs ) than others ( the charles_dickens works ) . use by facebook . to combat the problem of '' fake news '' on its site , facebook announced in 2018 that it is using wikipedia as a tool . . notable blog mentions . tim bray of sun microsystems , '' wikipedia '' , ongoing weblog ( aug . 31 , 2004 ) : : maybe the wikipedia is a short-lived fad , maybe it ’ ll get better , maybe it ’ ll get worse , but i was surprised that nobody pointed this out : the wikipedia is beautiful . it ’ s an unexpected and unexplainable triumph of collective creativity and of order over entropy . i hope it lasts a long time , and those who criticize it just don ’ t get it . wikipedia user comments . this is excellent stuff from wiki . great work to you all . kudos . - manoj ( india ) two16 , from user talk : ed poor ( spelling corrected ) : : '' i 've never posted to a usenet group because nothing i wanted to say was worth the overhead of learning the interface . it is a big commitment for me to learn any new interface . this killer app called , email , everyone around me has been chattering about for 17 years , does n't provide me incentive to learn a very simple interface , how the hell could a usenet group ? the killer app called wiki wiki has caused me to learn a mark up language , learn to keyboard , learn to compose text while touch typing and learn npov cold . i came here because a project under development needed a back end content manager and i was asked to take a quick look so i could provide an expert opinion on its suitability as the project 's interface . boy does it ever work . i 've declared wiki wiki to be the killer app of the world wide web . '' angelikadagmar , from an anonymous talk page : : '' i am amazed not to have discovered wikipedia until now . i am so moved by its richness and intellectual value that i actually shed tears . what a wonderful endeavor ! '' from the talk : israeli-palestinian conflict page : : editor , : i have studied the issues of the israeli-palestinian conflict for decades . i also lived in the middle east for 10 years . i must tell you that yours is one of the most non-biased , fact-based articles i 've every seen on the topic . i appreciate your objectivity ; i wish more people were like that . : sincerely , : e . davidson : atlanta stan shebs 's personal page : : dumping my life 's accumulated factoids into wikipedia seems like a fun thing to do , we 'll see how it goes . two weeks later , it seems more like being an add-afflicted magpie in a bottle cap factory ! kingturtle 's personal page : : the discovery of wikipedia matched love-at-first-sight . for years , i 've been collecting old almanacs and encyclopedia . i bandied about different ideas regarding sharing and documenting the information revealed in these discarded sources . to stumble on a thriving community devoted to sharing information gave me a tremendous thrill and a curious sense of relief . thank heavens you 're all out there ! user : aarchiba on user talk : aarchiba : : i must say , wikipedia has made tremendous progress since i last fiddled with it ; it 's astonishingly compendious , and the quality is just amazing . musichastherighttochildren on wikipedia : village pump : i am a newcomer to wikipedia ; although i have been aware of it and used it on occasion for quite a while , i have only recently realised the depth of this resource , and discovered the mechanics behind it . : this project is fantastic ! the number of articles and the amount of information in them is truly amazing , even articles on topics so obscure i thought there would be no chance they would exist . the band biographies , for example , seem to have more detailed information and useful links than any official band website i have seen . : also , the articles are articulately written and unbiased , and the links between articles are very well done ( though perhaps i have whiled away too many hours in school reading article after article as a consequence of this ) . wikipedia has become the primary internet resource for me ( with the possible exception of news websites ) , and i really think that it is a credit to everyone who works on it , and indeed to human nature itself ! this may seem like a sweeping statement , but it is hard to believe that something so incredible could be produced entirely voluntarily by people in their spare time . and , at the same time , would-be spoilers are repelled ; i have never seen an incorrect piece of information or any 'graffiti ' . good show ! : anyway , i 'm sure plenty of people have said this before , but just thought i would congratulate everyone who works on here , and say hi . i 'm jack by the way , and i live in north wales . i shall try to contibute as much as possible ( so far all i have done is added a sentence about john peel going to school in colwyn bay ) ! anonymous , from wikipedia : village pump : : wow . just wow . as i cruised around the pump , i noticed talks about how old people were . as a 16 year old , i 'm supposed to be jaded on the world , but the fact that there are kids younger than myself gives me an unexplicable sic hope . wikipedia has the greatest minds on the internet , and i look forward to working with them . i have n't even written my first article yet , but when i do , expect me to look to younger users for advice . anonymous , from talk : main page : thank you wikipedia . this is one of the best things to ever happen to me . an infinite amount of knowledge all integrated into one website . i love this thing ! you need to know about something ? just type it in . you need to know about something relating to it , just click on one of the links in its explanation . i could go on for hours on this thing just learning ! i love it ! thanks a lot ! . see also . wp : external peer review wp : criticisms . references .