Robert Burnell

early life . by 1198 burnell 's family had bestowed its name on acton burnell in shropshire , harding '' burnell , robert '' oxford dictionary of national biography where burnell was born greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 6 : york : prebends : holme probably in about 1239 , as he was close in age to king edward . his father was probably roger burnell , who died in about 1259 . he had three brothers , two of whom died fighting the welsh at the battle of moel-y-don in 1282 ; the third , hugh , died in 1286 . hugh 's son philip was robert 's eventual heir . burnell worked as a clerk in the royal chancery , the office responsible for the writing of documents , coredon dictionary p . 66 before moving to the household of the lord edward , later king edward i of england . chrimes introduction p . 134 by 1257 burnell was spending most of his time with the prince and the prince 's household . prestwich edward i p . 23 after simon de montfort 's victory at the battle of lewes in 1264 , burnell continued to serve edward , and was named the prince 's clerk in december 1264 . studd '' chancellors of the lord edward '' bulletin of the institute of historical research p . 183 as a reward for his service , burnell was given the prebend of holme in the diocese of york some time before 1267 , and was named archdeacon of york in december 1270 . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 6 : york : archdeacons : york he also held the office of chancellor to edward from the time of the battle of evesham in 1265 until 1270 , when edward left on crusade . the lord edward tried to have burnell elected to the archbishop of canterbury in 1270 , but was frustrated by the canterbury cathedral chapter 's members , who instead elected their prior , william chillenden . eventually pope gregory x set chillenden aside and installed his own choice in the see , robert kilwardby . prestwich edward i p . 73 burnell did not accompany the prince on crusade in late 1270 , although he had originally planned to do so . instead , he was appointed one of the four lieutenants who looked after edward 's interests while the prince was away . thus he was still in england when henry iii died in november 1272 . burnell acted as one of the regents of the kingdom until august 1274 , when the prince , now king , returned from palestine . during the regency burnell supervised a parliament , dealt with raids on the welsh marches and resolved a trade conflict with flanders . prestwich plantagenet england p . 123 after the king 's return to england burnell was made chancellor . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 85 the historian richard huscroft considers that burnell gained valuable experience governing england during edward 's absence , ensuring burnell 's dominance in the english government after edward 's return . huscroft '' robert burnell and the government of england '' thirteenth century england viii p . 59 . chancellor and bishop . on 23 january 1275 burnell was elected to the see of bath and wells . he received the property of the see on 19 march 1275 and was consecrated on 7 april 1275 . three years later edward once more tried to secure the see of canterbury for his favourite . burnell was elected to the archbishopric in june or july 1278 , but the election was quashed by pope nicholas iii in january 1279 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 233 king edward sent a deputation , including the eventual appointee , john peckham , to secure nicholas ' confirmation of the election . jordan '' english holy men '' cistercian studies quarterly p . 74 the pope named three cardinals as investigators , and then appointed peckham instead . harding england in the thirteenth century p . 243 the bishop 's second failure to obtain the archbishopric was probably a consequence of his lifestyle , which included keeping a mistress . edward made one final attempt to promote his friend to a wealthier see in early 1280 , when burnell was nominated to become bishop of winchester , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 276 but pope nicholas iii quashed the election greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : winchester : bishops on 28 june 1280 . burnell was the chief and most influential of edward i 's advisers during the first half of his reign . prestwich edward i p . 138 as part of his duties burnell spent most of his time in attendance on the king . he heard many requests and petitions from those who desired patronage or other advancements , and was diligent and active in dealing with routine business . prestwich edward i p . 233 burnell played a leading role in the legislation introduced by king edward . the king 's major legislative acts mainly date to burnell 's tenure of the office of chancellor , from 21 september 1274 until burnell 's death in 1292 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 228 burnell was instrumental in the enforcement of royal writs and enactments , including the statutes of westminster , enacted in 1275 , 1285 , and 1290 . those of 1275 attempted to deal with the usurpation of royal rights . prestwich plantagenet england pp . 124–126 keeping the peace in the realm and the extension of royal jurisdiction to cover rape was dealt with in the statutes from 1285 , along with a number of other issues . prestwich three edwards pp . 20–21 the last statute , from 1290 , regulated land law , the result of pressure from the magnates , the leading laymen of england . during burnell 's time in office edward and his royal officials made great efforts to reassert royal rights that were felt to have been usurped by the king 's subjects . these efforts were made under writs of quo warranto , which asked the recipient what royal grant or warrant gives the recipient the authority to exercise a right or a power . they were first issued in 1278 , after earlier attempts to recover royal rights through parliament unintentionally resulted in too much work for that body . through these writs , attempts were made to enforce the rule that the only correct way to receive a privilege or grant of land was through a written charter , which might have deprived most of the magnates of england of their lands and rights . most lands at that time were held not by documentary grants , but by the force of custom . by the 1290s the government was forced to back down and permit rights as they had been allowed from '' time out of mind '' . clanchy from memory to written record p . 3 the distinction between the king 's personal household department of the wardrobe and the governmental department of the chancery , which was headed by the chancellor , disappeared almost entirely during burnell 's period of office . the wardrobe had developed as a less formal department for the collection and distribution of money , but under edward had effectively become a treasury for warfare . saul '' government '' companion to medieval england pp . 115–118 there was no rivalry between the holders of the great seal , the official seal of government and used for formal documents , coredon dictionary p . 143 and the privy seal , chrimes introduction p . 140 used to authenticate the king 's less formal letters . coredon dictionary p . 227 during burnell 's time in office the king only used a privy seal warrant , or an informal set of instructions for the chancellor to issue a letter from the chancery under the great seal , when the king and burnell were apart ; after burnell 's death the number of privy seal warrants increased greatly . edward had such trust in his chancellor and the chancellor 's clerks that burnell and the clerks were allowed to dispense with the hanaper system , which required fees for sealing charters to be paid into the hanaper department of the chancery for disbursal . coredon dictionary p . 148 robert and his clerks were permitted to enjoy the profits from the fees of their office . lyon constitutional and legal history pp . 362–363 chrimes introduction p . 145 burnell was also responsible for the decision to force the court of chancery to settle in london , rather than following the king and his court around the country . a chancery memorandum of 1280 records that the chancellor , along with the other ministers , now had the duty of sorting the many petitions that came into the government and only passing on the most urgent to the king . as bishop , burnell had a wall built around the cathedral at wells , which helped to improve the security of the cathedral and its outlying buildings . he left the court each year at lent , when he returned to his diocese and attended to its affairs . peckham appointed burnell to be his deputy when the archbishop went to wales in 1282 . it was probably burnell who suggested a compromise in 1285 over the jurisdictions of the royal and ecclesiastical courts , which allowed royal officials to return cases involving only religious matters to the church courts . . foreign service . burnell was active in the king 's foreign policy , especially towards france , scotland and wales , and undertook a number of diplomatic missions to those countries . burnell served as the royal spokesman on several of these occasions , one of them being at paris in 1286 when he made a speech detailing the history of english–french relations since the treaty of paris ( 1259 ) . the speech was a prelude to discussions , successfully concluded , involving the homage that edward owed to king philip iv of france , for edward 's land in france . prestwich edward i p . 323 burnell was employed in gascony during the late 1280s , helping to administer that duchy and to reorganise its government . he showed himself sensitive to the gascon desire for independence and did not attempt to impose the same systems of government that were used in england . the historian michael prestwich therefore argues that the first half of edward 's reign was the period when gascony enjoyed its most successful government under the plantagenets . prestwich edward i p . 311 later , in june 1291 , burnell gave two speeches at the great council of english and scottish nobles in norham to decide the succession to the scottish crown . edward had been asked to mediate an end to the crisis over the succession , or the great cause as it was known in england . prestwich edward i p . 365 in welsh affairs , burnell attended a number of councils dealing with llywelyn ap gruffudd , prince of wales , and in 1277 he escorted llywelyn to westminster , where llywelyn pledged homage to edward . burnell was present during edward 's conquest of wales in the 1280s ; he witnessed documents in rhuddlan in 1282 , and subsequently at conwy and caernarfon . sometime before 1290 burnell vowed to go on crusade to help reinforce the crusader city of acre , which was threatened by muslims in the late 1280s , but he never fulfilled his obligation . tyerman england and the crusades p . 236 . death and legacy . burnell died in berwick , on 25 october 1292 . his body , without his heart , is interred in the nave of wells cathedral ; his heart was buried at bath abbey . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 7 : bath and wells : bishops although he was usually busy with royal business , burnell managed to expand his bishopric and provide for his relatives . he amassed great wealth , and acquired numerous estates in shropshire , worcestershire , somerset , kent , surrey and elsewhere . at his death , he owned 82 manors over 19 counties , most of them his personal property rather than that of the diocese of bath and wells . moorman church life p . 169 even after he became a bishop burnell kept a mistress , juliana . rumours circulated that she bore him four sons , and that he had a number of daughters , all of which burnell denied . prestwich edward i p . 136 he kept a magnificent household , sufficient for him to be able to host a parliament at his home in acton burnell in autumn 1283 . powell and wallis house of lords p . 208 he married off a number of young female relatives , rumoured to be his daughters , to noblemen . moorman church life p . 167 amabilla burnell married a member of a royal justice 's family , and a joan burnell was the subject of a guarantee to the bishop that the son of william of greystoke would marry her . a william burnell was dean of wells cathedral , and was named as one of the bishop 's executors . robert burnell 's eventual heir was his nephew , philip . burnell built extensively at acton burnell castle , and large parts of his house have survived . it was substantially different in plan from the older hall-style houses , which had the private quarters at the back of a large hall . at acton burnell the bishop 's quarters were well away from the building 's main public spaces , and included a latrine . the house was not quite a castle , but it was designed to have some defensive capability . platt castle p . 83 the overall form of the structure was of a fortified hall-house , much like the norman-era hall-keeps . pettifer english castles p . 209 he also built the chapel and great hall in the bishop 's palace , wells . '' bishop 's palace chapel wells , uk '' palace trust burnell was a dominant figure during the first part of edward 's reign , and he controlled most aspects of royal administration . he was involved not only in domestic issues but also in foreign relations , huscroft '' robert burnell and the government of england '' thirteenth century england viii p . 70 a responsibility he retained for two decades after edward 's return to england in 1274 . huscroft '' should i stay or should i go ? '' nottingham medieval studies pp . 108–109 huscroft argues that he may have been the most important royal administrator of the 13th century . huscroft '' should i stay or should i go ? '' nottingham medieval studies p . 97 . notes . citations . references . . further reading . . external links . inquisition post mortem at british history online . it is item number 65 on the list .