1960 in music

specific locations . 1960 in british music 1960 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1960 in country music 1960 in jazz . events . january – stuart sutcliffe joins the liverpool band johnny and the moondogs and suggests they change their name to the beatals ; after several variations this settles on the beatles in august . january 14 – elvis presley is promoted to sergeant in the united states army . january 25 – the national association of broadcasters in the united states reacts to the payola scandal by threatening fines for any disc jockeys accepting money for playing particular records . february 6 – songwriter jesse belvin dies in an automobile accident in los angeles ; he is co-author of '' earth angel '' , the penguins ' classic from 1954 . february 23 – old guard fife and drum corps formed . march 5 – elvis presley returns home from serving in the u.s . army in germany , having stopped off on march 2 at glasgow prestwick airport , his only time in the u.k . march 15 – jussi björling suffers a heart attack before a performance at the royal opera house , covent garden , london . he goes on to perform , but dies six months later in sweden . march 29 – the 5th eurovision song contest , held at the royal festival hall , london , is won by france with the song '' tom pillibi '' , sung by jacqueline boyer . spring – '' skokiaan '' by bill haley & his comets becomes the band 's final single to make it onto the american sales charts ( with the exception of a 1974 reissue of '' rock around the clock '' ) . april 1 – frank sinatra , sammy davis jr . , elvis presley , dean martin and mitch miller film sinatra 's timex special for abc at miami , florida 's fountainbleu hotel . april 2 – the national association of recording merchandisers presents its first annual awards in las vegas valley . april 4 – rca victor records announces that it will release all pop singles in mono and stereo simultaneously , the first record company to do so . elvis presley 's single '' stuck on you '' is rca 's first mono/stereo release . april 17 – eddie cochran , gene vincent and cochran 's girlfriend sharon sheeley are injured in a car accident near chippenham in england . cochran dies in a hospital in bath , somerset , from severe brain injuries . police officer david harman , who attends the incident , starts learning to play the guitar using cochran 's impounded gretsch , later becoming professional musician dave dee . april 20 – elvis presley returns to hollywood for the first time since coming home from germany to film g.i . blues . may 2 – the drifters ' ben e . king leaves the group and signs a solo record contract with atco records . may 20–28 – the beatles , as the silver beetles ( uncredited ) , play their first ever tour , as a backing group for johnny gentle on a tour of scotland . the lineup comprises john lennon , paul mccartney , george harrison , stuart sutcliffe and tommy moore . june 30 – opening of lionel bart 's oliver ! in london 's west end . july – the shadows ' instrumental apache is released in the u.k . july 30 – '' battle of beaulieu '' : at an english jazz festival at beaulieu , hampshire , fans of trad jazz come to blows with progressives . august 17 – the beatles make their debut under this name in hamburg , germany , beginning a 48-night residency at the indra club . the band at the time comprises john lennon , paul mccartney , george harrison , stu sutcliffe on bass and pete best on drums . august 27 – last radio broadcast of louisiana hayride . october – dion dimucci splits from dion and the belmonts . october 16 – a single concert at the donaueschingen festival premieres penderecki 's anaklasis and messiaen 's chronochromie . november 13 – sammy davis , jr . marries may britt . december – édith piaf 's recording of '' non , je ne regrette rien '' is released in france . the last 78 rpm records are released in the u.s . and the u.k . english rock musician ritchie blackmore 's musical career begins . renato carosone announces his retirement , at the height of his popularity . dalida and charles aznavour share the grand prix award for best italian song . ian lake launches the music of our time festival in london for hitherto unknown composers . indian santoor player shivkumar sharma records his first solo album . 14-year-old neil young founds the jades with ken koblun . albums released . a date with the everly brothers - the everly brothers a portrait of duke ellington – dizzy gillespie alone with dion – dion at last ! - etta james at newport 1960 – muddy waters around midnight – julie london the best of the crests – the crests bill haley and his comets – bill haley & his comets bing & satchmo – bing crosby and louis armstrong bo diddley in the spotlight – bo diddley bo diddley is a gunslinger – bo diddley boss tenor – gene ammons broadway playbill – the hi-lo's change of the century – ornette coleman the crests sing all biggies – the crests ella in berlin : mack the knife – ella fitzgerald ella fitzgerald sings songs from '' let no man write my epitaph '' – ella fitzgerald ella wishes you a swinging christmas – ella fitzgerald elvis is back ! – elvis presley les enfants du pirée – dalida everything goes ! ! ! – the four lads fiorello ! – oscar peterson for the young at heart – perry como the genius hits the road – ray charles g.i . blues – elvis presley giant steps – john coltrane haley 's juke box – bill haley & his comets have guitar will travel – bo diddley hello , love – ella fitzgerald his hand in mine – elvis presley i got ta right to swing – sammy davis jr . it 's everly time – everly brothers jo + jazz – jo stafford joan baez – joan baez julie.at home – julie london just a closer walk with thee - patti page the last month of the year – the kingston trio me and my shadows – cliff richard & the shadows more songs by ricky – ricky nelson nice ' n ' easy – frank sinatra no cover , no minimum – billy eckstine now , there was a song ! – johnny cash once more with feeling – billy eckstine portrait in jazz – bill evans pre bird – charles mingus ride this train – johnny cash rockin ' at the hops – chuck berry show time – doris day sketches of spain – miles davis sings hank williams – johnny cash sold out – the kingston trio string along – the kingston trio swingin ' on the moon – mel tormé the brothers four - the brothers four the two of us - brook benton and dinah washington this is.brenda – brenda lee the village of st . bernadette – andy williams we insist ! – max roach what every girl should know – doris day where the boys are – connie francis wish upon a star with dion & the belmonts – dion and the belmonts . biggest hit singles . the following singles achieved the highest chart positions in 1960 . compositions . william alwyn – piano concerto no . 2 malcolm arnold – symphony no . 4 henk badings – symphonic variations luciano berio circles for female voice , harp and two percussionists momenti for tape benjamin britten – cello sonata in c major elliott carter – string quartet no . 2 mario davidovsky – contrastes no . 1 for string orchestra and electronic sounds lukas foss concerto , for five improvising instruments time cycle , for soprano and orchestra alberto ginastera – cantata para américa mágica sofia gubaidulina – serenade for solo guitar bernard herrmann – psycho ( film score ) wojciech kilar – herbsttag for female voice and string quartet olivier messiaen – chronochromie krzysztof penderecki anaklasis for 42 string instruments and percussion threnody to the victims of hiroshima walter piston – symphony no . 7 francis poulenc – gloria ( written ) dmitri shostakovich – string quartet no . 7 in e flat major , op.108 string quartet no . 8 ( shostakovich ) karlheinz stockhausen carré , for 4 orchestras and choirs kontakte , for piano , percussion and electronic sounds , or electronic sounds alone igor stravinsky – movements , for piano and orchestra virgil thomson – missa pro defunctis william walton – symphony no . 2 mieczyslaw weinberg – sinfonietta no . 2 la monte young – compositions 1960 . opera . henk badings – martin korda benjamin britten – a midsummer night 's dream ( premiered on june 11 at the aldeburgh festival ; the rôle of oberon is sung by the countertenor alfred deller for whom it is written ) du mingxin – women generals of the yangs lukas foss – introductions and goodbyes ( a nine-minute opera , libretto by gian carlo menotti , composed 1959 , premiered on may 5 , 1960 ) hans werner henze – der prinz von homburg ( composed 1958 , premiered on may 22 , 1960 ) . jazz . musical theater . beg , borrow or steal ( bud freeman ) and ( leon pober ) - broadway production opened at the martin beck theatre on february 10 and ran for 5 performances . bye bye birdie ( lee adams and charles strouse ) – broadway production opened at the martin beck theatre on april 14 and ran for 607 performances camelot ( alan jay lerner and frederick loewe ) – broadway production opened at the majestic theatre on december 3 and ran for 873 performances christine broadway production opened at the 46th street theatre on april 28 and ran for 12 performances do re mi broadway production opened at the st . james theatre on december 26 and ran for 400 performances the fantasticks off-broadway production opened at the sullivan street playhouse on may 3 and runs for 17,162 performances ( 42 years ) flower drum song ( rodgers & hammerstein ) – london production opened at the palace theatre on march 24 and ran for 464 performances from a to z broadway revue opened at the plymouth theatre on april 20 and ran for 21 performances greenwillow broadway production opened at the alvin theatre on march 8 and ran for 97 performances hooray for daisy london production opened at the lyric , hammersmith on december 20 . starring eleanor drew and robin hunter . irma la doucebroadway production opened at the plymouth theatre on september 29 and ran for 524 performances oh , kay ! & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; off broadway revival opened at the east 74th street theatre on april 16 and ran for 119 performances . oliver ! ( lionel bart ) – london production opened at the new theatre on june 30 and ran for 2618 performances parade & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway revue opened at the players theatre on january 20 and ran for 95 performances tenderloin & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway production opened at the 46th street theatre on october 17 and ran for 216 performances . the unsinkable molly brown ( meredith willson ) – broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on november 3 and ran for 532 performances valmouth & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; off broadway production opened at the york playhouse on october 6 and ran for 14 performances wildcat broadway production opened at the alvin theater on december 16 and ran for 171 performances . musical films . barsaat ki raat bollywood films starring madhubala bells are ringing ( vincente minnelli ) starring judy holliday , dean martin and eddie foy jr . can-can ( walter lang ) starring frank sinatra , shirley maclaine , maurice chevalier , louis jourdan and juliet prowse cinderfella ( frank tashlin ) starring jerry lewis g.i . blues ( norman taurog ) starring elvis presley and juliet prowse high time ( blake edwards ) starring bing crosby , fabian forte , tuesday weld and yvonne craig . let 's make love ( george cukor ) starring marilyn monroe , yves montand and frankie vaughan . births . january 3 – mikuláš škuta , pianist and composer january 4 art paul schlosser , singer-songwriter michael stipe , lead singer for the rock band r.e.m . january 8 – dave weckl , jazz fusion drummer january 20 – scott thunes , bass player ( frank zappa band ) january 22 – michael hutchence , australian vocalist , songwriter and actor for inxs ( d . 1997 ) january 26 – charlie gillingham ( counting crows ) january 29 – cho-liang lin , taiwanese-american violinist january 31 – george benjamin , composer february 3 – tim chandler ( daniel amos , the swirling eddies ) february 4 – tim booth , british rock singer ( james ) february 18 – gazebo , singer february 19 – william holly johnson , singer ( frankie goes to hollywood ) february 20 – kee marcello , swedish rock guitarist ( easy action , europe ) february 27 – paul humphreys ( orchestral manoeuvres in the dark ) march 4 – thierry pastor , french singer march 12 – maki nomiya , japanese singer ( pizzicato five ) march 13 – adam clayton , bassist of rock band u2 april 4 – jane eaglen , wagnerian soprano april 10 – fabio golfetti , brazilian musician and record producer ( violeta de outono , gong ) april 21 – john maher , drummer for buzzcocks , flag of convenience , the invisible girls april 23 steve clark , english guitarist ( def leppard ) ( d . 1991 ) david gedge , english musician ( the wedding present and cinerama ) april 26 – roger taylor , english rock musician ( duran duran ) may 6 – john flansburgh , american rock musician ( they might be giants ) may 8 – eric brittingham , american bass player ( cinderella and naked beggars ) may 27 – alexander bashlachev , russian singer ( d . 1988 ) may 10 – bono , lead singer of u2 june 1 – simon gallup , bassist of the cure june 2 – tony hadley , vocalist of spandau ballet june 6 – steve vai , american guitarist ( david lee roth ) june 8 mick hucknall , english vocalist of simply red terje gewelt , norwegian bassist june 10 – mark-anthony turnage , composer june 12 – meredith brooks , american singer june 14 – gary husband , drummer , pianist and composer june 20 – john taylor , bassist of duran duran june 22 – alexander shchetynsky , composer june 24 – siedah garrett , american singer-songwriter and pianist ( brand new heavies ) june 26 – zachary breaux , american jazz guitarist ( d . 1997 ) july 3 – vince clarke , english rock songwriter ( depeche mode , yazoo , erasure ) july 11 – david baerwald american singer-songwriter ( david & david ) july 14 – kyle gass , american music singer-songwriter-guitarist/actor july 22 john prior , australian composer-producer-drummer ( matt finish ) jon oliva , american vocalist and pianist ( savatage ) july 23 – billy rutherford , scottish singer-songwriter , musician and record producer ( riders of the dark ) july 28 – chris reece , drummer ( social distortion ) august 1 – chuck d ( public enemy ) august 2 neal morse , american singer and keyboard player ( spock 's beard , transatlantic , yellow matter custard , and flying colors ) david yow , american singer-songwriter ( scratch acid , the jesus lizard , and qui ) august 7 – jacquie o'sullivan , bananarama august 15 – karlheinz essel , austrian composer , performer , sound artist , improviser , and composition teacher august 17 – johnny wright ( music manager ) , american music manager and a president/ceo of the wright entertainment group ( weg ) . august 23 – chris potter , canadian actor and musician august 26 – branford marsalis , african american jazz musician august 30 – chalino sánchez , mexican musician ( d . 1992 ) august 31 – chris whitley , singer-songwriter ( d . 2005 ) september 1 – joseph williams , singer and film composer september 4 – kim thayil , soundgarden september 5 – karita mattila , operatic soprano september 8 – david steele , fine young cannibals september 22 – joan jett , american rock singer , songwriter , composer , musician , record producer and occasional actress . the runaways semtepber 24 – amy sky , canadian singer-songwriter , record producer , theatre actress , and television host . september 29 – alan mcgee , british music industry mogul and musician october 7 – kyosuke himuro , japanese singer ( boøwy ) october 13 – joey belladonna , born joseph bellardini , american thrash metal vocalist ( anthrax ) october 19 – dan woodgate , english drummer madness october 22 – cris kirkwood , meat puppets october 30 – alfred hill , composer november 12 – ismo alanko , finnish singer-songwriter ( hassisen kone , sielun veljet , and ismo alanko säätiö ) november 14 – tom judson , american musical theatre actor november 15 – keith washington , american singer november 18 – kim wilde , english pop singer , author , dj , television presenter and gardener ( daughter of marty wilde ) november 19 – matt sorum , american drummer ( guns n ' roses , velvet revolver , the cult ) november 25 – amy grant , american christian singer-songwriter and actress december 2 – rick savage ( def leppard ) december 5 – osvaldo golijov , composer december 22 – mark brydon , english musician ( moloko ) december 27 – fred hammond , african american gospel musician date unknown phil cunningham , folk musician greg flesch ( daniel amos , the swirling eddies ) diane meredith belcher , american concert organist , teacher and church musician priti paintal , east indian composer , performer , music producer and promoter . deaths . january 2 – leila megane , mezzo-soprano , 68 january 5 – jakob van domselaer , composer , 69 january 18 – gladys bentley , blues singer , 52 ( pneumonia ) january 24 – edwin fischer , pianist and conductor , 73 january 25 – rutland boughton , composer , 82 february 2 – jenő huszka , composer of operettas , 84 february 3 ace brigode , bandleader , 67 fred buscaglione , italian singer , musician and songwriter , 38 ( car accident ) february 6 – jesse belvin , singer , pianist and songwriter , 27 ( car accident ) february 9 – ernő dohnányi , pianist , conductor and composer , 82 february 12 – bobby clark , us comedian and singer , 71 march 4 – leonard warren , baritone , operatic baritone ( cerebral hemorrhage ) march 16 – billy garland , blues guitarist , singer and songwriter , 41 ( car accident ) march 30 – fabian andre , composer , 50 april 10 – arthur benjamin , composer , 66 april 17 – eddie cochran , rock & roll singer , 21 ( road accident ) april 24 – carl braun , operatic bass , 73 may 8 – hugo alfvén , violinist , conductor and composer , 88 may 12 – cecil armstrong gibbs , composer , 70 may 13 – gid tanner , country music star , 74 may 14 – lucrezia bori , operatic soprano , 72 july 18 – f.a . reynolds , instrument manufacturer , 75 ( heart attack at work ) july 24 hans albers , actor and singer , 69 louise gunning , singer , broadway and vaudeville , 81 august 9 – louis cahuzac , clarinetist and composer , 80 august 23 – oscar hammerstein ii , librettist and director of many musicals , 65 september 1 – aunt molly jackson , folk singer and union activist , c . 80 september 3 – joseph lamb , ragtime composer , 72 september 5 – oliphant chuckerbutty , organist and composer , 75 september 8 – oscar pettiford , american jazz musician and composer , 37 september 9 – jussi björling , operatic tenor , 49 ( heart attack ) september 13 – leo weiner , music teacher , 75 september 24 – mátyás seiber , composer , 55 ( car accident ) october 19 – günter raphael , composer , 57 october 20 – denise orme , music hall performer , 75 october 30 – alfred hill , composer and conductor , 90 november 2 – dimitris mitropoulos , pianist , conductor and composer , 64 november 5 – johnny horton , american country singer , 35 ( car accident ) december 4 – walter goehr , composer , 57 december 7 – clara haskil , pianist , 65 december 10 – mado robin , singer , 41 ( cancer ) date unknown lawrence duhé ( b . 1887 ) , jazz musician lorenzo herrera ( b . 1896 ) , singer and composer jacobo rubalcaba ( b . 1895 ) , musician and bandleader . awards . grammy awards . record of the year : '' theme from a summer place '' – percy faith album of the year : button down mind – bob newhart song of the year : – '' theme from exodus '' – ernest gold , songwriter . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1960 . pulitzer prize for music . elliott carter – string quartet no . 2 . references .