Geats

etymology . the etymology of the name geat ( old english , from a proto-germanic gautaz , plural gautōz ) is similar , although not identical , to that of goths and gutar ( gutô , plural gutaniz ) . the names derive from different ablaut grades of the proto-germanic word geutaną , meaning '' to pour '' . nordisk familjebok , the article '' götar '' ( in swedish ) . they are generally accepted as having originated as heiti for '' men ( of the tribe ) '' , with the literal meaning '' they who pour their seed '' . svenskt ortnamnslexikon , språk- och folkminnesinstitutet , uppsala 2003 , pages 103 och 92 ( articles '' götaland '' and '' gotland '' ) . ( for more information see goths etymology . ) the names could also allude to watercourses in the land where they were living , an interpretation of both names of götaland and gotland according to the etymology sentences in their respective articles in nationalencyklopedin . but this is not generally accepted to be the case , partly because that would mean that the names ' similarity would be coincidental . a more specific theory about the word gautigoths is that it means the goths who live near the river gaut , today 's göta älv . nationalencyklopedin , the article ( in swedish ) about klarälven , which says that klarälven was called gautelfr in records from the 13th century . see also nationalencyklopedin , the article '' göta älv '' ( in swedish ) . it might also have been a conflation of the word gauti with a gloss of goths . götar in svenska akademiens ordbok . in the 17th century the name göta älv , 'river of the geats ' , replaced the earlier names götälven and gautelfr . the etymology of the word gaut ( as mentioned above ) derives from the proto-germanic word geutan , and the extended meaning of '' to pour '' is '' flow , stream , waterfall '' , which could refer to trollhättan falls or to the river itself . the short form of gautigoths was the old norse , which originally referred to just the inhabitants of västergötland , or the western parts of today 's götaland , a meaning which is retained in some icelandic sagas . . history . earliest mentions . thus , gēatas is the old english form of old norse gautar and modern swedish götar . this correspondence seems to tip the balance for most scholars . it is also based on the fact that in beowulf , the gēatas live east of the dani ( across the sea ) and in close contact with the sweon , which fits the historical position of the geats between the danes/daci and the swedes . moreover , the story of beowulf , who leaves geatland and arrives at the daner court after a naval voyage , where he kills a beast , finds a parallel in hrólf kraki 's saga . in this saga , bödvar bjarki leaves gautland and arrives at the daner court after a naval voyage and kills a beast that has been terrorizing the danes for two years ( see also origins for beowulf and hrólf kraki ) . the geats and the jutes are mentioned in beowulf as different tribes , and whereas the geats are called gēatas , the jutes are called ēotena ( genitive ) or ēotenum ( dative ) . moreover , the old english poem widsith also mentions both geats and jutes , and it calls the latter ȳtum . however , fahlbeck proposed in 1884 that the gēatas of beowulf referred to jutes and he proposed that the jutes originally also were geats like those of southern sweden . this theory was based on an old english translation of venerable bede 's ecclesiastical history of the english people attributed to alfred the great where the jutes ( iutarum , iutis ) once are rendered as gēata ( genitive ) and twice as gēatum ( dative ) ( see e.g . the oed which identifies the geats through eotas , iótas , iútan and geátas ) . fahlbeck did not , however , propose an etymology for how the two ethnonyms could be related . fahlbeck 's theory was refuted by schück who in 1907 noted that another old english source , the anglo-saxon chronicle , called the jutes īutna , īotum or īutum . moreover , schück pointed out that when alfred the great 's translation mentions the jutes for the second time ( book iv , ch . 14 ( 16 ) ) it calls them ēota and in one manuscript ȳtena . björkman proposed in 1908 that alfred the great 's translation of jutes as geats was based on a confusion between the west saxon form geotas ( '' jutes '' ) and gēatas ( '' geats '' ) . as for the origins of the ethnonym jute , it may be a secondary formation of the toponym jutland , where jut is derived from a proto-indo-european root eud meaning '' water '' . . gutnish hypothesis . since the 19th century , there has also been a suggestion that beowulf 's people were gutes ( from the island of gotland in sweden ) . according to the poem , the weather-geats or sea-geats , as they are called are supposed to have lived east of the danes/dacians and be separated from the swedes by wide waters . some researchers have found it a little far-fetched that wide waters relates to vänern in västergötland or mälaren . the weather in weather-geats , and sea-geats marks a people living at a windy , stormy coast by the sea . the geats of västergötland were historically an inland people , making an epithet such as weather- or sea- a little strange . moreover , when beowulf dies he is buried in a mound at a place called hrones-naesse , meaning '' the cape of whales '' . whales have for obvious reasons never lived in vänern , where , according to birger nerman , beowulf is buried . however , an expanse of water separates the island of gotland from the swedes . the island lies east of denmark/dacia and whales were once common in the baltic sea where gotland is situated . the name of the gutes in swedish , gutar , is an ablaut-grade of the same name as that of the geats in beowulf . these facts made the archaeologist gad rausing come to the conclusion that the weather-geats may have been gutes . this was supported by another swedish archaeologist bo gräslund . according to rausing , beowulf may be buried in a place called rone on gotland , a name corresponding to the hrones in hrones-naesse . not far from there lies a place called arnkull corresponding to the earnar-naesse in beowulf , which according to the poem was situated closely to hrones-naesse . this theory does not exclude the ancient population of västergötland and östergötland from being geats , but rather holds that the anglo-saxon name geat could refer to west-geats ( västergötland ) , east-geats ( östergötland ) as well as weather-geats ( gotland ) , in accordance with jordanes account of the scandinanian tribes gautigoth , ostrogoth and vagoth . see also . dacia blenda geatish society göta götavirke ( geatish dyke ) gutes varangian viking beowulf . references .