Chrétien de Troyes

life . little is known of his life , but he seems to have been from troyes or at least intimately connected with it . between 1160 and 1172 he served ( perhaps as herald-at-arms , as gaston paris speculated ) at the court of his patroness marie of france , countess of champagne , daughter of king louis vii and eleanor of aquitaine , who married count henry i of champagne in 1164 . later , he served the court of philip i , count of flanders . . works . chrétien 's works include five major poems in rhyming eight-syllable couplets . four of these are complete : erec and enide ( c . 1170 ) ; cligès ( c . 1176 ) ; yvain , the knight of the lion ; and lancelot , the knight of the cart , the latter two written simultaneously between 1177 and 1181 . yvain is generally considered chrétien 's most masterful work . chrétien 's final romance was perceval , the story of the grail , written between 1181 and 1190 , but left unfinished , though some scholars have disputed this . it is dedicated to philip , count of flanders , to whom chrétien may have been attached in his last years . he finished only 9,000 lines of the work , but four successors of varying talents added 54,000 additional lines in what are known as the four continuations . grigsby , john l . ( 1991 ) . '' continuations of perceval '' . in norris j . lacy , the new arthurian encyclopedia , pp . 99–100 . new york : garland . similarly , the last thousand lines of lancelot were written by godefroi de leigni , apparently by arrangement with chrétien . chrétien de troyes , d.d.r . owen ( translator ) ( 1988 ) arthurian romances , tuttle publishing , reprinted by everyman 's library . in the case of perceval , one continuer says the poet 's death prevented him from completing the work ; in the case of lancelot , no reason is given . this has not stopped speculation that chrétien did not approve of lancelots adulterous subject ( in which case he seems unlikely to have invented lancelot ) . there are also several lesser works , not all of which can be securely ascribed to chrétien . philomela is the only one of his four poems based on ovid 's metamorphoses that has survived . two short-lyric chansons on the subject of love are also very likely his , but the attribution of the pious romance guillaume d'angleterre to him is now widely doubted . it has also been suggested that chrétien might be the author of two short verse romances titled le chevalier à l'épée and la mule sans frein , but this theory has not found much support . chrétien names his treatments of ovid in the introduction to cligès , where he also mentions his work about king mark and iseult . the latter is presumably related to the legend of tristan and iseult , though tristan is not named . chrétien 's take on tristan has not survived , though in the introduction of cligès , chrétien himself says that his treatment of tristan was not well received , possibly explaining why it does not survive . chrétien 's works are written in vernacular old french , although it is marked by traits of the regional champenois dialect ( which is still fairly similar to the '' standard '' french of paris ) . sources and influence . the immediate and specific sources for his romances are uncertain , as chrétien speaks in the vaguest way of the materials he used . geoffrey of monmouth or wace might have supplied some of the names , but neither author mentioned erec , lancelot , gornemant and many others who play an important role in chrétien 's narratives . one is left to guess about latin or french literary originals which are now lost , or upon continental lore that goes back to a celtic source in the case of béroul , an anglo-norman who wrote around 1150 . for his perceval , the story of the grail , the influence of the story is clearly tied to the story of saint galgano ( galgano guidotti ) who died in 1180–1181 and was canonized in 1185 : a knight struck by god 's vision , planted his sword in the ground that immediately solidified ( kept in abbey san galgano ) . however , chrétien found his sources immediately at hand , without much understanding of its primitive spirit , but appreciating it as a setting for the ideal society dreamed of , although not realized , in his own day . and chrétien 's five romances together form the most complete expression from a single author of the ideals of french chivalry . though so far there has been little critical attention paid to the subject , it is not inaccurate to say that chrétien was influenced by the changing face of secular and canonical law in the 12th century . this is particularly relevant for his lancelot , the knight of the cart , which makes repeated use of the customary law prevalent in chrétien 's day . cohen , esther . the crossroads of justice : law and culture in late medieval france . boston : brill publishing , 1992 , 27 william wistar comfort praised de troyes ' '' significance as a literary artist and as the founder of a precious literary tradition which distinguishes him from all other poets of the latin races between the close of the empire and the arrival of dante . '' chrétien 's writing was very popular , as evidenced by the high number of surviving copies of his romances and their many adaptations into other languages . three of middle high german literature 's finest examples , wolfram von eschenbach 's parzival and hartmann von aue 's erec and iwein , were based on perceval , erec , and yvain ; the three welsh romances associated with the mabinogion ( peredur , son of efrawg , geraint and enid , and owain , or the lady of the fountain ) are derived from the same trio . especially in the case of peredur , however , the connection between the welsh romances and their source is probably not direct and has never been satisfactorily delineated . chrétien also has the distinction of being the first writer to mention the holy grail loomis 1991 . ( perceval ) , camelot ( lancelot ) , and the love affair between queen guinevere and lancelot ( lancelot ) , subjects of household recognition even today . there is a specific classical influence in chrétien 's romances , the likes of which ( the iliad , the aeneid , the metamorphoses ) were '' translated into the old french vernacular during the 1150s '' . uitti , chrétien de troyes revisited foster guyer argues that specifically yvain , the knight of the lion contains definite ovid influence : '' yvain was filled with grief and showed the ovidian love symptoms of weeping and sighing so bitterly that he could scarcely speak . he declared that he would never stay away a full year . using words like those of leander in the seventeenth of ovid 's epistles he said : 'if only i had the wings of a dove/to fly back to you at will/many and many a time i would come ' . '' chrétien has been termed '' the inventor of the modern novel '' . karl uitti argues : '' with chrétien 's work a new era opens in the history of european story telling… this poem reinvents the genre we call narrative romance ; in some important respects it also initiates the vernacular novel . '' a '' story '' could be anything from a single battle scene , to a prologue , to a minimally cohesive tale with little to no chronological layout . uitti argues that yvain is chrétien 's '' most carefully contrived romance… it has a beginning , a middle , and an end : we are in no doubt that yvain 's story is over . '' this very method of having three definite parts , including the build in the middle leading to the climax of the story , is in large part why chrétien is seen to be a writer of novels five centuries before novels , as we know them , existed . see also . 12th century in poetry