Lady Windermere's Fan

composition . by the summer of 1891 wilde had already written three plays : vera ; or , the nihilists and the duchess of padua had found little success , and salome had yet to be staged . unperturbed , he decided to write another play but turned from tragedy to comedy . ellmann ( 1988:314 ) he went to the lake district in the north of england , where he stayed with a friend and later met robbie ross . numerous characters in the play appear to draw their names from the north of england : lady windermere from the lake and nearby town windermere ( though wilde had used '' windermere '' earlier in lord arthur savile 's crime ) , the duchess of berwick from berwick-upon-tweed , lord darlington from darlington . wilde began writing the play at the prodding of sir george alexander , the actor manager of st james 's theatre . the play was finished by october . ellmann ( 1988:315 ) alexander liked the play , and offered him an advance of £1,000 for it . wilde , impressed by his confidence , opted to take a percentage instead , from which he would earn £7,000 in the first year alone ( worth £ today ) . alexander was a meticulous manager and he and wilde began exhaustive revisions and rehearsals of the play . both were talented artists with strong ideas about their art . wilde , for instance , emphasised attention to aesthetic minutiae rather than realism ; he resisted alexander 's suggested broad stage movements , quipping that '' details are of no importance in life , but in art details are vital '' . raby ( 1997:146 ) these continued after the opening night when , at the suggestion of both friends and alexander , wilde made changes to reveal mrs erlynne 's relationship with lady windermere gradually throughout the play , rather than reserving the secret for the final act . raby ( 1997:144 ) despite these artistic differences , both were professional and their collaboration was a fruitful one . there is an extant manuscript of the play held in the william andrews clark memorial library at the university of california in los angeles . . characters . lord windermere lord darlington lord augustus lorton mr . dumby mr . cecil graham mr . hopper parker , butler lady windermere the duchess of berwick lady agatha carlisle lady plymdale lady stutfield lady jedburgh mrs . cowper-cowper mrs . erlynne rosalie , maid . plot . act i . the play opens in the morning room of the windermeres ' residence in london . it is tea time and lady windermere—who is preparing for her coming of age birthday ball that evening—has a visit from a friend , lord darlington . she shows off her new fan : a present from her husband . she explains to lord darlington that she is upset over the compliments he continues to pay to her , revealing that she has very particular views about what is acceptable in society , due in part to her somewhat puritan upbringing . the duchess of berwick calls and lord darlington leaves shortly thereafter . the duchess informs lady windermere that her husband may be betraying her marriage by making repeated visits to another woman , a mrs erlynne , and possibly giving her large sums of money . these rumours have been gossip among london society for quite a while , though seemingly this is the first lady windermere has heard about it . following the departure of the duchess , lady windermere decides to check her husband 's bank book . she finds the book in a desk and sees that nothing appears amiss , though on returning she discovers a second bank book : one with a lock . after prying the lock open , she finds it lists large sums of money given to mrs erlynne . at this point , lord windermere enters and she confronts him . though he can not deny that he has had dealings with mrs erlynne , he states that he is not betraying lady windermere . he requests that she send mrs erlynne an invitation to her birthday ball that evening to help her back into society . when lady windermere refuses , he writes out an invitation himself . lady windermere makes clear her intention to cause a scene if mrs erlynne appears , to which lord windermere responds that it would be in her best interest not to do so . lady windermere leaves in disgust to prepare for the party , and lord windermere reveals in soliloquy that he is protecting mrs erlynne 's true identity to save his wife extreme humiliation . act ii . act ii opens in the windermeres ' drawing room during the birthday ball that evening . various guests enter , and make small-talk . lord windermere enters and asks lady windermere to speak with him , but she brushes him off . a friend of lord windermere 's , lord augustus lorton ( '' tuppy '' ) , pulls him aside to inquire about mrs erlynne , with whom he is enamoured . lord windermere reveals that there is nothing untoward in his relationship with mrs erlynne , and that she will be attending the ball , which comes as a great relief to lord augustus as he was worried about her social standing . after an unsuccessful attempt to make peace with his wife , lord windermere summons the courage to tell the truth to her , but at that moment mrs erlynne arrives at the party , where she is greeted coldly by lady windermere , spoiling his plan . alone , lady windermere and lord darlington discuss mrs erlynne 's attendance . lady windermere is enraged and confused and asks lord darlington to be her friend . instead of friendship , lord darlington takes advantage of lady windermere 's tragic state and professes his love to her , offering her his life , and inviting her to risk short-term social humiliation for a new life with him . lord darlington sets her an ultimatum to try to convince her to take action immediately , while still in a state of shock . lady windermere is shocked by the revelation , and finds she does not have the courage to take the offer . heartbroken , lord darlington announces that he will be leaving the country the next day and that they will never meet again , and leaves . the guests begin to leave , and say their goodnights to lady windermere—some remarking positively about mrs erlynne . on the other side of the room mrs erlynne is discussing her plans with lord windermere ; she intends to marry lord augustus and will require some money from lord windermere . later , lady windermere , in spite of her earlier reluctance , decides to depart the house at once for lord darlington , and leaves a note to that effect for lord windermere . mrs erlynne discovers the note and that lady windermere has gone , and is curiously worried by this revelation . while reading the note , a brief monologue reveals that she is in fact lady windermere 's mother and made a similar mistake herself twenty years previously . she takes the letter and exits to locate lady windermere . act iii . lady windermere is alone in lord darlington 's rooms , unsure if she has made the right decision . eventually she resolves to return to her husband , but then mrs erlynne appears . despite mrs erlynne 's honest attempts to persuade her to return home to her husband , lady windermere is convinced her appearance is part of some plot conceived by her and lord windermere . mrs erlynne finally breaks lady windermere 's resistance by imploring her to return for the sake of her young child , but as they begin to exit they hear lord darlington entering with friends . the two women hide . the men—who include lord windermere and lord augustus—have been evicted from their gentlemen 's club at closing time and talk about women : mainly mrs erlynne . one of them takes notice of a fan lying on a table ( lady windermere 's ) and presumes that lord darlington presently has a woman visiting . as lord windermere rises to leave , the fan is pointed out to him , which he instantly recognises as his wife 's . he demands to know if lord darlington has her hidden somewhere . lord darlington refuses to cooperate , believing that lady windermere has come to him . just as lord windermere is about to discover lady windermere 's hiding place , mrs erlynne reveals herself instead , shocking all the men and allowing lady windermere to slip away unnoticed . act iv . the next day , lady windermere is lying on the couch of the morning room anxious about whether to tell her husband what actually happened , or whether mrs erlynne will have already betrayed her secret . her husband enters . he is sympathetic towards her and suggests that as the london season is almost over that they head to their country estate to forget the recent incident . lady windermere apologises for her previous suspicion of her husband and behaviour at the party , and lord windermere makes clear his new contempt for mrs erlynne—warning his wife to stay away from her . mrs erlynne 's arrival is announced along with the return of the fan , and despite her husband 's protestations , lady windermere insists on seeing her . mrs erlynne enters and states that she shall be going abroad , but asks that lady windermere give her a photograph of herself and her son . whilst lady windermere leaves the room to find one , the story is revealed : mrs erlynne left her husband for a lover shortly after lady windermere 's birth . when her new lover abandoned her , mrs erlynne was left alone and in disrepute . more recently , using the assumed name of mrs erlynne , she has begun blackmailing lord windermere to regain her lifestyle and status , by threatening to reveal her true identity as lady windermere 's shameful mother—not dead , as lady windermere believes . her son-in-law , lord windermere laments not having told his wife the whole story at once and resolves to tell her the truth now . mrs erlynne forbids him to do so , threatening to spread shame far and wide if he does . lady windermere returns with the photograph which she presents to mrs erlynne , and requests that lord windermere check for the return of mrs erlynne 's coach . now that they are alone , and being owed a favour , mrs erlynne demands that lady windermere not reveal the truth about the events of the previous night to lord windermere , and lady windermere promises to keep the secret . after lord windermere 's return , lord augustus enters . he is shocked to see mrs erlynne after the events of the night before , but she requests his company as she heads to her carriage , and he soon returns to the windermeres with news that she has satisfactorily explained the events of the evening , and that they are to marry and live out of england . their marriage is restored , but both lord and lady windermere keep their secrets . productions . premiere . the premiere at the st james 's theatre was followed by a famous speech by wilde . when wilde answered the calls of '' author ! '' and appeared before the curtains after the third act , critics were more offended by the cigarette in his hand than his ironically egotistic speech : ladies and gentlemen . i have enjoyed this evening immensely . the actors have given us a charming rendering of a delightful play , and your appreciation has been most intelligent . i congratulate you on the great success of your performance , which persuades me that you think almost as highly of the play as i do myself . mrs . erlynne was originated by marion terry , and lady windermere by winifred emery . the play 's broadway première on 5 february 1893 at palmer 's theatre was also the first broadway performance for stage and screen actress julia arthur , who played lady windermere in that production . themes . by showing in st . james 's , wilde was targeting a fashionable , upper-middle class audience and wilde maps out the geography of their world , grosvenor square , curzon street , the park , with precision . raby ( 1997:145 ) peter raby has also highlighted lady windermere 's fan as a good example of wilde 's most successful dramatic technique : the juxtaposition of the comic and the serious . '' once the absurd and the patently false have been established , the serious emotions and ideas which are explored have been given a setting which prevents them from ever becoming too serious '' . raby ( 1997:147 ) scholar paul fortunato describes oscar wilde as a modernist , who used his modern aesthetics so as to direct him into the realm of mass culture . wilde 's huge popularity as a playwright began with his production of lady windermere 's fan , his recherché attitude and personal aesthetics reflected in his writing . fortunato elaborates on the facets of his aestheticism—an aestheticism that distorts and lies on the surface , rejects any notion of an authentic self , and centres on the female aesthete and woman of fashion . as he describes , understanding wilde as a modernist through his writing of lady windermere 's fan can help us understand the disparity between mass culture and high society . wilde bridges this by theorising his modern aesthetics beneath the ornamental surface of fashion and elite society . the fan that strings together the play 's scenes simultaneously evokes a traditional symbol of modesty while revealing a truly modern current of infidelity . . media . an audio production by the recorded drama society of the university of cambridge . adaptations . the play has been the subject of numerous film and television adaptations and a musical adaptation . films include : a 1916 british film lady windermere 's fan . in 1924 , hong shen 's ( 洪深 ) production of 少奶奶的扇子 ( shàonǎinai de shànzi ) ( '' the young lady 's fan '' ) . hsiung , yuwen : expressionism and its deformation in contemporary chinese theater , 2007 phd dissertation , purdue university in 1925 silent film , lady windermere 's fan , which stars ronald colman , may mcavoy , bert lytell , irene rich and edward martindel . it was adapted by julien josephson and directed by ernst lubitsch . in 2002 , this film was selected for preservation in the united states national film registry by the library of congress as being '' culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant '' . a 1935 german film lady windermere 's fan directed by heinz hilpert and starring lil dagover and walter rilla a 1948 argentine film story of a bad woman directed by luis saslavsky and starring dolores del río . in 1949 , otto preminger directed an adaptation entitled the fan starring jeanne crain , madeleine carroll , and george sanders . in 1975 , an egyptian adaptation film ( 2 women - امرأتان ) starring nelly , ahmed mazhar and noor el sherif was released . the film was directed by hassan ramzy . a 2004 film adaptation , entitled a good woman , switched the setting to the amalfi coast of italy , made the windermeres mr . & mrs . , and updated the time frame to 1930 . the film stars helen hunt , mark umbers , scarlett johansson , stephen campbell moore , and tom wilkinson . the bbc produced a television version as part of their theatre night series which was first transmitted in the uk during september 1985 . this production features helena little , tim woodward , stephanie turner and kenneth cranham . it is available on dvd as part of the oscar wilde collection . a musical theatre version of the play was created by noël coward in 1954 under the title after the ball . in 2009 irish television production company accomplice tv received funding from the broadcasting commission of ireland and tv3 ( ireland ) for their contemporary adaptation of the play set in south county dublin . laura windermere 's bag was broadcast by tv3 in 2009 . in 2018 , kathy burke 's production of the play the cast included grace moloney , samantha spiro , kevin bishop , jennifer saunders and joshua james . at london 's vaudeville theatre was recorded and shown '' live '' in cinemas under the '' more2screen '' initiative . in 2020 , the virtual international theatre company cloud theatrics performed an online production of lady windermere 's fan . the production was directed by marie newton and holden stokes . the performance had a youtube release followed by a public release on their platform . radio adaptations include : on 19 june 1989 , joely richardson starred as lady windermere in a bbc radio 4 monday play production directed by david johnson , with penelope keith as mrs . erlynne , gary bond as lord windermere , janet burnell as the duchess of berwick , patsy rowlands as lady carlisle , richard tate as lord augustus lorton and edward fox as lord darlington . in may 1999 , l.a . theatre works the play 's the thing series broadcast a reading of the play featuring joanna going as lady windermere , judy geeson as lady plymdale , roger rees as lord windermere , eric stoltz as lord darlington , lisa harrow as mrs . erlynne and miriam margolyes as the duchess of berwick . on 15 april 2018 , bbc radio 3 's drama on 3 broadcast a production directed by martin jarvis with mira sorvino as mrs erlynne , susannah fielding as lady windermere , james callix as lord windermere , jonathan cake as lord darlington , rosalind ayres as the duchess of berwick , ian ogilvy as lord augustus lorton and peter woodward as mr . dumby . . in music . the british synthpop band emile 's telegraphic transmission device composed and recorded a song , '' lady windermere '' , on their album ambivalence in motion using the basic plot from the play . editions . wilde , oscar . lady windermere 's fan . published in the importance of being earnest and other plays . london : penguin , 1940 . wilde , oscar . lady windermere 's fan . london : nick hern books , 2005 . see also . lady windermere syndrome . references . . external links . ibdb listing of broadway productions . review of 1925 film by darragh o'donoghue .