Pseudohistory

definition and etymology . the term pseudohistory was coined in the early nineteenth century , which makes the word older than the related terms pseudo-scholarship and pseudoscience . monthly magazine and british register , volume 55 ( february 1823 ) , p . 449 , in reference to john galt , ringan gilhaize : or , the covenanters , oliver & boyd , 1823 . in an attestation from 1815 , it is used to refer to the contest of homer and hesiod , a purportedly historical narrative describing an entirely fictional contest between the greek poets homer and hesiod . c . a . elton , remains of hesiod the ascraean 1815 , p . xix . the pejorative sense of the term , labelling a flawed or disingenuous work of historiography , is found in another 1815 attestation . the critical review : or , annals of literature , volume 1 ed . tobias george smollett , 1815 , p . 152 pseudohistory is akin to pseudoscience in that both forms of falsification are achieved using the methodology that purports to , but does not , adhere to the established standards of research for the given field of intellectual enquiry of which the pseudoscience claims to be a part , and which offers little or no supporting evidence for its plausibility . writers michael shermer and alex grobman define pseudohistory as '' the rewriting of the past for present personal or political purposes '' . other writers take a broader definition ; douglas allchin , a historian of science , contends that when the history of scientific discovery is presented in a simplified way , with drama exaggerated and scientists romanticized , this creates wrong stereotypes about how science works , and in fact constitutes pseudohistory , despite being based on real facts . . characteristics . robert todd carroll has developed a list of criteria to identify pseudo-historic works . he states that : '' pseudohistory is purported history which : treats myths , legends , sagas and similar literature as literal truth is neither critical nor skeptical in its reading of ancient historians , taking their claims at face value and ignoring empirical or logical evidence contrary to the claims of the ancients is on a mission , not a quest , seeking to support some contemporary political or religious agenda rather than find out the truth about the past often denies that there is such a thing as historical truth , clinging to the extreme skeptical notion that only what is absolutely certain can be called 'true ' and nothing is absolutely certain , so nothing is true often maintains that history is nothing but mythmaking and that different histories are not to be compared on such traditional academic standards as accuracy , empirical probability , logical consistency , relevancy , completeness , fairness , honesty , etc . , but on moral or political grounds is selective in its use of ancient documents , citing favorably those that fit with its agenda , and ignoring or interpreting away those documents which do n't fit considers the possibility of something being true as sufficient to believe it is true if it fits with one 's agenda often maintains that there is a conspiracy to suppress its claims because of racism , atheism or ethnocentrism , or because of opposition to its political or religious agenda '' carroll , robert todd . the skeptic 's dictionary . hoboken : john wiley & sons ( 2003 ) , p . 305 . nicholas goodrick-clarke prefers the term '' cryptohistory . '' he identifies two necessary elements as '' a complete ignorance of the primary sources '' and the repetition of '' inaccuracies and wild claims '' . goodrick-clarke 1985 : 224,225 nicholas goodrick-clarke , the occult roots of nazism , p . 225 ( tauris parke paperbacks , 2005 edition ) . other common characteristics of pseudohistory are : the arbitrary linking of disparate events so as to form – in the theorist 's opinion – a pattern . this is typically then developed into a conspiracy theory postulating a hidden agent responsible for creating and maintaining the pattern . for example , the pseudohistorical the holy blood and the holy grail links the knights templar , the medieval holy grail , the merovingian frankish dynasty and the artist nicolas poussin in an attempt to identify lineal descendants of jesus . hypothesising the consequences of unlikely events that '' could '' have happened , thereby assuming tacitly that they did . sensationalism , or shock value cherry picking evidence that helps the historical argument being made and suppressing evidence that hurts it . ellis , joseph j . american dialogue : the founders and us . new york : alfred a . knopf , 2018 . p . 168 . . categories and examples . the following are some common categories of pseudohistorical theory , with examples . note that not all theories in a listed category are necessarily pseudohistorical ; they are rather categories that seem to attract pseudohistorians . ancient aliens , ancient technologies , and lost lands . immanuel velikovsky 's books worlds in collision ( 1950 ) , ages in chaos ( 1952 ) , and earth in upheaval ( 1955 ) , which became '' instant bestsellers '' , demonstrated that pseudohistory based on ancient mythology held potential for tremendous financial success and became models of success for future works in the genre . in 1968 , erich von däniken published chariots of the gods ? , which claims that ancient visitors from outer space constructed the pyramids and other monuments . he has since published other books in which he makes similar claims . these claims have all been categorized as pseudohistory . similarly , zechariah sitchin has published numerous books claiming that a race of extraterrestrial beings from the planet nibiru known as the anunnaki visited earth in ancient times in search of gold , and that they genetically engineered humans to serve as their slaves . he claims that memories of these occurrences are recorded in sumerian religion , as well as other mythologies all across the globe . these speculations have likewise been categorized as pseudohistory . the ancient astronaut hypothesis was further popularized in the united states by the history channel television series ancient aliens . history professor ronald h . fritze observed that the pseudohistorical claims promoted by von däniken and the ancient aliens program have a periodic popularity in the us : '' in a pop culture with a short memory and a voracious appetite , aliens and pyramids and lost civilizations are recycled like fashions . '' the author graham hancock has sold over four million copies of books promoting the pseudohistorical thesis that all the major monuments of the ancient world , including stonehenge , the egyptian pyramids , and the moai of easter island , were built by a single ancient supercivilization , which hancock claims thrived from 15,000 to 10,000 bc and possessed technological and scientific knowledge equal to or surpassing that of modern civilization . he first advanced the full form of this argument in his 1995 bestseller fingerprints of the gods , which won popular acclaim , but scholarly disdain . christopher knight has published numerous books , including uriel 's machine ( 2000 ) , expounding pseudohistorical assertions that ancient civilizations possessed technology far more advanced than the technology of today . merriman , nick , editor , public archaeology , routledge , 2004 p . 260 tonkin , s . , 2003 , uriel 's machine – a commentary on some of the astronomical assertions . the claim that a lost continent known as lemuria once existed in the pacific ocean has likewise been categorized as pseudohistory . . antisemitic pseudohistory . the protocols of the learned elders of zion is a fraudulent work purporting to show a historical conspiracy for world domination by jews . the work was conclusively proven to be a forgery in august 1921 , when the times revealed that extensive portions of the document were directly plagiarized from maurice joly 's 1864 satirical dialogue the dialogue in hell between machiavelli and montesquieu , as well as hermann goedsche 's 1868 anti-semitic novel biarritz . . the khazar theory is an academic fringe theory that postulates that the bulk of european jewry are of central asian ( turkic ) origin . in spite of genetic studies on jews , this theory has been promoted in anti-semitic and anti-zionist circles alike , arguing that jews are an alien element both in europe and in palestine . holocaust denial and genocide denial in general are widely categorized as pseudohistory . major proponents of holocaust denial include david irving and others , who argue that the holocaust , holodomor , armenian genocide , and other genocides did not occur , or were exaggerated greatly . many muslims deny the jewish history of jerusalem and in particular temple denial . hazony , david . '' temple denial in the holy city '' , the new york sun , march 7 , 2007 . . alternative chronologies . an alternative chronology is a revised sequence of events that deviates from the standard timeline of world history accepted by mainstream scholars . an example of an '' alternative chronology '' is anatoly fomenko 's new chronology , which claims that recorded history actually began around the year 800 ad and all events that allegedly occurred prior to that point either never really happened at all or are simply inaccurate retellings of events that happened later . other , less extreme examples , are the phantom time hypothesis , which asserts that the years ad 614–911 never took place ; and the new chronology of david rohl , which claims that the accepted timelines for ancient egyptian and israelite history are wrong . '' in his book a test of time ( 1995 ) , rohl argues that the conventionally accepted dates for strata such as the middle and late bronze ages in palestine are wrong '' – in daniel jacobs , shirley eber , francesca silvani , israel and the palestinian territories : the rough guide , p . 424 ( rough guides ltd . , 2nd revised edition , 1998 ) . . ethnocentric revisionism . most afrocentric ( i.e . pre-columbian africa-americas contact theories , see ancient egyptian race controversy ) ideas have been identified as pseudohistorical , alongside the '' indigenous aryans '' theories published by hindu nationalists during the 1990s and 2000s . the '' crypto-history '' developed within ariosophy and nazi occultism has likewise been placed under this categorization . nicholas goodrick-clarke . 1985 . the occult roots of nazism : secret aryan cults and their influence on nazi ideology : the ariosophists of austria and germany , 1890–1935 . wellingborough , england : the aquarian press . ( several reprints . ) expanded with a new preface , 2004 , i.b . tauris & co . among leading nazis , heinrich himmler is believed to have been influenced by occultism and according to one theory , developed the ss base at wewelsburg in accordance with an esoteric plan . the sun language theory is a pseudohistorical ideology which argues that all languages are descended from a form of proto-turkish . the theory may have been partially devised in order to legitimize arabic and semitic loanwords occurring in the turkish language by instead asserting that the arabic and semitic words were derived from the turkish ones rather than vice versa . ghil'ad zuckermann ( 2003 ) , language contact and lexical enrichment in israeli hebrew . palgrave macmillan . p . 165 . a large number of nationalist pseudohistorical theories deal with the legendary ten lost tribes of ancient israel . british-israelism , also known as anglo-israelism , the most famous example of this type , has been conclusively refuted by mainstream historians using evidence from a vast array of different fields of study . another form of ethnocentric revisionism is nationalistic pseudohistory . the '' antiquization '' is one such pseudohistorical theory , which postulates demographic , cultural and linguistic continuity between macedonians of antiquity and the main ethnic group in present-day north macedonia . anastas vangeli , nation-building ancient macedonian style : the origins and the effects of the so-called antiquization in macedonia . doi : published online by cambridge university press : 20 november 2018 . romanian historiography has created the myth of the second bulgarian empire as '' vlaho - the bulgarian state '' under the power of asen dynasty , and conceals the fact that dobrogea from the last quarter of the seventh century until the establishment of the dobrudzha despotate ( presented as a '' medieval romanian state '' ) , in the second half of the fourteenth century it was continuously part of the medieval bulgarian states . there is no mention of the significant slavic-bulgarian influence on the romanian gene pool , language and culture . румънски фалшификации на българската история . historical falsification . in the eighth century , a forged document known as donation of constantine , which supposedly transferred authority over rome and the western part of the roman empire to the pope , became widely circulated . in the twelfth century , geoffrey of monmouth published the historia regum britanniae , a pseudohistorical work purporting to describe the ancient history and origins of the british people . the book synthesises earlier celtic mythical traditions to inflate the deeds of the mythical king arthur . the contemporary historian william of newburgh wrote around 1190 that '' it is quite clear that everything this man wrote about arthur and his successors , or indeed about his predecessors from vortigern onwards , was made up , partly by himself and partly by others '' . . historical revisionism . the shakespeare authorship question is a fringe theory that claims that the works attributed to william shakespeare were actually written by someone other than william shakespeare of stratford-upon-avon . hope , warren and kim holston . the shakespeare controversy ( 2009 ) 2nd ed . , 3 : '' in short , this is a history written in opposition to the current prevailing view '' . potter , lois . '' marlowe onstage '' in constructing christopher marlowe , james alan downie and j . t . parnell , eds . ( 2000 , 2001 ) , paperback ed . , 88–101 ; 100 : '' the possibility that shakespeare may not really be shakespeare , comic in the context of literary history and pseudo-history , is understandable in this world of double-agents . '' aaronovitch , david . '' the anti-stratfordians '' in voodoo histories ( 2010 ) , 226–229 : '' there is , however , a psychological or anthropological question to be answered about our consumption of pseudo-history and pseudoscience . i have now plowed through enough of these books to be able to state that , as a genre , they are badly written and , in their anxiety to establish their dubious neo-scholarly credentials , incredibly tedious . why do we read bad history books that have the added lack of distinction of not being in any way true or useful . '' kathman , david . shakespeare authorship page : '' . shakespeare scholars regard oxfordianism as pseudo-scholarship which arbitrarily discards the methods used by real historians . in order to support their beliefs , oxfordians resort to a number of tactics which will be familiar to observers of other forms of pseudo-history and pseudo-science . '' a similar revisionist fringe theory is the christ myth theory , which claims that jesus of nazareth never existed as a historical figure and that his existence was invented by early christians . this argument currently finds very little support among scholars and historians of all faiths and has been described as pseudohistorical . in a 2011 review of the state of modern scholarship , bart ehrman ( a secular agnostic ) wrote : '' he certainly existed , as virtually every competent scholar of antiquity , christian or non-christian , agrees '' b . ehrman , 2011 forged : writing in the name of god . p . 285 robert m . price ( an atheist who denies the existence of jesus ) agrees that this perspective runs against the views of the majority of scholars : robert m . price '' jesus at the vanishing point '' in the historical jesus : five views edited by james k . beilby & paul rhodes eddy , 2009 intervarsity , p . 61 michael grant ( a classicist ) states that '' in recent years , 'no serious scholar has ventured to postulate the non historicity of jesus ' or at any rate very few , and they have not succeeded in disposing of the much stronger , indeed very abundant , evidence to the contrary . '' in jesus : an historian 's review of the gospels by michael grant 2004 p . 200 richard a . burridge states : '' there are those who argue that jesus is a figment of the church ’ s imagination , that there never was a jesus at all . i have to say that i do not know any respectable critical scholar who says that anymore . '' in jesus now and then by richard a . burridge and graham gould ( apr 1 , 2004 ) p . 34 did jesus exist ? , bart ehrman , 2012 , chapter 1 sykes , stephen w . ( 2007 ) . '' paul 's understanding of the death of jesus '' . sacrifice and redemption . cambridge university press . pp . 35–36 . confederate revisionists ( a.k.a . '' civil war revisionists '' ) , lost cause of the confederacy , and neo-confederates argue that the confederate states of america 's prime motivation was the maintenance of states ' rights and limited government , rather than the preservation and expansion of slavery . . matriarchy . the consensus among academics is that no strictly matriarchal society is known to have existed . goldberg , steven , the inevitability of patriarchy ( william morrow & co . , 1973 ) . anthropologist donald brown 's list of cultural universal ( viz . , features shared by nearly all current human societies ) includes men being the '' dominant element '' in public political affairs , brown , donald e . , human universals ( philadelphia : temple university press , 1991 ) , p . & nbsp ; 137 . which is the contemporary opinion of mainstream anthropology . some societies that are matrilineal or matrifocal , but in fact have patriarchal power structures may be misidentified as matriarchal . the idea that matriarchal societies existed and they preceded patriarchal societies was first raised in the 19th-century among western academics , but it has since been discredited . '' the view of matriarchy as constituting a stage of cultural development now is generally discredited . furthermore , the consensus among modern anthropologists and sociologists is that a strictly matriarchal society never existed . '' encyclopædia britannica ( 2007 ) , entry matriarchy . despite this however , second-wave feminists have asserted the supposed existence of a matriarchy that preceded the patriarchy . the goddess movement and riane eisler 's the chalice and the blade cite venus figurines as evidence that societies of paleolithic and neolithic europe were matriarchies that worshipped a goddess . this belief is not supported by mainstream academics . ruth whitehouse . '' the mother goddess hypothesis and its critics , '' in handbook of gender in archaeology , sarah milledge nelson ( ed . ) , pp . 756-758 . pre-columbian trans-oceanic contact theories . most theories of pre-columbian trans-oceanic contact , excluding the norse colonization of the americas , and other reputable scholarship , have been classified as pseudohistory , including claims that the americas were actually discovered by arabs or muslims . gavin menzies ' book 1421 : the year china discovered the world , which argues for the idea that chinese sailors discovered america , has also been categorized as a work of pseudohistory . . psychohistory . psychohistory is an amalgam of psychology , history , and related social sciences and the humanities . paul h . elovitz , ed . , psychohistory for the twenty-first century ( 2013 ) p . 1-3 . note that there are varying definitions by accomplished and often distinguished psychohistorians such as peter loewenberg ( ucla ) , charles b . strozier ( cuny graduate school ) , george kren ( kansas state university ) , bruce mazlish ( mit ) , paul roazen ( york university -- canada ) , j . donald hughes ( university of denver ) , vamik volkan ( university of virginia medical school ) , henry lawton ( author of the psychohistorians handbook , 1988 ) , jacques szaluta ( us merchant marine academy ) and others . it examines the '' why '' of history , especially the difference between stated intention and actual behavior . it works to combine the insights of psychology , especially psychoanalysis , with the research methodology of the social sciences and humanities to understand the emotional origin of the behavior of individuals , groups and nations , past and present . mainstream historians have categorized it as pseudohistory . . racist pseudohistory . josiah priest and other nineteenth-century american writers wrote pseudohistorical narratives that portrayed african americans and native americans in an extremely negative light . priest 's first book was the wonders of nature and providence , displayed . ( 1826 ) . the book is regarded by modern critics as one of the earliest works of modern american pseudohistory . priest attacked native americans in american antiquities and discoveries of the west ( 1833 ) and african-americans in slavery , as it relates to the negro ( 1843 ) . other nineteenth-century writers , such as thomas gold appleton , in his a sheaf of papers ( 1875 ) , and george perkins marsh , in his the goths in new england , seized upon false notions of viking history to promote the superiority of white people ( as well as to oppose the catholic church ) . such misuse of viking history and imagery reemerged in the twentieth century among some groups promoting white supremacy . . religious pseudohistory . holy blood , holy grail ( 1982 ) by michael baigent , richard leigh , and henry lincoln is a book which purports to show that certain historical figures , such as godfrey of bouillon , and contemporary aristocrats are the lineal descendants of jesus . mainstream historians have widely panned the book , categorizing it as pseudohistory , and pointing out that the genealogical tables used in it are now known to be spurious . nonetheless , the book was an international best-seller and inspired dan brown 's bestselling mystery thriller novel the da vinci code . although historians and archaeologists consider the book of mormon to be an anachronistic invention of joseph smith , many members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) archaeology and the book of mormon another example of religious pseudohistory is the thesis , found in the writings of david barton and others , asserting that the united states was founded as an exclusively christian nation . boston theological institute newsletter volume xxxiv , no . 17 , richard v . pierard , january 25 , 2005 mainstream historians instead support the traditional position , which holds that the american founding fathers intended for church and state to be kept separate . rob boston ( 2007 ) . '' dissecting the religious right 's favorite bible curriculum '' , americans united for separation of church and state , american humanist association . retrieved on april 9 , 2013 searches for noah 's ark have also been categorized as pseudohistory . dietz , robert s . '' ark-eology : a frightening example of pseudo-science '' in geotimes 38:9 ( sept . 1993 ) p . 4 . in her books , starting with the witch-cult in western europe ( 1921 ) , english author margaret murray claimed that the witch trials in the early modern period were actually an attempt by chauvinistic christians to annihilate a witch-cult hypothesis , which she claimed worshipped a horned god . murray 's claims have now been widely rejected by respected historians . nonetheless , her ideas have become the origin myth for modern wicca , a contemporary neopagan religion . belief in murray 's alleged witch-cult is still prevalent among wiccans , but is gradually declining . . hinduism . the belief that ancient india was technologically advanced to the extent of being a nuclear power is gaining popularity in india . emerging extreme nationalist trends and ideologies based on hinduism in the political arena promote these discussions . vasudev devnani , the education minister for the western state of rajasthan , said in january 2017 that it was important to '' understand the scientific significance '' of the cow , as it was the only animal in the world to both inhale and exhale oxygen . in 2014 , prime minister narendra modi told a gathering of doctors and medical staff at a mumbai hospital that the story of the hindu god ganesha showed genetic science existed in ancient india . many new age pseudohistorians who focus on converting mythological stories into history are well received among the crowd . indian science congress ancient aircraft controversy is a related event when capt . anand j . bodas , retired principal of a pilot training facility , claimed that aircraft more advanced than today 's versions existed in ancient india at the indian science congress . . as a topic of study . undergraduate . pseudohistory is offered as a course in liberal arts settings , one example being in claremont mckenna college . . see also . list of pseudohistorians pseudoscientific metrology . references . external links . '' pseudohistory and pseudoscience '' program in the history of science and technology , university of minnesota , minneapolis , minnesota , united states . pseudohistory entry at skeptic 's dictionary the hall of ma'at '' the restoration of history '' from the american skeptic magazine .