Octavia E. Butler

critical reception . most critics praise butler for her unflinching exposition of human flaws , which she depicts with striking realism . the new york times regarded her novels as '' evocative '' and '' often troubling '' explorations of '' far-reaching issues of race , sex , power '' . the magazine of fantasy and science fiction called her examination of humanity '' clear-headed and brutally unsentimental '' , and the village voices dorothy allison described her as '' writing the most detailed social criticism '' where '' the hard edge of cruelty , violence , and domination is described in stark detail '' . locus regarded her as '' one of those authors who pay serious attention to the way human beings actually work together and against each other , and she does so with extraordinary plausibility . '' the houston post ranked her '' among the best sf writers , blessed with a mind capable of conceiving complicated futuristic situations that shed considerable light on our current affairs . '' scholars , on the other hand , focus on butler 's choice to write from the point of view of marginal characters and communities and thus '' expanded sf to reflect the experiences and expertise of the disenfranchised '' . while surveying butler 's novels , critic burton raffel noted how race and gender influence her writing : '' i do not think any of these eight books could have been written by a man , as they most emphatically were not , nor , with the single exception of her first book , pattern-master ( 1976 ) , are likely to have been written , as they most emphatically were , by anyone but an african american . '' robert crossley commended how butler 's '' feminist aesthetic '' works to expose sexual , racial , and cultural chauvinisms because it is '' enriched by a historical consciousness that shapes the depiction of enslavement both in the real past and in imaginary pasts and futures . '' butler has been praised widely for her spare yet vivid style , with washington post book world calling her craftsmanship '' superb '' . burton raffel regards her prose as '' carefully , expertly crafted '' and '' crystalline , at its best , sensuous , sensitive , exact , not in the least directed at calling attention to itself '' . raffel , burton . '' genre to the rear , race and gender to the fore : the novels of octavia e . butler . '' literary review 38.3 ( spring 1995 ) : 454–61 . . influence . in interviews with charles rowell and randall kenan , butler credited the struggles of her working-class mother as an important influence on her writing . . because butler 's mother received little formal education herself , she made sure that young butler was given the opportunity to learn by bringing her reading materials that her white employers threw away , from magazines to advanced books . she also encouraged butler to write . she bought her daughter her first typewriter when she was 10 years old , and , seeing her hard at work on a story casually remarked that maybe one day she could become a writer , causing butler to realize that it was possible to make a living as an author . a decade later , mrs . butler would pay more than a month 's rent to have an agent review her daughter 's work . she also provided butler with the money she had been saving for dental work to pay for butler 's scholarship so she could attend the clarion science fiction writers workshop , where butler sold her first two stories . a second person to play an influential role in butler 's work was the american writer harlan ellison . as a teacher at the open door workshop of the screen writers guild of america , he gave butler her first honest and constructive criticism on her writing after years of lukewarm responses from composition teachers and baffling rejections from publishers . impressed by her work , ellison suggested she attend the clarion science fiction writers workshop and even contributed 100 towards her application fee . as the years passed , ellison 's mentorship became a close friendship . butler herself has been highly influential in science fiction , particularly for people of color . in 2015 , adrienne maree brown and walidah imarisha co-edited octavia 's brood : science fiction stories from social justice movements , a collection of 20 short stories and essays about social justice inspired by butler . toshi reagon adapted parable of the sower into an opera . in 2020 , adrienne maree brown and toshi reagon began collaborating on a podcast called octavia 's parables . . point of view . butler began reading science fiction at a young age , but quickly became disenchanted by the genre 's unimaginative portrayal of ethnicity and class as well as by its lack of noteworthy female protagonists . smith foster , frances . '' octavia butler 's black female future fiction . '' extrapolation 23.1 ( 1982 ) : 37–49 . she determined to correct those gaps by , as de witt douglas kilgore and ranu samantrai point out , '' choosing to write self-consciously as an african-american woman marked by a particular history '' —what butler termed as '' writing myself in '' . butler 's stories , therefore , are usually written from the perspective of a marginalized black woman whose difference from the dominant agents increases her potential for reconfiguring the future of her society . . audience . publishers and critics have labelled butler 's work as science fiction . while butler enjoyed the genre deeply , calling it '' potentially the freest genre in existence '' , butler , octavia . '' black scholar interview with octavia butler : black women and the science fiction genre . '' frances m . beal . black scholar ( mar/apr . 1986 ) : 14–18 . she resisted being branded a genre writer . her narratives have drawn attention of people from varied ethnic and cultural backgrounds . she claimed to have three loyal audiences : black readers , science-fiction fans , and feminists . . adaptations . parable of the sower was adapted as parable of the sower : the opera , written by american folk/blues musician toshi reagon in collaboration with her mother , singer and composer bernice johnson reagon . the adaptation 's libretto and musical score combine african-american spirituals , soul , rock and roll , and folk music into rounds to be performed by singers sitting in a circle . it was performed as part of the public theater 's 2015 under the radar festival in new york city . moon , grace . '' toshi reagon 's parable . '' velvetpark : art , thought and culture . january 14 , 2015 . '' under the radar 2015 : octavia e . butler 's parable of the sower : the concert version '' , the new york times . january 18 , 2015 . kindred was adapted as a graphic novel by author damien duffy and artist john jennings . the adaptation was published by abrams comicsarts on january 10 , 2017 . '' kindred : a graphic novel adaptation '' . retrieved march 11 , 2017 to visually differentiate the time periods in which butler set the story , jennings used muted colors for the present and vibrant ones for the past to demonstrate how the remnants and relevance of slavery are still with us . the graphic novel adaption debuted as number one new york times hardcover graphic book bestseller on january 29 , 2017 . after the success of kindred , duffy and jennings also adapted parable of the sower as a graphic novel . a graphic novel adapts octavia butler 's science fiction classic they also plan on releasing an adaptation of parable of the talents . depress start -- damianduffy.net dawn is currently being adapted for television by producers ava duvernay and charles d . king 's macro ventures , alongside writer victoria mahoney , marking the first time that octavia butler 's work has been adapted for television . there is no projected release date for the adaptation yet . a television series based on wild seed is also in the works for amazon prime video . amazon is developing a show based on octavia butler 's ‘ wild seed ’ . awards and honors . 1980 : creative arts award , l.a . ywca 1984 : hugo award for best short story – '' speech sounds '' 1984 : nebula award for best novelette – '' bloodchild '' 1985 : locus award for best novelette – '' bloodchild '' '' octavia e . butler-about . '' octavia e . butler official website . 1985 : hugo award for best novelette – '' bloodchild '' 1985 : science fiction chronicle award for best novelette – '' bloodchild '' '' science fiction chronicle reader awards winners by year '' , the locus index to sf awards . 2010–2011 . 1988 : science fiction chronicle award for best novelette – '' the evening and the morning and the night '' 1995 : john d . and catherine t . macarthur foundation '' genius '' grant 1995 : bloodchild a new york times notable book 1998 : publishers weekly best '98 books – parable of the talents 1998 : james tiptree jr . award honor list– parable of the talents 1999 : los angeles times bestseller – parable of the talents 1999 : nebula award for best novel – parable of the talents 2001 : arthur c . clarke award shortlist – parable of the talents 2000 : lifetime achievement award in writing from the pen american center 2005 : langston hughes medal of the city college '' octavia e . butler biographical timeline '' , in rebecca j . holden and nisi shawl ( eds ) , strange matings : science fiction , feminism , african american voices , and octavia e . butler , aqueduct press , 2013 . ( 10 ) ( 13 ) . 2010 : inducted by the science fiction hall of fame 2012 : solstice award '' butler , octavia '' , in john clute , david langford , peter nicholls and graham sleight ( eds ) , the encyclopedia of science fiction , london : gollancz . april 3 , 2015 . 2018 : the international astronomical union named a mountain on charon ( a moon of pluto ) butler mons to honor the author , after a public suggestion period and nomination by nasa . 2018 : google featured her in a google doodle in the united states on june 22 , 2018 , which would have been butler 's 71st birthday . 2019 : asteroid 7052 octaviabutler , discovered by american astronomer eleanor helin at palomar observatory in 1988 , was named in her memory . the official was published by the minor planet center on august 27 , 2019 . 2019 : los angeles public library opened the octavia lab , a do-it-yourself maker space and audiovisual space named in butler 's honor . roe , mike . '' la public library 's new maker space/studio lets you 3d print , shoot on a green screen , and way more '' , laist , los angeles , 14 june 2019 . retrieved on 14 october 2019 . . memorial scholarships . in 2006 , the carl brandon society established the octavia e . butler memorial scholarship in butler 's memory , to enable writers of color to attend the annual clarion west writers workshop and clarion workshop , descendants of the original clarion science fiction writers ' workshop in clarion , pennsylvania , where butler got her start . the first scholarships were awarded in 2007 . in march 2019 , butler 's alma mater , pasadena city college , announced the octavia e . butler memorial scholarship for students enrolled in the pathways program and committed to transfer to four-year institutions . the memorial scholarships sponsored by the carl brandon society and pasadena city college help fulfill three of the life 's dream board in a notebook from 1988 : '' i will send poor black youngsters to clarion or other writer 's workshops '' i will help poor black youngsters broaden their horizons '' i will help poor black youngsters go to college '' . selected works . a complete bibliography of butler 's work and secondary was compiled in 2008 by calvin ritch . . series . patternist series : patternmaster ( doubleday , 1976 ) : mind of my mind ( doubleday , 1977 ) : survivor ( doubleday , 1978 ) : wild seed ( doubleday , 1980 ) : clay 's ark ( st . martin 's press , 1984 ) : seed to harvest ( grand central publishing 2007 ; omnibus excluding survivor ) xenogenesis series : dawn ( warner , 1987 ) : adulthood rites ( warner , 1988 ) : imago ( warner , 1989 ) : xenogenesis ( guild america books , 1989 ) ( an omnibus edition of dawn , adulthood rites , & imago ) : lilith 's brood ( warner , 2000 ) ( another omnibus edition of dawn , adulthood rites , & imago ) parable series ( also called the earthseed series ) : parable of the sower ( four walls , eight windows , 1993 ) : parable of the talents ( seven stories press , 1998 ) . standalone novels . kindred ( doubleday , 1979 ) fledgling ( seven stories press , 2005 ) . short story collections . bloodchild and other stories ( four walls , eight windows , 1995 ; seven stories press , 2005 including '' amnesty '' and '' the book of martha '' ) unexpected stories ( 2014 , including '' a necessary being '' and '' childfinder '' ) . essays and speeches . '' lost races of science fiction . '' transmission ( summer 1980 ) : pp . & nbsp ; 16–18 . '' birth of a writer . '' essence 20 ( may 1989 ) : 74+ . reprinted as '' positive obsession '' in bloodchild and other stories . '' free libraries : are they becoming extinct ? '' omni 15.10 ( august 1993 ) : 4 . '' journeys . '' journeys 30 [ oct 1995 ) . part of an edition from pen/faulkner foundation , a talk given by butler at the pen/faulkner awards for fiction in rockville , md at quill & brush . reprinted as '' the monophobic response '' ( the title that butler prefers , in dark matter : a century of speculative fiction from the african diaspora , ed . sheree r thomas ( new york : aspect/warner books , 2000 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 415–416 . '' devil girl from mars : why i write science fiction '' , media in transition . mit february 19 , 1998 . transcript october 4 , 1998 . '' brave new worlds : a few rules for predicting the future '' , essence 31.1 ( may 2000 ) : 164+ . '' a world without racism '' / npr essay un racism conference . npr weekend edition saturday . september 1 , 2001 . '' eye witness : '' butler 's aha ! moment '' . o : the oprah magazine 3.5 ( may 2002 ) : 79–80 . incomplete novels and projects . '' i should have said . '' ( memoir , 1998 ) '' paraclete '' ( novel , 2001 ) '' spiritus '' ( novel , 2001 ) '' parable of the trickster '' ( novel , 1990s-2000s ) . unpublished/not-in-print stories and novels . '' to the victor '' ( story , 1965 , under penname karen adams , winning submission for a competition at pasadena city college ) '' loss '' ( story , 1967 , 5th place in national writer 's digest short story contest ) blindsight ( novel : 1978 , started ; 1981 , first draft ; 1984 , second draft )