Kingdom of Kent

decline of romano-british kent . in the roman britain period , the area of modern kent that lay east of the river medway was a civitas known as cantiaca . its name had been taken from an older common brittonic place-name , cantium ( '' corner of land '' or '' land on the edge '' ) used in the preceding pre-roman iron age , although the extent of this tribal area is unknown . during the late third and fourth centuries , roman britain had been raided repeatedly by franks , saxons , picts , and scoti . as the closest part of britain to mainland europe , it is likely that kent would have experienced many attacks from seafaring raiders , resulting in the construction of four saxon shore along the kentish coast : regulbium , rutupiae , dubris , and portus lemanis . it is also likely that germanic-speaking mercenaries from northern gaul , known as foederati , would have been hired to supplement official roman troops during this period , with land in kent as payment . these foederati would have assimilated into romano-british culture , making it difficult to distinguish them archaeologically . there is evidence that over the fourth and early fifth centuries , rural villas were abandoned , suggesting that the romano-british elite were moving to the comparative safety of fortified urban centres . however , urban centres also witnessed decline ; canterbury evidenced a declining population and reduced activity from the late third century onward , while dover was abandoned by the end of the fourth century . in 407 , the roman legions left britain in order to deal with incursions into the empire 's continental heartlands . in 410 , the roman emperor honorius sent a letter to his british subjects announcing that they must thenceforth look after their own defence and could no longer rely on the imperial military to protect them . according to the anglo-saxon chronicle , produced in late anglo-saxon england and not considered an accurate record of events in the fifth century , in 418 many romans left britain via kent , taking much of their wealth with them . this may represent a memory of a genuine exodus of the roman aristocracy . early jutish kent . jutish migration : 410–499 . according to archaeologist martin welch , the fifth century witnessed '' a radical transformation of what became kent , politically , socially and in terms of physical landscape '' . both literary and archaeological records show the migration of linguistically germanic peoples from northern europe into britain during this century . there has been much debate as to the scale of this migration ; some see it as a mass migration in which large numbers of germanic peoples left northern europe to settle in britain , pushing the native british population to western britain or brittany ; others have argued that only a small warrior elite came over , dominating ( or even enslaving ) the romano-british population , who then began using the old english language and material culture of the newcomers . currently , many scholars accept that there was significant regional variation , with the former view being more applicable in the south and east and the latter in the north and west . toby f . martin , the cruciform brooch and anglo-saxon england ( 2015 ) , pp . 173-174 in kent , archaeological and historical evidence suggests that a large-scale immigration of germanic peoples did indeed take place . stuart brookes and susan harrington , the kingdom and people of kent , ad 400-600 ( 2010 ) , p . 24 however , some of the romano-british population likely remained , as the roman name for the area , cantiaca , influenced the name of the new anglo-saxon kingdom , the cantware ( '' dwellers of kent '' ) . the germanic migration to britain is noted in textual sources from the late anglo-saxon period , most notably bede 's ecclesiastical history of the english people and the anglo-saxon chronicle ; both rely on oral history from the fifth century , and were attempts to establish origin myths that would justify the politics of the time . according to the anglo-saxon chronicle , a '' king of the britons '' known as vortigern invited two germanic leaders , hengist and horsa ( '' stallion '' and '' horse '' ) , to britain to help defend against pictish raiders . after arriving at ypwinesfleot ( ebba 's creek , modern ebbsfleet near ramsgate ) in kent in 449 , hengist and horsa led the defeat of the picts before turning on the british and inviting more germanic tribes to colonise britain . among these were the old saxons , the angles , and the jutes ; the latter settled in kent and the isle of wight , establishing the peoples known as the cantware and wihtwara . according to the chronicle , in 455 hengist and horsa fought vortigern at ægelesthrep ( probably aylesford in kent ) , in which battle horsa was killed . hengist succeeded him as king , followed in turn by his son æsc . in 456 hengest and æsc battled the britons at crecganford ( probably crayford ) . the britons then fled kent for their london stronghold . a similar account is provided in bede 's ecclesiastical history : that the people of kent and isle of wight were descended from jutish settlers , and that horsa was killed in battle against the britons , adding that his body was buried in east kent . the accuracy of these accounts is questioned ; s . e . kelly states that '' the legendary details are easy to dismiss '' . scholars often view hengist and horsa as mythological figures borrowed from folk tradition , to legitimise rulers in the mid-to-late anglo-saxon period . the incoming germanic peoples settled on the prime agricultural land of the romano-britons ; particularly the foothills to the north of the downs and holmesdale south of the downs escarpment . it is likely that they complemented agriculture with animal husbandry , but with nearby coasts and rivers it is also likely that they engaged in fishing and trading . the anglo-saxons made use of pre-existing prehistoric and roman road systems , with 85 % of cemeteries being located within 1.2 & nbsp ; km of a roman road , a navigable river or the coast , and the remaining 15 % being close to ancient trackways . little archaeological evidence of these early settlements exists , but one prominent example is a grubenhaus at lower warbank , keston that was built atop the site of a former roman villa , adjacent to a romano-british trackway through the north downs . fifth-century ceramics have also been found at a number of villa sites around kent , suggesting reoccupation of these locations during this period . in east kent , fifth century cemeteries mostly comprise solely of inhumation burials , with a distinct kentish character . conversely , in west kent cemeteries such orpington mix cremations with inhumations , which is more typical of saxon cemeteries north of the river thames . this may suggest that west kent at this point was independent of east kent , and part of the kingdom of essex north of the thames estuary . development and westward expansion : 500–590 . in the sixth century the kingdom of kent had some relationship with the merovingian-governed kingdom of francia , which was then extending its influence in northwestern europe . textual sources suggest that kent may have been under merovingian control for part of this century . archeological evidence of frankish material culture from this period has been found in kent , but not in other areas of lowland britain , suggesting a trade monopoly with the frankish kingdom . sixth century kentish artefacts have been found in continental europe , in particular in the areas of modern charente , western normandy , the rhineland , frisia , thuringia , and southern scandinavia . they are relatively absent between the sein and the somme across the english channel from the saxons in sussex , suggesting that trade was established between particular tribal or ethnic groups rather than by geography . there is also archaeological evidence of kentish trade links in hampshire and the isle of wight , and copies or imitations appearing in cemeteries further afield , in areas such as wiltshire and cambridgeshire . archaeological evidence suggests that at some point in the sixth century , east kent annexed west kent . to the south lay the weald , a dense forest of no value to the kentish elite , leaving the fertile area west of the kingdom attractive for conquest , particularly the river darenth and the dip slopes of the north downs to the west of the medway . established kingdom and christianisation : 597–650 . firmly in the control of an elite class , kent is the first anglo-saxon kingdom to appear in the historical record in 597 . the monk bede refers to kent as ruled by æthelberht at this period , making him the earliest reliably attested anglo-saxon monarch . bede states that æthelberht was a bretwalda who controlled everything south of the river humber , including other kingdoms . the anglo-saxon chronicle refers to wars in sixth-century britain , but most were in the west and did not affect kent ; the one exception was a battle between the kentish and west saxons in 568 , during which æthelberht 's forces were pushed back into kent . æthelberht 's reign also produced the law of æthelberht , the oldest surviving text in old english . according to bede , the christianization of anglo-saxon england began in kent under æthelberht 's reign when the benedictine monk augustine arrived on the ebbsfleet peninsula in 597 , bringing the gregorian mission with him . æthelberht 's frankish wife , bertha , was already a christian , with æthelberht himself converting a few years later . during this period , anglo-saxon kings moved around their kingdoms continually , subsisting on goods from the local populations and reciprocating with gifts . various seventh and eighth century documents attest to the fact that kent was governed by two kings , a dominant one in the east and a subordinate in the west , likely reflecting the earlier divide . this period witnessed the end of furnished burial , marked archaeologically by less regional distinctiveness of grave goods and more artefacts decorated in the animal style motifs . it also saw the emergence of elite burials with far greater wealth than others ; notable kentish examples have been found at sarre anglo-saxon cemetery and the kingston barrow cemetery , while the elite taplow burial in modern buckinghamshire also contained kentish characteristics , suggesting a potential kentish influence in that region . middle and late anglo-saxon kent . decline and mercian domination : 650–825 . in the seventh century , kent 's power waned as that of mercia and northumbria grew , but it remained the fourth wealthiest kingdom in england , according to the tribal hidage with 15,000 hides of land recorded in the seventh or eighth century . however the period was tumultuous for the kentish royal family ; kent was ruled by ecgberht from 664 to 673 , but between 664 and 667 two royal cousins , æthelred and æthelberht , were killed at eastry royal hall , perhaps because they were a threat to ecgberht . ecgberht was succeeded by his brother , hlothere , who ruled from 674 to 686 before being overthrown and killed by one of ecgberht 's sons , eadric , who had allied with the south saxons ; eadric then ruled until 687 . in the late seventh century , kent gradually came to be dominated by mercia . there had been a kentish royal hall and reeve in lundenwic until at least the 680s , but the city then passed into mercian hands . the loss of lundenwic probably broke kent 's monopoly on cross-channel trade and its control of the thames , eroding its economic influence . according to bede 's later account , in 676 the mercian king æthelred i led an attack that destroyed many kentish churches . mercia 's control of kent increased in the following decades ; by 689–690 east saxon kings under mercian overlordship were active in west kent , and there are records attesting that æthelred arbitrated on the income of the christian communities at minster-in-thanet and reculver , indicating strong mercian control over the east of the kingdom too . in 686 kent was conquered by cædwalla of wessex ; within a year , cædwalla 's brother mul was killed in a kentish revolt , and cædwalla returned to devastate the kingdom again . after this , kent fell into a state of disorder . the mercians backed a client king named oswine , but he seems to have reigned for only about two years , after which wihtred became king . wihtred , famous for the law of wihtred , did a great deal to restore the kingdom after the devastation and tumult of the preceding years , and in 694 he made peace with the wessex by paying compensation for the killing of mul . records of kent following the death of wihtred in 725 are fragmented and obscure . for forty years , two or even three kings typically ruled simultaneously . this division may have made kent the first target of the rising power of offa of mercia : in 764 , he gained supremacy over kent and ruled it through client kings . by the early 770s , it appears that offa was attempting to rule kent directly , and a rebellion followed . a battle was fought at otford in 776 , and although the outcome is unknown , records of following years suggest that the rebels prevailed ; egbert ii and later ealhmund seem to have ruled independently of offa for nearly a decade thereafter . this did not last , however , as offa firmly re-established his authority over kent in 785 . religious centres of this period , minsters containing a church , were often far larger than lay settlements , with access to many resources and trade links ; the minster-in-thanet was recorded as possessing three trade ships . the seventh century saw the reintroduction of masonry in anglo-saxon england , primarily for churches . the earliest churches in the region have been termed the '' kentish group '' and reflect both italian and frankish influences in their design ; early examples include st pancras , st mary , and st peter and st paul , all part of st augustine 's abbey in canterbury , as well as st . andrews in rochester and st mary in lyminge . in the late seventh century , the earliest charters appear , giving estate boundaries , and showing reclamation of land , for use by livestock , from the wantsum channel and romney marsh . the ebbsfleet watermill near gravesend in west kent , dated to circa 700 , also reflects new uses of the landscape . canterbury grew into the economic and political centre of kent during the seventh century , as evidenced by rubbish pits , metalworking , timber halls , and sunken-feature buildings from the period . intensive development was also present at dover , and possibly at rochester , although archaeological evidence is lacking . it is known that both canterbury and rochester were the home to major mints in this period , primarily producing silver sceattas . this suggests that from the seventh century onward , kings in kent were establishing control over the kingdom 's economic structure . during the eighth and ninth centuries , a number of fortified earthworks , most notably wansdyke and offa 's dyke , were constructed as barriers between the warring kingdoms ; the faestendic passing through the river cray and the routeway that has since become the a25 were likely kentish earthworks of this period designed to protect the kingdom . evidence for such militarisation might also be seen in the rochester bridge burdens , documented from the 790s , which lay out the obligation for the roman bridge across the river medway to be maintained , which would be vital for allowing kentish troops to cross the river . after king ealhmund presumably died shortly after witnessing a charter in 784 , his son egbert was driven out of kent and into exile by offa of mercia . it is clear from charters that offa was in control of kent by 785 . rather than just acting as overlord of his new possession , he attempted to annex it or at least reduce its importance by creating a new diocese in mercia at lichfield , possibly because the archbishop of canterbury jænberht refused to crown his son ecgfrith . jænberht resigned a part of his bishopric and the pro-mercian hygeberht was chosen by king offa to replace him '' through enmity conceived against the venerable jænberht and the kentish people '' , according to offa 's eventual successor coenwulf . in 796 offa died , and in this moment of mercian weakness a kentish rebellion under eadbert praen temporarily succeeded . offa 's eventual successor , coenwulf , reconquered kent in 798 , however , and installed his brother cuthred as king . after cuthred 's death in 807 , coenwulf ruled kent directly . mercian authority was replaced by that of wessex in 825 , following the latter 's victory at the battle of ellendun , and the mercian client king baldred was expelled . viking attacks : 825–1066 . the anglo-saxon chronicle records that kent was first attacked by viking raiders in the late eighth century . kent and southeast england would have been an attractive target because of its wealthy minsters , often located on exposed coastal locations . in 804 , the nuns of lyminge were granted refuge in canterbury to escape the attackers , while in 811 kentish forces gathered to repel a viking army based on the isle of sheppey . further recorded attacks occurred on sheppey in 835 , through romney marsh in 841 , in rochester in 842 , canterbury ( battle of aclea ) and sandwich ( battle of sandwich ) in 851 , thanet in 853 , and across kent in 865 . kent was also attractive for its easy access to major land and sea routes . by 811 , it is recorded that vikings built fortifications on the kentish north coast , and over-wintered their armies on thanet in 851–852 and sheppey in 854–855 . at this point , canterbury and rochester still had roman walls that could have been refurbished , but they were nevertheless attacked by the vikings : rochester in 842 , canterbury in 851 , and rochester again in 885 , when they laid siege until it was liberated by alfred 's army . the burghal hidage lists the construction of the eorpenburnam fort , possibly castle toll . hoards have been found , particularly around the west kent coast , that might have been wealth hidden from the vikings . in 892 , when southern england was united under alfred the great , kent was on the brink of disaster . alfred had defeated guthrum the old and allowed vikings by treaty to settle in east anglia and the north east . however , other danes were still on the move . haesten , a highly experienced warrior-leader , had mustered huge forces in northern france having besieged paris and taken brittany . as many as 350 viking ships sailed from boulogne to the south coast of kent in 892 . between 5000 and 10,000 men , with their families and horses , came up limen estuary ( the east-west route of the royal military canal in reclaimed romney marsh ) and attacked a saxon fort near st rumwold 's church , bonnington , killing all inside . they moved on and over the next year built a fortress at appledore . hearing of this , danes in east anglia and elsewhere then rose against alfred . they raided kent from appledore , razing a large settlement , seleberhtes cert ( present-day great chart near ashford ) . they moved further inland and engaged in numerous battles with the english , but after four years they gave up . some retreated to east anglia and others went back to northern france as the forebears of the normans who conquered england in 1066 . a large viking army led by thorkell the tall siege of canterbury in 1011 , culminating in the pillage of the city and the eventual murder of archbishop alphege , on 19 april 1012 . . see also . kings of kent kentish royal legend white horse of kent . notes and references . notes .