Battle of the Falkland Islands

background . the british battlecruisers each mounted eight guns , whereas spee 's best ships ( scharnhorst and gneisenau ) were equipped with eight pieces . additionally , the battlecruisers could make against spee 's ; thus , the british battlecruisers not only significantly outgunned their opponents , but could outrun them too . the obsolete pre-dreadnought battleship had been grounded at stanley to act as a makeshift defence battery for the area . spee 's squadron . at the outbreak of hostilities , the german east asia squadron commanded by spee was outclassed and outgunned by the royal navy and the imperial japanese navy . spee and the high command did not believe germany 's asian possessions could be defended and doubted the squadron could even survive in that theatre . spee wanted to get his ships home and began by heading southeast across the pacific , although he was pessimistic about their chances . spee 's fleet won the battle of coronel off the coast of coronel , chile , on 1 november 1914 , where his ships sank the cruisers ( admiral cradock 's flagship ) and . after the battle , on 3 november , scharnhorst , gneisenau and nürnberg entered valparaíso harbour and were welcomed as heroes by the german population . von spee declined to join in the celebrations ; when presented with a bouquet of flowers , he refused them , commenting that '' these will do nicely for my grave '' . massie , 2004 , p . 237 , citing pitt pp . 66–67 . as required under international law for belligerent ships in neutral countries , the ships left within 24 hours , moving to mas afuera , off the chilean coast . there they received news of the loss of the cruiser , which had previously detached from the squadron and had been raiding in the indian ocean . they also learned of the fall of the german colony at tsingtao in china , which had been their home port . on 15 november , the squadron moved to bahia san quintin on the chilean coast , where a ceremony was held to award 300 iron crosses , second class , to crew members , and an iron cross first class to admiral spee . massie , 2004 , pp . 251–52 spee 's officers counseled a return to germany . the squadron had used half its ammunition at coronel ; the supply could not be replenished , and it was difficult even to obtain coal . intelligence reports suggested that the british ships , cornwall and carnarvon were stationed in the river plate , and that there had been no british warships at stanley when recently visited by a steamer . spee had been concerned about reports of a british battleship , canopus , but its location was unknown . on 26 november , the squadron set sail for cape horn , which they reached on 1 december , then anchored at picton island , where they stayed for three days distributing coal from a captured british collier , the drummuir , and hunting . on 6 december , the british vessel was scuttled and its crew transferred to the auxiliary seydlitz . the same day spee proposed to raid the falkland islands before setting course for germany . the raid was unnecessary because the squadron now had as much coal as it could carry . most of spee 's captains opposed the raid , but he nevertheless decided to proceed . massie , 2004 , pp . 253–56 . british preparations . on 30 october , retired admiral of the fleet sir john fisher was reappointed first sea lord to replace admiral prince louis of battenberg , who had been forced to resign because of public outcry against a perceived german prince running the british navy , though louis had been british and in the royal navy since the age of 14 . on 3 november , fisher was advised that spee had been sighted off valparaíso and acted to reinforce cradock by ordering defence , already sent to patrol the eastern coast of south america , to reinforce his squadron . on 4 november , news of the defeat at coronel arrived . the blow to british naval prestige was palpable , and the british public was rather shocked . as a result , the battlecruisers invincible and inflexible were ordered to leave the grand fleet and sail to plymouth for overhaul and preparation for service abroad . chief of staff at the admiralty was vice-admiral doveton sturdee . fisher had a long-standing disagreement with sturdee , who had been one of those calling for his earlier dismissal as first sea lord in 1911 , so he took the opportunity to appoint sturdee commander-in-chief , south atlantic and pacific , to command the new squadron from invincible . massie , 2004 , p . 248 on 11 november , invincible and inflexible left devonport , although repairs to invincible were incomplete and she sailed with workmen still aboard . despite the urgency of the situation and their maximum speed of around , the ships were forced to cruise at to conserve coal in order to complete the long journey south across the atlantic . the two ships were also heavily loaded with supplies . although secrecy of the mission was considered important so as to surprise spee , lieutenant hirst from glasgow heard locals discussing the forthcoming arrival of the ships while ashore at cape verde on 17 november ; however the news did not reach spee . sturdee arrived at the abrolhos rocks on 26 november , where rear admiral stoddart awaited him with the remainder of the squadron . massie , 2004 , p . 249 sturdee announced his intention to depart for the falkland islands on 29 november . from there , the fast light cruisers glasgow and bristol would patrol seeking spee , summoning reinforcements if they found him . captain luce of glasgow , who had been at the battle of coronel , objected that there was no need to wait so long and persuaded sturdee to depart a day early . the squadron was delayed during the journey for 12 hours when a cable towing targets for practice-firing became wrapped around one of invincibles propellers , but the ships arrived on the morning of 7 december . the two light cruisers moored in the inner part of stanley harbour , while the larger ships remained in the deeper outer harbour of port william . divers set about removing the offending cable from invincible ; cornwalls boiler fires were extinguished to make repairs , and bristol had one of her engines dismantled . the famous ship —reduced to a coal bunker—supplied coal to invincible and inflexible . the armed merchant cruiser macedonia was ordered to patrol the harbour , while kent maintained steam in her boilers , ready to replace macedonia the next day , 8 december ; spee 's fleet arrived in the morning of the same day . massie , 2004 , pp . 249–51 an unlikely source of intelligence on the movement of the german ships was from mrs muriel felton , wife of the manager of a sheep station at fitzroy , and her maids christina goss and marian macleod . they were alone when felton received a telephone call from port stanley advising that german ships were approaching the islands . the maids took turns riding to the top of a nearby hill to record the movements of the ships , which felton relayed to port stanley by telephone . her reports allowed bristol and macedonia to take up the best positions to intercept . the admiralty later presented the women with silver plates and felton received an obe for her actions . . battle . opening moves . spee 's cruisers—gneisenau and nürnberg—approached stanley first . at the time , the entire british fleet was coaling . some believe that , had spee pressed the attack , sturdee 's ships would have been easy targets , '' . the prospects should the germans press home an attack without delay were far from pleasant . '' corbett , j.s . british official history – naval operations . ( london : h.m . stationery office , 1921 ) vol . i , chapter xxix , cited in baldwin , hanson w . world war i : an outline history . ( new york : grove press , 1962 ) p . 46 although this is a subject of conjecture and some controversy . any british ship that tried to leave would have faced the full firepower of the german ships ; having a vessel sunk might also have blocked the rest of the british squadron inside the harbour . however , the germans were surprised by gunfire from an unexpected source : , which had been grounded as a guardship and was behind a hill . this was enough to check the germans ' advance . the sight of the distinctive tripod masts of the british battlecruisers confirmed that they were facing a better-equipped enemy . hms kent was already making her way out of the harbour and had been ordered to pursue spee 's ships . made aware of the german ships , sturdee had ordered the crews to breakfast , knowing that canopus had bought them time while steam was raised . to spee , with his crew battle-weary and his ships outgunned , the outcome seemed inevitable . realising his danger too late , and having lost any chance to attack the british ships while they were at anchor , spee and his squadron dashed for the open sea . the british left port around 10:00 . spee was ahead by , with the german ships in line abreast heading southeast , but there was plenty of daylight left for the faster battlecruisers to catch up . contact . it was 13:00 when the british battlecruisers opened fire , but it took them half an hour to get the range of sms leipzig . realising that he could not outrun the british ships , spee decided to engage them with his armoured cruisers alone , to give the light cruisers a chance to escape . he turned to fight just after 13:20 . the german armoured cruisers had the advantage of a freshening north-west breeze , which caused the funnel smoke of the british ships to obscure their target practically throughout the action . gneisenau 's second-in-command hans pochhammer indicated that there was a long respite for the germans during the early stages of the battle , as the british attempted unsuccessfully to force admiral spee away from his advantageous position . despite initial success by scharnhorst and gneisenau in striking invincible , the british capital ships suffered little damage . spee then turned to escape , but the battlecruisers came within extreme firing range 40 minutes later . hms invincible and hms inflexible engaged scharnhorst and gneisenau , while sturdee detached his cruisers to chase sms leipzig and sms nürnberg . hms inflexible and hms invincible turned to fire broadsides at the armoured cruisers and spee responded by trying to close the range . his flagship sms scharnhorst took extensive damage with funnels flattened , fires and a list . the list became worse at 16:04 , and she sank by 16:17 , taking von spee and the entire crew with her . sms gneisenau continued to fire and evade until 17:15 , by which time her ammunition had been exhausted , and her crew allowed her to sink at 18:02 . regan , geoffrey . military anecdotes ( 1992 ) p . 13 guinness publishing during her death throes , admiral sturdee continued to engage sms gneisenau with his two battlecruisers and the cruiser hms carnarvon , rather than detaching one of the battlecruisers to hunt down the escaping dresden . 190 of sms gneisenaus crew were rescued from the water . both of the british battlecruisers had received about 40 hits between them from the german ships , with one crewman killed and four injured . meanwhile , sms nürnberg and sms leipzig had run from the british cruisers . sms nürnberg was running at full speed but in need of maintenance , while the crew of the pursuing hms kent were pushing her boilers and engines to the limit . sms nürnberg finally turned for battle at 17:30 . hms kent had the advantage in shell weight and armour . sms nürnberg suffered two boiler explosions around 18:30 , giving the advantage in speed and manoeuvrability to hms kent . the german ship then rolled over and sank at 19:27 after a long chase . the cruisers hms glasgow and hms cornwall had chased down sms leipzig ; hms glasgow closed to finish sms leipzig , which had run out of ammunition but was still flying her battle ensign . sms leipzig fired two flares , so hms glasgow ceased fire . at 21:23 , more than southeast of the falklands , she also rolled over and sank , leaving only 18 survivors . during the course of the main battles , sturdee had despatched captain fanshawe on hms bristol , together with hms macedonia , to destroy the colliers . baden and santa isabel were chased , stopped , and ( after removing the crews ) sunk by hms bristol and hms macedonia at 19:00 . seydlitz had taken a separate course and escaped . . outcome . casualties and damage were extremely disproportionate ; the british suffered only very lightly . admiral spee and his two sons were among the german dead . rescued german survivors , 215 total , became prisoners on the british ships . most were from the gneisenau , nine were from nürnberg and 18 were from leipzig . scharnhorst was lost with all hands . one of gneisenaus officers who lived had been the sole survivor on three different guns on the battered cruiser . he was pulled from the water saying he was a first cousin of the british commander ( stoddart ) . regan p . 14 of the known german force of eight ships , two escaped : the auxiliary seydlitz and the light cruiser dresden , which roamed at large for a further three months before her captain was cornered by a british squadron ( kent , glasgow and orama ) off the juan fernández islands on 14 march 1915 . after battle of más a tierra , dresden 's captain evacuated his ship and scuttled her by detonating the main ammunition magazine . as a consequence of the battle , the german east asia squadron , germany 's only permanent overseas naval formation , effectively ceased to exist . commerce raiding on the high seas by regular warships of the kaiserliche marine was brought to an end . however , germany put several armed merchant cruiser into service as commerce raiders until the end of the war ( for example , see felix von luckner ) . british intelligence during the battle . after the battle , german naval experts were baffled at why admiral spee attacked the base and how the two squadrons could have met so coincidentally in so many thousands miles of open waters . kaiser william ii 's handwritten note on the official report of the battle reads : '' it remains a mystery what made spee attack the falkland islands . see 'mahan 's naval strategy ' . '' franz von rintelen ( in english ) . the dark invader : wartime reminiscences of a german naval intelligence officer ( 1998 ed . ) . routledge . pp . 326 . it was generally believed spee was misled by the german admiralty into attacking the falklands , a royal naval fuelling base , after receiving intelligence from the german wireless station at valparaiso which reported the port free of royal navy warships . despite the objection of three of his ships ' captains , spee proceeded to attack . halpern , p . 97 massie , 2004 , p . 255 however , in 1925 a german naval officer , franz von rintelen , interviewed admiral william reginald hall , director of the admiralty 's naval intelligence division ( nid ) , and was informed that spee 's squadron had been lured towards the british battlecruisers by means of a fake signal sent in a german naval code broken by british cryptographers . ( similarly , on 14 march 1915 , was intercepted by british ships while taking on coal at sea in a location identified by nid codebreakers . ) beesly , patrick ( 1982 ) . room 40 . london : hamish hamilton ltd . pp . 77–78 . . scharnhorst wreck . the wreck of scharnhorst was discovered on 4 december 2019 , approximately southeast of stanley at a depth of . . notes . references . michael mcnally ( 2012 ) . coronel and falklands 1914 ; duel in the south atlantic . osprey campaign series 248 . osprey publishing . . external links . description of the battle from the diary of captain jd allen rn ( hms kent ) battle of the falkland islands battles of coronel and the falklands – a pictorial look sailing vessel fairport and her appearance during the battle discovery of ww1 german battlecruiser sms scharnhorst in falklands waters