Ring ouzel

nomenclature . '' ouzel '' ( or '' ousel '' ) is an old name for the common blackbird , the word being cognate with the german '' amsel '' . lockwood ( 1984 ) p.112 . '' ouzel '' may also be applied to a group of superficially similar but more distantly related birds , the dippers , the european representative of which is sometimes known as the water ouzel . lockwood ( 1984 ) p.162 . '' ring ouzel '' was first used by john ray in his 1674 collection of english words not generally used and became established with his 1678 the ornithology of francis willughby of middleton in the county of warwick . lockwood ( 1984 ) p.129 . as with the english name , the scientific name also refers to the male 's obvious white neck crescent , being derived from the latin words turdus , '' thrush '' , and torquatus , '' collared '' . . taxonomy . about 65 species of medium to large thrushes are in the genus turdus , characterised by rounded heads , longish , pointed wings , and usually melodious songs . although two european thrushes , the song thrush and mistle thrush , are early offshoots from the eurasian lineage of turdus thrushes after they spread north from africa , the ring ousel is descended from ancestors that had colonised the caribbean islands from africa and subsequently reached europe from there . a 2007 mitochondrial cytochrome b gene analysis showed that the species found in europe and asia diverged from south american ‘ ’ turdus ’ ’ thrushes between 1.2-3.7 mya . detailed of the study suggests that the ring ouzel , a member of the eurasian group , may be more closely related to naumann 's thrush rather than the superficially more similar common blackbird . this species was first described by carl linnaeus in his landmark 1758 10th edition of systema naturae under its current scientific name . . subspecies . the ring ouzel has three subspecies : northern ring ouzel , turdus torquatus torquatus linnaeus ( 1758 ) . the nominate subspecies . breeds across western and northern europe from ireland through scandinavia to northwest russia , winters in southern europe and northwest africa . alpine ring ouzel , t . t . alpestris brehm , c l ( 1831 ) breeds in mountain ranges from iberia through southern and central europe to the balkans , greece and western turkey , also north africa . winters in north africa , southern europe and southern turkey . caucasian ring ouzel , t . t . amicorum hartert ( 1923 ) . breeds in central and eastern turkey east to turkmenistan , winters mainly in iran and parts of iraq . analysis of mitochondrial dna from across europe suggest that low altitude populations share their with arctic and alpine forms , and that this reflects a once much broader distribution . . description . the adult male is all black except for a white crescent on the breast and a yellowish bill . the wings have a silvery appearance due to white feather edgings . the male sings its loud and mournful song from trees or rocks . the female is similar but duller , and younger birds often lack the breast crescent . the juvenile has brown plumage . the pale throat makes adults of this species unmistakeable , and first-winter males also sometime show a weak crescent . other young ouzels can be confused with common blackbirds , but always show a paler wing panel than that species . males of t . t . alpestris have broader white scalloping on their underparts , giving a distinctly scaly appearance below . the wing panel is also paler than in the nominate subspecies . females are much as nominate , but with broad white fringes on the chin and throat . males of t . t . amicorum have the largest and whitest breastband , of the three subspecies , and the broader white edges and tips of the wing feathers form a distinctive formed whitish panel in the wing . females have narrow white fringes on their underparts . . distribution and habitat . the ring ouzel breeds discontinuously across western and northern europe from north-west ireland through scandinavia to northwest russia , and across and central southern europe in mountains from the pyrenees through the alps , the balkans , greece and turkey east to turkmenistan . there are small populations in the mountains of north africa and iran . in 2014 , breeding was recorded on thetiman ridge , arkhangelsk oblast , about further east than previously known breeding sites in north russia . the ring ouzel is extinct in latvia and occurs only on migration in denmark . it is a passage migrant in syria and a vagrant to iceland , jordan , the arabian peninsula , sudan , kazakhstan , mauritania , svalbard and jan mayen . behaviour and ecology . it is territorial and normally seen alone or in pairs , although loose flocks may form on migration . when not breeding , several birds may also be loosely associated in good feeding areas , such as a fruiting tree , often with other thrushes . diet . the ring ouzel is omnivorous , eating a wide range of insects , earthworms , small amphibians and reptiles and fruit . most animal prey is caught on the ground . during spring migration and the breeding season , invertebrates dominate the diet , and include earthworms , beetles fly , ants , spiders and snails . later in the year , fruit becomes more important , including bramble , fragaria , cherry hawthorn , rowan and juniper . the young are mainly fed invertebrates , caterpillars and earthworms being a major item where available . although birds migrating in autumn use similar habitat to that used in spring , berries then make up most of their diet , particularly elderberries , haws and , where available , juniper berries . . nesting . the ring ouzel nests in bushes or amongst rocks , laying several pale blue eggs , mottled with brown , in a neat cup-shaped nest . status and conservation . the ring ouzel has an extensive range , estimated at , and a large population , estimated at 600,000–2 million individuals in europe ( which comprises 95 % of the breeding range ) . the species is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the iucn red list ( i.e . , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and is therefore evaluated as least concern . the breeding population in europe is estimated to be 299,000-598,000 pairs . there are signs of decline in several . suspected causes include climate change , human disturbance , hunting and outdoor leisure activities . loss of junipers may be a factor in southern spain and north-west africa , as may upland forestation in the uk . there may also be competition form larger thrushes like the common blackbird , mistle thrushand fieldfare . a scottish study suggested that sites at higher altitudes and with a good cover of heather were less likely to have been deserted by breeding ring ouzels than lower or more open locations . in the alps breeding densities can reach 60–8022 & nbsp ; pairs/km² , but are generally much lower with 3722 & nbsp ; pairs/km² in haute-savoie , 22 & nbsp ; pairs/km² in the jura mountains , and 822 & nbsp ; pairs/km² in more open habitats in britain . . references . cited texts . . notes . bibliography . . external links . ageing and sexing ( pdf ; 0.9 mb ) by javier blasco-zumeta & gerd-michael heinze