Amanita phalloides

taxonomy and naming . the death cap is named in latin as such in the correspondence between the english physician thomas browne and christopher merrett . ' the fungi phalloides '' i found not very far from norwich , large and very fetid.i have a part of one dried still by me . letter dated august 18th 1668 in vol 3 . the works of sir thomas browne ed . simon wilkins 1834 also , it was described by french botanist sébastien vaillant in 1727 , who gave a succinct phrase name '' fungus phalloides , annulatus , sordide virescens , et patulus '' - a recognizable name for the fungus today . though the scientific name phalloides means '' phallus-shaped '' , it is unclear whether it is named for its resemblance to a literal phallus or the stinkhorn mushrooms phallus . in 1821 , elias magnus fries described it as agaricus phalloides , but included all white amanitas within its description . finally in 1833 , johann heinrich friedrich link settled on the name amanita phalloides , link jhf ( 1833 ) grundriss der kraeuterkunde iv . haude und spenerschen buchhandlung ( s.j . joseephy ) , berlin after persoon had named it amanita viridis 30 years earlier . although louis secretan 's use of the name amanita phalloides predates link 's , it has been rejected for nomenclatural purposes because secretan 's works did not use binomial nomenclature consistently ; some taxonomists have , however , disagreed with this opinion . amanita phalloides is the type species of amanita section phalloideae , a group that contains all of the deadly poisonous amanita species thus far identified . most notable of these are the species known as destroying angels , namely amanita virosa and amanita bisporigera , as well as the fool 's mushroom ( a . verna ) . the term '' destroying angel '' has been applied to a . & nbsp ; phalloides at times , but '' death cap '' is by far the most common vernacular name used in english . other common names also listed include '' stinking amanita '' and '' deadly amanita '' . benjamin , p.203 a rarely appearing , all-white form was initially described a . & nbsp ; phalloides f . alba by max britzelmayr , jordan & wheeler , p.109 though its status has been unclear . it is often found growing amid normally colored death caps . it has been described , in 2004 , as a distinct variety and includes what was termed a . & nbsp ; verna var . tarda . the true amanita verna fruits in spring and turns yellow with koh solution , whereas a . & nbsp ; phalloides never does . . description . the death cap has a large and imposing epigeous ( aboveground ) fruiting body ( basidiocarp ) , usually with a pileus ( cap ) from across , initially rounded and hemispherical , but flattening with age . the color of the cap can be pale- , yellowish- , or olive-green , often paler toward the margins and often paler after rain . the cap surface is sticky when wet and easily peeled , a troublesome feature , as that is allegedly a feature of edible fungi . jordan & wheeler , p.99 the remains of the partial veil are seen as a skirtlike , floppy annulus usually about below the cap . the crowded white lamellae ( gills ) are free . the stipe is white with a scattering of grayish-olive scales and is long and thick , with a swollen , ragged , sac-like white volva ( base ) . as the volva , which may be hidden by leaf litter , is a distinctive and diagnostic feature , it is important to remove some debris to check for it . jordan & wheeler , p.108 the smell has been described as initially faint and honey-sweet , but strengthening over time to become overpowering , sickly-sweet and objectionable . zeitlmayr , p.61 young specimens first emerge from the ground resembling a white egg covered by a universal veil , which then breaks , leaving the volva as a remnant . the spore print is white , a common feature of amanita . the transparent spores are globular to egg-shaped , measure 8–10 & nbsp ; μm ( 0.3 & ndash ; 0.4 & nbsp ; mil ) long , and stain blue with iodine . the gills , in contrast , stain pallid lilac or pink with concentrated sulfuric acid . . distribution and habitat . the death cap is native to europe , where it is widespread . it is found from the southern coastal regions of scandinavia in the north , to ireland in the west , east to poland and western russia , and south throughout the balkans , in greece , italy , spain and portugal in the mediterranean basin , and in morocco and algeria in north africa . in west asia it has been reported from forests of northern iran . asef , m.r . 2009 . poisonous mushrooms of iran . iran-shenasi publishing . there are records from further east in asia but these have yet to be confirmed as a . & nbsp ; phalloides . it is ectomycorrhizally associated with several tree species and is symbiotic with them . in europe , these include hardwood and , less frequently , conifer species . it appears most commonly under oaks , but also under beeches , chestnuts , aesculus , birches , filberts , hornbeams , pines , and spruces . in other areas , a . & nbsp ; phalloides may also be associated with these trees or with only some species and not others . in coastal california , for example , a . & nbsp ; phalloides is associated with coast live oak , but not with the various coastal pine species , such as monterey pine . in countries where it has been introduced , it has been restricted to those exotic trees with which it would associate in its natural range . there is , however , evidence of a . & nbsp ; phalloides associating with tsuga and with genera of the myrtaceae : eucalyptus in tanzania and algeria , and leptospermum and kunzea in new zealand , suggesting that the species may have invasive potential . it may have also been anthropogenically introduced to the island of cyprus , where it has been documented to fruit within corylus avellana plantations . loizides m , bellanger jm , yiangou y , moreau pa . ( 2018 ) . preliminary phylogenetic investigations into the genus amanita ( agaricales ) in cyprus , with a review of previous records and poisoning incidents . documents mycologiques 37 , 201–218 . by the end of the 19th century , charles horton peck had reported a . & nbsp ; phalloides in north america . in 1918 , samples from the eastern united states were identified as being a distinct though similar species , a . brunnescens , by g . f . atkinson of cornell university . by the 1970s , it had become clear that a . & nbsp ; phalloides does occur in the united states , apparently having been introduced from europe alongside chestnuts , with populations on the west and east coasts . benjamin , p.204 although a 2006 historical review concluded the east coast populations were introduced , the origins of the west coast populations remained unclear , due to scant historical records . a 2009 genetic study provided strong evidence for the introduced status of the fungus on the west coast of north america . amanita phalloides has been conveyed to new countries across the southern hemisphere with the importation of hardwoods and conifers . introduced oaks appear to have been the vector to australia and south america ; populations under oaks have been recorded from melbourne and canberra ( where two people died in january 2012 , of four who were poisoned ) and adelaide , death cap mushrooms growing in the hills elisa black , adelaidenow.com.au , 7 january 2012 , accessed 8 january 2012 as well as uruguay . it has been recorded under other introduced trees in argentina and chile . pine plantations are associated with the fungus in tanzania and south africa , where it is also found under oaks and poplars . . toxicity . as the common name suggests , the fungus is highly toxic , and is responsible for the majority of fatal mushroom poisonings worldwide . death cap mushroom soup claims fourth victim its biochemistry has been researched intensively for decades , and , or half a cap , of this mushroom is estimated to be enough to kill a human . benjamin , p.211 on average , one person dies a year in north america from death cap ingestion . some authorities strongly advise against putting suspected death caps in the same basket with fungi collected for the table and to avoid even touching them . furthermore , the toxicity is not thermostability , freezing , or drying . . similarity to edible species . in general , poisoning incidents are unintentional and result from errors in identification . recent cases highlight the issue of the similarity of a . & nbsp ; phalloides to the edible volvariella volvacea , with east- and southeast-asian immigrants in australia and the west coast of the united states falling victim . in an episode in oregon , four members of a korean family required liver transplants . benjamin , pp.198–199 of the 9 people poisoned in the canberra region between 1988 and 2011 , three were from laos and two were from china . many north american incidents of death cap poisoning have occurred among laotian and hmong immigrants , since it is easily confused with amanita princeps , commonly known as '' white caesar '' , a popular mushroom in their native countries . novices may mistake juvenile death caps for edible puffballs or mature specimens for other edible amanita species , such as amanita lanei , so some authorities recommend avoiding the collecting of amanita species for the table altogether . the white form of a . & nbsp ; phalloides may be mistaken for edible species of agaricus , especially the young fruitbodies whose unexpanded caps conceal the telltale white gills ; all mature species of agaricus have dark-colored gills . in europe , other similarly green-capped species collected by mushroom hunters include various green-hued brittlegills of the genus russula and the formerly popular tricholoma equestre , now regarded as hazardous owing to a series of restaurant poisonings in france . brittlegills , such as russula heterophylla , russula aeruginea , and russula virescens , can be distinguished by their brittle flesh and the lack of both volva and ring . zeitlmayr , p.62 other similar species include amanita subjunquillea in eastern asia and amanita arocheae , which ranges from andes colombia north at least as far as central mexico , both of which are also poisonous . in january 2012 four people were accidentally poisoned when death caps ( reportedly misidentified as straw fungi , which are popular in chinese and other asian dishes ) were served at a new year 's eve dinner party in canberra , australia . all the victims required hospital treatment and two of them died , with a third requiring a liver transplant . . biochemistry . the species is now known to contain two main groups of toxins , both multicyclic ( ring-shaped ) peptides , spread throughout the mushroom tissue : the amatoxins and the phallotoxins . another toxin is phallolysin , which has shown some hemolysis ( red blood cell–destroying ) activity in vitro . an unrelated compound , antamanide , has also been isolated . amatoxins consist of at least eight compounds with a similar structure , that of eight amino-acid rings ; they were isolated in 1941 by heinrich o . wieland and rudolf hallermayer of the university of munich . of the amatoxins , α-amanitin is the chief component and along with β-amanitin is likely responsible for the toxic effects . their major toxic mechanism is the inhibition of rna polymerase ii , a vital enzyme in the synthesis of messenger rna ( mrna ) , microrna , and small nuclear rna ( snrna ) . without mrna , essential protein synthesis and hence cell metabolism grind to a halt and the cell dies . the liver is the principal organ affected , as it is the organ which is first encountered after absorption in the gastrointestinal tract , though other organs , especially the kidneys , are susceptible . benjamin , p.217 the rna polymerase of amanita phalloides is insensitive to the effects of amatoxins , so the mushroom does not poison itself . the phallotoxins consist of at least seven compounds , all of which have seven similar peptide rings . phalloidin was isolated in 1937 by feodor lynen , heinrich wieland 's student and son-in-law , and ulrich wieland of the university of munich . though phallotoxins are highly toxic to liver cells , they have since been found to add little to the death cap 's toxicity , as they are not absorbed through the gut . furthermore , phalloidin is also found in the edible ( and sought-after ) blusher ( amanita rubescens ) . another group of minor active peptides are the virotoxins , which consist of six similar monocyclic heptapeptides . like the phallotoxins , they do not induce any acute toxicity after ingestion in humans . the genome of the death cap has been sequenced . . signs and symptoms . death caps have been reported to taste pleasant . this , coupled with the delay in the appearance of symptoms—during which time internal organs are being severely , sometimes irreparably , damaged—makes it particularly dangerous . initially , symptoms are gastrointestinal in nature and include colicky abdominal pain , with watery diarrhea , nausea , and vomiting , which may lead to dehydration if left untreated , and , in severe cases , hypotension , tachycardia , hypoglycemia , and acid–base homeostasis . these first symptoms resolve two to three days after the ingestion . a more serious deterioration signifying liver involvement may then occur—jaundice , diarrhea , delirium , seizures , and coma due to fulminant liver failure and attendant hepatic encephalopathy caused by the accumulation of normally liver-removed substance in the blood . kidney failure ( either secondary to severe hepatitis or caused by direct toxic kidney damage ) and coagulopathy may appear during this stage . life-threatening complications include increased intracranial pressure , intracranial bleeding , pancreatitis , acute kidney failure , and cardiac arrest . death generally occurs six to sixteen days after the poisoning . mushroom poisoning is more common in europe than in america . up to the mid-20th century , the mortality rate was around 60–70 % , but this has been greatly reduced with advances in medical care . a review of death cap poisoning throughout europe from 1971 to 1980 found the overall mortality rate to be 22.4 % ( 51.3 % in children under ten and 16.5 % in those older than ten ) . this has fallen further in more recent surveys to around 10–15 % . benjamin , p.215 . treatment . consumption of the death cap is a medical emergency requiring hospitalization . the four main categories of therapy for poisoning are preliminary medical care , supportive measures , specific treatments , and liver transplantation . preliminary care consists of gastric decontamination with either activated carbon or gastric lavage ; due to the delay between ingestion and the first symptoms of poisoning , it is common for patients to arrive for treatment many hours after ingestion , potentially reducing the efficacy of these interventions . supportive measures are directed towards treating the dehydration which results from fluid loss during the gastrointestinal phase of intoxication and correction of metabolic acidosis , hypoglycemia , electrolyte imbalances , and impaired coagulation . no definitive antidote is available , but some specific treatments have been shown to improve survivability . high-dose continuous intravenous penicillin g has been reported to be of benefit , though the exact mechanism is unknown , and trials with cephalosporins show promise . benjamin , p.227 some evidence indicates intravenous silibinin , an extract from the silybum marianum ( silybum marianum ) , may be beneficial in reducing the effects of death cap poisoning . a long-term clinical trial of intravenous silibinin began in the us in 2010 . silibinin prevents the uptake of amatoxins by hepatocyte , thereby protecting undamaged liver tissue ; it also stimulates dna-dependent rna polymerases , leading to an increase in rna synthesis . several historical figures may have died from a . & nbsp ; phalloides poisoning ( or other similar , toxic amanita species ) . these were either accidental poisonings or assassination plots . alleged victims of this kind of poisoning include claudius , pope clement vii , the russian tsaritsa natalia naryshkina , and holy roman emperor charles vi . r . gordon wasson recounted the details of these deaths , noting the likelihood of amanita poisoning . in the case of clement vii , the illness that led to his death lasted five months , making the case inconsistent with amatoxin poisoning ( p . & nbsp ; 110 ) . natalia naryshkina is said to have consumed a large quantity of pickled mushrooms prior to her death . it is unclear whether the mushrooms themselves were poisonous or if she succumbed to food poisoning . charles vi experienced indigestion after eating a dish of sautéed mushrooms . this led to an illness from which he died 10 days later—symptomatology consistent with amatoxin poisoning . his death led to the war of the austrian succession . noted voltaire , '' this dish of mushrooms changed the destiny of europe . '' benjamin , p.35 the case of claudius ' poisoning is more complex . claudius was known to have been very fond of eating amanita caesarea . following his death , many sources have attributed it to his being fed a meal of death caps instead of caesar 's mushrooms . ancient authors , such as tacitus and suetonius , are unanimous about poison having been added to the mushroom dish , rather than the dish having been prepared from poisonous mushrooms . wasson speculated the poison used to kill claudius was derived from death caps , with a fatal dose of an unknown poison ( possibly a variety of nightshade ) being administered later during his illness . benjamin , pp.33–34 other historians have speculated that claudius may have died of natural causes . see also . list of amanita species list of deadly fungi mushroom poisoning . references . cited texts . . external links . uk telegraph newspaper ( september 2008 ) - one woman dead , another critically ill after eating death cap fungi americanmushrooms.com - the death cap mushroom amanita phalloides amanita phalloides : the death cap amanita phalloides : invasion of the death cap key to species of amanita section phalloideae from north and central america - amanita studies website california fungi—amanita phalloides death cap in australia - anbg website on the trail of the death cap mushroom from national public radio