Dickinson College

history . 18th–20th centuries . the carlisle grammar school was founded in 1773 as a frontier latin school for young men in western pennsylvania . within years carlisle 's elite , such as james wilson and john montgomery , were pushing for development of the school as a college . in 1782 , benjamin rush , a physician who was a prominent leader during and after the american revolution , met in philadelphia with montgomery and william bingham , a prominent businessman and politician . as their conversation about founding a frontier college in carlisle took place on his porch , '' bingham 's porch '' was long a rallying cry at dickinson . dickinson college was chartered by the pennsylvania legislature on september 9 , 1783 , six days after the signing of the treaty of paris ( 1783 ) that ended the american revolution ; it was the first college to be founded in the newly independent nation . rush intended to name the college after the governor of pennsylvania john dickinson and his wife mary norris dickinson , proposing '' john and mary 's college . '' the dickinsons had given the new college an extensive library which they jointly owned , one of the largest libraries in the colonies . the name dickinson college was chosen instead . when founded , its location west of the susquehanna river made it the westernmost college in the united states . for the first meeting of the trustees , held in april 1784 , rush made his first journey to carlisle . the trustees selected charles nisbet , a scottish minister and scholar , to serve as the college 's first president . he arrived and began to serve on july 4 , 1785 , serving until his unexpected death in 1804 . a combination of financial troubles and faculty dissension led to a college closing from 1816 to 1821 . in 1832 , when the trustees were unable to resolve a faculty curriculum dispute , they ordered dickinson 's temporary closure a second time . the law school dates to 1833 . it became a separate school 1890 , although the law school and the college continued to share a president until 1912 . the law school is now affiliated with the pennsylvania state university . among the 18th-century graduates of dickinson were robert cooper grier and roger brooke taney , who later became u.s . supreme court justices , and served together on the court for 18 years . during the 19th century , two noted dickinson college alumni had prominent roles in the lead up to the civil war . they were james buchanan , the 15th president of the united states , and roger brooke taney , the 5th chief justice of the united states . dickinson is one of three liberal arts colleges to have graduated a president and a chief justice ( bowdoin and amherst are the others ) . taney led the supreme court in its ruling on the dred scott v . sandford decision , which held that congress could not prohibit slavery in federal territories , overturning the missouri compromise . buchanan threw the full prestige of his administration behind congressional approval of the lecompton constitution in kansas . during the civil war , the campus and town of carlisle were occupied twice by confederate forces in 1863 . when george metzger , class of 1798 , died in 1879 , he left his land and 25,000 to the town of carlisle to found a college for women . in 1881 , the metzger institute opened . the college operated independently until 1913 , when its building was leased to dickinson college for the education of women . the building served as a women 's dorm until 1963 . in 1887 , zatae longsdorff became the first woman to graduate from dickinson . in 1901 , john robert paul brock became the first black man to graduate from dickinson ; in 1919 , esther popel shaw was the first black woman to graduate . henry clarke , an alumnus who developed the klondike bar into a national brand for an ice cream bar , founded the clarke forum for contemporary issues at dickinson college , and in 1994 established the clarke center . the town of carlisle was also the location of the carlisle army barracks , which was adapted in the late 1870s for use as the carlisle indian industrial school . in 1879 dickinson college and the nearby carlisle indian school began a collaboration , when james andrew mccauley , president of the college , led the first worship service at the indian school . the collaboration between the institutions lasted almost four decades , from the opening day to the closing of the indian school in 1918 . dickinson college professors served as chaplains and special faculty to the native american students . professor charles francis himes , dr . george edward reed , stephen baird , and joshua lippincott fostered the relationship between the institutions through religious services , advisory meetings , lectures , and commencement speeches . dickinson college students volunteered services , observed teaching methods , and participated in events at the indian school . dickinson students visited the indian school to offer their talents and services . the october 24 , 1896 dickinsonian reported that volunteer sunday school teachers came from the college chapter of the ymca . those teachers with indian students were said to '' enjoy a rare privilege . the work is doubly interesting because one can be studying the characteristics of his scholars , at the same time learning many valuable lessons in methods of teaching . '' the college gave dickinson students a half-day holiday to attend the annual commencement and '' very interesting exercises '' at the indian school . dickinson college accepted select indian school students to attend its preparatory school ( '' conway hall '' ) and gain college-level education . dickinson also admitted native american students directly : thomas marshall was one of the first such students at dickinson . in 1910 , frank mount pleasant was the first native american to graduate from dickinson college . 21st century . since 2000 , dickinson 's acceptance rate has dropped by 20 % , sat scores have risen by 100 points , and the institutional endowment has more than doubled . in 2000 dickinson opened a new science building , tome hall , a state-of-the-art interdisciplinary facility to host astronomy , computer science , math , and physics . tome houses dickinson 's innovative '' workshop physics '' program and was the first stage of a new science complex . opened in 2008 , the leed gold certified rector science complex serves as a place of scientific exploration and learning in an environment that is artful and sustainable . featuring of laboratories , classrooms and research facilities , it houses the departments of biology , chemistry , psychology and interdisciplinary programs in biochemistry & molecular biology and neuroscience . courses in the emerging fields of bioinformatics and nanotechnology are also taught there . on january 22 , 2013 , dickinson announced that it had acquired allison united methodist church for college expansion . a longtime landmark in carlisle , allison 's limestone building and property is contiguous with the benjamin rush campus of dickinson . the building , located at 99 & nbsp ; mooreland avenue , provides the college with more than for events , guest speakers , student presentations , meetings , ecumenical worship and additional offices . dickinson aims for campus environmental sustainability through several initiative . in the sustainable endowments institute 's 2010 green report card dickinson was one of only 15 schools in the usa to receive an a- , the highest grade possible . in the same year , dickinson was named a sierra magazine '' cool '' school '' in its comprehensive guide to the most eco-enlightened u.s . colleges : live ( green ) and learn . the college 's commitment to making study of the environment and sustainability a defining characteristic of a dickinson education was also recognised through being top of the princeton review 's 2010 green honor roll . in 2008 , the college bought 100 % of its energy from wind power , had solar panels on campus , owned and operated an organic garden and farm , and had signed the american colleges & universities presidents climate commitment . the college 's emphasis on sustainability education recognizes its importance for innovation and the lives of tomorrow 's graduates . the college had made a commitment to being carbon neutral by 2020 . this involved a mixture of increased energy efficiency on campus , switching energy sourcing , promoting behavior change and carbon ofsetting . . campus . dickinson 's quiet campus is three blocks from the main square in the historic small town of carlisle , the county seat of cumberland county , pennsylvania , and the site of the nation 's second oldest military base , carlisle barracks , which is now used as the u.s . army war college . the campus is characterized by limestone-clad buildings and has numerous trees . the frontier grammar school was founded in 1773 and housed in a small , two-room brick building on liberty avenue , near bedford and pomfret streets . when dickinson college was founded in 1783 , this building was expanded to accommodate all the functions . in 1799 the penn family sold on the western edge of carlisle to the nascent college , which became its campus . on june 20 of that year , the cornerstone was laid by founding trustee john montgomery for a building on the new land . the twelve-room building burned to the ground on february 3 , 1803 , five weeks after opening its doors . the college operations were temporarily returned to its previous accommodations . within weeks of the fire , a national fundraising campaign was launched , enticing donations from president thomas jefferson , secretary of state james madison , chief justice john marshall , and many others . benjamin latrobe , already noted for his design work on the bank of pennsylvania and princeton university 's nassau hall , and soon-to-be named as architect of the capitol , was chosen to design the new structure . latrobe 's design for the building , now known as '' west college '' or '' old west , '' featured monumental and classical elements within a simple and subdued academic style . the building was to be capped with a classically inspired cupola graced by a figure of triton . the local craftsman instead created a mermaid , which has since been a symbol of the college . latrobe , who donated his services to the college , visited the building for the first time in 1813 . the total cost of west college topped 22,000 and , although classes began in 1805 , work was not finished until 1822 . more than 200 years after its doors opened for the first time , old west is today the ceremonial heart of the college , as all students march through the open doors during convocation at the beginning of their freshman year , and march out the same doors to receive their degrees and graduate . old west , which is listed on the national register of historic places , also houses the college administration , several classrooms , a computer lab , and the college chapel . throughout the 19th century dickinson expanded across what has now become its main academic quadrangle , known formally as the john dickinson campus . dickinson expanded across college street to build the holland union building and waidner-spahr library , which along with several dormitories , makes up the benjamin rush campus . across high street ( u.s . route 11 ) lies the charles nisbet campus , home to the largest grouping of dormitories . the dickinson school of law , part of penn state , lies directly to the south of the nisbet campus . together these three grass-covered units compose the vast majority of the college 's campus , though several outlying buildings surround these main areas . in addition , the college owns playing fields and a large organic farm , both of which are only a short distance from the main campus . buildings of note include : althouse hall - a science hall opened in 1958 , althouse housed the chemistry department until it moved to the new rector science complex . since the spring 2010 semester , this building houses the international business & management program as well as the economics department . bosler hall - completed in 1886 , the building was dickinson 's first purpose-built library . today it houses foreign language classes . east college - dickinson 's second building , which at one time housed the college president and served as a dormitory and place of instruction . east college also served as confederate hospital during the battle of carlisle in july 1863 . today east college houses the departments of religion , classical studies , english , and other humanities . denny hall - completed in 1896 but destroyed by fire in 1904 , the current building dates to 1905 and was given in memory of harmar denny and his family , several of whom are dickinson alumni . denny currently houses the departments of political science , history , anthropology , and archeology , amongst others . holland union building ( hub ) - opened in 1964 , the hub is dickinson 's expansive student union , and hosts the cafeteria , snack bar , an organic cafe , student offices and services , and the bookstore . kline athletic center - finished in 1979 , the kline center is a multipurpose facility that houses many of the varsity and intramural sports that dickinson offers . in addition , the building features a modern fitness center , pool , indoor track , basketball , squash , and racquetball courts , and a climbing wall . rector science complex - opened in 2008 , the new science complex , crowned by stuart and james halls , joined with tome hall to create a completely unified interdisciplinary science campus that houses the departments of biology , chemistry , psychology and interdisciplinary programs in biochemistry , molecular biology and neuroscience . this building was constructed on the site of james hall , which formerly housed geology , psychology , and environmental science and was demolished in 2006 . stern center for global education - finished in 1885 as the tome scientific hall , it was one of the nation 's first science-only academic buildings . in 2000 , a new science building was completed , itself taking the name tome hall . the stern center houses the college 's global education programs and segments of the international studies , international business and management , and east asian studies majors . tome hall - opened in the year 2000 , tome is the home to physics , astronomy , math , and computer science . waidner-spahr library - opened as the spahr library in 1967 , the building was a modern home for dickinson 's rapidly expanding collection . in 1997 the building was reopened as the waidner-spahr library , after a massive expansion and renovation project . it houses the library 's collection of over 510,000 volumes and 1,600 periodicals , as well as student study space and computer labs . weiss center - opened in 1929 as the alumni gymnasium . it was dramatically renovated in 1981 and now hosts the college 's performing and fine arts departments . the building is also the home to the trout gallery , dickinson 's collection of fine arts . student life . dickinson has a rich and varied student life with a variety of organizations involved in many different causes and interests . its programs are geared only toward traditional students of typical college age . there are over a hundred organizations representing different facets of the college . . theatre and performing arts . working in cooperation with the dickinson department of theatre and dance , the mermaid players , dickinson 's student-run theatrical society , offers dickinsonians the opportunity to experience live theatre in a variety of ways . performances normally occur in mathers theater , located in the hub , or the cubiculo ( aka the cube ) , a black-box space located above the carlisle theater . however their collective creativity does not limit them to 'traditional ' spaces , as recent performances have seen the audience seated on the mathers stage , or at the dickinson farm for an outdoor performance of 'the grapes of wrath ' . athletics . the dickinson red devils participate in the ncaa division iii centennial conference . the red devils sport uniforms of red , white , and black . dickinson has 23 varsity sports teams , including baseball and softball , men 's and women 's golf , men 's and women 's soccer , football , men 's and women 's tennis , men 's and women 's track , men 's and women 's basketball , men 's and women 's lacrosse , men 's and women 's swimming , men 's and women 's cross country , men 's and women 's riding , women 's volleyball , and women 's field hockey . the college also has a cheerleading squad and dozens of intramural and club sports including ice hockey , men 's volleyball , lacrosse , soccer , and ultimate frisbee . the school 's cross country teams are led by long standing coach don nichter . the women 's cross country team has made 15 consecutive appearances at the division iii national championships . the men 's team has seen similar success , with eight consecutive appearances at the nationals championships . the current football coach at dickinson is brad fordyce . dickinson won a notable football victory in 1931 , defeating penn state 10-6 under head coach joseph mccormick . the two teams have not met since . dickinson won the 1958 men 's lacrosse team national title and roy taylor division championship , also defeating penn state in its final game to clinch the title . dickinson lacrosse continues today under men 's lacrosse coach dave webster '88 whose squad posted a compiled record of 65-10 over the 2010 , 2011 , 2012 and 2013 seasons . the team won three consecutive centennial conference championships ( 2011 , 2012 , 2013 ) and went to the ncaa tournament four consecutive years ( 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 ) . prior to the 2010 season , dickinson had never been in the ncaa tournament . in 2013 , heather morrison '15 and brandon palladino '13 were named the ncaa division iii outstanding players of the year : iroquois nationals award . palladino was also the first player in centennial conference history to earn first-team all-conference honors all four years of his career . dickinson 's men 's basketball team won centennial conference titles in 2013 and 2015 , and an at-large bid to the ncaa tournament in 2014 . dickinson reached the '' elite eight '' in the 2014 d-iii tournament . gerry wixted '15 was named d-iii national player of the year in 2015 . in may 2019 , the dickinson college softball team won the centennial conference championship . madison milaszewski earned the 2019 centennial conference mvp award . from 1963 to 1994 , the college hosted the summer training camp for the nfl 's washington redskins . . music . approximately 300 students study music at dickinson every year . all music courses , performance studies and ensembles are open to all dickinson students regardless of major . music ensembles , which are open to all students by audition , include the dickinson college choir , the dickinson college collegium , the dickinson college jazz ensemble , the dickinson orchestra , the dickinson improvisation and collaboration ensemble , and the dickinson chamber ensembles . there is a vibrant music scene of student-led groups , which is supported by dickinson by way of '' the band aid , '' a college-sponsored practice space for student-led bands that is available to all students . the '' treehouse '' dormatory sponsors frequent student-led group and individual performances , including open mike nights . the music house , a music-themed special interest housing option , and the dickinson college student music society sponsor many activities throughout the year , including music field trips to metropolitan areas such as new york city and washington , d.c . , an annual children 's concert , and music outreach programs to local schools . language , culture , and global education . dickinson college has various on-campus houses and clubs dedicated to language and culture . on-campus student houses include a romance language house , the russian house , the global community house , and the social justice house.the center for sustainable living , or treehouse , is an on-campus student house dedicated to sustainability and environmentalism . each year , some dickinson students have the opportunity to spend one year abroad pursuing accredited study , at such institutions as the university of oxford throughout the world . religious life . dickinson has a number of different religious organizations , including the harlow family hillel and the asbell center for jewish life , the dickinson christian fellowship ( dcf ) , the dickinson catholic campus ministry ( dccm ) , disciplemakers christian fellowship , and the muslim educational and cultural association ( meca ) . academic honor societies . national organizations recognizing academic achievement include alpha lambda delta and phi beta kappa . dickinson 's phi beta kappa chapter , the alpha of pennsylvania , is the first established in the state . greek organizations . dickinson college has three recognized fraternities : delta sigma phi , kappa alpha psi , and sigma lambda beta . the college has five recognized sororities : delta nu , which was founded at dickinson college in 1971 ; kappa alpha theta , kappa kappa gamma , pi beta phi , and sigma lambda gamma . fraternities that are suspended , inactive , or not currently recognized by the school include : kappa sigma and phi delta theta , both unrecognized by the school in 2017 ; phi kappa sigma ( epsilon chapter ) , established in 1854 as the first fraternity at dickinson until it was suspended in 2009 ; sigma alpha epsilon , suspended in 2012 ; theta chi , unrecognized by school in 2008 ; beta theta pi , which founded its alpha sigma chapter at dickinson in 1874 and was suspended in 2000 ; and sigma chi , unrecognized by school in 2004 . . the dickinsonian . the dickinsonian is an award-winning student-run newspaper published by students , first published in 1872 . school songs . the college 's musical tradition dates back to at least 1858 when the medal of honor recipient and author , alumnus horatio collins king , wrote the alma mater , '' noble dickinsonia '' to the tune of '' o tannenbaum '' ( '' o christmas tree '' ) . in 1937 the college published a book titled songs of dickinson , which contains over 70 works from dickinson 's past . in 1953 the men 's glee club recorded an album of college songs . in 2005-2006 , the octals , dickinson 's all-male a cappella group , recorded a similar cd . hat societies . dickinson college has four '' hat societies '' on its campus . this name is given by the distinctive hats members wear on campus . to gain admittance into a hat society , one is '' tapped '' as a junior by current senior members to then serve as a member during his or her senior year . the induction ceremony is known as a tapping ceremony . while membership criteria differ amongst the organizations , overall character and general campus leadership are major requirements for membership in any of the organizations . the four hat societies at dickinson college are : raven 's claw or '' white hats '' - 7 senior men ( est . 1896 ) the order of scroll and key or '' gray hats '' - 7 senior men ( est . 2001 ) wheel and chain or '' blue hats '' - 10 senior women ( est . 1924 ) queer caps ( est . 2008 ) . alumni . notable alumni of dickinson college include chief justice of the united states roger b . taney ( 1795 ) ; president of the united states james buchanan ( 1809 ) ; john goucher ( 1868 ) , the founder of goucher college ; baseball hall of fame pitcher chief bender ( 1902 ) ; former chief of the strategic air command of the united states air force ( sac ) richard h . ellis ( 1941 ) ; and baseball executive andy macphail ( 1976 ) , inspector general for the u.s . agency for international development ann calvaresi barr ( 1982 ) . rankings and awards . in 2010 , dickinson was one of only 15 schools to receive an a- in the sustainable endowments institute 's 2010 green report card . in 2010 , the college was named a sierra magazine '' cool school '' in its comprehensive guide to the most eco-enlightened u.s . colleges . in 2010 , the college 's commitment to making study of the environment and sustainability a defining characteristic of a dickinson education landed it at the top of the princeton review 's 2010 green honor roll . in 2006 , the college was ranked the most physically fit school in america by men 's fitness . in 2006 , dickinson decided to stop publicizing its ranking in '' america 's best colleges '' from u.s . news & world report ; however , in 2015 rankings dickinson placed 40 among national liberal arts colleges . in may 2007 , dickinson president william g . durden joined with other college presidents in asking schools not to participate in the reputation portion of the magazine 's survey . the institute of international education ( iie ) ranked dickinson no . 5 for yearlong study abroad and no . 11 for semesterlong study abroad in the baccalaureate category of its most recent open doors report ( for the 2013-14 academic year ) . dickinson is a perennial producer of fulbright scholars , and the department of state ’ s bureau of educational and cultural affairs has named dickinson a top producer every year for the last six years . it is also a top producer of peace corps volunteers , ranking 8th among small colleges and universities in 2014 . . references . external links . official athletics website