Lady Caroline Lamb

family background . she was the only daughter of frederick ponsonby , 3rd earl of bessborough , an anglo-irish peer , and henrietta , countess of bessborough . she was known as the honourable caroline ponsonby until her father succeeded to the earldom in 1793 . she was related to other leading society ladies , being the niece of georgiana cavendish , duchess of devonshire , and cousin ( by marriage ) of annabella , lady byron . she was related to sarah ponsonby , one half of the ladies of llangollen . she was never the viscountess melbourne because she died before melbourne succeeded to the peerage . youth and education . image : angelica kauffmann , portrait of henrietta , countess of bessborough ( 1793 ) . jpg thumb left lady caroline 's mother , henrietta , countess of bessborough , by angelica kauffman in 1793 as a small child she was considered delicate and for her health spent much time in the country . she travelled with her mother and other family to italy , where she made an agonizing recovery from an illness caused by worms that nearly ended her life . after returning with her mother to england , she rejoined a lively menage of children who lived at devonshire house and roehampton , her cousins , the children of william cavendish , 5th duke of devonshire : by his first marriage , to lady georgiana spencer , three children , lady georgiana ( '' little g '' ) , lady harriet cavendish ( '' hary-o '' ) , and lord hartington ( '' hart '' , later the 6th duke of devonshire ) ; and by his mistress and second wife , elizabeth hervey , two children , augustus clifford and caroline st jules , later wife of george lamb ( politician and writer ) . during childhood she became particularly close to lady harriet , who was only three months older . leveson-gower , sir george ( ed . ) , hary-o : the letters of lady harriet cavendish 1796–1809 , london : john murray ( 1940 ) . her behaviour grew increasingly troublesome to her family , she experimented with sedatives like laudanum and had a special governess to control her . lady morgan reported in her memoirs that lady caroline told her that she had grown up as a tomboy , and quite unable to read or write until adolescence . as a child lady caroline considered being able to wash a dog one of her most satisfying accomplishments . wives of the prime ministers 1844 to 1906 by elizabeth lee , nesbitt and co.london.1918 while many scholars have accepted this ( and other melodramatic claims made by lady morgan ) at face value , '' lady caroline lamb , '' the literary encyclopedia , published works of correspondence about her family members make it extremely unlikely . the grandmother she shared with her cavendish cousins , the formidable dowager lady spencer , was zealously dedicated to promoting education , and later employed their governess as her own companion . this governess was miss selina trimmer , the daughter of mrs sarah trimmer , a well-known and respected author of moral tales for children . she taught them an extensive curriculum , considerably beyond mere literacy . there is a published letter lady caroline wrote on 31 october 1796 ( just before her eleventh birthday ) that not only demonstrates her literacy , but shows a merciless wit and talent for mimicry . lady caroline was exceptionally well educated at home . she also attended a school in hans place , knightsbridge , london , the successor to reading abbey girls ' school , where she was taught by frances arabella rowden . rowden was not only a published poet , but , according to another pupil , mary russell mitford , '' she had a knack of making poetesses of her pupils '' . in her early adult years , lady caroline not only wrote prose and poetry , but also took to sketching portraiture . these courtly skills stood her in good stead . she spoke french and italian fluently , was skilled at greek and latin , and also enjoyed music and drama . marriage and family . right in june 1805 , at the age of nineteen , lady caroline ponsonby married the hon . william lamb , an up-and-coming politician , and heir to the 1st viscount melbourne . although their meeting had been shrewdly orchestrated by william lamb 's mother , theirs was a love match . the couple had become '' mutually captivated '' during a visit to brocket hall in 1802 and for many years the pair enjoyed a happy marriage . in 1809 his brother george married her namesake cousin caroline st jules . caroline and william produced a son , george augustus frederick , born on 11 august 1807 , and a premature daughter , born in 1809 who died within 24 hours . lady caroline was physically ill-suited to childbirth and suffered long recovery periods after each one . her son was born with severe mental problems . although most aristocratic families sent mentally challenged relatives to institutions , the lambs cared for their son at home until his eventual death in 1836 , eight years after lady caroline 's own death . the stress of their son 's ill health , combined with william lamb 's consuming career ambitions , drove a wedge between the couple . a further difficulty was that william 's brothers and sister , a very close-knit clan , all detested caroline , whom they called '' the little beast '' , while she and her mother-in-law hated each other from the start , and their lifelong enmity was to be a great cause of unhappiness to caroline . lord byron . from march to august 1812 , lady caroline embarked on a well-publicized affair with lord byron . he was 24 , she 26 . she spurned his attention on their first meeting , which was at a society event at holland house . according to the memoirs of her friend sydney , lady morgan , lady caroline claimed she coined the phrase '' mad , bad , and dangerous to know '' soon after meeting the poet . it became his lasting epitaph , but there is no contemporary evidence to prove that she coined the famous phrase at the time . she wrote him a fan letter ; his response was to visit her because of her high social status , and then to pursue her passionately . lady caroline and lord byron publicly decried each other as they privately pledged their love over the following months . byron referred to lamb as '' caro '' , which she adopted as her public nickname . wu , duncan . '' appropriating byron : lady caroline lamb ’ s a new canto . ” wordsworth circle . 26.3 ( 1995 ) : 140–46 . after byron broke things off , her husband took the disgraced and desolated lady caroline to ireland . the distance did not cool lady caroline 's interest in the poet ; she and byron corresponded constantly during her exile . when lady caroline returned to london in 1813 , however , byron made it clear he had no intention of restarting their relationship . this spurred increasingly public attempts to reunite with her former lover . matters came to a head at lady heathcote 's ball in early july 1813 , when byron publicly insulted lady caroline , who responded by breaking a wine glass and trying to slash her wrists . she did not seriously injure herself , due largely to the prompt intervention of her mother-in-law , and it is most unlikely that she had any suicidal intentions ; but polite society was scandalised , and her mental stability was called into question . byron himself referred to it as a theatrical performance : '' lady caroline performed the dagger scene '' ( a reference to macbeth ) . lady caroline 's obsession with byron would define much of her later life , as well as influencing both her and byron 's works . they would write poems in the style of each other , about each other , and even embed overt messages to one another in their verse . after a thwarted visit to byron 's home , lady caroline wrote '' remember me ! '' into the flyleaf of one of byron 's books . he responded with the hate poem ; '' remember thee ! remember thee ! ; till lethe quench life 's burning stream ; remorse and shame shall cling to thee , and haunt thee like a feverish dream ! remember thee ! ay , doubt it not . thy husband too shall think of thee ! by neither shalt thou be forgot , thou false to him , thou fiend to me ! '' her cousin harriet ( by then lady granville ) , with whom lady caroline 's relationship had deteriorated after childhood , visited her in december 1816 and was so incredulous at her unrepentant behaviour that she ended her description of the visit in a letter to her sister with : '' i mean my visits to be annual . '' leveson-gower , f . ( ed . ) , letters of harriet countess granville 1810–1845 , london : longmans , green , and co . ( 1894 ) . . literary career . lady caroline lamb was noted to have been involved in a few different literary circles that met in the holland house , lady charleville 's , lord ward 's , lord lansdowne 's , and others of similar repute . lady caroline 's most famous work is glenarvon , a gothic novel that was released in 1816 just weeks after byron 's departure from england . although published anonymously , lady caroline 's authorship was an open secret . it featured a thinly disguised pen-picture of herself and her former lover , who was painted as a war hero who turns traitor against irish nationalism . the book was notable for featuring the first version of the byronic hero outside of byron 's own work as well as a detailed scrutiny of the romanticism and , more specifically , the ton . dickson , leigh wetherall and douglass , paul ( eds . ) '' the works of lady caroline lamb . '' pickering & chatto ( 2009 ) volume 1 : glenarvon : lii + 451 ; volume 2 : graham hamilton and poems xxx + 229 ; volume 3 : ada reis , a tale xx + 222 . lady caroline included scathing caricatures of several of those prominent society members . one of them , the countess of jersey , cancelled lady caroline 's vouchers to almack 's in retribution for her characterisations . this was the opening salvo in a backlash that found lady caroline blackballed from fashionable society : although her sister-in-law , emily lamb , countess cowper , got lady caroline readmitted to almack 's in 1819 , her reputation never fully recovered . byron responded to the novel ; '' i read glenarvon too by caro lamb….god damn ! '' the book was a financial success that sold out several editions but was dismissed by critics as pulp fiction . however , goethe deemed it worthy of serious literary consideration . hennig , john '' goethe 's klaggesang . irisch . '' monatshefte , vol . 41 , no . 2 '' university of wisconsin press ( 1949 ) pp . 71–76 in 1819 , lady caroline put her ability to mimic byron to use in the narrative poem '' a new canto . '' years before , lady caroline had impersonated byron in a letter to his publishers to have them send her a portrait of byron . it worked ; the tone and substance of her request fooled them into sending the painting . she used that skill to respond to byron 's '' don juan ( byron ) '' . lady caroline was most concerned with those allusions byron had made about her ; for example , the line '' some play the devil—and then write a novel '' from '' don juan ii '' . in '' a new canto '' , lady caroline wrote – as byron – '' i 'm sick of fame ; i 'm gorged with it ; so full i almost could regret the happier hour ; when northern oracles proclaimed me dull . '' byron never publicly responded to the poem . a reviewer of the time opined , in part ; '' the writer of this lively nonsense has evidently intended it as an imitation of lord byron . it is a rhapsody from beginning to end . '' monthly review new series v . 94 ( 1821 ) , 329 . london , uk lady caroline published three additional novels during her lifetime : graham hamilton ( 1822 ) , ada reis ( 1823 ) , and penruddock ( 1823 ) . later life and death . byron 's confidante and close friend was william lamb 's own mother , the colourful elizabeth lamb , viscountess melbourne . lady melbourne had been instrumental in bringing about the politically advantageous marriage of her son to lady caroline , despite disliking both her and her mother . however , once lady caroline began her affair with byron , her mother-in-law began a long and blatant campaign to rid her son of his wife ; as lord david cecil remarks , she had long since concluded that caroline deserved all her misfortunes . william lamb refused to submit and regretted that his mother had conspired against his wife with byron . calling byron treacherous , william lamb was supportive of his wife to her death . cecil , david , the young melbourne & lord m , p . 178 . ultimately , it was lady caroline who prevailed on her husband to agree to a formal separation in 1825 . both parties had had numerous extramarital affairs by that time and lamb had long been known to eschew duplicity . she took up permanent residence at brocket hall . her struggle with mental instability became more pronounced in her last years , complicated by her abuse of alcohol and laudanum . by 1827 , she was under the care of a full-time physician as her body , which had always been frail , began to shut down and she retained fluids ( a condition then known as dropsy , and now known as oedema ) . william lamb was chief secretary for ireland by that time and made a perilous crossing to be by her side when lady caroline died on 25 january 1828 . lady caroline was buried in the graveyard of st etheldreda 's church in hatfield ; her husband was later buried within the church . popular culture . in 1972 , the film lady caroline lamb was released to predominantly critical reviews with sarah miles in the lead role . in 2003 , the bbc broadcast byron with jonny lee miller in the title role and camilla power as lady caroline lamb . the 1905 novel the marriage of william ashe by mary augusta ward was based on lady caroline and her husband . in the 1971 novel flash for freedom by george macdonald fraser , the lead character harry flashman names an african woman , taken as a slave , '' caroline lamb . '' . references . further reading . douglass , paul ( 2004 ) . lady caroline lamb : a biography . palgrave macmillan . douglass , paul ( 2006 ) . the whole disgraceful truth : selected letters of lady caroline lamb . palgrave-macmillan . douglass , paul ; dickson , leigh wetherall ( 2009 ) . the collected works of lady caroline lamb . pickering & chatto . external links . 'caro : the lady caroline lamb website : “ mad , bad , and dangerous to know ” ? ' lady caroline lamb lamb 's 'new canto'