Blackcurrant

description . thumb ribes nigrum , the blackcurrant , is a medium-sized shrub , growing to . the leaves are alternate , simple , broad and long with five palmate lobes and a serrated margin . all parts of the plant are strongly aromatic . the flowers are produced in racemes known as '' strigs '' up to long containing ten to twenty flowers , each about in diameter . each flower has a hairy sepal with yellow glands , the five lobes of which are longer than the inconspicuous petals . there are five stamens surrounding the stigma and style and two fused carpels . the flowers open in succession from the base of the strig and are mostly pollination , but some pollen is distributed by the wind . a pollen grain landing on a stigma will germinate and send a slender pollen tube down the style to the ovule . in warm weather this takes about 48 hours but in cold weather it may take a week , and by that time , the ovule may have passed the stage where it is receptive . if fewer than about 35 ovules are fertilised , the fruit may not be able to develop and will fall prematurely . frost can damage both unopened and open flowers when the temperature falls below . the flowers at the base of the strig are more protected by the foliage and are less likely to be damaged . in midsummer the strigs of green fruit ripen to edible berries , very dark purple in colour , almost black , with glossy skins and persistent calyxes at the apex , each containing many seeds . an established bush can produce about 4.5 kilograms ( 10 pounds ) of fruit each year . plants from northern asia are sometimes distinguished as a separate variety , ribes nigrum var . sibiricum , of which ribes cyathiforme is considered a synonym . . cultivation . site selection and planting . blackcurrants can grow well on sandy or heavy loams , or forest soils , as long as their nutrient requirements are met . they prefer damp , fertile but not waterlogged ground and are intolerant of drought . although the bushes are winter hardy , frosts during the flowering period may adversely affect the yield and cold winds may restrict the number of flying insects visiting and pollinating the flowers . a ph of about 6 is ideal for blackcurrants and the ground can be limed if the soil is too acidic . planting is usually done in the autumn or winter to allow the plants to become established before growth starts in the spring , but container-grown stock can be planted at any time of year . two-year-old bushes are usually planted but strong one-year-old stock can also be used . planting certified stock avoids the risk of introducing viruses . on a garden scale the plants can be set at intervals of or they can be set in rows with planting intervals of and row separations of or more . in the uk , young bushes are generally planted deeper than their initial growing level to encourage new stems to grow from the base . . manures and fertilizers . the blackcurrant requires a number of essential nutrients to be present to enable it to thrive ; nitrogen provides strong plant growth and stimulates the production of flower sprigs ; phosphorus aids growth , the setting of fruit and crop yield ; potassium promotes growth of individual shoots and increases the weight of individual fruits ; magnesium is a constituent of chlorophyll and helps increase yields through interaction with potassium ; calcium is required for cell division and enlargement and is particularly important for young plants and buds . an annual spring mulch of well rotted manure is ideal and poultry manure can also be used but needs prior composting with straw or other waste vegetable material . spent mushroom compost can be used but care should be taken as it often contains lime and blackcurrants prefer slightly acidic soils . the blackcurrant is a gross feeder and benefits from additional nitrogen , and phosphatic and potash fertilisers should also be applied annually . a balanced fertilizer can be used and a 10-10-10 granular product can be spread around the bushes at the rate of per plant . weed growth can be suppressed with an organic mulch such as sawdust , bark , mushroom compost or straw , heavy plastic topped with an organic mulch cover or landscape fabric . . pruning . fruit in blackcurrants is borne primarily on one-year-old shoots . newly planted bushes should be pruned severely , cutting all shoots back to two buds above ground level . this gives the plant a chance to get properly established before needing to put its energy into producing fruit . the general rule when pruning is to remove all weak shoots and those growing out sideways which may get weighed down when fruiting . the remaining branches should be thinned to remove old unproductive wood and to encourage new shoots . an established bush should not be allowed to become overcrowded and should have about one third of its main branches or stems removed each year . when harvesting by machine , plants with an upright growth habit are encouraged . . harvesting . on a garden scale , the berries should be picked when dry and ripe . commercially , most harvesting is done mechanically by straddle harvesters . these move continually down the rows , straddling a row of bushes , shaking the branches and stripping off the fruit . the blackcurrants are placed into half tonne bins and to minimise stoppage time , some machines have conveyor system which direct the fruit into continuously moving trailers in the adjoining row . a modern machine can pick up to fifty tonnes of blackcurrants in a day using only one operator and two tractor drivers . the bins should be stored in a cool place . some fruit is still picked by hand for use in the fresh fruit market . . diseases and pests . thumb ribes plants are susceptible to several diseases and a number of insect pests . however , new varieties have been or are being developed to overcome some of these problems . reversion is a serious disease transmitted by the blackcurrant gall mite cecidophyopsis ribis . it causes a decline in yield and is quite widespread in europe but is rarely encountered on other continents . symptoms include a modification of leaf shape in summer and swollen buds ( '' big bud '' ) in winter , each housing thousands of microscopic mites . as pest control has limited effectiveness , severely infected bushes should be destroyed . all new plants purchased should be certified as virus-free . white pine blister rust ( cronartium ribicola ) needs two alternate hosts to complete its life cycle . one host is plants in the genus ribes . on the blackcurrant , it causes the leaves to become pale and later develop tiny orange pustules and sometimes a yellow filamentous coating on some leaves . the fruit crop is little affected but the leaves fall early and growth is slowed the following year . the other host is any of the white pines , in which it causes serious disease and mortality for the north american species that have not co-evolved with the rust . as a result , the blackcurrant was banned in the united states as a disease vector for much of the 20th century , and even after the federal ban was lifted in 1966 , several u.s . states continued their own bans , some of which remain in force today . the effectiveness of these restrictions is questionable , since other ribes species also host the disease , some are native to north america , and others such as red currants and ribes uva-crispa were never banned . podosphaera and powdery mildew can infect the leaves and shoot tips , and botrytis may cause the fruit to rot in a wet season . currant and gooseberry leaf spot ( drepanopeziza ribis ) is another disease of blackcurrants , but it is not usually a serious problem as most cultivars now have some resistance . the blackcurrant leaf midge can cause browning , crimping and distortion of leaves at the tips of shoots but it is seldom a serious problem . the blackcurrant sawfly ( nematus ribesii ) lays its eggs on the underside of the leaves and the voracious larvae work their way along the shoots , stripping off leaf after leaf . in a serious attack , the bush can be denuded of leaves . larvae of the currant borer drill their way along the centres of shoots , which wilt and die back . other insect pests include scale insects , aphids and earwigs . . research and cultivars . there are many cultivars of blackcurrant . 'baldwin ' was the mainstay of the industry for many years but it has now largely been superseded by more productive and disease-resistant varieties . during the 20th century in europe , much hybridisation work has been carried out in order to reduce the plant 's susceptibility to disease and frost and also to increase yields . this effort centered mainly in scotland , poland , and new zealand . in britain the scottish crop research institute was tasked with developing new varieties suitable for growing in the north of the country . they produced new cultivars that had greater cold tolerance , especially in the spring , ripened earlier and more evenly and had greater fungal disease resistance . frost tolerance was improved by selecting for late flowering and genetic research identified genes involved in resistance to gall mite and the blackcurrant reversion virus . 'ben lomond ' was the first of the 'ben ' varieties and was released in 1975 . this was followed by several other cultivars for the juicing industry such as 'ben alder ' and 'ben tirran ' . the cultivar 'ben hope ' was released in 1998 with increased tolerance to gall mite , and in the same year , 'ben gairn ' became available . it shows resistance to the reversion virus . for gardeners and the pick-your-own market , 'ben sarek ' , 'ben connan ' and 'big ben ' were introduced and have large , sweet berries . the cultivars 'ben connan ' and 'big ben ' have gained the royal horticultural society 's award of garden merit . and new varieties are being developed continually to improve frost tolerance , disease resistance , machine harvesting , fruit quality , nutritional content and fruit flavour . varieties producing green fruit , less strongly-flavoured and sweeter than typical blackcurrants , are cultivated in finland , where they are called '' greencurrants '' ( viherherukka ) . in poland , the research institute of horticulture has done work on improving the blackcurrant with regard to disease and pest resistance , fruit quality , adaptations to local conditions and mechanical harvesting . researchers have crossed various varieties and introduced inter-specific genetic material from the gooseberry ( ribes grossularia ) , the red currant ( ribes rubrum ) and the flowering currant ( ribes sanguineum ) . the resulting offspring were further back-crossed to r . nigrum . cultivars produced include 'tisel ' and 'tiben ' in 2000 and 'ores ' , 'ruben ' and 'tines ' in 2005 . further cultivars 'polares ' and 'tihope ' are being tested . since 1991 , new zealand has become an important centre for research and development , as its temperate climate is particularly suitable for cultivation of the crop . breeding programmes are concentrating on yield , large fruit size , consistency of cropping and upright habit . in north america , there is a need for this fruit to have resistance to white pine blister rust . new cultivars such as 'crusader ' , 'coronet ' and 'consort ' have been developed there by crossing r . nigrum with r . ussuriense and these show resistance to the disease . however the quality and yield of these varieties are poor as compared to non-resistant strains and only consort is reliably self-fertile . back-crossing these varieties to a parent have produced new strains such as 'titania ' that have a higher yield , better disease resistance , are more tolerant of adverse weather conditions and are suitable for machine harvesting . two new releases from a black currant breeding program in british columbia , canada , 'blackcomb ' and 'tahsis ' , were selected for their immunity to white pine blister rust and their frost tolerance . . history . the blackcurrant is native to northern europe and asia . it was cultivated in russia by the 11th century when it was present in monastery gardens and also grown in towns and settlements . cultivation in europe is thought to have started around the last decades of the 17th century . decoction of the leaves , bark or roots was also used as a traditional remedy . during world war ii , most fruits rich in vitamin c , such as oranges , became difficult to obtain in the united kingdom . since blackcurrant berries are a rich source of the vitamin , and blackcurrant plants are suitable for growing in the uk climate , the british government encouraged their cultivation and soon the yield of the nation 's crop increased significantly . from 1942 onwards , blackcurrant syrup was distributed free of charge to children under the age of two . this may have given rise to the lasting popularity of blackcurrant as a flavouring in britain . in britain the commercial crop is completely mechanised and about 1,400 hectares of the fruit are grown , mostly under contract to the juicing industry . commercially , most large-scale cultivation of blackcurrants is done in eastern europe for the juice and juice concentrate market . as of 2017 , major cultivation efforts to improve fruit characteristics occurred in scotland , new zealand , and poland . blackcurrants were once popular in the united states as well , but became less common in the 20th century after currant farming was banned in the early 1900s , when blackcurrants , as a vector of cronartium ribicola , were considered a threat to the u.s . logging industry . the federal ban on growing currants was shifted to the jurisdictions of individual states in 1966 , and was lifted in new york state in 2003 through the efforts of horticulturist greg quinn . as a result , currant growing is making a comeback in new york , vermont , connecticut and oregon . however , several statewide bans still exist including maine , new hampshire , virginia , ohio , and massachusetts . since the american federal ban curtailed currant production nationally for nearly a century , the fruit remains largely unknown in the united states , and has yet to regain its previous popularity to levels enjoyed in europe or new zealand . owing to its unique flavour and richness in polyphenols , dietary fiber and essential nutrients , awareness and popularity of blackcurrant is once again growing , with a number of consumer products entering the u.s . market . thumb . uses . culinary uses . the fruit of blackcurrants when eaten raw has a strong , tart flavour . it can be made into jams and jellies which set readily because of the fruit 's high content of pectin and acid . for culinary use , the fruit is usually cooked with sugar to produce a purée , which can then be passed through muslin to separate the juice . the purée can be used to make blackcurrant preserves and be included in cheesecakes , yogurt , ice cream , desserts , sorbets , and many other sweet dishes . the exceptionally strong flavour can be moderated by combining it with other fruits , such as raspberries and strawberries in summer pudding , or apples in crumbles and pies . the juice can be used in syrups and cordials . blackcurrants are a common ingredient of rødgrød , a popular kissel-like dessert in north german and danish cuisines . blackcurrants are also used in savoury cooking . their astringency creates added flavour in sauces , meats and other dishes . blackcurrants are included in some unusual combinations of foods . they can be added to tomato and mint to make a salad . blackcurrants may accompany roast beef , grilled lamb , seafood and shellfish . they can provide a dipping sauce at barbecues . they can be blended with mayonnaise , and used to invigorate bananas and other tropical fruits . blackcurrants can be combined with dark chocolate or added to mincemeat in traditional mince pies at christmas . japan imports us 3.6 & nbsp ; million of new zealand blackcurrants for uses as dietary supplements , snacks , functional food products and as quick-frozen ( iqf ) produce for culinary production as jams , jellies or preserves . . beverages . the juice forms the basis for various liqueurs , juice drinks , and smoothies . macerated blackcurrants are also the primary ingredient in the apéritif , crème de cassis , which in turn is added to white wine to produce a kir or to champagne to make a kir royal . in the united kingdom , a blackcurrant cordial may be mixed with cider ( hard cider ) to make a drink called '' cider and black '' . if made with any common british lager beer , it is known as a '' lager and black '' . the addition of blackcurrant to a mix of cider and lager results in '' diesel '' or '' snakebite and black '' available at pubs . a '' black ' n ' black '' can be made by adding a small amount of blackcurrant juice to a pint of stout . the head is purple if the shot of juice is placed in the glass first . blackcurrant juice may be combined with whey in an energy drink . in russia , blackcurrant leaves may be used for flavoring tea or preserves , such as salted cucumbers , and berries for home winemaking . sweetened vodka may also be infused with blackcurrant leaves making a deep greenish-yellow beverage with a tart flavor and astringent taste . the berries may be infused in a similar manner . in britain , 95 % of the blackcurrants grown are used to manufacture ribena ( a brand of fruit juice whose name is derived from ribes nigrum ) and similar fruit syrups and juices . blackcurrant seed oil is an ingredient in cosmetics preparations , often in combination with vitamin e . the leaves can be extracted to yield a yellow dye , and the fruit is a source for a blue or violet dye resulting from its rich content of anthocyanins . . nutrients . raw blackcurrants are 82 % water , 15 % carbohydrates , 1 % protein and 0.4 % fat ( table ) . per 100 & nbsp ; g serving providing 63 kilocalories , the raw fruit has high vitamin c content ( 218 % of the daily value , dv ) and moderate levels of iron and manganese ( 12 % dv each ) . other nutrients are present in negligible amounts ( less than 10 % dv , table ) . phytochemicals . polyphenol phytochemicals present in the fruit , seeds and leaves , are being investigated for their potential biological activities . major anthocyanins in blackcurrant pomace are delphinidin-3-o-glucoside , delphinidin-3-o-rutinoside , cyanidin-3-o-glucoside , and cyanidin-3-o-rutinoside , which are retained in the juice concentrate among other yet unidentified polyphenols . blackcurrant seed oil is rich in vitamin e and unsaturated fatty acids , including alpha-linolenic acid and gamma-linolenic acid . . see also . jostaberry redcurrant white currant . references . external links . pfaf plant database — ribes nigrum blackcurrant — characteristics , cultivation , uses . berry crops grower 's guide the blackcurrant foundation