Adolphe Quetelet

biography . adolphe was born in ghent ( which , at the time was a part of the new french republic ) . he was the son of françois-augustin-jacques-henri quetelet , a frenchman and anne françoise vandervelde , a flemish woman . his father was born at ham , picardy , and being of a somewhat adventurous spirit , he crossed the english channel and became both a british citizen and the secretary of a scottish nobleman . in that capacity , he traveled with his employer on the continent , particularly spending time in italy . at about 31 , he settled in ghent and was employed by the city , where adolphe was born , the fifth of nine children , several of whom died in childhood . francois died when adolphe was only seven years old . adolphe studied at the ghent lycée , where he afterwards started teaching mathematics in 1815 at the age of 19 . in 1819 , he moved to the athenaeum in brussels and in the same year he completed his thesis ( de quibusdam locis geometricis , necnon de curva focal & ndash ; of some new properties of the focal distance and some other curves ) . quetelet received a doctorate in mathematics in 1819 from the university of ghent . shortly thereafter , the young man set out to convince government officials and private donors to build an astronomical observatory in brussels ; he succeeded in 1828 . he became a member of the royal academy in 1820 . he lectured at the museum for sciences and letters and at the belgian military school . in 1825 , he became a correspondent of the royal institute of the netherlands , in 1827 he became a member . from 1841 to 1851 , he was a supernumerary associate in the institute , and when it became royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences he became foreign member . in 1850 , he was elected a foreign member of the royal swedish academy of sciences . quetelet also founded several statistical journals and societies , and was especially interested in creating international cooperation among statisticians . he encouraged the creation of a statistical section of the british association for the advancement of science ( ba ) , which later became the royal statistical society , of which he became the first overseas member . in 1853 he chaired both the international maritime conference and the first international statistical congress . he was a founding member of the first société des douze . in 1855 , quetelet suffered from apoplexy , which diminished but did not end his scientific activity . he died in brussels on 17 february 1874 , and is buried in the brussels cemetery . family . in 1825 , he married cécile-virginie curtet . . work . his scientific research encompassed a wide range of different scientific disciplines : meteorology , astronomy , mathematics , statistics , demography , sociology , criminology and history of science . he made significant contributions to scientific development , but he also wrote several monographs directed to the general public . he founded the royal observatory of belgium , founded or co-founded several national and international statistical societies and scientific journals , and presided over the first series of the international statistical congresses . quetelet was a liberal and an anticlerical , but not an atheism or materialism nor a socialism . social physics . the new science of probability and statistics was mainly used in astronomy at the time , where it was essential to account for measurement errors around means . this was done using the method of least squares . quetelet was among the first to apply statistics to social science , planning what he called '' social physics '' . he was keenly aware of the overwhelming complexity of social phenomena , and the many variables that needed measurement . his goal was to understand the statistical laws underlying such phenomena as crime rates , marriage rates or suicide rates . he wanted to explain the values of these variables by other social factors . these ideas were rather controversial among other scientists at the time who held that it contradicted the concept of freedom of choice . his most influential book was sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés , ou essai de physique sociale , published in 1835 ( in english translation , it is titled treatise on man , but a literal translation would be '' on man and the development of his faculties , or essays on social physics '' ) . in it , he outlines the project of a social physics and describes his concept of the '' average man '' ( l'homme moyen ) who is characterized by the mean values of measured variables that follow a normal distribution . he collected data about many such variables . quetelet 's student pierre françois verhulst developed the logistic function in the 1830s as a model of population growth ; see for details . when auguste comte discovered that quetelet had appropriated the term 'social physics ' , which comte had originally introduced , comte found it necessary to invent the term 'sociologie ' ( sociology ) because he disagreed with quetelet 's notion that a theory of society could be derived from a collection of statistics . adolphe quetelet also had a significant influence on florence nightingale who shared with him a religious view of statistics which saw understanding statistics as revealing the work of god in addition to statistics being a force of good administration . nightingale met quetelet in person at the 1860 international statistical congress in london , and they corresponded for years afterwards . . criminology . quetelet was an influential figure in criminology . along with andre-michel guerry , he helped to establish the cartographic school and positivist schools of criminology which made extensive use of statistical techniques . through statistical analysis , quetelet gained insight into the relationships between crime and other social factors . among his findings were strong relationships between age and crime , as well as gender and crime . other influential factors he found included climate , poverty , education , and alcohol consumption , with his research findings published in of the development of the propensity to crime . piers beirne ( 1987 ) . '' adolphe quetelet and the origins of positivist criminology '' . in ; american journal of sociology 92 ( 5 ) : pp . 1140–1169 . . anthropometry . in his 1835 text on social physics , in which he presented his theory of human variance around the average , with human traits being distributed according to a normal curve , he proposed that normal variation provided a basis for the idea that populations produce sufficient variation for artificial or natural selection to operate . in terms of influence over later public health agendas , one of quetelet 's lasting legacies was the establishment of a simple measure for classifying people 's weight relative to an ideal for their height . his proposal , the body mass index ( or quetelet index ) , has endured with minor variations to the present day . garabed eknoyan ( 2008 ) . '' adolphe quetelet ( 1796 & ndash ; 1874 ) & ndash ; the average man and indices of obesity '' . in : nephrol . dial . transplant . 23 ( 1 ) : 47–51 . anthropometric data is used in modern applications and referenced in the development of every consumer-based product . awards and honours . quetelet was elected a list of fellows of the royal society elected in 1839 . the asteroid 1239 queteleta is named after him . the title of quetelet professor at columbia university is awarded in his name . publications . 1823 . relation d'un voyage fait à la grotte de han au mois d'août 1822 ' . 'with m.m . kickx . 1827 . recherches sur la population , les naissances , les décès , les prisons , les dépôts de mendicité , etc . , dans le royaume des pays-bas . 1829 . recherches statistiques sur le royaume des pays-bas . 1831 . the propensity to crime . 1834 . astronomie élémentaire . 1835 . sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés , ou essai de physique sociale . 2 volumes . 1838 . de l'influence des saisons sur la mortalité aux différens âges dans la belgique . 1839 . catalogue des principales apparitions d'étoiles filantes . 1842 . a treatise on man and the development of his faculties . 1843 . sur l'emploi de la boussole dans les mines . 1845 & ndash ; 1851 . sur le climat de la belgique . 2 volumes . 1848 . du système social et des lois qui le régissent . 1848 . sur la statistique morale et les principes qui doivent en former la base . 1850 . mémoire sur les lois des naissances et de la mortalité à bruxelles . 1853 . mémoire sur les variations périodiques et non périodiques de la température , d'après les observations faites , pendant vingt ans , à l'observatoire royal de bruxelles . 1864 . histoire des sciences mathématiques et physiques chez les belges . 1867 . météorologie de la belgique comparée à celle du globe . 1867 . sciences mathématiques et physiques au commencement du xixe siècle . 1869 . sur la physique du globe en belgique . 1870 . anthropométrie , ou mesure des différentes facultés de l'homme .