Adelbert von Chamisso

life . the son of louis marie , count of chamisso , by his marriage to anne marie gargam , chamisso began life as louis charles adélaïde de chamissot at the château of boncourt at ante , in champagne , france , the ancestral seat of his family . his name appears in several forms , one of the most common being ludolf karl adelbert von chamisso . rodolfo e.g . pichi sermolli . 1996 . authors of scientific names in pteridophyta . royal botanic gardens , kew . in 1790 , the french revolution drove his parents out of france with their seven children , and they went successively to liège , the hague , würzburg , and bayreuth , and possibly hamburg where he reportedly met both a younger boy in johann august wilhelm neander and another younger boy in karl august varnhagen von ense before settling in berlin . there , in 1796 the young chamisso was fortunate in obtaining the post of page-in-waiting to the queen of prussia , and in 1798 he entered a prussian infantry regiment as an ensign to train for a career as an army officer . shortly thereafter , thanks to the peace of tilsit , his family was able to return to france , but chamisso remained in prussia and continued his military career . he had little formal education , but while in the prussian military service in berlin he assiduously studied natural science for three years . in collaboration with varnhagen von ense , in 1803 he founded the berliner musenalmanach , the publication in which his first verses appeared . the enterprise was a failure , and , interrupted by the napoleonic wars , it came to an end in 1806 . it brought him , however , to the notice of many of the literary celebrities of the day and established his reputation as a rising poet . chamisso had become a lieutenant in 1801 , and in 1805 he accompanied his regiment to hamelin , where he shared in the humiliation of the town 's treasonable capitulation the next year . placed on parole , he went to france , but both his parents were dead ; returning to berlin in the autumn of 1807 , he obtained his release from the prussian service early the following year . homeless and without a profession , disillusioned and despondent , chamisso lived in berlin until 1810 , when through the services of an old friend of the family he was offered a professorship at the lycée at napoléonville in the vendée . he set out to take up the post , but instead joined the circle of madame de staël , and followed her in her exile to coppet in switzerland , where , devoting himself to botany , he remained nearly two years . in 1812 he returned to berlin , where he continued his scientific studies . in the summer of the eventful year , 1813 , he wrote the prose narrative peter schlemihl , the man who sold his shadow . this , the most famous of all his works , has been translated into most european languages ( english by william howitt ) . it was written partly to divert his own thoughts and partly to amuse the children of his friend julius eduard hitzig . in 1815 , chamisso was appointed botanist to the russian ship rurik , fitted out at the expense of count nikolay rumyantsev , which otto von kotzebue ( son of august von kotzebue ) commanded on a scientific voyage round the world . he collected at the cape of good hope in january 1818 in the company of krebs , mund and maire . '' botanical exploration of southern africa '' - gunn & codd ( 1981 ) his diary of the expedition ( tagebuch , 1821 ) is a fascinating account of the expedition to the pacific ocean and the bering sea . during this trip chamisso described a number of new species found in what is now the san francisco bay area . several of these , including the california poppy , eschscholzia californica , were named after his friend johann friedrich von eschscholtz , the rurik 's entomology . in return , eschscholtz named a variety of plants , including the genus camissonia , after chamisso . on his return in 1818 he was made custodian of the botanical gardens in berlin , and was elected a member of the academy of sciences , and in 1819 he married his friend hitzig 's foster daughter antonie piaste ( 1800–1837 ) . he became a leading member of the serapion brethren , a literary circle around e . t . a . hoffmann . in 1827 , partly for the purpose of rebutting the charges brought against him by kotzebue , he published views and remarks on a voyage of discovery , and description of a voyage round the world . both works display great accuracy and industry . his last scientific labor was a tract on the hawaiian language . chamisso 's travels and scientific researches restrained for a while the full development of his poetical talent , and it was not until his forty-eighth year that he turned back to literature . in 1829 , in collaboration with gustav schwab , and from 1832 in conjunction with franz von gaudy , he brought out the deutscher musenalmanach , in which his later poems were mainly published . chamisso died in berlin at the age of 57 . his grave is preserved in the protestant friedhof iii ( cemetery no . 3 of the congregations of jerusalem 's church and the new church ) in kreuzberg , to the south of the hallesches tor . botanical work . chamisso is chiefly remembered for his work as a botanist ; his most important contribution , done in conjunction with diederich franz leonhard von schlechtendal , was the description of many of the most important trees of mexico in 1830–1831 . also , his bemerkungen und ansichten , published in an incomplete form in kotzebue 's entdeckungsreise ( weimar , 1821 ) and more completely in chamisso 's collected works ( 1836 ) , and the botanical work , übersicht der nutzbarsten und schädlichsten gewächse in norddeutschland ( review of the most useful and the most noxious plants of north germany , with remarks on scientific botany ) , of 1829 , are esteemed for their careful treatment of their subjects . the genera chamissoa kunth ( amaranthaceae ) and camissonia link ( onagraceae ) and many species were named in his honor . . belles lettres . chamisso 's earliest writings , which include a verse translation of the tragedy le comte de comminge in which '' heilsam '' is used in place of '' heilig '' , show a 20-year-old still struggling to master his new language , and a number of his early poems are in french . between 1801 and 1804 he became closely associated with other writers and edited their journal . as a poet chamisso 's reputation stands high . frauenliebe und -leben ( 1830 ) , a cycle of lyrical poems set to music by robert schumann , by carl loewe , and by franz paul lachner , is particularly famous . also noteworthy are schloss boncourt and salas y gomez . he often deals with gloomy or repulsive subjects ; and even in his lighter and gayer productions there is an undertone of sadness or of satire . in the lyrical expression of the domestic emotions he displays a fine felicity , and he knew how to treat with true feeling a tale of love or vengeance . die löwenbraut may be taken as a sample of his weird and powerful simplicity ; and vergeltung is remarkable for a pitiless precision of treatment . the first collected edition of chamisso 's works was edited by hitzig and published in six volumes in 1836 .