Brig

rigging . in sailing , a full-rigged brig is a vessel with two square rigged masts ( fore and main ) . the main mast of a brig is the aft one . to improve maneuverability , the mainmast carries a small ( gaff rigged ) fore-and-aft sail . brig sails are named after the masts to which they are attached : the mainsail ; above that the main topsail ; above that the main topgallant sail ; and occasionally a very small sail , called the royal , is above that . behind the main sail there is a small fore-and-aft sail called the spanker or boom mainsail ( it is somewhat similar to the main sail of a schooner ) . on the foremast is a similar sail , called the trysail . attached to the respective yards of square-rigged ships are smaller spars , which can be extended , thus lengthening the yard , thus receiving an additional sailing wing on each side . these are called studding sails , and are used with fair and light wind only . the wings are named after the sails to which they are fastened , i.e . the main studding sails , main top studding sails , and the main top gallant studding sails , etc . the brig 's foremast is smaller than the main mast . the fore mast holds a fore sail , fore top sail , fore top gallant sail , and fore royal . between the fore mast and the bowsprit are the fore staysail , jib , and flying jib . all the yards are manipulated by a complicated arrangement of cordage named the running rigging . this is opposed to the standing rigging which is fixed , and keeps mast and other objects rigid . . hull material . a brig is '' generally built on a larger scale than a schooner , and may approach the magnitude of a full-sized , three-masted ship . '' brigs vary in length between with tonnages up to 480 . a notable exception being the famous designer colin mudie 's 'little brigs ' ( ts bob allen and ts caroline allen ) , which are only 10m long and weigh only 8 tonnes . historically , most brigs were made of wood , although some later brigs were built with hulls and masts of steel or iron . a brig made of pine in the 19th century was designed to last for about twenty years ( many lasted longer ) . . development of the brig . the word '' brig '' has been used in the past as an abbreviation of brigantine ( which is the name for a two-masted vessel with foremast fully square rigged and her mainmast rigged with both a fore-and-aft mainsail , square topsails and possibly topgallant sails ) . the brig actually developed as a variant of the brigantine . re-rigging a brigantine with two square-rigged masts instead of one gave it greater sailing power . the square-rigged brig 's advantage over the fore-and-aft rigged brigantine was '' that the sails , being smaller and more numerous , are more easily managed , and require fewer men or 'hands ' to work them . '' the variant was so popular that the term '' brig '' came to exclusively signify a ship with this type of rigging . by the 17th century the british royal navy defined '' brig '' as having two square rigged masts . . historic usage . brigs were used as small warships carrying about 10 to 18 guns . due to their speed and maneuverability they were popular among pirates ( though they were rare among american and caribbean pirates ) . while their use stretches back before the 17th century , one of the most famous periods for the brig was during the 19th century when they were involved in famous naval battles such as the battle of lake erie . in the early 19th century the brig was a standard cargo ship . it was seen as '' fast and well sailing '' , but required a large crew to handle its rigging . while brigs could not sail into the wind as easily as fore-and-aft–rigged vessels such as schooners , a trait that is common to all square-rigged ships , a skilled brig captain could '' manoeuvre it with ease and elegance ; a brig could for instance turn around almost on the spot '' . a brig 's square-rig also had the advantage over a fore-and-aft–rigged vessel when travelling offshore , in the trade winds , where vessels sailed down wind for extended distances and where '' the danger of a sudden jibe was the large schooner-captain 's nightmare '' . chapelle : the history of american sailing ships , 1935 , p.209 this trait later led to the evolution of the barquentine . the need for large crews in relation to their relatively small size led to the decline of the production of brigs . they were replaced in commercial traffic by gaffsail schooners ( which needed fewer personnel ) and steam boats ( which did not have the windward performance problems of square rigged ships ) . . historic examples . hms pilot , a cruizer-class brig-sloop launched in 1807 . while commanded by john toup nicholas off southern italy in 1810-1812 , pilot participated in the capture or destruction of over 130 enemy vessels . in 1815 she fought the last naval engagement of the napoleonic wars , fighting to a draw the french frigate légère . uss argus used during the first barbary war and the war of 1812 . archer , a vessel of the second texas navy . uss oneida used during the war of 1812 . james fenimore cooper was a midshipman aboard the oneida while under construction . the cargo-hauling brig farmer owned by george washington . the cargo-hauling brig fleetwing . leonora of captain bully hayes . mercury ( russian : меркурий ) an 1819 russian navy 18 gun brig painted twice by ivan aivazovsky . on may 14 , 1829 mercury engaged in an uneven battle against 2 turkish ships of the line , selimiye ( 110 guns ) and real-bei ( 74 guns ) and emerged victorious from that battle , damaging both turkish sufficiently to be not able to chase mercury and disengaging the battle . uss niagara captained by commander oliver hazard perry in the battle of lake erie , a pivotal victory for the united states in the war of 1812 . uss oregon , used in the u.s . exploring expedition . the cargo brig pilgrim , whose 1834 trading voyage from boston , massachusetts to california is described in the book two years before the mast . potomac , a vessel of the second texas navy rebecca , captained by robert jenkins , whose boarding triggered the war of jenkins ' ear . uss reprisal , fought in the american revolution . uss somers , sunk in the mexican–american war . was built as a brig in 1820 for the royal navy . she was deployed as a survey vessel to survey the coasts of south america , australia , and africa . a mizzen mast was added prior to the 5-year voyage with charles darwin to increase manoeuvrability in the shallow coastal waters that she would explore . jean lafitte 's pirate brig , the pride from 1815 to 1816 . hms badger , the future lord nelson first command as a young lieutenant . wharton , one of the vessels of the second texas navy , which participated in the naval battle of campeche , which is the only historical example of a steam navy having been defeated by a sail navy . joel root as supercargo sailed out of new haven harbor in 1802 on the brig huron to begin his journey around the world on a sealing expedition . rover was a privateer brig out of liverpool , nova scotia known for several bold battles in the napoleonic wars . nms mircea was a brig of the romanian navy , built in london in 1882 and sunk by aircraft in april 1944 . the telos , built in bangor , maine in 1883 , was reportedly the last brig to join the american merchant marine , and was '' considered to be the finest vessel of her class ever constructed in maine '' . she was wrecked on aves island , off bonaire in the caribbean , in 1900 . new york times june 17 , 1900 , p . 10 the famous mystery ship mary celeste , while sometimes called a brig , was clearly a brigantine . in fiction . arkham in h . p . lovecraft 's at the mountains of madness . aquila in the game assassin 's creed iii . beneficence in gary r . bush 's '' sail into treachery '' blue bird in evert taube 's song '' balladen om briggen blue bird av hull '' . charlotta in vilhelm moberg 's the emigrants constanzia from jules verne 's a drama in mexico . covenant in robert louis stevenson 's kidnapped ( novel ) . duncan from jules verne 's in search of the castaways . enterprise in the film star trek generations ( portrayed by the brig lady washington ) . forward from jules verne 's the adventures of captain hatteras . grampus in edgar allan poe 's novel the narrative of arthur gordon pym of nantucket . hellebore in the nathaniel drinkwater series by richard woodman . hms sophie in master and commander by patrick o'brian . hms wolverine in l.a . meyer 's under the jolly roger . interceptor in the film pirates of the caribbean : the curse of the black pearl ( portrayed by the brig lady washington ) . isle of skye in iain lawrence 's the wreckers ( high seas trilogy ) . jackdaw in the game assassin 's creed iv : black flag . jolly roger , a pirate ship of captain hook from james m . barrie 's peter pan . lightning in joseph conrad 's the rescue and the brig '' bonito '' in conrad 's '' freya of the seven isles '' . molly swash , in james fenimore cooper ’ s book jack tier . morrigan in the game assassin 's creed rogue , which was a brig-sloop . porta coeli , flame and amélie appear in the horatio hornblower series of books by c . s . forester ( later adapted to films and television ) . rattlesnakethe 18-guner commanded by commander terence o'brien in frederick marryat 's peter simple . sea hawk in the pirate of the mediterranean by william henry giles kingston . seahawk in avi 's novel the true confessions of charlotte doyle . speedy a pirate ship from jules verne 's the mysterious island . triton in ramage and the freebooters and governor ramage r.n . by dudley pope . poison orchid in scott lynch 's red seas under red skies . modern recreations . image : lady washington commencement bay2.jpg thumb the brig lady washington lady washington tre kronor niagara morgenster lady nelson ts royalist pilgrim stavros s niarchos and prince william roald amundsen la grace the 'little brigs ' ts bob allen and ts caroline allen mercedes fryderyk chopin . see also . brig sloop brigantine cruizer-class brig-sloop gun-brig snow ( ship )