Late capitalism

history of the term . the term '' late capitalism '' was first used by werner sombart in his magnum opus der moderne kapitalismus , which was published from 1902 through 1927 , and subsequent writings ; sombart divided capitalism into different stages : ( 1 ) proto-capitalist society from the early middle ages up to 1500 ad , ( 2 ) early capitalism in 1500–1800 , ( 3 ) the heyday of capitalism ( hochkapitalismus ) from 1800 to the first world war , and ( 4 ) late capitalism since then . sombart 's work was never translated into english , but historians sometimes do refer to late bourgeois society in contrast to early bourgeois society in the 17th and 18th century , or classical bourgeois society in the 19th and early 20th century . vladimir lenin famously declared that there are no '' absolutely hopeless situations '' for capitalism . the communist international stated that with the first world war , a new world epoch of wars and revolutions had opened , and it defined state monopoly capitalism as the highest and final stage of capitalism . the term late capitalism began to be used by socialists in continental europe towards the end of the 1930s and in the 1940s , when many economists believed capitalism was doomed . see , for example , natalie moszkowska 's zur dynamik des spätkapitalismus . zurich : verlag der aufbruch , 1943 . at the end of world war ii , many economists , including joseph schumpeter and paul samuelson , believed the end of capitalism could be near , in that the economic problems might be insurmountable . philip armstrong , andrew glyn and john harrison , capitalism since world war ii : the making and breakup of the great boom . fontana , 1984 , chapter 1 . the term was used in the 1960s in germany and austria , by western marxism writing in the tradition of the frankfurt school and austromarxism . leo michielsen and andre gorz popularized the term '' neo-capitalism '' in france and belgium , with new analyses of the new post-war capitalism . leo michielsen , neo-kapitalisme . brussel : jacquemotte stichting , 1969 . andré gorz , stratégie ouvriére et néocapitalisme , paris : le seuil , 1964 . jacques derrida preferred neo-capitalism to post- or late-capitalism . catherine malabou/jacques derrida , counterpath ( 2004 ) p . 114–115 theodor adorno preferred '' late capitalism '' over '' industrial society , '' which was the theme of the 16th congress of german sociologists in 1968 . theodor w . adorno ( ed . ) spätkapitalismus oder industriegesellschaft . verhandlungen des 16 . deutschen soziologentages . stuttgart , 1969 . in 1971 , leo kofler published a book called technologische rationalität im spätkapitalismus ( technological rationality in late capitalism ) . claus offe published his essay '' spätkapitalismus – versuch einer begriffsbestimmung '' ( late capitalism – an attempt at a conceptual definition ) in 1972 . claus offe , strukturprobleme ds kapitalistischen staates . frankfurt : suhrkamp , 1972 , pp . 7–25 . in 1973 , jürgen habermas published his legitimationsprobleme im spätkapitalismus ( legitimacy problems in late capitalism ) . jürgen habermas , legitimationsprobleme im spätkapitalismus frankfurt : suhrkamp , 1973 . in 1975 , ernest mandel published his phd thesis late capitalism in english at new left books . herbert marcuse also accepted the term . herbert marcuse , '' protosocialism and late capitalism : toward a theoretical synthesis based on bahro 's analysis '' . international journal of politics , vol . 10 no . 2/3 , summer-fall 1980 , 25–48 . immanuel wallerstein believes that capitalism may be in the process of being replaced by another world system . michele dillon , introduction to sociological theory ( 2009 ) p . 39 . the american literary critic and cultural theorist frederic jameson thought rudolf hilferding 's term the latest stage of capitalism ( jüngster kapitalismus ) perhaps more prudent and less prophetic-sounding m . hardt/k . weeks eds . , the jameson reader ( 2000 ) p . 257 but jameson often used '' late capitalism '' in his writings . hegel 's theme of '' the end of history '' was rekindled by kojève in his introduction to the reading of hegel . the '' end of history '' is discussed by francis fukuyama in the sense that liberal democracy is the ultimate form of society , which can not be surpassed by anything that is superior to it , because there does not and can not exist anything superior . in modern usage , late capitalism often refers to a new mix of high-tech advances , the concentration of ( speculative ) financial capital , post-fordism , and a growing income inequality . harry targ , challenging late capitalism , neoliberal globalization , & militarism . carl davidson , 2006 , p . 15–26 . ernest mandel . according to the marxist economist ernest mandel , who popularised the term with his 1972 phd dissertation , late-stage capitalism will be dominated by the machinations—or perhaps better , fluidities—of financial capital ; the jameson reader p . 268–269 and also by the increasing commodification and industrialisation of ever more inclusive sectors of human life . mandel believed that '' far from representing a 'post-industrial society ' , late capitalism . constitutes generalized universal industrialization for the first time in history '' . ernest mandel , late capitalism ( london : humanities press , 1975 ) p . 387 up to the mid-1960s , mandel preferred to use the term '' neo-capitalism '' , which was most often used by intellectuals in belgium and france around that time . ernest mandel , the economics of neocapitalism . socialist register 1964 , pp . 56–67 . this term drew attention to new characterististics of capitalism , but at the time ultra-leftist marxists objected to it , because , according to them , it might suggest that capitalism was no longer capitalism , and it might lead to reformist errors rather than the overthrow of capitalism . in his work late capitalism , mandel distinguished three periods in the development of the capitalist mode of production . freely competitive capitalist production , roughly from 1700 to 1870 , through the growth of industrial capital in domestic markets . the phase of monopoly capitalism , roughly from 1870 to 1940 , and is characterized by the imperialism competition for international markets , and the exploitation of colony . the epoch of late capitalism emerging out of the second world war , which has as its dominant features the multinational corporation , globalization , consumerism , and the space of liquid multinational capital flows . the jameson reader p . 165–166 in the tradition of the orthodox marxists , mandel tried to characterize the nature of the modern epoch as a whole , with reference to the main laws of motion of capitalism specified by marx . the jameson reader , p . 216–217 mandel 's aim was to explain the unexpected revival of capitalism after world war ii , contrary to leftist prognostications , and the long economic boom which showed the fastest economic growth ever seen in human history . the jameson reader , p . 257 his work has produced a new interest in the theory of long waves in economic development . grace k . hong , the ruptures of american capital ( 2006 ) p . 152 . fredric jameson . fredric jameson borrowed mandel 's vision as a basis for his widely cited postmodernism , or , the cultural logic of late capitalism . jameson 's postmodernity involves a new mode of cultural production ( developments in literature , film , fine art , video , social theory , etc . ) which differs markedly from the preceding era of modernism , particularly in its treatment of subject position , temporality and narrative . in the modernist era , the dominant ideology was that society could be re-engineered on the basis of scientific and technical knowledge , and on the basis of a popular consensus about the meaning of progress . from the second half of the 20th century , however , modernism was gradually eclipsed by postmodernism , which is skeptical about social engineering and features a lack of consensus about the meaning of progress . in the wake of rapid technological and social change , all the old certainties have broken down . this begins to destabilize every part of life , making almost everything malleable , changeable , transient and impermanent . jameson argues that '' every position on postmodernism today — whether apologia or stigmatization — is also.necessarily an implicitly or explicitly political stance on the nature of multinational capitalism today '' . the jameson reader , p . 190 a section of jameson 's analysis has been reproduced on the marxists internet archive . jameson regards the late capitalist stage as a new and previously unparalleled development with a global reach — whether defined as a multinational or informational capitalism . at the same time , late capitalism diverges from marx 's prognosis for the final stage of capitalism . the jameson reader p . 164–171 . in popular culture . a character in thomas pynchon 's 2013 novel bleeding edge states '' late capitalism is a pyramid scheme on a global scale.getting the suckers to believe it 's all gon na go on forever . '' thomas pynchon , bleeding edge ( 2013 ) p . 163 according to a 2017 article in the atlantic , the term '' late capitalism '' is again in vogue to describe modern business culture , although with a semantic change or an ironic twist . '' late capitalism '' has become a catch-all term for various phenomena that express capitalism 's distortions of human life , and it is often used in critique and satire . this usage also conveys a sense that contemporary capitalism can not go on like it does forever , because the problems created by business are getting too large and unmanageable . kimberley amadeo , “ late stage capitalism , its characteristics , and why the term 's trending ” . the balance , 24 august 2018 . youtube late capitalism video . see also .