Staurakios

biography . early life . staurakios was born in the early 790sad , probably between 791 and 793 , to nikephoros i and an unknown woman , often referred to as prokopia due to confusion with her daughter , prokopia . nikephoros was logothetēs tou genikou ( finance minister ) at the time of staurakios birth , before he revolted against byzantine empress irene in 802 ad , and seized the throne for himself ; staurakios was around 10–12 years old at this time . nikephoros consolidated power in the throne , instituted caesaropapism , and implemented strict fiscal laws . for these reasons , he was hated by many , especially the contemporary ecclesiastical historians , who are the main source of history for his reign ; many modern historians , therefore , doubt their assertions of his malevolent character . staurakios was not given an official government position upon his father 's accession to the throne , but , in the summer of 803 , bardanes tourkos revolted against nikephoros in the anatolic theme ; although his revolt was put down by early september , it convinced nikephoros to consolidate his hold on the throne by declaring staurakios co-emperor and heir , which he did on 25 december 803 . by doing so , nikephoros removed any question of the imperial succession and increased his own legitimacy—although staurakios , now somewhere between the ages of 11 and 13 , was not yet old enough to actually exercise power . after staurakios elevation to co-emperor , he is not mentioned again in the sources until 807 , when nikephoros decided that staurakios needed to marry , and thus held an imperial bride show to select a wife on 20 december 807 . theophano of athens was selected , likely due to the fact that she was a kinswoman of irene , and therefore would help add legitimacy to both nikephoros and staurakios rule . according to the heavily-biased byzantine historian theophanes , she was chosen despite the fact that she was already engaged to a man , whom she had slept with premaritally , and was not the most beautiful of the women presented at the bride show . after his marriage , staurakios is not mentioned again until 811 , when nikephoros prepared his invasion of the bulgarian khanate in may of that year . the bulgarians had been a serious foreign threat to the byzantine empire since the reign of constantine iv 668–685 ) , who had led a disastrous invasion into their lands . between 808 and 811 , the building tension between the two powers resulted in outright warfare . nikephoros led the campaign over the balkan mountains and into the bulgarian khanate in person alongside staurakios , his son-in-law michael rhangabe , a kouropalates ( high-ranking court official ) , and many senior imperial officials . the invasion was initially very successful , with the byzantine forces attacking the bulgarian capital of pliska , defeating first the 12,000-strong garrison of the city , and then an army of 15,000 which had been sent by the bulgarian khan krum to relieve the city . in correspondence sent to constantinople , nikephoros attributed these military victories to the strategic advice of staurakios . the victorious byzantine forces began to march back to the byzantine empire , but a desperate krum managed to trap the byzantine army in a small valley with palisades , before launching a massive assault two days later , on 26 july 811 . this battle , known as the battle of pliska , resulted in a bulgarian massacre of the byzantine forces . much of the byzantine army was destroyed , and nikephoros himself was slain . reign . the remaining byzantine forces , including a severely wounded staurakios , retreated to adrianople over three days . staurakios spine had been severed during the battle , which along with staurakios ' demonstrated lack of ability , led the uninjured influential figures in the empire to consider the issue of nikephoros ' successor . chiefly they were three who had traveled with nikephoros and staurakios , the magistros ( master of offices ) theoktistos , the domestic of the schools stephanos , and michael rhangabe . the severity of staurakios wounds led to speculation as to whether he would live , although eventually they judged he would make the best candidate , as the legitimate successor , and declared him emperor . staurakios gave a speech to the surviving troops , where he insulted nikephoros military judgment , before being acclaimed by the army 28 july 811 . almost immediately after staurakios ascended the throne , michael was pressured to usurp it , due to the legitimacy granted to him by his marriage to staurakios ' sister , prokopia , and his military abilities . theoktistos and others attempted to convince michael to take the throne , although he repeatedly refused at this time . staurakios was brought by litter to constantinople . by this time , it had been discovered that he had blood in his urine , and was paralyzed from the waist down . in spite of this , staurakios did his best to assert his imperial authority , including rebuffing the attempts of the ecumenical patriarch of constantinople , nikephoros i , to have funds which nikephoros had collected returned to the church . the severity of his injury , and the lack of any children to nominate as heirs led to a debate about who would succeed him , as his impending death was considered a certainty . staurakios sister , prokopia , backed her husband michael , while theophano backed herself , hoping to take the throne the same way her kinswoman irene had . the only proof of such intrigues given by contemporary historians comes from records that staurakios became hostile to theoktistos and michael , which would suggest he was aware of their plottings , and that he suspected prokopia of conspiring to kill him . staurakios wavered between two possible options for succession . the first , to make theophano empress , and the second , attested in a ninth-century chronicle , to institute a form of imperial democracy . the second option is considered by the byzantine historian j . b . bury to be the machinations of an addled brain if it did in fact happen . after hearing of the two options staurakios was considering , patriarch nikephoros i aligned himself with stephanos , theoktistos , and michael . afraid of the possibility of a public uprising due to lack of an heir , staurakios declared theophano his successor . this decision united the chief leaders and officials of the byzantine empire behind michael , as they did not desire to return to the uncertainty which had pervaded irene 's rule , due to her ruling despite being a woman . on 1 september 811 , staurakios summoned stephanos , whom he trusted completely , likely because stephanos was the first to proclaim staurakios emperor , to propose blinding michael ; staurakios was unaware that michael had the support of stephanos himself . stephanos assured staurakios of the strength of his position , and dissuaded him from having michael blinded , saying he was too well protected to attempt it . stephanos , after swearing he would not reveal the discussion to anyone else , gathered the remaining tagmatic forces and important officials at the hippodrome of constantinople , where on 2 october michael was proclaimed emperor by the army and senate at dawn . upon hearing of this , staurakios hastened to abdicate , fearing his execution otherwise . staurakios summoned his relative , symon the monk , and was tonsured and dressed in monastic garb . staurakios also sent a letter of protest to patriarch nikephoros for his role in the coup d ’ état ; nikephoros answered in person , writing alongside michael and prokopia , and assured staurakios that he had not betrayed him , but rather protected him . staurakios was unimpressed and informed the patriarch that '' you will not find him ( michael ) a better friend '' , meaning that michael would not be more useful to nikephoros than staurakios himself had been . staurakios lived another three months before dying of gangrene on 11 january 812 . he was buried in the monastery of braka , which was given to theophano by prokopia . according to the syriac sources—the chronicle of 813 and michael the syrian—and the chronicle of the petros of alexandria , there were rumors that staurakios had been poisoned by his sister prokopia , rather than dying of gangrene . theophanes considered these rumors possible and mentions that theophano herself considered these rumors true . historiography . the main source for the reigns of both nikephoros i and staurakios is theophanes chronographia , which was tainted by theophanes hatred of both men . although many historians believe that both nikephoros i and staurakios have been falsely portrayed as malevolent , few other sources exist for their reign . most other sources take the form of short references , which provide little insight , and include many errors , especially the syriac chronicle of 813 . because of the brevity of staurakios reign , and the weakness and bias of the sources , much of his life is unknown . staurakios reigned only two months and eight days , and was therefore unable to leave a mark on the empire as his father had done . hints from the chronographia suggest that staurakios wielded strategic understanding , and perhaps that staurakios was as strong-willed as his father , but his character is otherwise unknown . both nikephoros and staurakios were generally successful in maintaining the borders of the byzantine empire , although they did not achieve much military success , occasionally being forced to make humiliating concessions to powerful enemies , such as the abbasid caliph harun al-rashid . references . citations . . bibliography . . external links .