Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency

history . originally , vehicle registration was the responsibility of borough and county councils throughout great britain , a system created by the motor car act 1903 . the licensing system was centralised in 1965 and administered from the driver and vehicle licensing centre ( dvlc ) in swansea . in april 1990 , the dvlc was renamed as the driver and vehicle licensing agency ( dvla ) , becoming an executive agency of department for transport . . british forces germany civilian vehicles . civilian vehicles used in germany by members of british forces germany or their families are registered with the dvla on behalf of the ministry of defence . diplomatic and consular vehicles . official diplomatic and consular vehicles are registered with the dvla on behalf of the foreign and commonwealth office . dvla database . the vehicle register held by dvla is used in many ways . for example , by the dvla itself to identify untaxed vehicles , and by outside agencies to identify keepers of cars entering central london who have not paid the congestion charge , or who exceed speed limits on a road that has speed cameras by matching the cars to their keepers utilising the dvla database . the current dvla vehicle register was built by eds under a £5 million contract signed in 1996 , with a planned implementation date on october 1998 , though actual implementation was delayed by a year . it uses a client–server architecture and uses the vehicle identification number , rather than the registration plate , as the primary key to track vehicles , eliminating the possibility of having multiple registrations for a single vehicle . the vehicle identity check ( vic ) was introduced to help reduce vehicle crime . it was intended to deter criminals from disguising stolen cars with the identity of written off or scrapped vehicles , however this scheme was abandoned in october 2015 . under the scheme , when an insurance company wrote off a car it would notify the dvla . this notification would set a '' vic marker '' on the vehicle record on the dvla database . an identity check might then be required before the vehicle tax could be renewed or before any amendments could be made to the logbook . dvla database records are used by commercial vehicle check companies to offer a comprehensive individual car check to prospective purchasers . however , the accuracy of the data held remains a continuing problem . anyone can request information from the database if they purport to have just cause to need it , for a fee of £2.50 . the database of drivers , developed in the late 1980s , holds details of some 42 million driving licence holders in the uk . it is used to produce driving licences and to assist bodies such as the driver and vehicle standards agency , police and courts in the enforcement of legislation concerning driving entitlements and road safety . the dvla revealed in december 2012 that it had temporarily banned 294 public bodies , including local councils and police forces , for not using their access to the database correctly between 2006 and 2012 . a further 38 bodies were banned permanently during the period . . financial information . between 2002 and 2015 it is estimated that the dvla spent £500 million on information technology from ibm . . employment . staff of the dvla are predominantly female whereas other parts of the department for transport are predominantly male . starting salaries are just over £12,500 . in november 2007 , a public accounts committee report criticised the '' amazingly high '' levels of sick leave among staff at the dvla , where employees took an average of three weeks per year of sick leave . the report said that overall sickness leave at the dft and its seven agencies averaged 10.4 working days per full-time employee in 2005 , which they calculated as costing taxpayers £24 million . while sick leave rates at the department itself and four of its agencies were below average—at the dvla and dsa , which together employ more than 50 % of all dft staff—they were '' significantly higher '' . committee chairman edward leigh said it was surprising the agencies could '' function adequately '' . dvla sick leave 'amazingly high ' bbc news - 20 november 2007 in 2008 dvla staff went on a one-day strike over pay inequality arguing that they should receive similar salaries to other employees of the department for transport . the most recent level of sickness absence for 2012/13 was 6.7 days . . controversies . missing documents . in 2006 , 120,000 to 130,000 vehicle registration certificates went missing . a bbc investigation in 2010 found that vehicles worth £13 million had been stolen using the documents in the 18 months preceding the investigation . around ten cars are found each week to have forged log books and police said it would be decades before they were all recovered . . dvla letter bombs . on 7 february 2007 , a letter bomb was sent to the dvla in swansea and injured four people . it is suspected that this is part of a group of letter bombs sent to other organisations that deal with the administration of motoring charges and offences , such as capita in central london , which was targeted a few days earlier . miles cooper , aged 27 , a school caretaker , was arrested on 19 february 2007 , and charged on 22 february . the dvla have since installed x-ray machines in all post opening areas to reduce the effectiveness of any further attacks . wrong confidential records on surveys . in december 2007 , it was revealed that while sending out surveys to 1,215 drivers , the dvla sent out confidential details , but to the wrong owners . the error occurred during the sending out of routine surveys , and was not discovered until members of the public contacted the dvla to notify them of the error . . lost entitlements . in 2009 bbc 's watchdog reported that entitlements , specifically the entitlement to drive a motorcycle , were being lost from reissued driving licences . in 2005 the same programme highlighted drivers who had lost entitlements to drive heavy goods vehicles in a similar way . sale of details . in 2010 it was revealed that the dvla had sold drivers ' details from the database to certain private parking enforcement companies run by individuals with criminal records . the dvla sells details to companies for £2.50 , but it was found that the agency had sold some of these to a business which had been fined weeks before for unfair business practices . . complaints resolution . the dvla handled 12,775 complaints in the year 2015/16 , of which it failed to resolve 14.9 % at first contact . overall complaints for that year were down by 6.5 % . the dvla 'customer service excellence standard ' was retained . no details were provided on how this was measured . customer satisfaction levels varied between 76 % to 97 % in the four categories surveyed ; vehicle registration , driver licence renewal , vehicle taxation , driver medical transactions . no data was provided in respect of complaints about the sorn scheme or other fines levied . dvla annual report and accounts 2015-2016 . in popular culture . the dvlc in swansea is regularly referred to in the bbc political sitcom yes , minister . bernard woolley is regularly threatened with reassignment there . in the episode '' big brother '' , jim hacker is scheduled to give an address there . references . external links .