Filter paper

properties . filter paper has various properties . the important parameters are wet strength , porosity , particle retention , volumetric flow rate , compatibility , efficiency and capacity . there are two mechanisms of filtration with paper ; volume , and surface . by volume filtration the particles are caught in the bulk of the filter paper . by surface filtration the particles are caught on the paper surface . filter paper is mostly used because even a small piece of filter paper will absorb a significant volume of liquid . manufacture . the raw materials are different paper pulps . the pulp may be from softwood , hardwood , fiber crops , mineral fibres . for high quality filters , dissolving pulp and mercerised pulp are used . most filter papers are made on small paper machines . for laboratory filters the machines may be as small as 50 & nbsp ; cm width . the paper is often crêped to improve porosity . the filter papers may also be treated with reagents or impregnation to get the right properties . types . air filters . the main application for air filters are combustion air to engines . the filter papers are transformed into filter cartridges , which then is fitted to a holder . the construction of the cartridges mostly requires that the paper is stiff enough to be self-supporting . a paper for air filters needs to be very porous and have a weight of 100 - 200 g/m 2 . normally particularly long fibrous pulp that is mercerised is used to get these properties . the paper is normally impregnated to improve the resistance to moisture . some heavy duty qualities are made to be rinsed and thereby extend the life of the filter . coffee filter . coffee filters of paper are made from about 100 g/m 2 crêpe paper . the crêping allows the coffee to flow freely between the filter and the filtration funnel . the raw materials ( pulp ) for the filter paper are coarse softwood , often from fast growing trees . both bleached and unbleached qualities are made . coffee filters are made in different shapes and sizes to fit into different holders . important parameters are strength , compatibility , efficiency and capacity . fuel filters . the paper used for fuel filters is a crêpe paper with controlled porosity , which is pleated and wound to cartridges . the raw material for filter paper used in fuel filters are made of a mixture of hardwood and softwood fibres . the basis weight of the paper is 50 - 80 g/m 2 . . horizontal plate filters . horizontal plate filter paper is commonly utilized in industrial processing . filter paper typically is designed to fit the manufacturers specifications . absolute micron retention can range from 1-100 microns but diatomaceous earth is commonly used with filter paper to obtain sub-micron filtration . activated carbon or other filter aids can be used with the filter paper to form a filter cake to achieve specific results . filter paper can be impregnated with de or activated carbon . laboratory filters . filter papers are widely used in laboratory experiments across many different fields , from biology to chemistry . the type of filter used will differ according to the purpose of the procedure and the chemicals involved . generally , filter papers are used with laboratory techniques such as gravity or vacuum filtration . . qualitative filter paper . qualitative filter paper is used in qualitative analytical techniques to determine materials . there are different grades of qualitative filter paper according to different pore size . there are total 13 different grades of qualitative filter paper . the largest pore size is grade 4 ; the smallest pore size is grade 602 h ; the most commonly used grades are grade 1 to grade 4 . . grade 1 . grade 1 qualitative filter paper has the pore size of 11 & nbsp ; μm . this grade of filter paper is widely used for many different fields in agricultural analysis , air pollution monitoring and other similar experiments . . grade 2 . grade 2 qualitative filter paper has the pore size of 8 & nbsp ; μm . this grade of filter paper requires more filtration time than grade 1 filter paper . this filter paper is used for monitoring specific contaminants in the atmosphere and soil testing . . grade 3 . grade 3 qualitative filter paper has the pore size of 6 & nbsp ; μm . this grade of filter paper is very suitable for carrying samples after filtration . . grade 4 . grade 4 qualitative filter paper has the pore size of 20~25 & nbsp ; μm . this grade of filter paper has the largest pore size among all standard qualitative filter papers . it is very useful as rapid filter for cleanup of geological fluids or organic extracts during experiment . . grade 602 h . grade 602 h qualitative filter paper has the pore size of 2 & nbsp ; μm . this grade of filter paper has the smallest pore size among all standard qualitative filter papers . it is used for collecting or removing fine particles . . quantitative filter paper . quantitative filter paper , also called ash-free filter paper , is used for quantitative and gravimetric analysis . during the manufacturing , producers use acid to make the paper ash-less and achieve high purity . . chromatography papers . chromatography is a method chemists use to separate compounds . this type of filter paper has specific water flow rate and absorption speed to maximize the result of paper chromatography . the absorption speed of this type of filter paper is from 6 & nbsp ; cm to 18 & nbsp ; cm and the thickness is from 0.17 & nbsp ; mm from 0.93 & nbsp ; mm . . extraction thimbles . extraction thimbles are rod-shape filter paper often used in soxhlet extractors or atomized extractors . it is ideal for very sensitive detection , the performance it depends on the thickness of inner diameter . also , it is usually used in areas of food control and environmental monitoring . . glass fiber filters . glass fiber filter has the pore size of 1 & nbsp ; μm , it is useful for filtering highly contaminated solutions or difficult-to-filter solution . also , glass fiber filter has extends filter life , wide range of particulate loads and can prevent sample contamination . in addition , different types of glass fiber filter are suitable for different filtration situation . there are 7 different types of glass fiber filters and the major difference is thickness . quartz fiber filter . quartz fiber filter paper has a high resistance to chemicals , does not absorb nox and sox dioxides , is unaffected by humidity and is easily sterilized . thus , it is mostly used for air pollution analysis . . ptfe filter . ptfe filter has wide operating temperature ( -120 & nbsp ; °c~260 & nbsp ; °c ) with high air permeability . the resistance to high temperature makes ptfe filter paper suitable for use in autoclaves . it is often used to filter hot oils , strong solvents and collecting airborne particulates . . oil filters . engine oil is filtered to remove impurities . filtration of oil is normally done with volume filtration . filter papers for lubrication oils are impregnated to resist high temperatures . . tea bags . tea bags are made from abacá , a very thin and long fiber manilla hemp . often the paper is augmented with a minor portion of synthetic fibers . the bag paper is very porous and thin and has high wet strength . . see also . filter . references .