Nepal

literature and the performing arts . nepal 's literature was closely intertwined with that of the rest of south asia until its unification into a modern kingdom . literary works , which were written in sanskrit by brahmin priests educated and sometimes also based in varanasi , included religious texts and other fantasies involving kings , gods and demons . the oldest extant nepali language text is dated to the 13th century but except for the epigraphic material , nepali language literature older than the 17th century have n't been found . however , newar literature dates back almost 500 years . the modern history of nepali literature begins with bhanubhakta acharya ( 1814-1868 ) , who for the first time composed major and influential works in nepali , the language accessible to the masses , most prominently , the bhanubhakta ramayana , a translation of the ancient hindu epic . by the end of the nineteenth century , motiram bhatta had published print editions of the works of acharya , and through his efforts , single-handedly popularised and propelled nepali language literature into modernity . by the mid-twentieth century , nepali literature was no longer limited to the hindu literary traditions . influenced by western literary traditions , writers in this period started producing literary works addressing the contemporary social problems , while many others continued to enrich nepali poetic traditions with authentic nepali poetry . newar literature also emerged as a premier literary tradition . after the advent of democracy in 1951 , nepali literature flourished . literary works in many other languages began to be produced . nepali literature continued to modernise , and in recent years , has been strongly influenced by the post civil-war nepali experience as well as global literary traditions . maruni , lakhey , sakela , kauda and tamang selo are some examples of the traditional nepali music and dance in the hilly regions of nepal . nepali film industry is known as '' kollywood '' . nepal academy is the foremost institution for the promotion of arts and culture in nepal , established in 1957 . . clothing . the most widely worn traditional dress in nepal , for both women and men , from ancient times until the advent of modern times , was draped . for women , it eventually took the form of a sari , a single long piece of cloth , famously six yards long , and of width spanning the lower body . the sari is tied around the waist and knotted at one end , wrapped around the lower body , and then over the shoulder . in its more modern form , it has been used to cover the head , and sometimes the face , as a veil , particularly in the terai . it has been combined with an underskirt , or the petticoat , and tucked in the waistband for more secure fastening . it is worn with a blouse , or choli , which serves as the primary upper-body garment , the sari 's end , passing over the shoulder , now serving to obscure the upper body 's contours , and to cover the midriff . cholo-sari has become the attire of choice for formal occasions , official environs and festive gatherings . in its more traditional form , as part of traditional dresses and as worn in daily life while performing household chores or labour , it takes the form of a fariya or gunyu , usually shorter than a sari in length as well as breadth , and all of it wrapped around the lower body . for men , a similar but shorter length of cloth , the dhoti , has served as a lower-body garment . it too is tied around the waist and wrapped . among the aryans , it is also wrapped once around each leg before being brought up through the legs to be tucked in at the back . dhoti or its variants , usually worn over a kaupinam , constitute the lower-body garment in the traditional clothing of tharus , gurungs and magars as well as the madhesi people , among others . other forms of traditional apparel that involve no stitching or tailoring are the patukas ( a length of cloth wrapped tightly over the waist by both sexes as a waistband , a part of most traditional nepali costumes , usually with a khukuri tucked into it when worn by men ) , scarves like pachhyauras and majetros and shawls like the newar ga and tibetan khata , ghumtos ( the wedding veils ) and various kinds of turbans ( scarves worn around the head as a part of a tradition , or to keep off the sun or the cold , called a pheta , pagri or sirpau ) . until the beginning of the first millennium ad , the ordinary dress of people in south asia was entirely unstitched . the arrival of the kushans from central asia , circa 48 ad , popularised cut and sewn garments in the style of central asia . the simplest form of sewn clothing , bhoto ( a rudimentary vest ) , is a universal unisex clothing for children , and traditionally the only clothing children wear until they come of age and are given adult garb , sometimes in a ceremonial rite of passage , such as the gunyu-choli ceremony for hindu girls . men continue to wear bhoto through adulthood . upper body garment for men is usually a vest such as the bhoto , or a shirt similar to the kurta , such as daura , a closed-necked double-breasted long shirt with five pleats and eight strings that serve to tie it around the body . suruwal , simply translated as a pair of trousers , is an alternative to and , more recently , replacement for dhoti , kachhad ( magars ) or lungi ( tharus ) ; it is traditionally much wider above the knees but tapers below , to fit tightly at the ankles , and is tied to the waist with a drawstring . modern cholos worn with sarees are usually half-sleeved and single-breasted , and do not cover the midriff . the traditional one called the chaubandi cholo , like the daura , is full-sleeved , double-breasted with pleats and strings , and extends down to the patuka , covering the midriff . daura-suruwal and gunyu-cholo were the national dresses for men and women respectively until 2011 when they were removed to eliminate favouritism . traditional dresses of many pahari ethnic groups are daura-suruwal or similar , with patuka , a dhaka topi and a coat for men , and gunyu-cholo or similar , with patuka and sometimes a scarf for women . for many other groups , men 's traditional dresses consist of a shirt or a vest , paired with a dhoti , kachhad or lungi . in the high himalayas , the traditional dresses are largely influenced by tibetan culture . sherpa women wear the chuba with the pangi apron , while sherpa men wear shirts with stiff high collar and long sleeves called tetung under the chuba . tibetan xamo gyaise hats of the sherpas , dhaka topi of pahari men and tamang round caps are among the more distinctive headwears . married hindu women wear tika , sindur , pote and red bangles . jewellery of gold and silver , and sometimes precious stones , are common . gold jewellery includes mangalsutras and tilaharis worn with the pote by the hindus , samyafung ( a huge gold flower worn on the head ) and nessey ( huge flattened gold earrings ) worn by the limbus , and sirphuli , sirbandhi and chandra worn by the magars . tharu women can wear as much as six kilograms of silver in jewellery , which includes mangiya worn on the head , tikuli the forehead , and kanseri and tikahamala around the neck . in the last 50 years , fashions have changed a great deal in nepal . increasingly , in urban settings , the sari is no longer the apparel of everyday wear , transformed instead into one for formal occasions . the traditional kurta suruwal is rarely worn by younger women , who increasingly favour jeans . the dhoti has largely been reduced to the liturgical vestment of shamans and hindu priests . cuisine . nepali cuisine consists of a wide variety of regional and traditional cuisines . given the range of diversity in soil type , climate , culture , ethnic groups , and occupations , these cuisines vary substantially from each other , using locally available spices , herbs , vegetables , and fruit . the columbian exchange had brought the potato , the tomato , maize , peanuts , cashew nuts , pineapples , guavas , and most notably , chilli peppers , to south asia . each became staples of use . the cereals grown in nepal , their choice , times , and regions of planting , correspond strongly to the timing of nepal 's monsoons , and the variations in altitude . rice and wheat are mostly cultivated in the terai plains and well-irrigated valleys , and maize , millet , barley and buckwheat in the lesser fertile and drier hills . the foundation of a typical nepali meal is a cereal cooked in plain fashion , and complemented with flavourful savoury dishes . the latter includes lentils , pulses and vegetables spiced commonly with ginger and garlic , but also more discerningly with a combination of spices that may include coriander , cumin , turmeric , cinnamon , cardamon , jimbu and others as informed by culinary conventions . in an actual meal , this mental representation takes the form of a platter , or thali , with a central place for the cooked cereal , peripheral ones , often in small bowls , for the flavourful accompaniments , and the simultaneous , rather than piecemeal , ingestion of the two in each act of eating , whether by actual mixing—for example of rice and lentils—or in the folding of one—such as bread—around the other , such as cooked vegetables . dal-bhat , centred around steamed rice is the most common example . as well as dairy and sometimes meat , is the most common and prominent example . the unleavened flat bread made from wheat flour called chapati occasionally replaces the steamed rice , particularly in the terai , while dhindo , prepared by boiling corn , millet or buckwheat flour in water , continuously stirring and adding flour until thick , almost solid consistency is reached , is the main substitute in the hills and mountains . tsampa , flour made from roasted barley or naked barley , is the main staple in the high himalayas . throughout nepal , fermented , then sun-dried , leafy greens called gundruk , are both a delicacy and a vital substitute for fresh vegetables in the winter . a notable feature of nepali food is the existence of a number of distinctive vegetarian cuisines , each a feature of the geographical and cultural histories of its adherents . the appearance of ahimsa , or the avoidance of violence toward all forms of life in many religious orders early in south asian history , especially upanishads , buddhism and jainism , is thought to have been a notable factor in the prevalence of vegetarianism among a segment of nepal 's hindu and buddhist populations , as well as among jains . among these groups , strong discomfort is felt at thoughts of eating meat . though per capita meat consumption is low in nepal , the proportion of vegetarianism is not high as in india , due to the prevalence of shaktism , of which animal sacrifice is a prominent feature . nepali cuisines possess their own distinctive qualities to distinguish these hybrid cuisines from both their northern and southern neighbours . nepali cuisines , with generally tomato-based , leaner curries , are lighter than their cream-based indian counterparts , and nepali momo dumplings are heavily spiced compared to their northern counterparts . newar cuisine , one of the richest and most influential in nepal , is more elaborate and diverse than most , as newar culture developed in the highly fertile and prosperous kathmandu valley . a typical newar cuisine can comprise more than a dozen dishes of cereals , meat , vegetable curries , chutneys and pickles . kwanti ( sprouted beans soup ) , chhwela ( ground beef ) , chatamari ( rice flour crepe ) , bara ( fried lentil cake ) , kachila ( marinated raw minced beef ) , samaybaji ( centred around flattened rice ) , lakhaamari and yomuri are among the more widely recognised . juju dhau , a sweet yoghurt originating in bhaktapur , is also famous . thakali cuisine is another well-known food tradition which seamlessly melds the tibetan and the indian with variety in ingredients , especially the herbs and spices . in the terai , bagiya is a rice flour dumpling with sweets inside , popular among the tharu and maithil people . various communities in the terai make sidhara ( sun-dried small fish mixed with taro leaves ) and biriya ( lentil paste mixed with taro leaves ) to stock for the monsoon floods . selroti , kasaar , fini and chaku are among the sweet delicacies . rice pulau or sweet rice porridge called kheer are usually the main dish in feasts . tea and buttermilk ( fermented milk leftover from churning butter from yoghurt ) are common non-alcoholic drinks . almost all janajati communities have their own traditional methods of brewing alcohol . raksi ( traditional distilled alcohol ) , jaand ( rice beer ) , tongba ( millet beer ) and chyaang are the most well-known . sports and recreation . nepali indigenous sports , like dandi biyo and kabaddi which were considered the unofficial national sports until recently , are still popular in rural areas . despite efforts , standardization and development of dandi biyo has not been achieved , while kabaddi , as a professional sport , is still in its infancy in nepal . bagh-chal , an ancient board game that 's thought to have originated in nepal , can be played on chalk-drawn boards , with pebbles , and is still popular today . ludo , snakes and ladders and carrom are popular pastimes . chess is also played . volleyball was declared as the national sport of nepal in 2017 . popular children 's games include versions of tag , knucklebones , hopscotch , duck , duck , goose and lagori , while marbles , top , hoop rolling and gully cricket are also popular among boys . rubber bands , or ranger bands cut from tubes in bike tyres , make a multi-purpose sporting equipment for nepali children , which may be bunched or chained together , and used to play dodgeball , cat 's cradle , jianzi and a variety of skipping rope games . football and cricket are popular professional sports . nepal is competitive in football in the south asia region but has never won the saff , the regional tournament . it usually ranks in the bottom quarter in the fifa world rankings . nepal has had success in cricket and holds the elite odi status , consistently ranking in the top 20 in the icc odi and t20i rankings . nepal has had some success in athletics and martial arts , having won many medals at the south asian games and some at the asian games . nepal has never won an olympic medal . sports like basketball , volleyball , futsal , wrestling , competitive bodybuilding and badminton are also gaining in popularity . women in football , cricket , athletics , martial arts , badminton and swimming have found some success . nepal also fields players and national teams in several tournaments for the differently abled , most notably in men 's as well as women 's blind cricket . the only international stadium in the country is the multi-purpose dasarath stadium where the men and women national football teams play their home matches . since the formation of the national team , nepal has played its home matches of cricket at tribhuvan university international cricket ground . nepal police , armed police force and nepal army are the most prolific producers of national players , and aspiring players are known to join armed forces , for the better sporting opportunities they can provide . nepali sports is hindered by a lack of infrastructure , funding , corruption , nepotism and political interference . very few players are able to make a living as professional sportspeople .