Christian art

history . beginnings . early christian art survives from dates near the origins of christianity . the oldest christian sculptures are from sarcophagi , dating to the beginning of the 2nd century . the largest groups of early christian paintings come from the tombs in the catacombs of rome , and show the evolution of the depiction of jesus , a process not complete until the 6th century , since when the conventional appearance of jesus in art has remained remarkably consistent . until the constantine i and christianity christian art derived its style and much of its iconography from popular roman art , but from this point grand christian buildings built under imperial patronage brought a need for christian versions of roman elite and official art , of which mosaics in churches in rome are the most prominent surviving examples . christian art was caught up in , but did not originate , the shift in style from the classical tradition inherited from ancient greek art to a less realist and otherworldly hieratic style , the start of gothic art . middle ages . much of the art surviving from europe after the fall of the western roman empire is christian art , although this in large part because the continuity of church ownership has preserved church art better than secular works . while the western roman empire 's political structure essentially collapsed after the fall of rome , its religious hierarchy , what is today the modern-day roman catholic church commissioned and funded production of religious art imagery . the orthodox church of constantinople , which enjoyed greater stability within the surviving eastern empire was key in commissioning imagery there and glorifying christianity . as a stable western european society emerged during the middle ages , the catholic church led the way in terms of art , using its resources to commission paintings and sculptures . during the development of christian art in the byzantine empire ( see byzantine art ) , a more abstract aesthetic replaced the naturalism previously established in hellenistic art . this new style was hieratic , meaning its primary purpose was to convey religious meaning rather than accurately render objects and people . realistic perspective , proportions , light and colour were ignored in favour of geometric simplification of forms , reverse perspective and standardized conventions to portray individuals and events . the controversy over the use of graven images , the interpretation of the second commandment , and the crisis of byzantine iconoclasm led to a standardization of religious imagery within the eastern orthodoxy . renaissance and early modern period . the fall of constantinople in 1453 brought an end to the highest quality byzantine art , produced in the imperial workshops there . orthodox art , known as icons regardless of the medium , has otherwise continued with relatively little change in subject and style up to the present day , with russia gradually becoming the leading centre of production . in the west , the renaissance saw an increase in monumental secular works , although christian art continued to be commissioned in great quantities by churches , clergy and by the aristocracy . the reformation had a the reformation and art ; martin luther in germany allowed and encouraged the display of a more limited range of religious imagery in churches , seeing the evangelical lutheran church as a continuation of the '' ancient , apostolic church '' . lutheran art like last supper ( cranach ) were produced in germany , especially by luther 's friend lucas cranach , to replace catholic ones , often containing portraits of leading reformers as the apostles or other protagonists , but retaining the traditional depiction of jesus . as such , '' lutheran worship became a complex ritual choreography set in a richly furnished church interior . '' lutherans proudly employed the use of the crucifix as it highlighted their high view of the theology of the cross . thus , for lutherans , '' the reformation renewed rather than removed the religious image . '' on the other hand , christians from a reformed background were generally iconoclastic , destroying existing religious imagery and usually only creating more in the form of book illustrations . artists were commissioned to produce more secular genres like portraits , landscape paintings and because of the revival of neoplatonism , subjects from classical mythology . in catholic countries , production of religious art continued , and increased during the counter-reformation , but catholic art was brought under much tighter control by the church hierarchy than had been the case before . from the 18th century the number of religious works produced by leading artists declined sharply , though important commissions were still placed , and some artists continued to produce large bodies of religious art on their own initiative . modern period . as a secular , non-sectarian , universal notion of art arose in 19th-century western europe , ancient and medieval christian art began to be collected for art appreciation rather than worship , while contemporary christian art was considered marginal . occasionally , secular artists treated christian themes ( bouguereau , manet ) — but only rarely was a christian artist included in the historical canon ( such as rouault or stanley spencer ) . however many modern artists such as eric gill , marc chagall , henri matisse , jacob epstein , elizabeth frink and graham sutherland have produced well-known works of art for churches . beth williamson , christian art : a very short introduction , oxford university press ( 2004 ) , page 110 . salvador dalí is an artist who had also produced notable and popular artworks with christian themes . contemporary artists such as makoto fujimura have had significant influence both in sacred and secular arts . other notable artists include larry d . alexander and john august swanson . some writers , such as gregory wolfe , see this as part of a rebirth of christian humanism . . popular devotional art . since the advent of printing , the sale of reproductions of pious works has been a major element of popular christian culture . in the 19th century , this included genre painters such as mihály munkácsy . the invention of color lithography led to broad circulation of holy cards . in the modern era , companies specializing in modern commercial christian artists such as thomas blackshear and thomas kinkade , although widely regarded in the fine art world as kitsch , cynthia a . freeland , but is it art ? : an introduction to art theory , oxford university press ( 2001 ) , page 95 have been very successful . subjects . subjects often seen in christian art include the following . see life of christ and life of the virgin for fuller lists of narrative scenes included in cycles : . see also . notes . references . régamey , pie-raymond ( 1952 ) . art sacré au xxe siècle ? éditions du cerf . jean soldini , storia , memoria , arte sacra tra passato e futuro , in sacre arti , by flaminio gualdoni ( editor ) , tristan tzara , s . yanagi , titus burckhardt , bologna , fmr , 2008 , pp . & nbsp ; 166–233 . further reading . . http : commons.wikimedia org/wiki/file : ecstasy_st_theresa_sm_della_vittoria_jpg . princeton 's index of medieval art