Business rule

introduction . business rules tell an organization what it can do in detail , while strategy tells it how to focus the business at a macro level to optimize results . put differently , a strategy provides high-level direction about what an organization should do . business rules provide detailed guidance about how a strategy can be translated to action . business rules exist for an organization whether or not they are ever written down , talked about or even part of the organization 's consciousness . however it is a fairly common practice for organizations to gather business rules . this may happen in one of two ways . organizations may choose to proactively describe their business practices , producing a database of rules . while this activity may be beneficial , it may be expensive and time-consuming . for example , they might hire a consultant to comb through the organization to document and consolidate the various standards and methods currently in practice . gathering business rules is also called rules harvesting or business rule mining . the business analyst or consultant can extract the rules from it documentation ( like use cases , specifications or system code ) . they may also organize workshops and interviews with subject matter experts ( commonly abbreviated as smes ) . software technologies designed to capture business rules through analysis of legacy source code or of actual user behavior can accelerate the rule gathering processing . more commonly , business rules are discovered and documented informally during the initial stages of a project . in this case , the collecting of the business rules is incidental . in addition , business projects , such as the launching of a new product or the re-engineering of a complex process , might lead to the definition of new business rules . this practice of incidental , or emergent , business rule gathering is vulnerable to the creation of inconsistent or even conflicting business rules within different organizational units , or within the same organizational unit over time . this inconsistency creates problems that can be difficult to find and fix . business rules can also be created when necessary for internal and/or external purposes . in order to meet the business 's goals , businesses can come up with their own business rules and self-impose them in order to meet their standards or if they are trying to comply to external standards . allowing business rules to be documented during the course of business projects is less expensive and easier to accomplish than the first approach , but if the rules are not collected in a consistent manner , they are not valuable . in order to teach business people about the best ways to gather and document business rules , experts in business analysis have created the business rules approach . this methodology defines a process of capturing business rules in natural language , in a verifiable and understandable way . this process is not difficult to learn , can be performed in real-time , and empowers business stakeholders to manage their own business rules in a consistent manner . types of business rules . there are several assertions to be kept in mind when one is trying to define types of business rules : a structural assertion is where facts are portrayed as the structure of an enterprise and are used to make decisions . action assertions outline constraints and conditions that control the actions of the business in some sort of way . a derivation is additional knowledge that stems from original knowledge about the business . keeping these assertions in mind , business rules can be divided into one of three types : coordination rules : rules set in place that are a general requirement that has to be met before continuing . the rules are geared to make sure the company keeps progressing without re-work . qualification/disqualification rules : these rules are used to determine which subjects should be included and which ones should not . it 's basically filtering and preventing wasted time and effort . decision rules : this rule is used when a subject needs to be sent back for more information , approved , or rejected . . categories . according to the white paper by the business rules group , business rules group , defining business rules ~ what are they really ? , a statement of a business rule falls into one of four categories : definitions of business terms the most basic element of a business rule is the language used to express it . the very definition of a term is itself a business rule that describes how people think and talk about things . thus , defining a term is establishing a category of business rule . terms have traditionally been documented in a glossary or as entities in a conceptual model . facts relating terms to each other the nature or operating structure of an organization can be described in terms of the facts that relate terms to each other . to say that a customer can place an order is not a business rule , but a fact . facts can be documented as natural language sentences or as relationships , attributes , and generalization structures in a graphical model . constraints ( also called '' action assertions '' ) every enterprise constrains behavior in some way , and this is closely related to constraints on what data may or may not be updated . to prevent a record from being made is , in many cases , to prevent an action from taking place . derivations business rules ( including laws of nature ) define how knowledge in one form may be transformed into other knowledge , possibly in a different form . real world applications and obstacles . business rules are gathered in these situations : when dictated by law during the business analysis as an ephemeral aid to engineers . this lack of consistent approach is mostly due to the cost and effort required to maintain the list of rules . while newer software tools are able to combine business rule management and execution , it is important to realize that these two ideas are distinct , and each provides value that is different from the other . software packages automate business rules using business logic . the term business rule is sometimes used interchangeably with business logic ; however the latter connotes an engineering practice and the former an intrinsic business practice . there is value in outlining an organization 's business rules regardless of whether this information is used to automate its operations . one of the pitfalls in trying to fill the gap between rules management and execution is trying to give business rules the syntax of logic , and merely describing logical constructs in a natural language . translation for engines is easier , but business users will no longer be able to write down the rules . another challenge companies may face is the existence of tribal knowledge , which is '' undocumented information , processes , and rules that exist only in the minds of certain employees . '' having business rules that are not known or shared across the organization , and if they are unwritten , can cause lack of communication across the board and inconsistency with production , processes , quality , and customer/employee experiences . . formal specification . business rules can be expressed using modeling approaches such as unified modeling language ( uml ) , z notation , business process execution language ( bpel ) , business process modeling notation ( bpmn ) , decision model and notation ( dmn ) or the semantics of business vocabulary and business rules ( sbvr ) . business rules encoded in computer code in an operational program are known as business logic . similar to how business risks can be structured as : if then a business rule can be structured as : when then otherwise however , since any if/then/else rule can be encoded as such , it is vaccuous to claim that this is especially a '' business rule '' . accordingly , these so-called '' business rules '' are simply , '' rules '' in the same sense of computer science .