Toxicity

types . there are generally four types of toxic entities ; chemical , biological , physical and radiation : chemical toxicants include inorganic substances such as , lead , mercury , hydrofluoric acid , and chlorine gas , and organic compounds such as methanol , most medications , and toxins . while some weakly radioactive substances , such as uranium , are also chemical toxicants , more strongly radioactive materials like radium are not , their harmful effects ( radiation poisoning ) being caused by the ionizing radiation produced by the substance rather than chemical interactions with the substance itself . disease-causing microorganisms and parasites are toxic in a broad sense but are generally called pathogens rather than toxicants . the biological toxicity of pathogens can be difficult to measure because the '' threshold dose '' may be a single organism . theoretically one virus , bacterium or worm can reproduce to cause a serious infection . however , in a host with an intact immune system , the inherent toxicity of the organism is balanced by the host 's ability to fight back ; the effective toxicity is then a combination of both parts of the relationship . in some cases , e.g . cholera , the disease is chiefly caused by a nonliving substance secreted by the organism , rather than the organism itself . such nonliving biological toxicants are generally called toxins if produced by a microorganism , plant , or fungus , and venoms if produced by an animal . physical toxicants are substances that , due to their physical nature , interfere with biological processes . examples include coal dust , asbestos fibers or finely divided silicon dioxide , all of which can ultimately be fatal if inhaled . corrosive chemicals possess physical toxicity because they destroy tissues , but they 're not directly poisonous unless they interfere directly with biological activity . water can act as a physical toxicant if taken in extremely high doses because the concentration of vital ions decreases dramatically if there 's too much water in the body . asphyxiant gases can be considered physical toxicants because they act by displacing oxygen in the environment but they are inert , not chemically toxic gases . as already mentioned , radiation can have a toxic effect on organisms . . measuring . toxicity can be measured by its effects on the target ( organism , organ , tissue or cell ) . because individuals typically have different levels of response to the same dose of a toxic substance , a population-level measure of toxicity is often used which relates the probabilities of an outcome for a given individual in a population . one such measure is the . when such data does not exist , estimates are made by comparison to known similar toxic things , or to similar exposures in similar organisms . then , '' safety factors '' are added to account for uncertainties in data and evaluation processes . for example , if a dose of a toxic substance is safe for a laboratory rat , one might assume that one-tenth that dose would be safe for a human , allowing a safety factor of 10 to allow for interspecies differences between two mammals ; if the data are from fish , one might use a factor of 100 to account for the greater difference between two chordate classes ( fish and mammals ) . similarly , an extra protection factor may be used for individuals believed to be more susceptible to toxic effects such as in pregnancy or with certain diseases . or , a newly synthesized and previously unstudied chemical that is believed to be very similar in effect to another compound could be assigned an additional protection factor of 10 to account for possible differences in effects that are probably much smaller . obviously , this approach is very approximate ; but such protection factors are deliberately very conservative , and the method has been found to be useful in a deep variety of applications . assessing all aspects of the toxicity of cancer-causing agents involves additional issues , since it is not certain if there is a minimal effective dose for carcinogens , or whether the risk is just too small to see . in addition , it is possible that a single cell transformed into a cancer cell is all it takes to develop the full effect ( the '' one hit '' theory ) . it is more difficult to determine the toxicity of chemical mixtures than a pure chemical because each component displays its own toxicity , and components may interact to produce enhanced or diminished effects . common mixtures include gasoline , tobacco smoking , and industrial waste . even more complex are situations with more than one type of toxic entity , such as the discharge from a malfunctioning sewage treatment plant , with both chemical and biological agents . the preclinical toxicity testing on various biological systems reveals the species- , organ- and dose-specific toxic effects of an investigational product . the toxicity of substances can be observed by ( a ) studying the accidental exposures to a substance ( b ) in vitro studies using cells/ cell lines ( c ) in vivo exposure on experimental animals . toxicity tests are mostly used to examine specific adverse events or specific endpoints such as cancer , cardiotoxicity , and skin/eye irritation . toxicity testing also helps calculate the no observed adverse effect level ( noael ) dose and is helpful for clinical studies . parasuraman s . toxicological screening . j pharmacol pharmacother serial online 2011 cited 2013 oct 12 ; 2:74-9 . available from : . classification . for substances to be regulated and handled appropriately they must be properly classified and labelled . classification is determined by approved testing measures or calculations and has determined cut-off levels set by governments and scientists ( for example , no-observed-adverse-effect levels , threshold limit values , and tolerable daily intake levels ) . pesticides provide the example of well-established toxicity class systems and toxicity labels . while currently many countries have different regulations regarding the types of tests , numbers of tests and cut-off levels , the implementation of the globally harmonized system has begun unifying these countries . global classification looks at three areas : physical hazards ( explosions and pyrotechnics ) , health hazards and environmental hazards . . health hazards . the types of toxicities where substances may cause lethality to the entire body , lethality to specific organs , major/minor damage , or cause cancer . these are globally accepted definitions of what toxicity is . anything falling outside of the definition can not be classified as that type of toxicant . acute toxicity . acute toxicity looks at lethal effects following oral , dermal or inhalation exposure . it is split into five categories of severity where category 1 requires the least amount of exposure to be lethal and category 5 requires the most exposure to be lethal . the table below shows the upper limits for each category . agency for toxic substances and disease registry whole effluent , aquatic toxicity testing faq toxmap environmental health e-maps from the united states national library of medicine toxseek : meta-search engine in toxicology and environmental health