Media of Canada

history . the history of canadian media performers goes back to the first days of radio . in the 1940s , the radio artists of toronto society ( rats ) was formed . radio performers in montreal , winnipeg , and vancouver also organized to fight for artists ' rights , working conditions , and better fees . in 1943 , the association of canadian radio artists ( acra ) was formed as a loose national coalition of actors ' groups . over the years , acra evolved into the association of canadian radio and television artists , followed by the canadian council of authors and artists , then the association of canadian television and radio artists , and , in 1984 , to the alliance of canadian cinema , television and radio , its present name . the canadian broadcasting act , historically and in its modern conception , is based on the fact that , since the start of the 20th century , it was important for broadcasters to ensure that information flowed freely and reflected the diversity of canadian points of view , as opposed to the classic approach , which gives media owners more freedom to express their views . the canadian broadcasting system as it exists today '' would probably not exist if we had allowed the marketplace to regulate ownership rights . '' pierre trudel , professor , l.r . wilson chair , information technologies and electronic commerce law , public law research centre , university of montreal , may 29 , 2003 in august 2015 , the canadian media guild , the union representing cbc journalists , became a registered third party in order to campaign for increased taxpayer funding of the cbc in the 2015 election . after the liberal party of canada won the election , it increased taxpayer funding of the cbc by ca 150 & nbsp ; million . in 2017 , the federal government announced a five-year 50-million program to help struggling local newspapers . in 2018 , it announced 595 & nbsp ; million in tax credits to help struggling newspapers and television networks adapt to competition from online news sources . in 2013 , maclean 's wrote an article noting the influence that quebecor and owner pierre karl péladeau have on the quebec media system . the article noted that quebecor behaves like a counterpart to the federalist la presse , owned by the paul desmarais . in november 2018 , unifor , the other major union for canadian journalists , announced that it would campaign against the conservative party of canada in the 43rd canadian federal election . in february 2019 , former attorney general jody wilson-raybould gave testimony to the house of commons justice committee raising further speculation of political interference from the liberal party in journalism . as part of the testimony , jessica prince , the wilson-raybould 's chief of staff revealed that katie telford , chief of staff to prime minister justin trudeau , said : “ if jody is nervous , we would , of course , line up all kinds of people to write op-eds saying that what she is doing is proper . ” additionally , the 1980s and 1990s saw the emergence of city-based alternative weekly newspapers , geared toward a younger audience with coverage of the arts and alternative news . in recent years , many of these weeklies have also been acquired or driven out of business by conglomerates like canwest , quebecor and brunswick news . smaller newspapers like the dominion , publishing primarily online but in a newspaper format , have attempted to fill gaps in canada 's journalistic coverage while avoiding the vulnerabilities of the previous generation of alternative media . in the 2000s , a number of online news and culture magazines also launched with the goal of providing alternative media . some important online publications include rabble.ca , the tyee , the vancouver observer , and sootoday.com . similarly , as of 2006 , canada had over 250 ethnic newspapers . the late 2010s have seen an expansion in online news partisan outlets with ties to the major political parties in canada , such as north99 with the liberal party , the post millennial with the conservatives , and pressprogress with the ndp have received attention though their massive mostly social-based following . . motion pictures . given canada 's small market and its position next to the united states—the dominant producer of feature films—the canadian film industry receives substantial assistance from the government . in the 2000s , about half of the budget of a typical canadian film came from various federal and provincial government sources . most of canada 's film ( and television ) industry produces output geared towards mainstream north american audiences , with alliance atlantis and lions gate entertainment in particular enjoying significant successes in recent years . montreal , toronto and vancouver are major production centres , with vancouver being the second largest film and television production centre in north america ( after los angeles ) . the toronto international film festival is considered one of the most important events in north american film , showcasing both canadian talent and hollywood films . alliance atlantis has become by far the largest and most successful canadian film studio , both as a film and television production house ( the company 's television properties include due south , this hour has 22 minutes and c.s.i . ) , and as the major canadian distributor of independent american and international films . lions gate entertainment has also become a major player in recent years . canada also produces films of a characteristically '' canadian '' nature , and of all canadian cultural industries , this segment of the film industry has the hardest time escaping the shadow of its ( north ) american counterpart . between the marketing budgets of mainstream films , and the largely american-controlled film distribution networks , it has been nearly impossible for most distinctively canadian films to break through to a wide audience . in many canadian cities , in fact , moviegoers do n't even have the option of seeing such films , as there are n't any theatres showing them . as a result , a canadian film is usually considered a runaway hit if it makes as little as 1 million at the box office . french canadian films , on the other hand , are often more successful & mdash ; as with french-language television , the language difference makes quebec audiences much more receptive to canadian-produced film . in many years , the top-grossing canadian film is a french-language film from quebec . as a result of the economic challenges involved in canadian film production , film funding is often provided by government bodies such as telefilm canada , and television services such as cbc television , crave or super channel are often a canadian film 's most lucrative potential market . however , there is an established network of film festivals which also provide important marketing and audience opportunities for canadian films . in addition to toronto 's film festival , the smaller vancouver international film festival features films from around the world , and other major festivals in montreal , calgary , edmonton and sudbury & mdash ; among other cities & mdash ; are also important opportunities for canadian filmmakers to gain exposure among more populist film audiences . one particular film production house , the national film board of canada , has become internationally famous for its animation and documentary production . publishing . books . canada 's most famous book publisher is mcclelland and stewart , which made its name in the 1970s as the leading publisher of english language canadian literature . english canada also has many smaller publishing houses , including coach house press , the porcupine 's quill , house of anansi , key porter books , hidden brook press , and douglas & mcintyre . numerous american and british publishers , including random house , harpercollins , alfred a . knopf and penguin books , also have canadian divisions . major francophone publishers in quebec include bibliothèque québécoise , alire , québec-amérique , éditions guérin and groupe beauchemin . several small francophone publishers also operate outside of quebec , including éditions le nordir and prise de parole . canada 's largest english science fiction genre publisher is edge science fiction and fantasy publishing , which now also owns the tesseract books imprint , well known for producing excellent canadian speculative fiction . magazines . a notable controversy in canadian magazine publishing in recent years has been the existence of split run magazines , where a title published in another country , such as time or sports illustrated , is republished in canada with a few pages of special canadian content , in order to take advantage of canadian advertising sales revenues . the government of canada imposed a special excise tax on split run publications in 1995 to discourage the practice , although this continues to be controversial . magazines published in canada include : l'actualité adbusters auto atlantic east coast auto magazine canadian business canadian dimension canadian geographic canadian living chart chatelaine women 's magazine chickadee cult mtl enterprise mag exclaim ! flare fashion frank satirical geist literary review of canada maclean's maisonneuve moneysense my halifax experience owl saturday night today 's parent sharp ( magazine ) toronto life this magazine umm up here the walrus . digital . the rise of online media platforms has inevitably disrupted the need for print media consumption . the concern , however , lies in whether or not these online platforms , whether hyperlocal or national , have appropriate practices to enforce standard journalism practices in place , avoiding situations of 'fake news ' . for example , some platforms have been known to use scare-tactics to drive web traffic . online-only media publishers in canada include : blogto canoe daily hive freshdaily huffpost canada mtl blog narcity the title report torontoist trnto university magazine university magazine . vice magazine yahoo canada stamina group divine.ca view the vibe swagger magazine wandereater magazine . see also . media ownership in canada concentration of media ownership canada multicultural media in canada canadian communications foundation list of radio stations in ontario . references . further reading . . external links . television : channel canada , canadian cable and satellite database . film : the great canadian guide to movies and tv . magazines : finding canadian magazines journalism.net . newspaper : the canadian newspaper association , thepaperboy.com canadian newspapers . cbc digital archives concentration to convergence : media ownership in canada canadian radio-television and telecommunications commission ( crtc ) broadcasting-history.ca canadian communications foundation canadian media history sources : media history in canada bibliographic database telecommunications , internet and overall media landscape : { canadian media concentration research project canadian radio directory the complete accurate user-friendly list of canadian radio stations .