Chris Barrie

early life and career . barrie was born in hanover , lower saxony , west germany to a father who was serving in the british army , chris barrie biography ( 1956– ) . filmreference.com . retrieved 2012-04-11 . and attended methodist college belfast boarding school in northern ireland . after dropping out of his combined studies course at brighton polytechnic , he became a gravedigger . he then began his television career as a sports personality impersonator on david essex in 1982 . he adopted the surname '' barrie '' as there was already an actor named chris brown on the equity uk lists . he was a regular on saturday live , amongst performers like fry and laurie , rik mayall and ben elton . barrie provided the voice of ronald reagan in the pop song '' two tribes '' by frankie goes to hollywood , as well as various vocalizations for other tracks by fgth and art of noise . he also appeared as an impressionist on the bbc 's carrott 's lib between 1983 and 1984 , and he starred in his own sketch show pushing up daisies ( re-titled coming next for the following season ) from 1984 to 1985 alongside hale and pace and carla mendonça . in 1987 , he appeared as a french revolutionary in blackadder the third ( episode '' nob and nobility '' ) and did various parts in the young ones both as an actor and a voice-over . red dwarf . barrie has played the character arnold j . rimmer in all twelve series of red dwarf , appearing in almost every episode of the series , absent only for a period during series 7 . when an unsold pilot for an american version of the show was produced , barrie was invited to reprise his role as rimmer . he passed up the offer because of the constraint of the five-series contract . he starred in the 2020 film red dwarf : the promised land , alongside the main cast of craig charles , danny john-jules and robert llewellyn ( series 3-present ) . in addition to starring in the tv series , barrie also narrated the first two red dwarf books , infinity welcomes careful drivers ( 1992 ) and better than life ( 1995 ) , including using his vocal talents to recreate the voices of the other characters , as they sound in the show . the brittas empire . barrie played gordon brittas , the title role in the brittas empire , a bbc sitcom running from january 1991 to february 1997 for seven series , with 52 episodes , including two christmas specials . brittas was the well-meaning , but incompetent manager of whitbury new town leisure centre . each episode featured a disastrous occurrence , which brittas was sure he could sort out , oblivious to the fact he was usually its cause . in 2014 , barrie reprised his role as gordon brittas in the music video for little mix 's version of '' word up ! '' . in 2017 the cast reunited for the reopening of ringwood leisure centre where a lot of the series was recorded . . roles in television and films . barrie 's tv work includes britain 's greatest machines with chris barrie , screened on the national geographic channel from 4 june 2009 . each of the four episodes features some of the most notable air , sea , and land vehicles and equipment of the 1930s , 1950s , 1960s , and 1980s , respectively . the second series of four episodes was transmitted in february 2010 , with the 1910s , 1920s , 1940s , and early steam trains as the subjects of each episode . barrie has also hosted the television series chris barrie 's massive engines and chris barrie 's massive machines on the discovery channel , later shown on channel 5 and released on dvd . the latest in this series massive speed with chris barrie was shown on discovery channel from november 2006 . in 2006 , he appeared as a regular team captain in the bbc two game show petrolheads and was the star of the british crime/comedy/drama film back in business , in which he played tom marks . between 2016 and 2019 he was the voice-over for channel 5 's car crash tv and idiot tv . filmography . trevor , the director of the mock panel show '' ooer , sounds a bit rude '' in episode two of filthy rich & catflap . the ship 's captain in the wall-poster cut scene during the young ones episode '' nasty '' . the voice of simon the sorcerer in the amiga cd32 re-release of the adventure soft computer game simon the sorcerer ( 1994 ) . gary prince in a prince among men ( 1997–98 ) . hillary the butler in the films lara croft : tomb raider ( 2001 ) and lara croft tomb raider : the cradle of life ( 2003 ) . doubting thomas in a small series of television advertisements for anglian windows . the voice of cif micro liquid . the voices of captain smollett and ben gunn in the legends of treasure island . appearances on the bbc radio 4 sketch show son of cliché . voice impersonations on recordings by frankie goes to hollywood : as ronald reagan on the 12-inch release of '' two tribes '' . as mike read , banning the single '' relax '' , on the 12-inch release of '' the power of love '' . as hrh prince charles on '' tag '' , from the album welcome to the pleasuredome . voice impersonation of robin day on the art of noise track '' close up '' . voice of a motorbike racing commentator in episode 3 of the bbc comedy series grace and favour . voice of ronald reagan in the video to the genesis song '' land of confusion '' . narrator for the channel 5 show car crash tv . a one-time appearance as '' the evil revolutionary '' in blackadder the third . personal life . barrie 's interests include vintage motorbikes and collecting fast cars . in 1995 , he released a video called chris barrie 's motoring wheel nuts , a showcase for his personal car collection . his current classic car collection consists of a triumph tr2 , mg mgb , wolseley 1500 and a jaguar xj6 ( his everyday car ) . he is a contributor to practical classics magazine . he has been married twice : first to monica de meo from 1987 to 1990 and then to alecks ( 1997–present ) with whom he has two sons . he lives in cookham , berkshire . . references . external links . chris barrie on national geographic channel . interviews . ayme interview – association of young people with me 26 september 2005 : bbc – wiltshire – films – interview with chris barrie play audio 11 august 2005 : bbc – wiltshire – mark seaman interview with chris barrie play audio video interview with chris barrie