Market system

types . in economics , market forms are studied . these look at the impacts of a particular form on larger markets , rather than technical characteristics of how buyers and sellers interact . heavy reliance on many interacting market systems and different forms of markets is a feature of capitalism , and advocates of socialism often criticize markets and aim to substitute markets with economic planning to varying degrees . competition is the regulatory mechanism of the market system . this article does not discuss the political impact of any particular system nor applications of a particular mechanism to any particular problem in real life . for more on specific types of real-life markets , see commodity markets , insurance markets , bond markets , energy markets , flea markets , debt markets , stock markets , online auctions , media exchange markets , real estate market , each of which is explained in its own article with features of its application , referring to market systems as such if needed . one of the most important characteristics of a market economy , also called a free enterprise economy , is the role of a limited government . protocols . the market itself provides a medium of exchange for the contracts and coupons and cash to seek prices relative to each other , and for those to be publicized . this publication of current prices is a key feature of market systems , and is often relevant far beyond the current groups of buyers and sellers , affecting others ' supply and demand decisions , e.g . whether to produce more of a commodity whose price is now falling . market systems are more abstract than their application to any one use , and typically a 'system ' describes a protocol of offering or requesting things for sale . well-known market systems that are used in many applications include : auctions - the most common , including : dutch auctions reverse auctions silent auctions rationing public administration ( including the command economy of some states ) regulated market ( including most real-life examples as above ) black market ( the term 'black ' indicating lack of regulation , or any trade , often illegal , operating in violation of official regulations ) the term 'laissez-faire ' ( '' let alone '' ) is sometimes used to describe some specific compromise between regulation and black market , resulting in the political struggle to define or exploit '' free markets '' . this is not an easy matter to separate from other debates about the nature of capitalism . there is no such thing as a '' free '' market other than in the sense of a black market , and most free-market advocates favor at least some form of regulated market , e.g . to prevent outright fraud , theft , and retain some degree of credibility with the larger public . this political debate is out of the scope of this article , other than to note that the '' free '' market is usually a '' less regulated '' market , but not qualitatively different from other regulated markets , in any society with laws , and that what opponents of '' free markets '' usually seek is some kind of moral purchasing rather than pure rationing . as this debate suggests , key debates over market systems relate to their accessibility , safety , fairness , and ability to guarantee clearance and closure of all transactions in a reasonable period of time . importance of trust . the degree of trust in a political or economic authority ( such as a bank or central bank ) is often critical in determining the success of a market . a market system depends inherently on a stable money system to ensure that units of account and standards of deferred payment are uniform across all players - and to ensure that the balance of contracts due within that market system are accepted as a store of value , i.e . as '' collateral '' of the holder of the contract , which justifies '' credit '' from a lender of cash . banks , themselves , are often described in terms of markets , as '' transducers of trust '' between lenders ( who deposit money ) and borrowers ( who take it out again ) . trust in the bank to manage this process makes more economic activity possible . however , critics say , this trust is also quite easy to abuse , and has many times proven difficult to limit or control ( see business cycle ) , resulting in 'runs on banks ' and other such 'crises of trust ' in 'the system ' . criticisms . in the economics of innocent fraud , economist john kenneth galbraith criticized the concept of the '' market system '' as nonsensical and as a weasel word intended to replace the term '' capitalism '' , but which does not specify anything specific . marketing system . marketing system is a consistent pattern of provisioning relationships in society that exists between members of society including individuals , firms , communities and institutions . while marketing , in the sense of firm 's micro marketing activities , can be the same across contexts , cultures , and nations , a marketing system is a unique market structure pertaining to a specific context ( e.g . agricultural marketing systems in africa ) . marketing system is a differentiated subset of social system . marketing system is a general term that represents how different patterns of the flows of goods/services from producers to consumers are culturally ( uniquely ) organised , whereas terms such as market system ( a market based economic system of the west ) , horizontal marketing system ( cooperation between two firms at the same level ) , and digital marketing system ( a specific type of centralised channel distribution ) represent its context-specific variations . marketing systems are mostly researched within the discipline of macromarketing . definition . the notion of '' aggregated marketing system '' signifies all marketing practices at the societal level . roger layton defines a marketing system as '' a network of individuals , groups and/or entities , embedded in a social matrix , linked directly or indirectly through sequential or shared participation in economic exchange , which jointly and/or collectively creates economic value with and for customers , through the offer of assortments of goods , services , experiences and ideas , that emerge in response to or anticipation of customer demand '' . marketing systems can be rudimentary or complex , emergent or purposefully designed , spatio-temporal or virtual ; these can also be aggregate , parallel , symbolic , dignity-based and chrematistics-driven . from the societal perspective , a marketing system represents a public good which can have value over and beyond goods/services it generates . mas theory . mas ( mechanism , action , structure ) theory of marketing systems proposed by layton focuses on social mechanisms , strategic action fields , and emergent marketing system structure to explicate potential sources and causes of marketing system 's formation , adaptation , and evolution . social mechanisms include cooperation , specialisation , and self-organisation , while strategic action fields comprise the action and practices of marketing system actors in their specific roles . layton argues that marketing systems emerge as localised exchanges grow in scope and become stabilised while specialisation expands , and in addition , as key structures become formalised . mspg theory . mspg ( marketing systems as a public good ) theory conceptualises a marketing system as a purposefully designed structure that resembles a '' public good '' in its features . according to this theory , the holistic design of a marketing system as a public good enables its structural elements ( e.g . goods , value , exchanges and processes ) to become meaningful . hence , purposeful design precedes emergence . symbolism in marketing systems . marketing systems are strongly driven by symbolism . . see also . the economics of innocent fraud capitalism financial capital free price system market abolitionism market economy market forms money moral purchasing risk voting system . references .