Yerba mate

name and pronunciation . the name given to the plant in the guaraní , language of the indigenous people who first used mate , is , which has the same meaning as '' herb '' . , in portuguese , is derived from the tupi expression , meaning something like '' what keeps us alive '' , but a term rarely used nowadays . mate is from the quechua , real academia española . '' mate '' . retrieved 23 may 2013 a word that means '' container for a drink '' and '' infusion of an herb '' , as well as '' gourd '' . aulex , '' online quechua-spanish dictionary '' . retrieved 23 may 2013 the word mate is used in modern portuguese and spanish . the pronunciation of in spanish is . the accent on the word mate is on the first syllable . the word is spanish for '' herb '' , where the initial '' h '' is silent ; is a variant spelling of hierba used throughout latin america . real academia española . '' yerba '' . retrieved 23 may 2013 yerba may be understood as '' herb '' but also as '' grass '' or '' weed '' . in argentina , refers exclusively to the plant . , therefore , originally translated literally as the '' gourd herb '' , i.e . the herb one drinks from a gourd . the ( brazilian ) portuguese name for the plant is either , pronounced variously as , or in the regions of traditional consumption , in coastal , urban rio de janeiro , the most used term . ferreira , a . b . h . novo dicionário da língua portuguesa . segunda edição . rio de janeiro : nova fronteira , 1986 . p.453 the drinks it is used to prepare are ( hot ) , ( cold ) , or ( hot or cold ) . while is made with toasted leaves , the other drinks are made with raw , green leaves , and are very popular in the south and center-west of the country . most people colloquially address both the plant and the beverage by the word . in english , both the spellings '' mate '' and '' maté '' are used to refer to the plant or beverage , but the latter spelling is incorrect in both spanish and portuguese , as it would put the stress on the second syllable , while the word is correctly pronounced with the stress on the first syllable . the addition of the acute accent over the final '' e '' in the english spelling was likely added as a hypercorrection to indicate that the final '' -é '' is not silent . indeed , the word maté in spanish has a completely different meaning ; in spanish : is understood as being the first person past tense conjugation of ( '' to kill '' ) and means '' i killed '' . '' word magic spanish dictionary '' . retrieved 23 may 2013 there are no variations in spelling of mate ( the plant ) in spanish . in both spanish and portuguese , the first syllable of mate ( plant ) is the tonic one , and the word does not require a written accent . if the tonic syllable were the last one , the accent would be required , as maté . . description . ilex paraguariensis begins as a shrub and then matures to a tree , growing up to tall . the leaves are evergreen , long and wide , with serrated margins . the leaves are often called ( spanish ) or ( portuguese ) , both of which mean '' herb '' . they contain caffeine ( known in some parts of the world as mateine ) and related xanthine alkaloids , and are harvested commercially . the flowers are small and greenish-white with four petals . the fruit is a red drupe in diameter . history . mate was first consumed by the indigenous guaraní people and also spread in the tupí people that lived in southern brazil and paraguay . its consumption became widespread during european colonization , particularly in the spanish colony of paraguay in the late 16th century , among both spanish settlers and indigenous guaraní , who had , to some extent before the spanish arrival , consumed it . this widespread consumption turned it into paraguay 's main commodity above other wares , such as tobacco , and the labour of indigenous peoples was used to harvest wild stands . in the mid-17th century , jesuits managed to domesticate the plant and establish plantations in jesuit reduction in misiones , argentina , sparking severe competition with the paraguayan harvesters of wild stands . after their expulsion in the 1770s , their plantations fell into decay , as did their domestication secrets . the industry continued to be of prime importance for the paraguayan economy after independence , but development in benefit of the paraguayan state halted after the paraguayan war ( 1864–1870 ) that devastated the country both economically and demographically . some regions with mate plantations in paraguay became argentine territory . brazil then became the largest producer of mate . '' erva-mate - o ouro verde do paraná '' . retrieved 10 july 2013 in brazilian and argentine projects in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the plant was domesticated once again , opening the way for plantation systems . when brazilian entrepreneurs turned their attention to coffee in the 1930s , argentina , which had long been the prime consumer , took over as the largest producer , resurrecting the economy in misiones province , where the jesuits had once had most of their plantations . for years , the status of largest producer shifted between brazil and argentina . today , brazil is the largest producer , with 53 % , followed by argentina , 37 % , and paraguay , 10 % . list of goods produced by child labor or forced labor in the city of campo largo , state of paraná , brazil , there is a mate historic park , funded by the state government to educate people on the sustainable harvesting methods needed to maintain the integrity and vitality of the oldest wild forests of mate in the world . as of june 2014 , however , the park is closed to public visitation . . cultivation . the yerba mate plant is grown and processed in its native regions of south america , specifically in northern argentina ( corrientes and misiones ) , paraguay , uruguay , and southern brazil ( rio grande do sul , santa catarina , paraná , and mato grosso do sul ) . cultivators are known as ( spanish ) or ( brazilian portuguese ) . seeds used to germinate new plants are harvested after they have turned dark purple , typically from january to april . after harvest , they are submerged in water in order to eliminate floating non-viable seeds and detritus like twigs , leaves , etc . new plants are started between march and may . for plants established in pots , transplanting takes place april through september . plants with bare roots are transplanted only during the months of june and july . burtnik , oscar josé , '' yerba mate production '' , 3rd edition , 2006 . retrieved 24 may 2013 many of the natural enemies of yerba mate are difficult to control in plantation settings . insect pests include gyropsylla spegazziniana , a true bug that lays eggs in the branches ; hedyphates betulinus , a type of beetle that weakens the tree and makes it more susceptible to mold and mildew ; perigonia lusca , a moth whose larvae eat the leaves ; and several species of mites . when i . paraguariensis is harvested , the branches are often dried by a wood fire , imparting a smoky flavor . the strength of the flavor , caffeine levels , and other nutrients can vary depending on whether it is a male or female plant . female plants tend to be milder in flavor and lower in caffeine . they are also relatively scarce in the areas where yerba mate is planted and cultivated . according to fao in 2012 , brazil is the biggest producer of mate in the world with 513,256 mt ( 58 % ) , followed by argentina with 290,000 mt ( 32 % ) and paraguay with 85,490 mt ( 10 % ) . . use as a beverage . the infusion , called mate in spanish-speaking countries or in brazil , is prepared by filling a container , traditionally a small , hollowed-out gourd , up to three-quarters full with dry leaves ( and twigs ) of i . paraguariensis , and filling it up with water at a temperature of , hot but not boiling . sugar may or may not be added . the infusion may also be prepared with cold water , in which case it is known as . how to make mate drinking mate is a common social practice in paraguay , uruguay , argentina , chile , and southern brazil among people of all ages , and is often a communal ritual following customary rules . friends and family members share from the same container , traditionally a hollow gourd ( also called a , , or simply in spanish , a or in portuguese , or a in italian ) , and drink through the same wooden or metal straw ( a in spanish or in portuguese ) . the gourd is given by the brewer to each person , often in a circle , in turn ; the recipient gives thanks , drinks the few mouthfuls in the container , and then returns the mate to the brewer , who refills it and passes it to the next person in clockwise order . although traditionally made from a hollowed calabash gourd , these days mate '' gourds '' are produced from a variety of materials including wood , glass , bull horns , ceramic , and silicone . guide to yerba mate gourds in the same way as people meet for tea or coffee , friends often gather and drink mate in paraguay , argentina , southern brazil , and uruguay . in warm weather the hot water is sometimes replaced by lemonade . paraguayans typically drink yerba mate with cold water during hot days and hot water in the morning and during cooler temperatures . yerba mate is most popular in paraguay and uruguay , where people are seen walking the streets carrying the and often a ( thermal vacuum flask ) in their arms . in argentina , of yerba mate is consumed annually per capita ; in uruguay , the largest consumer , consumption is . '' mate : the bitter tea south americans love to drink '' . retrieved 30 may 2013 the amount of herb used to prepare the infusion is much greater than that used for tea and other beverages , which accounts for the large weights . the flavor of brewed mate resembles an infusion of vegetables , herbs , and grass and is reminiscent of some varieties of green tea . some consider the flavor to be very agreeable , but it is generally bitter if steeped in hot water . sweetened and flavored mate is also sold , in which the mate leaves are blended with other herbs ( such as peppermint ) or citrus rind . in paraguay , brazil , and argentina , a version of mate known as ( or just mate or cocido ) in paraguay and in brazil is sold in teabags and in a loose leaf form . it is often served sweetened in specialized shops or on the street , either hot or iced , pure or with fruit juice ( especially lime , known in brazil as or milk . in paraguay , argentina , and southern brazil , this is commonly consumed for breakfast or in a café for afternoon tea , often with a selection of sweet pastries ( facturas ) . an iced , sweetened version of mate cocido is sold as an uncarbonated soft drink , with or without fruit flavoring . in brazil , this cold version of is especially popular in the south and southeast regions , and can easily be found in retail stores in the same cooler as other soft drinks . , which is toasted , has less of a bitter flavor and more of a spicy fragrance . becomes creamy when shaken and is more popular in the coastal cities of brazil , as opposed to the far southern states , where it is more commonly consumed in the traditional way ( green , with a silver straw from a shared gourd ) , and called in spanish , particularly argentine spanish ) . in paraguay , western brazil ( mato grosso do sul , west of são paulo and paraná ) , and the argentine littoral , a mate infusion , called in spanish and portuguese or in portuguese in southern brazil , is also consumed as a cold or iced beverage , usually sucked out of a horn cup called a with a . can be prepared with cold water ( the most common way in paraguay and brazil ) or fruit juice ( the most common way in argentina ) . the version with water is more bitter ; fruit juice acts as a sweetener ( in brazil , this is usually avoided with the addition of table sugar ) . medicinal or culinary herbs , known as ( weeds ) , may be crushed with a pestle and mortar and added to the water for taste or medicinal reasons . paraguayans have a tradition of mixing mate with crushed leaves , stems , and flowers of the plant known as ( the flower of august , plants of the genus senecio , particularly senecio grisebachii ) , which contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids . modifying mate in this fashion is potentially toxic , as these alkaloids can cause veno-occlusive disease , a rare condition of the liver which results in liver failure due to progressive occlusion of the small vein . mate has also become popular outside of south america . in the tiny hamlet of groot marico , north west province , south africa , mate was introduced to the local tourism office by the returning descendants of the boers , who in 1902 had emigrated to patagonia in argentina after losing the anglo boer war . it is also commonly consumed in lebanon , syria , and some other parts of the middle east , mainly by druze and alawite people . most of its popularity outside south america is a result of historical emigration to south america and subsequent return . it is consumed worldwide by expatriates from the southern cone . materva is a sweet , carbonated soft drink based on yerba mate . developed in cuba in 1920 , and produced since the 1960s in miami , florida , it is a staple of the cuban culture in miami . . use as a health food . mate is often consumed as a health food . packages of yerba mate are available in health food stores and are frequently stocked in large supermarkets in europe , australia , and the united states . by 2013 , asian interest in the drink had seen significant growth that led to significant exports to those countries . . chemical composition and properties . yerba mate contains a variety of polyphenols such as the flavonoids quercetin and rutin . yerba mate contains three xanthines : caffeine , theobromine , and theophylline , the main one being caffeine . caffeine content varies between 0.7 % and 1.7 % of dry weight dellacassa , cesio et al . departamento de farmacognosia , facultad de química , universidad de la república , uruguay , noviembre : 2007 , pages 1–15 ( compared with 0.4–9.3 % for tea leaves , 2.5–7.6 % in guarana , and up to 3.2 % for ground coffee ) ; theobromine content varies from 0.3 % to 0.9 % ; theophylline is typically present only in small quantities or sometimes completely absent . a substance previously called '' mateine '' is a synonym for caffeine ( like theine and guaranine ) . yerba mate also contains elements such as potassium , magnesium , and manganese . . health effects . yerba mate has been claimed to have various effects on human health , most of which have been attributed to the high quantity of polyphenols found in the beverage . research has found that yerba mate may improve allergy symptoms and reduce the risk of diabetes mellitus and hyperglycemia in mice . mate also contains compounds that may act as an appetite suppressant and possible weight loss tool , increases mental energy and focus , improves mood , and promotes deeper sleep ; however , sleep may be negatively affected in people who are sensitive to caffeine . before 2011 , there were no double-blind , randomized prospective clinical trials of yerba mate consumption with respect to chronic disease . many studies have been conducted since then , pointing to at least some probable health benefits of yerba mate , such as reduction of fat cells , inflammation , and cholesterol , although more research is needed . some non-blinded studies have found mate consumption to be effective in lipid lowering . another study determined that mate reduces progression of arteriosclerosis in rabbits but did not decrease serum cholesterol or aorta tbars and antioxidant enzymes . . weight loss . yerba mate contains polyphenols such as flavonoids and phenolic acids , which work by inhibiting enzymes like pancreatic lipase and lipoprotein lipase , which in turn play a role in fat metabolism . yerba mate has been shown to increase satiety by slowing gastric emptying . effects on weight loss may be due to reduced absorption of dietary fats and/or altered cholesterol metabolism . despite yerba mate 's potential for reducing body weight , there is minimal data on the effects of yerba mate on body weight in humans . therefore , yerba mate should not be recommended over diet and physical exercise without further study on its effects . cancer . the consumption of hot mate tea is associated with oral cancer , esophageal cancer , laryngeal cancer , and squamous cell cancers of the head and neck . studies show a correlation between tea temperature and likelihood of cancer , making it unclear how much of a role mate itself plays as a carcinogen . however , studies also note that incidents of cancer overlap with the use of alcohol , tobacco , the presence of nutritional deficiencies , and poor oral hygiene - not mate use alone . . e-ntpdase activity . research also shows that mate preparations can alter the concentration of members of the ecto-nucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase ( e-ntpdase ) family , resulting in elevated levels of extracellular atp , adp , and amp . this was found with chronic ingestion ( 15 days ) of an aqueous mate extract , and may lead to a novel mechanism for manipulation of vascular regenerative factors , i.e . treating heart disease . antioxidants . in an investigation of mate antioxidant activity , there was a correlation found between content of caffeoyl-derivatives and antioxidant capacity ( aoc ) . amongst a group of ilex species , the antioxidant activity of ilex paraguariensis was the highest . monoamine oxidase inhibition activity . a study from the university of são paulo cites yerba mate extract as an inhibitor of mao activity ; the maximal inhibition observed in vitro was 40–50 % . a monoamine oxidase inhibitor is a type of antidepressant , so there is some data to suggest that yerba mate has a calming effect in this regard . ( page 43 ) . see also . black drink club-mate matte leão ilex guayusa , known as guayusa , another caffeine-containing holly species of the ilex genus , native to the ecuadorian amazon rainforest ilex vomitoria , a caffeine-containing species of the ilex genus native to north america kuding , ilex kudingcha materva , a mate soft drink nativa guayaki , a brand of drinks based out of california . references .