Ancient Greek philosophy

pre-socratic philosophy . the convention of terming those philosophers who were active prior to the death of socrates as the pre-socratics gained currency with the 1903 publication of hermann diels ' fragmente der vorsokratiker , although the term did not originate with him . greg whitlock , preface to the pre-platonic philosophers , by friedrich nietzsche ( urbana : university of illinois press , 2001 ) , xiv–xvi . the term is considered useful because what came to be known as the '' athenian school '' ( composed of socrates , plato , and aristotle ) signaled the rise of a new approach to philosophy ; friedrich nietzsche 's thesis that this shift began with plato rather than with socrates ( hence his nomenclature of '' pre-platonic philosophy '' ) has not prevented the predominance of the '' pre-socratic '' distinction . greg whitlock , preface to the pre-platonic philosophers , by friedrich nietzsche ( urbana : university of illinois press , 2001 ) , xiii–xix . the pre-socratics were primarily concerned with cosmology , ontology , and mathematics . they were distinguished from '' non-philosophers '' insofar as they rejected mythological explanations in favor of reasoned discourse . john burnet , greek philosophy : thales to plato , 3rd ed . ( london : a & c black ltd . , 1920 ) , 3–16 . scanned version from internet archive . milesian school . thales of miletus , regarded by aristotle as the first philosopher , aristotle , metaphysics alpha , 983b18 . held that all things arise from a single material substance , water . aristotle , metaphysics alpha , 983 b6 8–11 . it is not because he gave a cosmogony that john burnet calls him the '' first man of science , '' but because he gave a naturalistic explanation of the cosmos and supported it with reasons . burnet , greek philosophy , 3–4 , 18 . according to tradition , thales was able to predict an eclipse and taught the egyptians how to measure the height of the pyramids . burnet , greek philosophy , 18–20 ; herodotus , histories , i.74 . thales inspired the milesian school of philosophy and was followed by anaximander , who argued that the substratum or arche could not be water or any of the classical elements but was instead something '' unlimited '' or '' indefinite '' ( in greek , the apeiron ) . he began from the observation that the world seems to consist of opposites ( e.g . , hot and cold ) , yet a thing can become its opposite ( e.g . , a hot thing cold ) . therefore , they can not truly be opposites but rather must both be manifestations of some underlying unity that is neither . this underlying unity ( substratum , arche ) could not be any of the classical elements , since they were one extreme or another . for example , water is wet , the opposite of dry , while fire is dry , the opposite of wet . burnet , greek philosophy , 22–24 . this initial state is ageless and imperishable , and everything returns to it according to necessity . guthrie , p.83 anaximenes in turn held that the arche was air , although john burnet argues that by this , he meant that it was a transparent mist , the aether . burnet , greek philosophy , 21 . despite their varied answers , the milesian school was searching for a natural substance that would remain unchanged despite appearing in different forms , and thus represents one of the first scientific attempts to answer the question that would lead to the development of modern atomic theory ; '' the milesians , '' says burnet , '' asked for the φύσις of all things . '' burnet , greek philosophy , 27 . . xenophanes . xenophanes was born in ionia , where the milesian school was at its most powerful and may have picked up some of the milesians ' cosmological theories as a result . burnet , greek philosophy , 35 . what is known is that he argued that each of the phenomena had a natural rather than divine explanation in a manner reminiscent of anaximander 's theories and that there was only one god , the world as a whole , and that he ridiculed the anthropomorphism of the greek religion by claiming that cattle would claim that the gods looked like cattle , horses like horses , and lions like lions , just as the ethiopians claimed that the gods were snub-nosed and black and the thracians claimed they were pale and red-haired . burnet , greek philosophy , 35 ; diels-kranz , die fragmente der vorsokratiker , xenophanes frs . 15–16 . xenophanes was highly influential to subsequent schools of philosophy . he was seen as the founder of a line of philosophy that culminated in pyrrhonism , eusebius , praeparatio evangelica chapter xvii possibly an influence on eleatics , and a precursor to epicurus ' total break between science and religion . burnet , greek philosophy , 33 , 36 . . pythagoreanism . pythagoras lived at roughly the same time that xenophanes did and , in contrast to the latter , the school that he founded sought to reconcile religious belief and reason . little is known about his life with any reliability , however , and no writings of his survive , so it is possible that he was simply a mystic whose successors introduced rationalism into pythagoreanism , that he was simply a rationalism whose successors are responsible for the mysticism in pythagoreanism , or that he was actually the author of the doctrine ; there is no way to know for certain . burnet , greek philosophy , 37–38 . pythagoras is said to have been a disciple of anaximander and to have imbibed the cosmology concerns of the ionians , including the idea that the cosmos is constructed of spheres , the importance of the infinite , and that air or aether is the arche of everything . burnet , greek philosophy , 38–39 . pythagoreanism also incorporated ascetic ideals , emphasizing purgation , metempsychosis , and consequently a respect for all animal life ; much was made of the correspondence between mathematics and the cosmos in a musical harmony . burnet , greek philosophy , 40–49 . pythagoras believed that behind the appearance of things , there was the permanent principle of mathematics , and that the forms were based on a transcendental mathematical relation . c.m . bowra 1957 the greek experience p . 166 '' . heraclitus . heraclitus must have lived after xenophanes and pythagoras , as he condemns them along with homer as proving that much learning can not teach a man to think ; since parmenides refers to him in the past tense , this would place him in the 5th century bce . burnet , greek philosophy , 57 . contrary to the milesian school , which posits one stable element as the arche , heraclitus taught that panta rhei ( '' everything flows '' ) , the closest element to this eternal flux being fire . all things come to pass in accordance with logos , dk b1 . which must be considered as '' plan '' or '' formula '' , pp . 419ff . , w.k.c . guthrie , a history of greek philosophy , vol . 1 , cambridge university press , 1962 . and '' the logos is common '' . dk b2 . he also posited a unity of opposites , expressed through dialectic , which structured this flux , such as that seeming opposites in fact are manifestations of a common substrate to good and evil itself . burnet , greek philosophy , 57–63 . heraclitus called the oppositional processes ἔρις ( eris ) , '' strife '' , and hypothesized that the apparently stable state of δίκη ( dikê ) , or '' justice '' , is the harmonic unity of these opposites . dk b80 . eleatic philosophy . parmenides of elea cast his philosophy against those who held '' it is and is not the same , and all things travel in opposite directions , '' —presumably referring to heraclitus and those who followed him . burnet , greek philosophy , 64 . whereas the doctrines of the milesian school , in suggesting that the substratum could appear in a variety of different guises , implied that everything that exists is corpuscular , parmenides argued that the first principle of being was one , indivisible , and unchanging . burnet , greek philosophy , 66–67 . being , he argued , by definition implies eternality , while only that which is can be thought ; a thing which is , moreover , can not be more or less , and so the rarefaction and condensation of the milesians is impossible regarding being ; lastly , as movement requires that something exist apart from the thing moving ( viz . the space into which it moves ) , the one or being can not move , since this would require that '' space '' both exist and not exist . burnet , greek philosophy , 68 . while this doctrine is at odds with ordinary sensory experience , where things do indeed change and move , the eleatic school followed parmenides in denying that sense phenomena revealed the world as it actually was ; instead , the only thing with being was thought , or the question of whether something exists or not is one of whether it can be thought . burnet , greek philosophy , 67 . in support of this , parmenides ' pupil zeno of elea attempted to prove that the concept of motion was absurd and as such motion did not exist . he also attacked the subsequent development of pluralism , arguing that it was incompatible with being . burnet , greek philosophy , 82 . his arguments are known as zeno 's paradoxes . pluralism and atomism . the power of parmenides ' logic was such that some subsequent philosophers abandoned the monism of the milesians , xenophanes , heraclitus , and parmenides , where one thing was the arche , and adopted pluralism , such as empedocles and anaxagoras . burnet , greek philosophy , 69 . there were , they said , multiple elements which were not reducible to one another and these were set in motion by love and strife ( as in empedocles ) or by mind ( as in anaxagoras ) . agreeing with parmenides that there is no coming into being or passing away , genesis or decay , they said that things appear to come into being and pass away because the elements out of which they are composed assemble or disassemble while themselves being unchanging . burnet , greek philosophy , 70 . leucippus also proposed an ontological pluralism with a cosmogony based on two main elements : the vacuum and atoms . these , by means of their inherent movement , are crossing the void and creating the real material bodies . his theories were not well known by the time of plato , however , and they were ultimately incorporated into the work of his student , democritus . burnet , greek philosophy , 94 . . sophism . sophism arose from the juxtaposition of physis ( nature ) and nomos ( law ) . john burnet posits its origin in the scientific progress of the previous centuries which suggested that being was radically different from what was experienced by the senses and , if comprehensible at all , was not comprehensible in terms of order ; the world in which people lived , on the other hand , was one of law and order , albeit of humankind 's own making . burnet , greek philosophy , 105–10 . at the same time , nature was constant , while what was by law differed from one place to another and could be changed . the first person to call themselves a sophist , according to plato , was protagoras , whom he presents as teaching that all virtue is conventional . it was protagoras who claimed that '' man is the measure of all things , of the things that are , that they are , and of the things that are not , that they are not , '' which plato interprets as a radical perspectivism , where some things seem to be one way for one person ( and so actually are that way ) and another way for another person ( and so actually are that way as well ) ; the conclusion being that one can not look to nature for guidance regarding how to live one 's life . burnet , greek philosophy , 113–17 . protagoras and subsequent sophists tended to teach rhetoric as their primary vocation . prodicus , gorgias , hippias , and thrasymachus appear in various dialogues , sometimes explicitly teaching that while nature provides no ethical guidance , the guidance that the laws provide is worthless , or that nature favors those who act against the laws . classical greek philosophy . socrates . socrates , believed to have been born in athens in the 5th century bce , marks a watershed in ancient greek philosophy . athens was a center of learning , with sophists and philosophers traveling from across greece to teach rhetoric , astronomy , cosmology , and geometry . the great statesman pericles was closely associated with this new learning and a friend of anaxagoras , however , and his political opponents struck at him by taking advantage of a conservative reaction against the philosophers ; it became a crime to investigate the things above the heavens or below the earth , subjects considered impious . anaxagoras is said to have been charged and to have fled into exile when socrates was about twenty years of age . debra nails , the people of plato ( indianapolis : hackett , 2002 ) , 24 . there is a story that protagoras , too , was forced to flee and that the athenians burned his books . nails , people of plato , 256 . socrates , however , is the only subject recorded as charged under this law , convicted , and sentenced to death in 399 bce ( see trial of socrates ) . in the version of his defense speech presented by plato , he claims that it is the envy he arouses on account of his being a philosopher that will convict him . while philosophy was an established pursuit prior to socrates , cicero credits him as '' the first who brought philosophy down from the heavens , placed it in cities , introduced it into families , and obliged it to examine into life and morals , and good and evil . '' cicero , tusculan disputations , v 10–11 ( or v iv ) . by this account he would be considered the founder of political philosophy . leo strauss , natural right and history ( chicago : university of chicago press , 1953 ) , 120 . the reasons for this turn toward political and ethical subjects remain the object of much study . seth benardete , the argument of the action ( chicago : university of chicago press , 2000 ) , 277–96 . laurence lampert , how philosophy became socratic ( chicago : university of chicago press , 2010 ) . the fact that many conversations involving socrates ( as recounted by plato and xenophon ) end without having reached a firm conclusion , or aporia , cf . plato , republic 336c & 337a , theaetetus 150c , apology ( plato ) 23a ; xenophon , memorabilia 4.4.9 ; aristotle , sophistical refutations 183b7 . has stimulated debate over the meaning of the socratic method . w.k.c . guthrie , the greek philosophers ( london : methuen , 1950 ) , 73–75 . socrates is said to have pursued this probing question-and-answer style of examination on a number of topics , usually attempting to arrive at a defensible and attractive definition of a virtue . while socrates ' recorded conversations rarely provide a definite answer to the question under examination , several maxims or paradoxes for which he has become known recur . socrates taught that no one desires what is bad , and so if anyone does something that truly is bad , it must be unwillingly or out of ignorance ; consequently , all virtue is knowledge . terence irwin , the development of ethics , vol . 1 ( oxford : oxford university press 2007 ) , 14 gerasimos santas , '' the socratic paradoxes '' , philosophical review 73 ( 1964 ) : 147–64 , 147 . he frequently remarks on his own ignorance ( claiming that he does not know what courage is , for example ) . plato presents him as distinguishing himself from the common run of mankind by the fact that , while they know nothing noble and good , they do not know that they do not know , whereas socrates knows and acknowledges that he knows nothing noble and good . apology ( plato ) 21d . numerous subsequent philosophical movements were inspired by socrates or his younger associates . plato casts socrates as the main interlocutor in his dialogues , deriving from them the basis of platonism ( and by extension , neoplatonism ) . plato 's student aristotle in turn criticized and built upon the doctrines he ascribed to socrates and plato , forming the foundation of aristotelianism . antisthenes founded the school that would come to be known as cynicism and accused plato of distorting socrates ' teachings . zeno of citium in turn adapted the ethics of cynicism to articulate stoicism . epicurus studied with platonic and pyrrhonism teachers before renouncing all previous philosophers ( including democritus , on whose atomism the epicurean philosophy relies ) . the philosophic movements that were to dominate the intellectual life of the roman empire were thus born in this febrile period following socrates ' activity , and either directly or indirectly influenced by him . they were also absorbed by the expanding muslim world in the 7th through 10th centuries ad , from which they returned to the west as foundations of medieval philosophy and the renaissance , as discussed below . plato . plato was an athenian of the generation after socrates . ancient tradition ascribes thirty-six dialogues and thirteen letters to him , although of these only twenty-four of the dialogues are now universally recognized as authentic ; most modern scholars believe that at least twenty-eight dialogues and two of the letters were in fact written by plato , although all of the thirty-six dialogues have some defenders . john m . cooper , ed . , complete works , by plato ( indianapolis : hackett , 1997 ) , v–vi , viii–xii , 1634–35 . a further nine dialogues are ascribed to plato but were considered spurious even in antiquity . cooper , ed . , complete works , by plato , v–vi , viii–xii . plato 's dialogues feature socrates , although not always as the leader of the conversation . ( one dialogue , the laws , instead contains an '' athenian stranger . '' ) along with xenophon , plato is the primary source of information about socrates ' life and beliefs and it is not always easy to distinguish between the two . while the socrates presented in the dialogues is often taken to be plato 's mouthpiece , socrates ' reputation for irony , his caginess regarding his own opinions in the dialogues , and his occasional absence from or minor role in the conversation serve to conceal plato 's doctrines . leo strauss , the city and man ( chicago : university of chicago press , 1964 ) , 50–51 . much of what is said about his doctrines is derived from what aristotle reports about them . the political doctrine ascribed to plato is derived from the republic , the laws , and the statesman . the first of these contains the suggestion that there will not be justice in cities unless they are ruled by philosopher kings ; those responsible for enforcing the laws are compelled to hold their women , children , and property in common ; and the individual is taught to pursue the common good through noble lies ; the republic says that such a city is likely impossible , however , generally assuming that philosophers would refuse to rule and the people would refuse to compel them to do so . leo strauss , '' plato '' , in history of political philosophy , ed . leo strauss and joseph cropsey , 3rd ed . ( chicago : university of chicago press 1987 ) : 33–89 . whereas the republic is premised on a distinction between the sort of knowledge possessed by the philosopher and that possessed by the king or political man , socrates explores only the character of the philosopher ; in the statesman , on the other hand , a participant referred to as the eleatic stranger discusses the sort of knowledge possessed by the political man , while socrates listens quietly . although rule by a wise man would be preferable to rule by law , the wise can not help but be judged by the unwise , and so in practice , rule by law is deemed necessary . both the republic and the statesman reveal the limitations of politics , raising the question of what political order would be best given those constraints ; that question is addressed in the laws , a dialogue that does not take place in athens and from which socrates is absent . the character of the society described there is eminently conservative , a corrected or liberalized timocracy on the spartan or cretan model or that of pre-democratic athens . plato 's dialogues also have metaphysics themes , the most famous of which is his theory of forms . it holds that non-material abstract ( but ousia ) forms ( or ideas ) , and not the material world of change known to us through our physical senses , possess the highest and most fundamental kind of reality . plato often uses long-form analogies ( usually allegories ) to explain his ideas ; the most famous is perhaps the allegory of the cave . it likens most humans to people tied up in a cave , who look only at shadows on the walls and have no other conception of reality . if they turned around , they would see what is casting the shadows ( and thereby gain a further dimension to their reality ) . if some left the cave , they would see the outside world illuminated by the sun ( representing the ultimate form of goodness and truth ) . if these travelers then re-entered the cave , the people inside ( who are still only familiar with the shadows ) would not be equipped to believe reports of this 'outside world' . this story explains the theory of forms with their different levels of reality , and advances the view that philosopher-kings are wisest while most humans are ignorant . one student of plato ( who would become another of the most influential philosophers of all time ) stressed the implication that understanding relies upon first-hand observation . aristotle . aristotle moved to athens from his native stageira in 367 bc and began to study philosophy ( perhaps even rhetoric , under isocrates ) , eventually enrolling at plato 's academy . carnes lord , introduction to the politics , by aristotle ( chicago : university of chicago press , 1984 ) : 1–29 . he left athens approximately twenty years later to study botany and zoology , became a tutor of alexander the great , and ultimately returned to athens a decade later to establish his own school : the lyceum . bertrand russell , a history of western philosophy ( new york : simon & schuster , 1972 ) . at least twenty-nine of his treatises have survived , known as the corpus aristotelicum , and address a variety of subjects including logic , physics , optics , metaphysics , ethics , rhetoric , politics , poetry , botany , and zoology . aristotle is often portrayed as disagreeing with his teacher plato ( e.g . , in raphael 's school of athens ) . he criticizes the regimes described in plato 's republic and laws , aristotle , politics , bk . 2 , ch . 1–6 . and refers to the theory of forms as '' empty words and poetic metaphors . '' aristotle , metaphysics , 991a20–22 . he is generally presented as giving greater weight to empirical observation and practical concerns . aristotle 's fame was not great during the hellenistic period , when stoic logic was in vogue , but later peripatetic commentators popularized his work , which eventually contributed heavily to islamic , jewish , and medieval christian philosophy . robin smith , '' aristotle 's logic , '' stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ( 2007 ) . his influence was such that avicenna referred to him simply as '' the master '' ; maimonides , alfarabi , averroes , and aquinas as '' the philosopher . '' . cynicism . cynicism was founded by antisthenes , who was a disciple of socrates , as well as diogenes , his contemporary . their aim was to live according to nature and against convention . antisthenes was inspired by the ascetism of socrates , and accused plato of pride and conceit . diogenes , his follower , took the ideas to their limit , living in extreme poverty and engaging in anti-social behaviour . crates of thebes was , in turn , inspired by diogenes to give away his fortune and live on the streets of athens . cyrenaicism . the cyrenaics were founded by aristippus of cyrene , who was a pupil of socrates . the cyrenaics were hedonists and held that pleasure was the supreme good in life , especially physical pleasure , which they thought more intense and more desirable than mental pleasures . pleasure is the only good in life and pain is the only evil . socrates had held that virtue was the only human good , but he had also accepted a limited role for its utilitarian side , allowing pleasure to be a secondary goal of moral action . aristippus and his followers seized upon this , and made pleasure the sole final goal of life , denying that virtue had any intrinsic value . megarians . the megarian school flourished in the 4th century bc . it was founded by euclides of megara , one of the pupils of socrates . its ethical teachings were derived from socrates , recognizing a single good , which was apparently combined with the eleatic doctrine of unity . their work on modal logic , logical conditionals , and propositional logic played an important role in the development of logic in antiquity , and were influences on the subsequent creation of stoicism and pyrrhonism . hellenistic philosophy . ' outlines of pyrrhonism ( upper ) pirrho • heliensis • plistarchi • filivs translation ( from latin ) : pyrrho • greek • son of plistarchus ( middle ) oportere • sapientem hanc illivs imitari secvritatem translation ( from latin ) : it is right wisdom then that all imitate this security ( pyrrho pointing at a peaceful pig munching his food ) ( lower ) whoever wants to apply the real wisdom , shall not mind trepidation and misery during the hellenistic and roman periods , many different schools of thought developed in the hellenistic world and then the greco-roman world . there were greeks , romans , egyptians , syrians and arabs who contributed to the development of hellenistic philosophy . elements of iranian philosophy and indian philosophy also had an influence . the spread of christianity throughout the roman world , followed by the spread of islam , ushered in the end of hellenistic philosophy and the beginnings of medieval philosophy , which was dominated by the three abrahamic traditions : jewish philosophy , christian philosophy , and early islamic philosophy . pyrrhonism . pyrrho of elis , a democritus philosopher , traveled to india with alexander the great 's army where pyrrho was influenced by buddhism teachings , most particularly the three marks of existence . after returning to greece , pyrrho started a new school of philosophy , pyrrhonism , which taught that it is one 's opinions about non-evident matters ( i.e . , dogma ) that prevent one from attaining eudaimonia . pyrrhonism places the attainment of ataraxia ( a state of equanimity ) as the way to achieve eudaimonia . to bring the mind to ataraxia pyrrhonism uses epoché ( suspension of judgment ) regarding all non-evident propositions . pyrrhonists dispute that the dogmatists – which includes all of pyrrhonism 's rival philosophies – have found truth regarding non-evident matters . for any non-evident matter , a pyrrhonist makes arguments for and against such that the matter can not be concluded , thus suspending belief and thereby inducing ataraxia . epicureanism . epicurus studied in athens with nausiphanes , who was a follower of democritus and a student of pyrrho of elis . he accepted democritus ' theory of atomism , with improvements made in response to criticisms by aristotle and others . his ethics were based on '' the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain '' . this was , however , not simple hedonism , as he noted that '' we do not mean the pleasures of the prodigal or of sensuality . we mean the aponia in the body and trouble in the mind '' . stoicism . the founder of stoicism , zeno of citium , was taught by crates of thebes , and he took up the cynic ideals of continence and self-mastery , but applied the concept of apatheia ( indifference ) to personal circumstances rather than social norms , and switched shameless flouting of the latter for a resolute fulfillment of social duties . logic and physics were also part of early stoicism , further developed by zeno 's successors cleanthes and chrysippus . stoic physics was based in materialism , which was structured by logos , reason ( but also called god or fate ) . stoic logic still feature in contemporary propositional calculus . their ethics was based on pursuing happiness , which they believed was a product of 'living in accordance with nature ' . this meant accepting those things which one could not change . one could therefore choose whether to be happy or not by adjusting one 's attitude towards their circumstances , as the freedom from fears and desires was happiness itself . platonism . . academic skepticism . around 266 bc , arcesilaus became head of the platonic academy , and adopted skepticism as a central tenet of platonism , making platonism nearly the same as pyrrhonism . sextus empiricus , '' outlines of pyrrhonism '' i.33.232 after arcesilaus , academic skepticism diverged from pyrrhonism . sextus empiricus , '' outlines of pyrrhonism '' i.33.225–231 this skeptical period of ancient platonism , from arcesilaus to philo of larissa , became known as the new academy , although some ancient authors added further subdivisions , such as a middle academy . the academic skeptics did not doubt the existence of truth ; they just doubted that humans had the capacities for obtaining it . they based this position on plato 's phaedo , sections 64–67 , in which socrates discusses how knowledge is not accessible to mortals . while the objective of the pyrrhonists was the attainment of ataraxia , after arcesilaus the academic skeptics did not hold up ataraxia as the central objective . the academic skeptics focused on criticizing the dogma of other schools of philosophy , in particular of the dogmatism of the stoics . they acknowledged some vestiges of a moral law within , at best but a plausible guide , the possession of which , however , formed the real distinction between the sage and the fool . slight as the difference may appear between the positions of the academic skeptics and the pyrrhonists , a comparison of their lives leads to the conclusion that a practical philosophical moderation was the characteristic of the academic skeptics whereas the objectives of the pyrrhonists were more psychological . middle platonism . following the end of the skeptical period of the academy with antiochus of ascalon , platonic thought entered the period of middle platonism , which absorbed ideas from the peripatetic and stoic schools . more extreme syncretism was done by numenius of apamea , who combined it with neopythagoreanism . eduard zeller , outlines of the history of greek philosophy , 13th edition , page 309 . neoplatonism . also affected by the neopythagoreans , the neoplatonism , first of them plotinus , argued that mind exists before matter , and that the universe has a singular cause which must therefore be a single mind . as such , neoplatonism became essentially a religion , and had great impact on gnosticism and christian theology . transmission of greek philosophy under byzantium and islam . during the middle ages , greek ideas were largely forgotten in western europe due to the migration period , which resulted in a decline in literacy . in the byzantine empire greek ideas were preserved and studied , and not long after the first major expansion of islam , however , the abbasid caliphs authorized the gathering of greek manuscripts and hired translators to increase their prestige . islamic philosophy such as al-kindi ( alkindus ) , al-farabi ( alpharabius ) , ibn sina ( avicenna ) and ibn rushd ( averroes ) reinterpreted these works , and during the high middle ages greek philosophy re-entered the west through translations from arabic to latin and also from the byzantine empire . lindberg , david . ( 1992 ) the beginnings of western science . university of chicago press . p . 162 . the re-introduction of these philosophies , accompanied by the new arabic commentaries , had a great influence on medieval philosophy such as thomas aquinas . see also . ancient philosophy byzantine philosophy dehellenization english words of greek origin international scientific vocabulary list of ancient greek philosophers translingualism transliteration of greek into english . notes . references . nikolaos bakalis ( 2005 ) . handbook of greek philosophy : from thales to the stoics analysis and fragments , trafford publishing john burnet , early greek philosophy , 1930 . william keith chambers guthrie , a history of greek philosophy : volume 1 , the earlier presocratics and the pythagoreans , 1962 . søren kierkegaard , on the concept of irony with continual reference to socrates , 1841 . a.a . long . hellenistic philosophy . university of california , 1992 . ( 2nd ed . ) martin litchfield west , early greek philosophy and the orient , oxford , clarendon press , 1971 . martin litchfield west , the east face of helicon : west asiatic elements in greek poetry and myth , oxford england ; new york : clarendon press , 1997 . further reading . clark , stephen . 2012 . ancient mediterranean philosophy : an introduction . new york : bloomsbury . curd , patricia , and d.w . graham , eds . 2008 . the oxford handbook of presocratic philosophy . new york : oxford univ . press . gaca , kathy l . 2003 . the making of fornication : eros , ethics , and political reform in greek philosophy and early christianity . berkeley : university of california press . garani , myrto and david konstan eds . 2014 . the philosophizing muse : the influence of greek philosophy on roman poetry . pierides , 3 . newcastle upon tyne : cambridge scholars publishing . gill , mary louise , and pierre pellegrin . 2009 . a companion to ancient greek philosophy . oxford : blackwell . hankinson , r.j . 1999 . cause and explanation in ancient greek thought . oxford : oxford university press . bettany hughes . 2010 . the hemlock cup : socrates , athens and the search for the good life . london : jonathan cape . kahn , c.h . 1994 . anaximander and the origins of greek cosmology . indianapolis , in : hackett luchte , james . 2011 . early greek thought : before the dawn . new york : continuum . martín-velasco , maría josé and maría josé garcía blanco eds . 2016 . greek philosophy and mystery cults . newcastle upon tyne : cambridge scholars publishing . nightingale , andrea w . 2004 . spectacles of truth in classical greek philosophy : theoria in its cultural context . cambridge , uk : cambridge univ . press . o ’ grady , patricia . 2002 . thales of miletus . aldershot , uk : ashgate . preus , anthony . 2010 . the a to z of ancient greek philosophy . lanham , md : scarecrow . reid , heather l . 2011 . athletics and philosophy in the ancient world : contests of virtue . ethics and sport . london ; new york : routledge . wolfsdorf , david . 2013 . pleasure in ancient greek philosophy . key themes in ancient philosophy . cambridge ; new york : cambridge university press . external links . ancient greek philosophy , entry in the internet encyclopedia of philosophy ancient greek philosophers , worldhistorycharts.com the impact of greek culture on normative judaism from the hellenistic period through the middle ages c . 330 bce – 1250 ce stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ancient greek philosophy and important greek philosophers , hellenism.net