Oliver Sacks

career . sacks served as an instructor and later clinical professor of neurology at yeshiva university 's albert einstein college of medicine from 1966 to 2007 , and also held an appointment at the new york university school of medicine from 1992 to 2007 . in july 2007 he joined the faculty of columbia university medical center as a professor of neurology and psychiatry . at the same time he was appointed columbia university 's first '' columbia university artist '' at the university 's morningside heights campus , recognising the role of his work in bridging the arts and sciences . he was also a visiting professor at the university of warwick in the uk . '' nyu langone medical center welcomes neurologist and author oliver sacks , md '' . newswise.com . 13 september 2012 . he returned to new york university school of medicine in 2012 , serving as a professor of neurology and consulting neurologist in the school 's epilepsy centre . sacks 's work at beth abraham hospital helped provide the foundation on which the institute for music and neurologic function ( imnf ) is built ; sacks was an honorary medical advisor . the institute honoured sacks in 2000 with its first music has power award . the imnf again bestowed a music has power award on him in 2006 to commemorate '' his 40 years at beth abraham and honour his outstanding contributions in support of music therapy and the effect of music on the human brain and mind . '' sacks maintained a busy hospital-based practice in new york city . he accepted a very limited number of private patients , in spite of being in great demand for such consultations . he served on the boards of the neurosciences institute and the new york botanical garden sacks , o . oliver sacks curriculum vitae . retrieved 7 january 2017 from where he had been an extremely frequent visitor since he first moved to new york city , as well as a very active member of the fern society , which meets there . writing . in 1967 sacks first began to write of his experiences with some of his neurological patients . his first such book , ward 23 , was burned by sacks during an episode of self-doubt . his books have been translated into over 25 languages . in addition , sacks was a regular contributor to the new yorker , the new york review of books , the new york times , london review of books and numerous other medical , scientific and general publications . he was awarded the lewis thomas prize in 2001 . sacks 's work is featured in a '' broader range of media than those of any other contemporary medical author '' and in 1990 , the new york times wrote he '' has become a kind of poet laureate of contemporary medicine '' . sacks considered his literary style to have grown out of the tradition of 19th century '' clinical anecdotes '' , a literary style that included detailed narrative case histories , which he termed novelistic . he also counted among his inspirations the case histories of the russian neuropsychologist a . r . luria , who became a close friend through correspondence from 1973 to 1977 , when dr . luria died . sacks , o . ( 2014 ) . luria and '' romantic science '' . in a . yasnitsky , r . van der veer & m . ferrari ( eds . ) , the cambridge handbook of cultural-historical psychology ( 517–528 ) . cambridge : cambridge university press after the publication of his first book migraine in 1970 , a review by his close friend w . h . auden encouraged sacks to adapt his writing style to '' be metaphorical , be mythical , be whatever you need . '' sacks described his cases with a wealth of narrative detail , concentrating on the experiences of the patient ( in the case of his a leg to stand on , the patient was himself ) . the patients he described were often able to adapt to their situation in different ways despite the fact that their neurological conditions were usually considered incurable . his book awakenings , upon which the 1990 awakenings is based , describes his experiences using the new drug levodopa on encephalitis patients at the former beth abraham hospital , currently beth abraham center for rehabilitation and nursing , allerton ave , in the northeast bronx , ny . awakenings was also the subject of the first documentary made ( in 1974 ) for the british television series discovery . tobias picker composed a ballet inspired by awakenings for the rambert dance company , which was premiered by rambert in salford , uk in 2010 ; picker , commissioned by the opera theatre of saint louis , also made an opera of awakenings with a libretto by aryeh lev stollman . in his book a leg to stand on he wrote about the consequences of a near-fatal accident he had at age 41 in 1974 , a year after the publication of awakenings , when he fell off a cliff and severely injured his left leg while mountaineering alone above hardangerfjord , norway . in some of his other books , he describes cases of tourette syndrome and various effects of parkinson 's disease . the title article of the man who mistook his wife for a hat describes a man with visual agnosia and was the subject of a 1986 opera by michael nyman . the title article of his book , an anthropologist on mars , which won a polk award for magazine reporting , is about temple grandin , an autistic professor . he writes in the book 's preface that neurological conditions such as autism '' can play a paradoxical role , by bringing out latent powers , developments , evolutions , forms of life that might never be seen , or even be imaginable , in their absence '' . seeing voices , sacks 's 1989 book , covers a variety of topics in deaf studies . the romantic drama film at first sight ( 1999 ) was based on the essay '' to see and not see '' in an anthropologist on mars . in his book the island of the colorblind sacks wrote about an island where many people have achromatopsia ( total colourblindness , very low visual acuity and high photophobia ) . the second section of this book , entitled cycad island , describes the chamorro people of guam , who have a high incidence of a neurodegenerative disease locally known as lytico-bodig disease ( a devastating combination of als , dementia and parkinsonism ) . later , along with paul alan cox , sacks published papers suggesting a possible environmental cause for the disease , namely the toxin beta-methylamino l-alanine ( bmaa ) from the cycad nut accumulating by biomagnification in the pteropus . in november 2012 sacks 's book hallucinations was published . in it he examined why ordinary people can sometimes experience hallucinations and challenged the stigma associated with the word . he explained : '' hallucinations do n't belong wholly to the insane . much more commonly , they are linked to sensory deprivation , intoxication , illness or injury . '' he also considers the less well known charles bonnet syndrome , sometimes found in people who have lost their eyesight . the book was described by entertainment weekly as : '' elegant . an absorbing plunge into a mystery of the mind . '' sacks sometimes faced criticism in the medical and disability studies communities . arthur k . shapiro for instance , an expert on tourette syndrome , said sacks 's work was '' idiosyncratic '' and relied too much on anecdotal evidence in his writings . kushner ( 2000 ) , p . 204 researcher makoto yamaguchi thought sacks 's mathematical explanations , in his study of the numerically gifted savant twins ( in the man who mistook his wife for a hat ) , are irrelevant . alt url although sacks has been characterised as a '' compassionate '' writer and doctor , others have felt that he exploited his subjects . sacks was called '' the man who mistook his patients for a literary career '' by british academic and disability rights activist tom shakespeare , and one critic called his work '' a high-brow freak show '' . sacks responded , '' i would hope that a reading of what i write shows respect and appreciation , not any wish to expose or exhibit for the thrill . but it 's a delicate business . '' he is also the author of the mind 's eye , oaxaca journal , on the move ( his second autobiography ) . before his death in 2015 sacks founded the oliver sacks foundation , a nonprofit organization established to increase understanding of the brain through using narrative nonfiction and case histories , with goals that include publishing some of sacks 's unpublished writings , and making his vast amount of unpublished writings available for scholarly study . a life well lived 30 august 2015 his first posthumous book , river of consciousness , an anthology of his essays , was published in october 2017 . most of the essays had been previously published in various periodicals or in science-essay-anthology books , and are no longer readily obtainable . sacks specified the order of his essays in river of consciousness prior to his death . some of the essays focus on repressed memories and other tricks the mind plays on itself . his next posthumous book will be a collection of some of his letters . sacks was a prolific handwritten-letter correspondent and he never communicated by e-mail . honours . in 1996 sacks became a member of the american academy of arts and letters ( literature ) . he was named a fellow of the new york academy of sciences in 1999 . also in 1999 he became an honorary fellow at the queen 's college , oxford . in 2000 sacks received the golden plate award of the academy of achievement . in 2002 he became fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences ( class iv—humanities and arts , section 4—literature ) and he was awarded the 2001 lewis thomas prize by rockefeller university . sacks was also a fellow of the royal college of physicians ( frcp ) . curriculum vitae - website of oliver sacks sacks was awarded honorary degree from georgetown university ( 1990 ) , college of staten island ( 1991 ) , tufts university ( 1991 ) , new york medical college ( 1991 ) , medical college of pennsylvania ( 1992 ) , bard college ( 1992 ) , queen 's university at kingston ( 2001 ) , gallaudet university ( 2005 ) , university of oxford ( 2005 ) , pontificia universidad católica del perú ( 2006 ) and cold spring harbor laboratory ( 2008 ) . oxford university awarded him an honorary doctor of civil law degree in june 2005 . sacks received the position '' columbia artist '' from columbia university in 2007 , a post that was created specifically for him and that gave him unconstrained access to the university , regardless of department or discipline . oliver sacks columbia university arts initiative columbia university . 2009 . retrieved 10 october 2011 in 2008 sacks was appointed commander of the order of the british empire ( cbe ) , for services to medicine , in the queen 's birthday honours . the minor planet 84928 oliversacks , discovered in 2003 , was named in his honour . in february 2010 sacks was named as one of the freedom from religion foundation 's honorary board of distinguished achievers . he described himself as '' an old jewish atheist '' , a phrase borrowed from his friend jonathan miller . . personal life . sacks never married and lived alone for most of his life . he declined to share personal details until late in his life . he addressed his homosexuality for the first time in his 2015 autobiography on the move : a life . sacks , o . on the move : a life . knopf ( 2015 ) . celibate for about 35 years since his forties , in 2008 he began a friendship with writer and new york times contributor bill hayes . their friendship slowly evolved into a committed long-term partnership that lasted until sacks 's death ; hayes wrote about it in the 2017 memoir insomniac city . in lawrence weschler 's biography and how are you , dr . sacks ? he is described by a colleague as '' deeply eccentric '' . a friend from his days as a medical resident mentions sacks ' need to cross taboos , like drinking blood mixed with milk , and how he was deeply into drugs like lsd and speed in the early 60s . sacks himself shared personal information about how he got his first orgasm spontaneously while floating in a swimming pool , and later when he was giving a man a massage . he also admits having '' erotic fantasies of all sorts '' in a natural history museum he visited often in his youth , many of them about animals , like hippos in the mud . a biography of oliver sacks , written by his boswell sacks noted in a 2001 interview that severe shyness , which he described as '' a disease '' , had been a lifelong impediment to his personal interactions . he believed his shyness stemmed from his prosopagnosia , popularly known as '' face blindness '' , a condition that he studied in some of his patients , including the titular man from his work the man who mistook his wife for a hat . this neurological disability of his , whose severity and life-impacts sacks did not fully grasp until he reached middle age , even prevented him from recognising his own reflection in mirrors . sacks , o . face blind ( 30 august 2010 ) . the new yorker . retrieved 18 may 2015 . sacks ' eldest brother marcus also had prosopagnosia . sacks swam almost daily for most of his life , beginning when his swimming-champion father started him swimming as an infant . he especially became publicly well known for swimming when he lived in the city island section of the bronx , as he would routinely swim around the entire island , or swim vast distances away from the island and back . illness and death . sacks underwent radiation therapy in 2006 for a uveal melanoma in his right eye . he discussed his stereoblindness caused by the treatment , which eventually resulted in right-eye blindness , in an article and later in his book the mind 's eye . sacks , o . the mind 's eye . knopf ( 2010 ) . in january 2015 metastasis from the ocular tumour were discovered in his liver . sacks announced this development in a february 2015 new york times op-ed piece and estimated his remaining time in '' months '' . he expressed his intent to '' live in the richest , deepest , most productive way i can '' . he added : '' i want and hope in the time that remains to deepen my friendships , to say farewell to those i love , to write more , to travel if i have the strength , to achieve new levels of understanding and insight . '' sacks died from the disease on 30 august 2015 at his home in manhattan at the age of 82 , surrounded by his closest friends . . bibliography . migraine ( 1970 ) awakenings ( 1973 ) a leg to stand on ( 1984 ) ( sacks 's own experience , after his accident in norway , of losing all awareness of his left leg . ) the man who mistook his wife for a hat ( 1985 ) seeing voices ( 1989 ) an anthropologist on mars ( 1995 ) ( first ed . ) the island of the colorblind ( 1997 ) ( first section about total congenital colour blindness in an island society ; second section about guam disease on guam . ) uncle tungsten ( 2001 ) ( first autobiography ) oaxaca journal ( 2002 ) ( travelogue of sacks 's ten-day trip with the american fern society to oaxaca , mexico , 2000 ) musicophilia : tales of music and the brain ( 2007 ) the mind 's eye ( 2010 ) hallucinations ( 2012 ) on the move : a life ( 2015 ) ( second autobiography ) gratitude ( 2015 ) ( published posthumously ) neurotribes : the legacy of autism and the future of neurodiversity by steve silberman ( 2015 ) ( sacks wrote the foreword ) oliver sacks : the last interview and other conversations ( 2016 ) ( a collection of interviews ) the river of consciousness ( 2017 ) everything in its place : first loves and last tales ( 2019 ) online version is titled '' how much a dementia patient needs to know '' . . references . further reading . simon callow , '' truth , beauty , and oliver sacks '' ( review of oliver sacks , everything in its place : first loves and last tales , knopf , 2019 , 274 pp . ) , the new york review of books , vol . lxvi , no . 10 ( 6 june 2019 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 4 , 6 , 8 . oliver sacks wrote in his public farewell in the new york times : '' above all , i have been a sentient being , a thinking animal , on this beautiful planet , and that in itself has been an enormous privilege and adventure . '' ( p . & nbsp ; 8 . ) bill hayes : insomniac city : new york , oliver sacks , and me ' , london ; oxford ; new york ; new delhi ; sydney : bloomsbury publishing , 2018 , . external links . oliver sacks biography and interview on american academy of achievement multimedia : interview with dempsey rice , documentary filmmaker , about oliver sacks film publications :