1963 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1963 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . february 20 – the classic epic western how the west was won premieres in the united states . it is an instant success with both audiences and critics and becomes the biggest moneymaker for mgm since ben-hur . june 12 – cleopatra , starring elizabeth taylor , rex harrison and richard burton , premieres at the rivoli theatre in new york city . its staggering production costs nearly bankrupted twentieth century fox and the adulterous affair between taylor and burton made the publicity even worse . cleopatra marked the only instance that a film would be the highest-grossing film of a year while still losing money , thus establishing it as , at the time , list of box office bombs . the film 's terrible reception harmed the reputation of director joseph l . mankiewicz , who had an esteemed career for directing classics like a letter to three wives , all about eve , julius caesar , the barefoot contessa , guys and dolls , and suddenly last summer . it effectively destroyed the career of its well-known producer walter wanger , who never worked in hollywood or on another film again ; he died five years later at the age of 74 of a heart attack . much of the blame of the film 's failures could be pointed at taylor 's super-diva personality , her health issues , her and burton 's adulterous affair , and the studio 's inadequate management . it would n't be until two years later that rodgers and hammerstein 's adaptation of the sound of music would help rescue fox from bankruptcy by becoming one of the highest-grossing motion pictures of all time . november 7 – the classic comedy it 's a mad , mad , mad , mad world premieres and it boasts one of the finest all-star ensemble casts ever , easily the most impressive for a comedy . it is also the first comedy film ever directed by stanley kramer , best known for directing serious human drama films on controversial subjects like the defiant ones , inherit the wind , judgment at nuremberg , and guess who 's coming to dinner . december 25 – walt disney 's production of the sword in the stone premieres . it is the second adaptation of t . h . white 's the once and future king after the alan jay lerner and frederick loewe musical camelot , the first cinematic adaptation of the novel , and the 13th film adaptation of the legend of king arthur . awards . academy awards : : best picture : tom jones & mdash ; woodfall , united artists-lopert ( british ) : best director : tony richardson – tom jones : best actor : sidney poitier – lilies of the field : best actress : patricia neal – hud : best supporting actor : melvyn douglas – hud : best supporting actress : margaret rutherford – the v.i.p.s : best foreign language film : 8½ ( otto e mezzo ) , directed by federico fellini , italy golden globe awards : : drama : : best picture : the cardinal : best actor : sidney poitier - lilies of the field : best actress : leslie caron - the l-shaped room : comedy or musical : : best picture : tom jones : best actor : alberto sordi - to bed or not to bed : best actress : shirley maclaine - irma la douce : other : best supporting actor : john huston - the cardinal : best supporting actress : margaret rutherford – the v.i.p.s : best director : elia kazan - america america palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : : the leopard ( il gattopardo ) , directed by luchino visconti , italy golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : hands over the city ( le mani sulla città ) , directed by francesco rosi , italy golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : il diavolo ( to bed . or not to bed ) , directed by gian luigi polidoro , italy . 1963 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1963 16 january the hook son of flubber 22 january the young racers 25 january the raven 30 january diamond head february 1963 13 february 8½ ( italy ) a child is waiting 14 february the day mars invaded earth 27 february follow the boys march 1963 1 march high and low ( japan ) 3 march california the long ships 4 march in the cool of the day 6 march diary of a madman papa 's delicate condition 7 march i could go on singing 15 march house of the damned 21 march the balcony 26 march operation bikini 27 march come fly with me the courtship of eddie 's father 28 march the birds love is a ball 29 march miracle of the white stallions . april–june . april 1963 3 april it happened at the world 's fair my six loves nine hours to rama the ugly american 4 april bye bye birdie call me bwana 8 april the sadist 13 april critic 's choice 17 april the man from the diners ' club 24 april free , white and 21 29 april flaming creatures may 1963 15 may black zoo drums of africa 16 may spencer 's mountain 20 may maniac 22 may dime with a halo 29 may 55 days at peking hud the list of adrian messenger tammy and the doctor june 1963 2 june savage sam 4 june the nutty professor 5 june come blow your horn irma la douce lancelot and guinevere 12 june cleopatra donovan 's reef the girl hunters island of love 15 june the yellow canary 17 june the terror 19 june captain sindbad jason and the argonauts pt 109 released five months before john f . kennedy was assassinated in dallas . axmaster , sean . '' pt 109 '' on tcm.com the stripper 21 june a gathering of eagles . july–september . july 1963 4 july the great escape 6 july blood feast 7 july summer magic 17 july tarzan 's three challenges the thrill of it all 31 july cattle king gidget goes to rome toys in the attic august 1963 7 august beach party for love or money 10 august the young and the brave 14 august flipper 15 august billy liar ( united kingdom ) promises ! promises ! 18 august a ticklish affair 21 august cairo the caretakers the three stooges go around the world in a daze 28 august the gun hawk the haunted palace september 1963 2 september the cool world 4 september the crawling hand wall of noise 6 september goldilocks and the three bares 11 september of love and desire shock corridor twice-told tales 13 september the v.i.p.s 18 september the haunting in the french style x : the man with the x-ray eyes the young swingers 25 september dementia 13 thunder island 29 september tom jones . october–december . october 1963 1 october lilies of the field 10 october from russia with love ( united kingdom/united states ) 16 october twilight of honor 17 october all the way home 19 october johnny cool 23 october under the yum yum tree 24 october mary , mary 29 october cry of battle 30 october a new kind of love the old dark house 31 october the world ten times over ( united kingdom ) november 1963 5 november palm springs weekend 6 november gunfight at comanche creek 7 november carry on cabby ( united kingdom ) it 's a mad , mad , mad , mad world 13 november the skydivers sunday in new york take her , she 's mine 14 november the wheeler dealers 18 november the victors 20 november the incredible journey 23 november mclintock ! 27 november fun in acapulco soldier in the rain 28 november who 's minding the store ? december 1963 5 december charade 13 december the cardinal 15 december america america 18 december the ceremony kings of the sun the pink panther samson and the slave queen 23 december captain newman , m.d . ladybug ladybug one man 's way 25 december 4 for texas the comedy of terrors love with the proper stranger move over , darling the prize the sword in the stone who 's been sleeping in my bed ? 26 december act one . notable films released in 1963 . united states except where noted . . 13 assassins ( 十三人の刺客 , jūsan-nin no shikaku ) , directed by eiichi kudo – ( japan ) 13 frightened girls , directed and produced by william castle 8½ , directed by federico fellini , starring marcello mastroianni , claudia cardinale , anouk aimée -- oscar for best foreign language film – ( italy ) 55 days at peking , starring charlton heston , ava gardner , david niven . a . les abysses , directed by nikos papatakis – ( france ) act one , directed by dore schary and starring george hamilton an actor 's revenge ( yukinojō henge ) , directed by kon ichikawa – ( japan ) al nasser salah ad-din ( saladin ) , directed by youssef chahine – ( egypt ) all the way home , starring jean simmons , robert preston , ronnie claire edwards alone on the pacific ( taiheiyo hitori-botchi ) , directed by kon ichikawa – ( japan ) america , america ( a.k.a . the anatolian smile ) by elia kazan any number can win ( mélodie en sous-sol ) , starring jean gabin and alain delon – ( france/italy ) apache gold ( winnetou – 1 . teil ) , directed by harald reinl – ( west germany/italy/yugoslavia ) atragon ( kaitei gunkan ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) attack squadron ! ( 太平洋の翼 , taiheiyō no tsubasa ) , directed by shue matsubayashi – ( japan ) . b . the bakery girl of monceau ( la boulangère de monceau ) , directed by éric rohmer , starring barbet schroeder – ( france ) the balcony , starring shelley winters , peter falk and leonard nimoy banana peel ( peau de banane ) , starring jeanne moreau and jean paul belmondo – ( france/italy/west germany ) bandini ( imprisoned ) , directed by bimal roy , starring ashok kumar – ( india ) barren lives ( vidas secas ) , directed by nelson pereira dos santos – ( brazil ) the bastard ( 悪太郎 , akutarō ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) bay of angels ( la baie des anges ) , directed by jacques demy , starring jeanne moreau – ( france ) beach party , directed by william asher , starring frankie avalon , annette funicello , bob cummings and dorothy malone bébo 's girl ( la ragazza di bube ) , starring claudia cardinale and george chakiris – ( italy ) mahanagar ( mahanagar ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) billy liar , directed by john schlesinger , starring tom courtenay and julie christie – ( u.k . ) the birds , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring tippi hedren , rod taylor , suzanne pleshette , jessica tandy bitter harvest , starring janet munro – ( u.k . ) the black abbot ( der schwarze abt ) , directed by franz josef gottlieb – ( west germany ) black sabbath ( i tre volti della paura ) , starring boris karloff – ( italy/u.k./france ) blood feast , directed by herschell gordon lewis bluebeard ( landru ) , directed by claude chabrol – ( france/italy ) il boom , directed by vittorio de sica , starring alberto sordi – ( italy ) bushido , samurai saga , directed by tadashi imai ( bushidô zankoku monogatari ) – ( japan ) bye bye birdie , starring janet leigh , dick van dyke and ann-margret . c . call me bwana , directed by gordon douglas , starring bob hope , anita ekberg , edie adams captain newman , m.d . , directed by david miller , starring gregory peck , tony curtis , bobby darin , eddie albert , angie dickinson captain sindbad the carabineers ( les carabiniers ) , directed by jean-luc godard – ( france ) carbide and sorrel ( karbid und sauerampfer ) – ( east germany ) the cardinal , directed by otto preminger , starring tom tryon , carol lynley , romy schneider , john huston the caretaker , starring alan bates and robert shaw – ( u.k . ) the caretakers , starring joan crawford , robert stack , polly bergen carom shots ( carambolages ) , directed by marcel bluwal – ( france ) carry on cabby , starring sid james and hattie jacques – ( u.k . ) carry on jack , starring kenneth williams and bernard cribbins – ( u.k . ) the cassandra cat ( až přijde kocour ) – ( czechoslovakia ) the ceremony , directed by laurence harvey chair de poule ( a.k.a . highway pickup ) , directed by julien duvivier – ( france ) charade , directed by stanley donen , starring cary grant , audrey hepburn , walter matthau , george kennedy , james coburn a child is waiting , starring judy garland and burt lancaster cleopatra , starring elizabeth taylor , rex harrison , richard burton – ( u.s./u.k./switzerland ) codine , directed by henri colpi – ( france/romania ) come blow your horn , starring frank sinatra , tony bill , barbara rush , jill st . john come fly with me , starring pamela tiffin , lois nettleton , dolores hart the conjugal bed ( l'ape regina ) , starring ugo tognazzi – ( italy ) contempt ( le mépris ) , directed by jean-luc godard , starring brigitte bardot , jack palance , michel piccoli – ( france ) the cool world , directed by shirley clarke the corrupt ( symphonie pour un massacre ) , directed by jacques deray the courtship of eddie 's father , directed by vincente minnelli , starring glenn ford , shirley jones , stella stevens , dina merrill , ron howard crisis : behind a presidential commitment , documentary film directed by robert drew critic 's choice , starring bob hope and lucille ball crooks in clover ( les tontons flingueurs ) , starring lino ventura – ( france/italy/west germany ) the cry ( křik ) – ( czechoslovakia ) . d . the damned , directed by joseph losey , starring macdonald carey – ( u.k . ) the day and the hour ( le jour et l'heure ) , directed by rené clément , starring simone signoret and stuart whitman – ( france ) dementia 13 , directed by francis ford coppola the devil ( il diavolo ) , starring alberto sordi , golden bear winner – ( italy ) diamond head , starring charlton heston , yvette mimieux , france nuyen , george chakiris , james darren diary of a madman , starring vincent price , nancy kovack , elaine devry dil ek mandir ( the heart is a temple ) – ( india ) donovan 's reef , directed by john ford , starring john wayne and lee marvin drama of the lark ( pacsirta ) – ( hungary ) . e . el dorado , directed by menahem golan , starring topol – ( israel ) empress wu tse-tien – ( hong kong ) the empty canvas ( la noia ) , starring bette davis and horst buchholz – ( italy ) the fiances ( i fidanzati ) , directed by ermanno olmi – ( italy ) the executioner ( el verdugo ) , directed by luis garcía berlanga , starring nino manfredi – ( spain ) . f . father came too ! , starring james robertson justice and leslie phillips – ( u.k . ) the fiances ( i fidanzati ) , directed by ermanno olmi – ( italy ) the fire within ( le feu follet ) , directed by louis malle – ( france ) flaming creatures , directed by jack smith flipper , starring chuck connors and luke halpin follow the boys , starring connie francis , paula prentiss , dany robin , janis paige for love or money , starring kirk douglas and mitzi gaynor 4 for texas , starring frank sinatra , dean martin , ursula andress , anita ekberg from russia with love , the second james bond film , starring sean connery , daniela bianchi , pedro armendáriz , robert shaw , lotte lenya – ( u.k./u.s . ) fun in acapulco , starring elvis presley and ursula andress . g . a gathering of eagles , starring rock hudson gidget goes to rome , starring cindy carol the girl hunters , starring mickey spillane ( as mike hammer ) , with lloyd nolan , shirley eaton the girl who knew too much ( la ragazza che sapeva troppo ) , directed by mario bava – ( italy ) le glaive et la balance ( a.k.a . two are guilty ) , starring anthony perkins – ( france/italy ) gone are the days ! , starring ossie davis , ruby dee and godfrey cambridge goryeojang ( 고려장 ) , written , produced and directed by kim ki-young – ( south korea ) the great escape , directed by john sturges , starring steve mcqueen , james garner , charles bronson , richard attenborough , david mccallum , donald pleasence os verdes anos ( os verdes anos ) – ( portugal ) . h . hallelujah the hills , directed by adolfas mekas hands over the city ( le mani sulla città ) , directed by francesco rosi , starring rod steiger – ( italy ) the haunted palace , directed by roger corman , starring vincent price the haunting , directed by robert wise , starring julie harris – ( u.k . ) heaven sent ( un drôle de paroissien ) , starring bourvil – ( france ) heavens above ! , directed by the boulting brothers , starring peter sellers – ( u.k . ) high and low ( 天国と地獄 ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) the hook , starring kirk douglas the hours of love ( le ore dell'amore ) , directed by luciano salce – ( italy ) the householder ( gharbar ) , directed by james ivory , starring shashi kapoor and leela naidu – ( india ) how to be loved ( jak być kochaną ) , starring zbigniew cybulski – ( poland ) hud , directed by martin ritt , starring paul newman , patricia neal , brandon dewilde , melvyn douglas . i . i could go on singing , starring judy garland and dirk bogarde – ( u.k./u.s . ) ikarie xb-1 ( icarus xb-1 ) – ( czechoslovakia ) l'immortelle ( the immortal ) – ( france/turkey ) in the cool of the day , starring peter finch , jane fonda , angela lansbury the indian scarf ( das indische tuch ) , directed by alfred vohrer – ( west germany ) the incredible journey the insect woman ( nippon konchūki ) , directed by shohei imamura - ( japan ) irma la douce , directed by billy wilder , starring jack lemmon and shirley maclaine the iron maiden ( a.k.a . swinging maiden ) , directed by gerald thomas and starring michael craig – ( u.k . ) island of love , starring robert preston and walter matthau it happened at the world 's fair , starring elvis presley it 's a mad , mad , mad , mad world , directed by stanley kramer , starring spencer tracy , milton berle , phil silvers , sid caesar , jonathan winters , mickey rooney , buddy hackett , ethel merman , dorothy provine , edie adams , dick shawn and many more it 's all happening ( a.k.a . the dream maker ) , directed by don sharp – ( u.k . ) ivan 's childhood originally ivanovo detstvo , directed by andrei tarkovsky , starring nikolay burlyaev , valentin zubkov , and evgeniy zharikov . country : soviet union . j . jason and the argonauts , starring todd armstrong – ( u.k./u.s . ) johnny cool , starring henry silva and elizabeth montgomery judex , directed by georges franju – ( france ) . k . kanto wanderer ( kantō mushuku ) – ( japan ) kings of the sun , directed by j . lee thompson , starring yul brynner and george chakiris the kiss of the vampire , directed by don sharp . l . ladies who do , starring harry h . corbett , robert morley and peggy mount – ( u.k . ) ladybug ladybug , directed by frank perry the leopard ( il gattopardo ) , directed by luchino visconti , starring burt lancaster , claudia cardinale , alain delon – palme d'or winner – ( italy ) like two drops of water ( als twee druppels water ) , directed by fons rademakers – ( netherlands ) lilies of the field , directed by ralph nelson , starring sidney poitier the list of adrian messenger , directed by john huston , starring george c . scott the little soldier ( le petit soldat ) , directed by jean-luc godard , starring anna karina – ( france ) lord of the flies , directed by peter brook – ( u.k . ) the love eterne ( liang shan bo yu zhu ying tai ) – ( hong kong ) love is a ball , starring glenn ford , hope lange , charles boyer , ricardo montalbán love with the proper stranger , starring natalie wood and steve mcqueen . m . edwin zbonek ( der henker von london ) , directed by edwin zbonek – ( west germany ) maigret voit rouge , starring jean gabin – ( france/italy ) the man from the diner 's club , directed by frank tashlin , starring danny kaye maniac , directed by michael carreras mary , mary , starring debbie reynolds , diane mcbain and barry nelson matango ( a.k.a . attack of the mushroom people ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) mathias sandorf , directed by georges lampin – ( italy/france/spain ) a matter of choice , directed by vernon sewell , starring anthony steel – ( u.k . ) mclintock ! , starring john wayne and maureen o'hara the mind benders , starring dirk bogarde and mary ure – ( u.k . ) miracle of the white stallions , starring robert taylor , lilli palmer , eddie albert monstrosity ( a.k.a . the atomic brain ) , directed by joseph v . mascelli mother of the bride ( omm el aroussa ) – ( egypt ) move over , darling , starring doris day , james garner , polly bergen , chuck connors mujhe jeene do ( let me live ) , starring sunil dutt – ( india ) murder at the gallop ( 1963 ) , a miss marple film directed by george pollock – ( u.k./u.s . ) muriel ( a.k.a . muriel ou le temps d'un retour ) , directed by alain resnais , starring delphine seyrig – ( france ) my six loves , starring debbie reynolds , cliff robertson , david janssen . n . naked among wolves ( nackt unter wölfen ) – ( east germany ) nartanasala , starring n . t . rama rao and savitri – ( india ) a new kind of love , starring paul newman and joanne woodward new tale of zatoichi ( 新・座頭市物語 , shin zatoichi monogatari ) , third film of the zatoichi trilogy – ( japan ) nine hours to rama , directed by mark robson , starring horst buchholz , diane baker , josé ferrer – ( u.k./u.s . ) not on your life ( el verdugo ) , directed by luis garcía berlanga , starring nino manfredi – ( spain ) nunca pasa nada ( nothing ever happens ) , directed by juan antonio bardem – ( spain ) nurse on wheels , directed by gerald thomas – ( u.k . ) nutty , naughty chateau ( château en suède ) , directed by roger vadim – ( france/spain ) the nutty professor , directed by and starring jerry lewis , with stella stevens . o . the old dark house , directed by william castle – ( u.k./u.s . ) one man 's way , directed by denis sanders and starring don murray operation bikini , starring tab hunter , frankie avalon , gary crosby ophélia , directed by claude chabrol – ( france ) i mostri ( i mostri ) , directed by dino risi – ( italy ) optimistic tragedy – ( u.s.s.r . ) the organizer ( i compagni ) , directed by mario monicelli , starring marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) . p . pt 109 , starring cliff robertson as john f . kennedy papa 's delicate condition , starring jackie gleason the paper man ( el hombre de papel ) – ( mexico ) paranoiac , starring janette scott and oliver reed – ( u.k . ) passenger ( pasażerka ) – ( poland ) the pink panther , directed by blake edwards , starring david niven , peter sellers , robert wagner , capucine pour la suite du monde ( for those who will follow ) – ( canada ) the prize , starring paul newman and elke sommer promises ! promises ! , starring jayne mansfield the punch and judy man , starring tony hancock – ( u.k . ) . r . rampage , starring robert mitchum and elsa martinelli the raven , directed by roger corman , starring vincent price , peter lorre , boris karloff raven 's end ( kvarteret korpen ) , directed by bo widerberg – ( sweden ) the red lanterns ( ta kokkina fanaria ) – ( greece ) the running man , directed by carol reed , starring laurence harvey , alan bates , lee remick – ( u.k . ) . s . the sadist ( a.k.a . profile of terror or sweet baby charlie ) , directed by james landis saladin the victorious , directed by youssef chahine - ( egypt ) sammy going south ( released in the u.s . as a boy ten feet tall ) , directed by alexander mackendrick – ( u.k . ) savage sam , a sequel to old yeller directed by norman tokar the scarecrow of romney marsh , directed by james neilson the scarlet blade ( released in the u.s . as the crimson blade ) , directed by john gilling – ( u.k . ) scum of the earth ! , directed by herschell gordon lewis the servant , directed by joseph losey , starring dirk bogarde , sarah miles , james fox – ( u.k . ) shock corridor , directed by samuel fuller , starring peter breck and constance towers showdown , starring audie murphy the silence ( tystnaden ) , written and directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) the small world of sammy lee , written and directed by ken hughes – ( u.k . ) sodom and gomorrah , starring stewart granger , anouk aimée , pier angeli soldier in the rain , starring steve mcqueen and jackie gleason son of flubber , starring fred macmurray sparrows ca n't sing , starring barbara windsor and roy kinnear – ( u.k . ) spencer 's mountain , starring henry fonda and maureen o'hara the squeaker ( der zinker ) , directed by alfred vohrer – ( west germany/france ) station six-sahara , directed by seth holt – ( u.k./west germany ) the stripper , starring joanne woodward , richard beymer , claire trevor , gypsy rose lee stolen hours , starring susan hayward and diane baker il successo ( il successo ) , starring vittorio gassman and jean-louis trintignant – ( italy ) summer holiday , starring cliff richard , lauri peters and the shadows – ( u.k . ) summer magic , starring dorothy mcguire , hayley mills , deborah walley sunday in new york , starring jane fonda , rod taylor , cliff robertson , robert culp sunshine in a net ( slnko v sieti ) – ( czechoslovakia ) suzanne 's career ( la carrière de suzanne ) , directed by éric rohmer – ( france ) sweet and sour ( dragées au poivre ) , directed by jacques baratier – ( italy/france ) sweet skin ( strip-tease ) , directed by jacques poitrenaud – ( italy/france ) the sword in the stone – an animated disney film . t . taj mahal – ( india ) take her , she 's mine , starring james stewart , sandra dee and audrey meadows take it all ( à tout prendre , a.k.a . all things considered ) directed by claude jutra – ( canada ) tammy and the doctor , starring sandra dee and peter fonda los tarantos , directed by francisco rovira beleta – ( spain ) tarzan 's three challenges , starring jock mahoney – ( u.k./u.s . ) the terror , produced and directed by roger corman that kind of girl , directed by gerry o'hara – ( u.k . ) this sporting life , directed by lindsay anderson , starring richard harris and rachel roberts – ( u.k . ) the three stooges go around the world in a daze , starring the three stooges the thrill of it all , directed by norman jewison , starring doris day and james garner a ticklish affair , directed by george sidney , starring shirley jones and gig young to die in madrid ( mourir à madrid ) , a documentary film directed by frédéric rossif – ( france ) tom jones , directed by tony richardson , starring albert finney and susannah york ( u.k . ) torpedo bay , starring james mason and lilli palmer – ( italy/france ) toys in the attic , directed by george roy hill , starring dean martin , geraldine page and yvette mimieux twice-told tales , starring vincent price twilight of honor , starring richard chamberlain . u . the ugly american , starring marlon brando uncle vanya , starring michael redgrave , laurence olivier , joan plowright – ( u.k . ) under the yum yum tree , starring jack lemmon , dean jones , carol lynley , edie adams . v . vice and virtue ( le vice et la vertu ) , starring annie girardot , robert hossein and catherine deneuve – ( france ) the victors , starring george peppard , george hamilton , vince edwards , romy schneider , jeanne moreau – ( u.k . ) la visita ( the visitor ) , starring sandra milo – ( italy ) the v.i.p.s , starring elizabeth taylor , richard burton , rod taylor , maggie smith , louis jourdan , margaret rutherford , orson welles – ( u.k . ) voyage to the end of the universe ( ikarie xb-1 ) , directed by jindřich polák – ( czechoslovakia ) . w . walking the streets of moscow ( ya shagayu po moskve ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) wall of noise , directed by richard wilson and starring suzanne pleshette and ty hardin what a crazy world , directed by michael carreras – ( u.k . ) what 's a nice girl like you doing in a place like this ? , a short film directed by martin scorsese the wheeler dealers , starring james garner and lee remick the whip and the body ( la frusta e il corpo ) , directed by mario bava under the alias '' john m . old '' who 's been sleeping in my bed ? , starring dean martin , carol burnett , elizabeth montgomery , jill st . john who 's minding the store ? , starring jerry lewis , agnes moorehead , jill st . john winter light ( nattvardsgästerna ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) wives and lovers , starring janet leigh , shelley winters , martha hyer women of the world ( la donna nel mondo ) , directed by gualtiero jacopetti , paolo cavara and franco prosperi – ( italy ) the wrong arm of the law , starring peter sellers – ( u.k . ) . x . x : the man with the x-ray eyes , directed by roger corman , starring ray milland . y . the yellow canary , starring pat boone yesterday , today and tomorrow ( ieri , oggi , domani ) , directed by vittorio de sica , starring sophia loren and marcello mastroianni – academy award for best foreign language film – ( italy ) yoso , directed by teinosuke kinugasa – ( japan ) young aphrodites ( mikres afrodites ) – ( greece ) youth of the beast ( yajū no seishun ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) . z . zatoichi on the road ( 座頭市喧嘩旅 , zatōichi kenka-tabi ) , directed by kimiyoshi yasuda – ( japan ) zatoichi the fugitive ( 座頭市兇状旅 , zatōichi kyōjō tabi ) , directed by tokuzō tanaka – ( japan ) . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930 & ndash ; 1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930 & ndash ; 1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931 & ndash ; 1969 ) yosemite sam ( 1945-1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953 & ndash ; 1968 ) . births . january 4 - dave foley , canadian actor and comedian january 14 - steven soderbergh , us director february 12 - john michael higgins , actor february 17 michael jordan , us basketball player and occasional actor larry the cable guy , american stand-up comedian , actor , producer , singer and radio personality february 21 - william baldwin , actor march 18 - vanessa l . williams , actress , singer and beauty queen march 20 - david thewlis , english actor march 27 - quentin tarantino , director april 17 - joel murray , actor april 18 - conan o'brien , television entertainer and talk show host april 26 - jet li , actor may 11 - natasha richardson , actress ( d . 2009 ) may 25 - mike myers , canadian actor june 6 - jason isaacs , english thespian june 9 - johnny depp , us actor june 10 - jeanne tripplehorn , us actress june 12 - tim dekay , actor & producer june 15 - helen hunt , us actress and director june 17 - greg kinnear , american actor , producer and television personality july 2 - mark kermode , english critic july 13 - sandy fox , american voice actress july 29 - alexandra paul , us actress july 30 - lisa kudrow , us actress august 1 - demián bichir , mexican-american actor august 5 - mark strong , english actor august 7 - harold perrineau , us actor august 13 - sridevi , indian actress ( d . 2018 ) august 14 - emmanuelle béart , french actress september 19 - dan povenmire , animator and voice actor september 25 - tate donovan , american actor and director october 6 - elisabeth shue , us actress october 12 - dave legeno , actor october 31 - rob schneider , actor and comedian november 5 - tatum o'neal , us actress november 20 - ming-na wen , american actress november 27 vladimir mashkov , russian actor fisher stevens , us actor december 15 - helen slater , us actress december 16 - benjamin bratt , american actor , producer and activist december 18 - brad pitt , actor december 19 jennifer beals , actress til schweiger , actor december 23 - jess harnell , american voice actor and singer . deaths . january 2 dick powell , 58 , american actor , director , murder , my sweet , the bad and the beautiful jack carson , 52 , canadian actor , cat on a hot tin roof , mildred pierce january 6 – frank tuttle , 70 , american director , this gun for hire , waikiki wedding january 26 – ole olsen , 70 , american actor and comedian , hellzapoppin' january 28 – john farrow , 58 , australian director , hondo , the big clock february 2 – william gaxton , 69 , american actor and singer , diamond horseshoe , the heat 's on february 8 – george dolenz , 55 , hungarian actor , vendetta , my cousin rachel february 18 – monte blue , 76 , american actor , key largo , white shadows in the south seas march 18 – wanda hawley , 67 , american actress , the young rajah , the midnight message march 25 – felix adler , 79 , american screenwriter , saps at sea , block-heads april 4 – jason robards sr . , 70 , american actor , mr . blandings builds his dream house , isle of the dead may 6 – monty woolley , 74 , american actor , the bishop 's wife , the man who came to dinner may 17 – daniel mendaille , french actor , 77 , on trial , napoléon may 19 – luana walters , 50 , american actress , mexicali rose , the corpse vanishes june 7 – zasu pitts , 69 , american actress , greed , life with father june 18 – pedro armendáriz , 51 , mexican actor , the fugitive , fort apache july 10 – john sutton , 54 , pakistani actor , the three musketeers , captain from castile july 25 – leota lane , 59 , american singer , actress , three hollywood girls august 4 – tom keene , 66 , american actor , our daily bread , ghost valley august 14 – clifford odets , 57 , american playwright and screenwriter , sweet smell of success , none but the lonely heart august 17 – richard barthelmess , 68 , american actor , broken blossoms , only angels have wings august 25 – edward l . cahn , 64 , american director , it ! the terror from beyond space , girls in prison october 8 – frank r . adams , 80 , american composer and screenwriter , peg o ' my heart , the cowboy and the lady grace darmond , 68 , canadian actress , what every woman wants , the hope diamond mystery october 11 – jean cocteau , 74 , french director and screenwriter , beauty and the beast , orpheus october 18 – constance worth , 52 , australian actress , china passage , meet boston blackie october 29 – adolphe menjou , 73 , american actor , paths of glory , a star is born october 31 henry daniell , 69 , british actor , sherlock holmes and the voice of terror , the great dictator hans jacoby , 59 , german screenwriter , reunion in reno , champagne for caesar november 1 – elsa maxwell , 82 , american gossip columnist , rhapsody in blue , stage door canteen november 15 - paul sloane , 70 , american director , the woman accused , down to their last yacht november 25 jean brooks , 47 , american actress , the leopard man , the seventh victim joseph sweeney , 79 , american actor , 12 angry men , the man in the grey flannel suit november 29 – charles schnee , 47 , american screenwriter , the bad and the beautiful , red river november 30 phil baker , 67 , american comedian and actor , the gang 's all here , take it or leave it gina malo , 54 , american actress , the gang show , all in december 2 sabu , 39 , indian actor , jungle book , the thief of bagdad mario zampi , 60 , italian director , the naked truth , five golden hours december 4 – robert hamer , 52 , british director , kind hearts and coronets , dead of night december 5 – tom london , 74 , american actor , calamity jane , high noon december 12 yasujirō ozu , 60 , japanese director and screenwriter , tokyo story , late spring barbara read , 45 , canadian actress , three smart girls , the shadow returns . film debuts . alan alda – gone are the days ! james brolin – take her , she 's mine mel brooks – the critic james caan – irma la douce william daniels – ladybug ladybug dick van dyke – bye bye birdie héctor elizondo – the fat black pussycat peter fonda – tammy and the doctor teri garr – fun in acapulco clint howard – the courtship of eddie 's father christopher lambert – who 's minding the store ? geoffrey lewis – the fat black pussycat estelle parsons – ladybug ladybug kurt russell – it happened at the world 's fair lynn redgrave – tom jones donald sutherland – the world ten times over andrei tarkovsky - ivan 's childhood a.k.a . ivanovo detstvo