Sixth form

england and wales . the term sixth form describes the school years numbered 12 and 13 , which are called the lower sixth ( l6 ) and upper sixth ( u6 ) by many schools , students aged 16 or 17 by august 31 . the term survives from an earlier system when the first five years of english secondary schooling were known as forms ( which would originally have been long backless benches on which rows of pupils sat in the classroom ) . pupils started their first year of secondary school in the first form or first year , and this was the academic year in which pupils would normally be 11 years old by august 31 . pupils would move up a form each year before entering the fifth form in the academic year in which they would be 15 year olds by august 31 . those who stayed on at school to study for a-levels moved up into the sixth form , which was divided into the lower sixth and the upper sixth . in some private schools , the term middle sixth was used in place of upper sixth , with the latter being used for those who stayed on for an extra term to take the entrance examinations that were previously set for candidates to oxford or cambridge universities . other schools described these oxbridge examination students as being in the seventh form or third year sixth . the system was changed for the 1990–1991 academic year and school years are now numbered consecutively from primary school onwards . year 1 is the first year of primary school after reception . the first year of secondary school ( the old first form ) is now known as year 7 . the lower sixth is now year 12 and the upper sixth is year 13 . however , the term '' sixth form '' has still been retained as a vestige of the old system and is used as a collective term for years 12 and 13 . public ( fee-charging ) schools , along with some state schools , tend to use the old system of numbering . in some parts of the country , specialist sixth form colleges were introduced . a large proportion of english secondary schools no longer have an integral sixth form . this is mainly related to reforms in the later 20th century , where different political areas became a factor in the introduction of colleges instead of the original sixth forms . there are now numerous sixth form colleges throughout england and wales , and in areas without these , sixth form schools and specialist further education ( fe ) colleges called tertiary colleges may fill the same role . sixth form is not compulsory in england and wales ( although from 2013 onwards , people of sixth form age must remain in some form of education or training in england only ; the school leaving age remains 16 in wales ) ; however , university entrance normally requires at least three a2-level qualifications and perhaps one as-level . students usually select between three and five subjects from the gcses they have just taken , for one '' as '' year , the as exams being taken at the end of lower sixth . three subjects are then carried into the a2 year ( the dropped as being '' cashed in '' as a qualification ) and further exams are taken at the end of that year . the marks attained in both sets of exams are converted into ucas points , which must meet the offer made by the student 's chosen university . northern ireland . in northern ireland , the equivalent of reception is '' p1 '' , and the equivalent of the english year 1 '' p2 '' , while the first year of secondary school is known as year 8 or first year ( rather than year 7 as in england ) , and following that lower and upper sixth are year 13 and year 14 respectively . scotland . in the scottish education system , the final year of school is known as sixth year or s6 . during this year , students typically study advanced higher and/or higher courses in a wide range of subjects , taking sqa exams at the end of both s5 and s6 . pupils in scotland may leave once they have reached the age of 16 ; those who reach 16 before 30 & nbsp ; september may leave after national examinations in may , whilst those who are 16 by the end of february may leave the previous christmas . it is not essential for candidates to do a sixth year if they wish to attend a scottish university , as they have obtained adequate higher grades in s5 and may apply and receive acceptance , though this is conditional on being successful in the examinations . however , the vast majority of scottish students return for s6 if they plan to attend university . some english universities will also accept scottish students who have obtained adequate higher grades in s5 . it was announced in december 2008 that , as from 2010 , ucas will increase the number of points awarded to those who achieve highers and advanced highers . bbc news website in some cases , particularly in independent schools , the term sixth form is also used for the last two years of secondary education . other countries . in some secondary schools in jamaica , barbados and trinidad and tobago , the sixth and seventh years , are called lower and upper sixth respectively . in india and nepal , it is the '' +2 '' part of the '' 10+2 '' educational system . similarly , the term sixth form is also used to define the final two years of education before entering university in malta . in malaysia , a sixth form is known as '' tingkatan 6 , '' and lasts for three semesters . in singapore , however , the equivalent of a sixth form college would be called a junior college , where pupils take their cambridge gce a-levels after two years . prior to the 1990s , these two years were known as '' pre-university '' ( pre-u ) 1 and 2 . in new zealand , under the old system of forms , standards and juniors , sixth form was the equivalent of year 12 in today 's system . year 13 was known as seventh form . australia also sometimes uses the term for year 12 , though the australian year 12 is equivalent to the nz year 13 & nbsp ; / seventh form and the uk 's upper sixth & nbsp ; / year 13 . in brunei , sixth form comprises year 12 and 13 , which may also be referred to as lower and upper sixth . at the end of the schooling , students sit for gce advanced level . students may also opt to take advanced subsidiary level or as level halfway at the end of lower sixth or halfway through upper sixth . sixth form is not compulsory , but a preferable choice for students wishing to continue in academic studies leading to university level . in some college preparatory schools in the united states , such as the hill school , woodberry forest school , ethical culture fieldston school , kent school , pomfret school , the church farm school , the haverford school , portsmouth abbey school and more , sixth form refers to the final year of education prior to college . it is the equivalent of twelfth grade in the us education system . see also . sixth form college education in the united kingdom eleventh grade and twelfth grade—equivalent american grades for this age range ontario academic credit . notes .