Mark Twain

labor . twain wrote glowingly about unions in the river boating industry in life on the mississippi , which was read in union halls decades later . philip s . foner , mark twain : social critic ( new york : international publishers , 1958 ) , p . 98 he supported the labor movement , especially one of the most important unions , the knights of labor . in a speech to them , he said : . religion . twain was a presbyterian . he was critical of organized religion and certain elements of christianity through his later life . he wrote , for example , '' faith is believing what you know ai n't so '' , and '' if christ were here now there is one thing he would not be & nbsp ; – a christian '' . with anti-catholic sentiment rampant in 19th century america , twain noted he was '' educated to enmity toward everything that is catholic '' . as an adult , he engaged in religious discussions and attended services , his theology developing as he wrestled with the deaths of loved ones and with his own mortality . dempsey , terrell , book review : mark twain 's religion . william e . phipps 2004 mark twain forum twain generally avoided publishing his most controversial opinions on religion in his lifetime , and they are known from essays and stories that were published later . in the essay three statements of the eighties in the 1880s , twain stated that he believed in an almighty god , but not in any messages , revelations , holy scriptures such as the bible , providence , or retribution in the afterlife . he did state that '' the goodness , the justice , and the mercy of god are manifested in his works '' , but also that '' deism '' , which determine '' small matters '' , such as who dies in a pestilence . twain , mark , ed . by paul baender . 1973 . what is man ? : and other philosophical writings . p . 56 at other times , he wrote or spoke in ways that contradicted a strict deist view , for example , plainly professing a belief in providence . phipps , william e . , mark twain 's religion , pp . 263–266 , 2003 mercer univ . press in some later writings in the 1890s , he was less optimistic about the theodicy , observing that '' if our maker is all-powerful for good or evil , he is not in his right mind '' . at other times , he conjectured sardonically that perhaps god had created the world with all its tortures for some purpose of his own , but was otherwise indifferent to humanity , which was too petty and insignificant to deserve his attention anyway . twain , mark , ed . by paul baender . 1973 . what is man ? : and other philosophical writings . pp.10 , 486 in 1901 , twain criticized the actions of the missionary dr . william scott ament ( 1851–1909 ) because ament and other missionaries had collected indemnities from chinese subjects in the aftermath of the boxer uprising of 1900 . twain 's response to hearing of ament 's methods was published in the north american review in february 1901 : to the person sitting in darkness , and deals with examples of imperialism in china , south africa , and with the u.s . occupation of the philippines . mark twain , '' to the person sitting in darkness '' , the north american review 182:531 ( february 1901 ) :161–176 ; a subsequent article , '' to my missionary critics '' published in the north american review in april 1901 , unapologetically continues his attack , but with the focus shifted from ament to his missionary superiors , the american board of commissioners for foreign missions . mark twain , '' to my missionary critics '' , the north american review 172 ( april 1901 ) :520–534 ; after his death , twain 's family suppressed some of his work that was especially irreverent toward conventional religion , including letters from the earth , which was not published until his daughter clara reversed her position in 1962 in response to soviet propaganda about the withholding . the anti-religious the mysterious stranger was published in 1916 . little bessie , a story ridiculing christianity , was first published in the 1972 collection mark twain 's fables of man . he raised money to build a presbyterian church in nevada in 1864 . twain created a reverent portrayal of joan of arc , a subject over which he had obsessed for forty years , studied for a dozen years and spent two years writing about . paine , albert bigelow , the adventures of mark twain , p . 281 , kessinger 2004 in 1900 and again in 1908 he stated , '' i like joan of arc best of all my books , it is the best '' . goy-blanquet , dominique , joan of arc , a saint for all reasons : studies in myth and politics , p . 132 , 2003 ashgate publishing those who knew twain well late in life recount that he dwelt on the subject of the afterlife , his daughter clara saying : '' sometimes he believed death ended everything , but most of the time he felt sure of a life beyond . '' phipps , william e . , mark twain 's religion , p . 304 , 2003 mercer univ . press twain 's frankest views on religion appeared in his final work autobiography of mark twain , the publication of which started in november 2010 , 100 years after his death . in it , he said : twain was a freemason . he belonged to polar star lodge no . 79 a.f . & a.m . , based in st . louis . he was initiated an entered apprentice on may 22 , 1861 , passed to the degree of fellow craft on june 12 , and raised to the degree of master mason on july 10 . twain visited salt lake city for two days and met there members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints . they also gave him a book of mormon . he later wrote in roughing it about that book : roughing it – chapter 16 . vivisection . twain was opposed to the vivisection practices of his day . his objection was not on a scientific basis but rather an ethical one . he specifically cited the pain caused to the animal as his basis of his opposition : mark twain , letter to sidney g . trist , editor of the animals ' friend magazine , in his capacity as secretary of the london anti-vivisection society ( may 26 , 1899 ) , in mark twain 's notebooks , ed . carlo de vito ( black dog & leventhal , 2015 ) . i am not interested to know whether vivisection produces results that are profitable to the human race or doesn't . & nbsp ; . the pains which it inflicts upon unconsenting animals is the basis of my enmity towards it , and it is to me sufficient justification of the enmity without looking further . . pen names . twain used different pen names before deciding on '' mark twain '' . he signed humorous and imaginative sketches as '' josh '' until 1863 . additionally , he used the pen name '' thomas jefferson snodgrass '' for a series of humorous letters . thomas jefferson snodgrass , ( charles honce , james bennet , ed . ) , pascal covici , chicago , 1928 he maintained that his primary pen name came from his years working on mississippi riverboats , where two fathoms , a depth indicating water safe for the passage of boat , was a measure on the sounding line . twain is an archaic term for '' two '' , as in '' the veil of the temple was rent in twain . '' the riverboatman 's cry was '' mark twain '' or , more fully , '' by the mark twain '' , meaning '' according to the mark on the line , the depth is two fathoms '' , that is , '' the water is deep and it is safe to pass . '' twain said that his famous pen name was not entirely his invention . in life on the mississippi , he wrote : isaiah sellers was not of literary turn or capacity , but he used to jot down brief paragraphs of plain practical information about the river , and sign them '' mark twain '' , and give them to the times-picayune . they related to the stage and condition of the river , and were accurate and valuable ; & nbsp ; . at the time that the telegraph brought the news of his death , i was on the pacific coast . i was a fresh new journalist , and needed a nom de guerre ; so i confiscated the ancient mariner 's discarded one , and have done my best to make it remain what it was in his hands & nbsp ; – a sign and symbol and warrant that whatever is found in its company may be gambled on as being the petrified truth ; how i have succeeded , it would not be modest in me to say . life on the mississippi , chapter 50 twain 's story about his pen name has been questioned by some cited in with the suggestion that '' mark twain '' refers to a running bar tab that twain would regularly incur while drinking at john piper 's saloon in virginia city , nevada . samuel clemens himself responded to this suggestion by saying , '' mark twain was the nom de plume of one captain isaiah sellers , who used to write river news over it for the new orleans picayune . he died in 1863 and as he could no longer need that signature , i laid violent hands upon it without asking permission of the proprietor 's remains . that is the history of the nom de plume i bear . '' fatout , paul . '' mark twain 's nom de plume . '' american literature , v 34 , n 1 ( march 1962 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 1–7 . in his autobiography , twain writes further of captain sellers ' use of '' mark twain '' : i was a cub pilot on the mississippi river then , and one day i wrote a rude and crude satire which was leveled at captain isaiah sellers , the oldest steamboat pilot on the mississippi river , and the most respected , esteemed , and revered . for many years he had occasionally written brief paragraphs concerning the river and the changes which it had undergone under his observation during fifty years , and had signed these paragraphs '' mark twain '' and published them in the st . louis and new orleans journals . in my satire i made rude game of his reminiscences . it was a shabby poor performance , but i did n't know it , and the pilots did n't know it . the pilots thought it was brilliant . they were jealous of sellers , because when the gray-heads among them pleased their vanity by detailing in the hearing of the younger craftsmen marvels which they had seen in the long ago on the river , sellers was always likely to step in at the psychological moment and snuff them out with wonders of his own which made their small marvels look pale and sick . however , i have told all about this in '' old times on the mississippi . '' the pilots handed my extravagant satire to a river reporter , and it was published in the new orleans true delta . that poor old captain sellers was deeply wounded . he had never been held up to ridicule before ; he was sensitive , and he never got over the hurt which i had wantonly and stupidly inflicted upon his dignity . i was proud of my performance for a while , and considered it quite wonderful , but i have changed my opinion of it long ago . sellers never published another paragraph nor ever used his nom de guerre again . '' autobiography of mark twain . '' volume 2 ; 10 september 1906 , ( 2013 , 2008 ) , paragraph 4 . . legacy and depictions . trademark white suit . while twain is often depicted wearing a white suit , modern representations suggesting that he wore them throughout his life are unfounded . evidence suggests that twain began wearing white suits on the lecture circuit , after the death of olivia langdon clemens in 1904 . however , there is also evidence showing him wearing a white suit before 1904 . in 1882 , he sent a photograph of himself in a white suit to 18-year-old edward w . bok , later publisher of the ladies home journal , with a handwritten dated note . the white suit did eventually become his trademark , as illustrated in anecdotes about this eccentricity ( such as the time he wore a white summer suit to a congressional hearing during the winter ) . mcmasters ' the mark twain encyclopedia states that twain did not wear a white suit in his last three years , except at one banquet speech . in his autobiography , twain writes of his early experiments with wearing white out-of-season : next after fine colors , i like plain white . one of my sorrows , when the summer ends , is that i must put off my cheery and comfortable white clothes and enter for the winter into the depressing captivity of the shapeless and degrading black ones . it is mid-october now , and the weather is growing cold up here in the new hampshire hills , but it will not succeed in freezing me out of these white garments , for here the neighbors are few , and it is only of crowds that i am afraid . i made a brave experiment , the other night , to see how it would feel to shock a crowd with these unseasonable clothes , and also to see how long it might take the crowd to reconcile itself to them and stop looking astonished and outraged . on a stormy evening i made a talk before a full house , in the village , clothed like a ghost , and looking as conspicuous , all solitary and alone on that platform , as any ghost could have looked ; and i found , to my gratification , that it took the house less than ten minutes to forget about the ghost and give its attention to the tidings i had brought . i am nearly seventy-one , and i recognize that my age has given me a good many privileges ; valuable privileges ; privileges which are not granted to younger persons . little by little i hope to get together courage enough to wear white clothes all through the winter , in new york . it will be a great satisfaction to me to show off in this way ; and perhaps the largest of all the satisfactions will be the knowledge that every scoffer , of my sex , will secretly envy me and wish he dared to follow my lead . '' autobiography of mark twain '' , volume 2 , october 8 , 1906 ( 2013 , 2008 ) , paragraph 14