I PAT

history . the equation was developed in 1970 during the course of a debate between barry commoner , paul r . ehrlich and john holdren . commoner argued that environmental impacts in the united states were caused primarily by changes in its production technology following world war ii and focused on present-day deteriorating environmental conditions in the united states . ehrlich and holdren argued that all three factors were important but emphasized the role of human population growth , focusing on a broader scale , being less specific in space and time . —— the equation can aid in understanding some of the factors affecting human impacts on the environment , but it has also been cited as a basis for many of the dire environmental predictions of the 1970s by paul ehrlich , george wald , denis hayes , lester brown , rené dubos , and sidney ripley that did not come to pass . r bailey ( 2000 ) earth day then and now , reason 32 ( 1 ) , 18-28 neal koblitz classified equations of this type as '' mathematical propaganda '' and criticized ehrlich 's use of them in the media ( e.g . on the tonight show ) to sway the general public . n koblitz ( 1981 ) '' mathematics as propaganda '' , in mathematics tomorrow , ed . lynn steen , pp 111-120 . . the dependent variable : impact . the variable '' i '' in the '' i pat '' equation represents environmental impact . the environment may be viewed as a self-regenerating system that can endure a certain level of impact . the maximum endurable impact is called the carrying capacity . as long as '' i '' is less than the carrying capacity the associated population , affluence , and technology that make up '' i '' can be perpetually endured . if '' i '' exceeds the carrying capacity , then the system is said to be in overshoot , which may only be a temporary state . overshoot may degrade the ability of the environment to endure impact , therefore reducing the carrying capacity . impact may be measured using ecological footprint analysis in units of global hectares ( gha ) . ecological footprint per capita is a measure of the quantity of earth 's biologically productive surface that is needed to regenerate the resources consumed per capita . impact is modeled as the product of three terms , giving gha as a result . population is expressed in human numbers ; therefore affluence is measured in units of gha per capita . technology is a unitless efficiency factor . the three factors . population . in the i pat equation , the variable p represents the population of an area , such as the world . since the rise of industrial societies , human population has been increasing exponentially . this has caused thomas malthus , paul ehrlich and many others to postulate that this growth would continue until checked by widespread hunger and famine ( see malthusian growth model ) . the united nations project that world population will increase from 7.7 billion today ( 2019 ) to 9.8 billion in 2050 and about 11.2 billion in 2100 . these projections take into consideration that population growth has slowed in recent years as women are having fewer children . this phenomenon is the result of demographic transition all over the world . although the un projects that human population may stabilize at around 11.2 billion in 2100 , the i pat equation will continue to be relevant for the increasing human impact on the environment in the short to mid-term future . environmental impacts of population . increased population increases humans ' environmental impact in many ways , which include but are not limited to : increased land use - results in habitat loss for other species increased resource use - results in changes in land cover increased pollution - can cause sickness and damages ecosystems increased climate change increased biodiversity loss . affluence . the variable a in the i pat equation stands for affluence . it represents the average consumption of each person in the population . as the consumption of each person increases , the total environmental impact increases as well . a common proxy for measuring consumption is through gdp per capita . while gdp per capita measures production , it is often assumed that consumption increases when production increases . gdp per capita has been rising steadily over the last few centuries and is driving up human impact in the i pat equation . environmental impacts of affluence . increased consumption significantly increases human environmental impact . this is because each product consumed has wide-ranging effects on the environment . for example , the construction of a car has the following environmental impacts : 605,664 gallons of water for parts and tires ; 682 & nbsp ; lbs . of pollution at a mine for the lead battery ; 2178 & nbsp ; lbs . of discharge into water supply for the 22 & nbsp ; lbs . of copper contained in the car . the more cars per capita , the greater the impact . ecological impacts of each product are far-reaching ; increases in consumption quickly result in large impacts on the environment through direct and indirect sources . technology . the t variable in the i pat equation represents how resource intensive the production of affluence is ; how much environmental impact is involved in creating , transporting and disposing of the goods , services and amenities used . improvements in efficiency can reduce resource intensiveness , reducing the t multiplier . since technology can affect environmental impact in many different ways , the unit for t is often tailored for the situation to which i pat is being applied . for example , for a situation where the human impact on climate change is being measured , an appropriate unit for t might be greenhouse gas emissions per unit of gdp . environmental impacts of technology . increases in efficiency from technologies can reduce specific environmental impacts , but due to increasing prosperity these technologies yield for the people and businesses that adopt them , technologies actually end up generating greater overall growth into the resources that sustain us . criticism . criticisms of the i pat formula : too simplistic for complex problem interdependencies between variables general sweeping assumptions of variables ’ effect toward environmental impact cultural differences cause wide variation in impact technology can not properly be expressed in a unit . varying the unit will prove to be inaccurate , as the result of the calculation depends on one ’ s view of the situation . interdependencies . the i pat equation has been criticized for being too simplistic by assuming that p , a , and t are independent of each other . in reality , at least seven interdependencies between p , a , and t could exist , indicating that it is more correct to rewrite the equation as i f ( p , a , t ) . for example , a doubling of technological efficiency , or equivalently a reduction of the t-factor by 50 % , does not necessarily reduce the environmental impact ( i ) by 50 % if efficiency induced price reductions stimulate additional consumption of the resource that was supposed to be conserved , a phenomenon called the rebound effect ( conservation ) or jevons paradox . as was shown by alcott , despite significant improvements in the carbon intensity of gdp ( i.e . , the efficiency in carbon use ) since 1980 , world fossil energy consumption has increased in line with economic and population growth . similarly , an extensive historical analysis of technological efficiency improvements has conclusively shown that improvements in the efficiency of energy and material use were almost always outpaced by economic growth , resulting in a net increase in resource use and associated pollution . huesemann , michael h . , and joyce a . huesemann ( 2011 ) . technofix : why technology wo n't save us or the environment , chapter 5 , '' in search of solutions ii : efficiency improvements '' , new society publishers , gabriola island , british columbia , canada , , 464 pp . ≥ . neglect of beneficial human impacts . there have also been comments that this model depicts people as being purely detrimental to the environment , ignoring any conservation or restoration efforts that societies have made . . neglect of political and social contexts . another major criticism of the i pat model is that it ignores the political context and decision-making structures of countries and groups . this means the equation does not account for varying degrees of power , influence , and responsibility of individuals over environmental impact . also , the p factor does not account for the complexity of social structures or behaviors , resulting in blame being placed on the global poor . i pat does not account for sustainable resource use among some poor and indigenous populations , unfairly characterizing these populations whose cultures support low-impact practices . however , it has been argued that the latter criticism not only assumes low impacts for indigenous populations , but also misunderstands the i pat equation itself . environmental impact is a function of human numbers , affluence ( i.e . , resources consumed per capita ) and technology . it is assumed that small-scale societies have low environmental impacts due to their practices and orientations alone but there is little evidence to support this . in fact , the generally low impact of small-scale societies compared to state societies is due to a combination of their small numbers and low-level technology . thus , the environmental sustainability of these societies is largely an epiphenomenon due their inability to significantly affect their environment . that all types of societies are subject to i pat was actually made clear in ehrlich and holdren 's 1972 dialogue with commoner in the bulletin of the atomic scientists , where they examine the pre-industrial ( and indeed prehistoric ) impact of human beings on the environment . their position is further clarified by holdren 's 1993 paper , a brief history of '' ipat '' . . policy implications . as a result of the interdependencies between p , a , and t and potential rebound effects , policies aimed at decreasing environmental impacts through reductions in p , a , and t may not only be very difficult to implement ( e.g . , population control and material sufficiency and degrowth movements have been controversial ) but also are likely to be rather ineffective compared to rationing ( i.e . , quotas ) or pigovian tax of resource use or pollution . . see also . affluence carbon footprint eco-economic decoupling ecological footprint ecological indicator embodied energy kaya identity life cycle assessment population growth sustainability measurement sustainability metrics and indices technology water footprint . references .