Religious nationalism

buddhist nationalism . buddhist nationalism is mainly prevalent and influential in countries like sri lanka and myanmar , and is also present in cambodia and thailand . sinhalese buddhist nationalism is a political ideology which combines a focus upon sinhalese culture and ethnicity with an emphasis upon theravada buddhism , which is the majority belief system of the sinhalese in sri lanka . the patriotic association of myanmar and 969 movement have the goal to '' organise and protect '' the burman people and their buddhist religion , which are influenced by buddhist nationalism in myanmar . christian nationalism . christian nationalists focus more on internal politics , such as passing laws that reflect their view of christianity . in the united states , christian nationalism tends to be conservative . in countries with a state church , christian nationalists , in seeking to preserve the status of a christian state , uphold an antidisestablishmentarian position . they actively promote religious ( christian ) discourses in various fields of social life , from politics and history , to culture and science ; with respect to legislation for example , christian nationalists advocate blue laws . distinctive radicalized forms of religious nationalism or clerical nationalism ( clero-nationalism or clerico-nationalism ) were emerging on the far-right of the political spectrum in various european countries specially during the interwar period in the first half of 20th century . in the middle ages , efforts were made in order to establish a pan-christian state by uniting the countries within christendom . christian nationalism played a role in this era in which christians felt the impulse to recover lands in which christianity flourished . after the rise of islam , certain parts of north africa , east asia , southern europe , central asia , and the middle east lost christian control . in poland , nationalism was always characterized by loyalty to the roman catholic church . groups like the national revival of poland use slogans like wielka polska katolicka ( great catholic poland ) and protest vigorously against legalization of gay marriage and abortion . conservative religious groups connected with radio maryja are often accused of harboring nationalist and antisemitic attitudes . religious nationalism characterized by communal adherence to eastern orthodoxy and national orthodox churches is found in many states of eastern europe and in the russian federation . hindu nationalism . given the extensive linguistic , religious , and ethnic diversity of the indian population , india , a country study , united states library of congress , note on ethnic groups nationalism in india in general does not fall within the purview of a solitary variant of nationalism . indians may identify with their nation on account of civic , cultural , or non-aligned movement . commentators have noted that in modern india , a contemporary form of hindu nationalism , or hindutva , has been endorsed by the bharatiya janata party and rashtriya swayamsevak sangh . hindutva ( meaning '' hinduness '' ) , a term popularised by hindu nationalist vinayak damodar savarkar in 1923 , is the predominant form of hindu nationalism in india . hindutva is championed by right-wing hindu nationalist volunteer organisation rashtriya swayamsevak sangh ( rss ) , widely regarded as the ruling bharatiya janata party 's parent organisation , along with its affiliate organisations , notably the vishva hindu parishad . islamic nationalism . unlike the secular nationalism of most other countries , pakistani nationalism is religious in nature being islamic nationalism . religion was the basis of pakistani nationalist narrative . ( see secularism in pakistan ) pakistani nationalism is very closely associated with muslim heritage , the religion of islam , and pan-islamism , as described in two-nation theory . it also refers to the consciousness and expression of religious and ethnic influences that help mould the national consciousness . pakistan has been called a '' global center for islamism '' . hamas is a palestinian nationalist party with islamic elements . jewish nationalism . religious zionism is an ideology that combines zionism and orthodox judaism . before the establishment of israel , religious zionists were mainly observant jews who supported zionist efforts to rebuild a jewish state in the land of israel . after the six-day war , and the capture of the west bank , a territory referred to in jewish , biblical terms as judea and samaria , right-wing components of the religious zionist movement became integrated with israeli nationalism and evolved into neo-zionism , whose ideology revolves around three pillars : the land of israel , the people of israel , and the torah of israel . adriana kemp , israelis in conflict : hegemonies , identities , and challenges , sussex academic press , 2004 , pp . 314–315 . . shinto . the '' state shinto '' term was thus used to categorize , and abolish , imperial japanese practices that relied on shinto to support nationalistic ideology . by refusing to ban shinto practices outright , constitution of japan was thus able to preserve full freedom of religion . . sikh . the khalistan movement is a sikh separatism seeking to create a homeland for sikhs by establishing a sovereign state , called khālistān ( '-stan the khalsa ' ) , in the punjab . kinnvall , catarina . 2007 . '' situating sikh and hindu nationalism in india . '' in globalization and religious nationalism in india : the search for ontological security , ( routledge advances in international relations and global politics 46 ) . london : routledge . the proposed state would consist of land that currently forms punjab , india and punjab , pakistan . . other religious movements and nationalism . in the korean peninsula the donghak movement and its leader , choe je-u , were inspired by korean catholic missionaries . however , they condemned the 'western learning ' preached by missionaries and contrasted it with the indigenous 'eastern learning ' . they started a rebellion in 1894 in jeolla province in southwestern korea . the rebellion was eventually crushed by chinese and japanese troops , resulting in 300,000 fatalities . it is comparable to the millenarian taiping rebellion led by hong xiuquan , who was also inspired by catholic missionaries . the donghak movement served as a template for the later daejonggyo and jeung san do movements , as well as for other religious nationalist movements . the buddhist-influenced daejonggyo movement financed guerillas in manchuria during japanese colonial rule of both korea and manchuria . the north korean state ideology , juche , is sometimes classified as a religion in the united states department of state 's human rights reports . . see also . clerical fascism national catholicism political aspects of islam political religion sectarianism theocracy . references . sources . . further reading . madhu kishwar , religion at the service of nationalism and other essays ( oxford university press , 1998 ) . von der mehden , fred r . '' marxism and early indonesian islamic nationalism '' . political science quarterly , vol . 73 , no . 3 , 1958 , pp . 335–351 . jstor soner cagaptay , '' islam , secularism , and nationalism in modern turkey '' , 2006 . endy bayuni , '' jokowi turns to islam-nationalism to preserve indonesia 's diversity '' , the staits times , apr 15 , 2017 jenny white , '' muslim nationalism and the new turks '' , princeton university press , 2014