Mytholmroyd

toponym . mytholmroyd was recorded in the 13th century as '' mithomrode '' and in the 17th century as '' mitholmroide '' . the name means ' a clearing for settlement , where two rivers meet ' , likely derived from the old english ( ge ) mȳthum ( inflected form of ( ge ) mȳthe , '' river mouth '' ) , plus rodu ( '' field '' or '' clearing '' ) . the l was probably inserted out of confusion with the common place-name element holm , old norse for a small island or eyot . . governance . the village is part of the luddendenfoot ward of the metropolitan borough of calderdale . it has had a labour-majority council as of may 2019 - all 3 councillors in the ward represent the labour party - jane scullion , deputy leader of calderdale council , roisin cavanagh and scott patient . it is part of the metropolitan county of west yorkshire . at a district-level , mytholmroyd urban district council was set up in 1894 . in 1937 it merged with hebden bridge urban district council to become hebden royd urban district council . at a county level mytholmroyd was administered by the west riding county council . both of these were abolished as part of the reforms introduced in the local government act 1972 . they were replaced with west yorkshire combined authority and calderdale . the hebden royd town council area forms a civil parish . west yorkshire county council was abolished in 1986 , leaving mytholmroyd represented at borough and town council level . the current mayor of hebden royd - val stevens ( labour , former deputy leader of manchester city council ) lives in the village . history . a bronze age urnfield exists on the moor top , north of mytholmroyd . it is a burial ground with cremation urns , dating between the 16th and 11th centuries bc of national importance . evidence of pre-historic farming is apparent because they cleared the upland forests for cattle grazing and created the peat moorlands . most of the celtic iron age settlements were concentrated on the hillside terraces which avoided the wooded and poorly drained valley floors . most of the older listed buildings are located on the hillsides away from the valley . a roman coin hoard has been found to the south of mytholmroyd . erringden and midgeley moors border the village . . cragg vale coiners . during the late 18th century , the valley to the south , known as cragg vale , was home to a gang of counterfeiters known as the cragg vale coiners . the gang 's leader , david hartley , or king david as he was known , was found guilty of the 1769 murder of excise official william dighton and was hanged at the york tyburn on 28 april 1770 . two other gang members were also executed for their part in the murder . recently local resident and writer benjamin myers wrote a novel charting their story , '' the gallows pole '' which went on to win the walter scott prize for historical fiction in 2018 . historic buildings and structures . . canalside mill . built in 1851 as canal wharf mill , it was home to local company walkley clogs , and converted into a well known tourist attraction with cafes , shops and an open clog factory on the ground floor . it was destroyed by fire in the 1990s ; consequently the top floor was demolished and re-opened under ownership of a property development company . it subsequently closed in 2002 and has since been boarded up . numerous planning applications to continue its former use or convert it into luxury apartments have been passed but never undertaken . on 1 august 2019 it was once again destroyed by fire , this time so badly that it has now been demolished . a planning application for the site development has yet to be accepted . st . michael 's church . the parish church was built in 1847 in early english style . it was badly damaged in the 2015 floods but has since re-opened . the sunday school in front of the church was reduced to one storey and is now used as a community hall and meeting spaces available for hire . in 2009 a new car park with monument in the form of an iron spike with a stone seating surround has been constructed park and is now used for village events including the mytholmroyd christmas market organised by royd regen ( the local development board ) and the town council . county bridge . there has been a river crossing point since 1329 in the centre of the village , at the site of the current 'county bridge ' . a bridge is recorded in this location under the name '' elphaborough bridge '' , after the name of elphaborough hall on the further side of cragg brook . records of a grant issued to the local township for the purchase of timber stated it was for '' repairs to mitholmroide bridge '' , in 1638 . similar records show that the current stone bridge was erected in 1684 by timothy wadsworth , at a cost of £50 . the current bridge was constructed in two parts ( and now consists of four extensions ) . the original packhorse style bridge in 1638 , and on the upstream side , the bridge was widened and two extra arches on the south end were added to ease the gradient , although the two new arches were considerably smaller , the bridge now consists of four arches in total . in the 19th century , with shops being constructed on the north end riverbank , and a new premises being built for the mytholmroyd co-operative society right up to the water 's edge on the south bank , two of the bridge 's arches are mostly hidden . however , the premises were built with a large opening underneath the buildings , allowing floodwater to still pass through the two hidden arches underground . mytholmroyd bridge was eventually taken over by west riding county council , which gives the historic bridge its present name of '' county bridge '' . . railway station and viaduct . a prominent viaduct lies above the southern end of mytholmroyd town centre . it was erected in 1840 by george stephenson and is still in use as part of the modern day calder valley line . in the 1850s , mytholmroyd railway station was built , consisting of two platforms built on the mytholmroyd viaduct , and a three-storey ticket office , waiting hall and entrance stairwell , leading unto the viaduct . this later closed and the platforms were built a matter of yards up the track on land , and is now accessed by open staircases and long access ramps up the steep banking , where flowers and displays are maintained by the mytholmroyd station partnership . the 19th century listed , 3 floor station building has recently been fully restored back to its former glory both inside and out and is awaiting tenants . in december 2019 , the project was awarded the railway heritage trust conservation award at the 2019 national railway heritage awards . it was recognised for showcasing a real passion for restoration work and an ability to understand the objectives of the original railway builders and architects . a new , near 200 space station car park is underway at the old loading yard comprising 10 e-car parking spaces , secure cycle lockers and car share facilities . the west yorkshire combined authority are working with the mytholmroyd station partnership to landscape the car park with bee-friendly planters and information boards . . dusty miller inn . this late 18th century pub replaced an earlier inn on the opposite side of the road , where bridge end cottages now stand . the earlier building was home to the cragg coiners in 1769 . the current listed building inn comprises a hotel , bar and restaurant . the premises were severely damaged in the 2012 and 2015 flooding , causing the business to close for repairs . the bar re-opened in april 2016 and was awarded the '' pub of the season award '' for summer 2016 by the local camra branch . the hotel and restaurant are yet to re-open . . gallery . file : mytholmroyd , st michael 's church - geograph.org.uk - 2051499.jpg st . michael 's church , mythomroyd file : elphin brook and railway viaduct , mytholmroyd - geograph.org.uk - 267863.jpg elphin brook passing under the caldervale line railway viaduct file : new lane , mytholmroyd ( 7th november 2010 ) . jpg new road passing under the caldervale line railway viaduct file : drinking fountain , cragg road , mytholmroyd - geograph.org.uk - 1462296.jpg drinking fountain , off cragg road file : gorillas next to the rochdale canal - geograph.org.uk - 103684.jpg gorillas next to the rochdale canal file : last colours of autumn , mytholmroyd ( 7th november 2010 ) . jpg last colours of autumn , mytholmroyd ( 7 november 2010 ) . flooding . the village is currently ( 2017/18 ) under development with the environment agency 's 35 million pound mytholmroyd flood alleviation scheme . this includes raising the height of flood walls on the banks of the river calder and cragg brook , as well as demolishing homes and businesses on the calder 's banks to widen the river . the village 's post office has been relocated to flood-proof premises , with other buildings being stabilised and strengthened . caldene bridge , upstream from county bridge , is being demolished and relocated as well as the bridge at greenhill industrial estate . 1837 . a disastrous flood occurred in 1837 ; few details are known about it , although it is known that the river reached the height of the canal , built on the hillside , and ultimately overflowed it . . 1946 . in the worst flooding to ever affect the village , many properties suffered flood water up to the second storey , and the village remained underwater for almost 12 hours . two shops on burnley road collapsed into the river , shops just doors down from the buildings that collapsed in the 2015 flood . by 8 am , flood waters reached up to 7 feet . 1954 . on saturday , 21 august 1954 , almost 8 years since the devastating 1946 flood , a flash flood devastated the village once again ; the river rose by more than 6 & nbsp ; ft in less than two hours , with flood water entering properties at over 2 & nbsp ; ft every 15 minutes . the dusty miller inn had almost 4 & nbsp ; ft of water in its bar area . flood alleviation works in the 1960s uncovered that county bridge was standing on foundations untouched since the wooden bridge 17th century , so as part of the works the bridge 's foundations were quickly filled with concrete . 2012 . a flash flood occurred in july 2012 , when a downpour lasting just 90 minutes devastated the village . this was a repeat of another flash flood of june , in the same year , where more than 50 & nbsp ; mm of rain fell causing the river calder to burst its banks . more than 5,000 properties were severely damaged in the upper calder valley ; many businesses lost insurance and consequently many never recovered . 2015 . mytholmroyd was severely affected by the boxing day floods in 2015 , when the river calder and the canal both rose to cover the valley floor , and consequently the town centre of mytholmroyd . it was the highest ever recorded river level . hundreds of homes and businesses were devastated , with some buildings still empty in 2017 . the row of shops north of county bridge partially collapsed into the river , and £10 million was earmarked for future protection of the village . the whole row of shops which partially collapsed have been fully demolished , along with homes along the riverbank at calder grove . by 2018 , russell dean furnishers had their furniture showroom above ground level and the co-op food built a replacement store . 2020 . on 9 february 2020 , storm ciara caused a month-and-a-half 's worth of rain to fall on mytholmroyd within 24 hours . this caused widespread flooding . the ea flood alleviation scheme was not yet complete so householders and businesses were once again affected . . education . mytholmroyd is the home of calder high school , the largest comprehensive school in the upper calder valley . it is also home to scout road academy and burnley road academy - where a young ted hughes attended . in 2016 , plans were announced by calderdale council to re-locate cragg vale school into calder high school 's sixth form . this is now completed and the new '' calder primary '' is in its 3rd year . culture . mytholmroyd community centre hosts the annual dock pudding championships , in april . in 2007 robbie coltrane entered the competition and was awarded second place . comedian jon richardson , and his wife lucy beaumont , during an interview in the halifax courier headlined '' mytholmroyd 's jon richardson and lucy beaumont tell us about their brand new sitcom '' , talked about their tv show meet the richardsons , which includes fellow comedians and their hebden bridge neighbours , and spoke about including a dock pudding competition . jeremy corbyn , leader of the labour party ( 2015-2020 ) , visited mytholmroyd community centre twice . once in may 2018 and also in november 2019 as part of local and national elections . on both occasions he spoke to a packed room of invited labour party members . the scout rock on the south side of the valley in mytholmroyd features heavily in ted hughes ' autobiography , the rock . hughes was born in the village , before moving to mexborough , but latterly owned a property in mytholmroyd in his adulthood . hughes claimed that scout rock cast its mood over the village . local writer ben myers also used scout rock as a backdrop for his non-fiction book under the rock released in 2018 which charts his time here after moving to the calder valley from london . mytholmroyd has four breweries : the nightjar brewing co , little valley brewery , equinox kombucha and vocation . the breweries supply locally and nationally and two have bars in hebden bridge . barbarys , which opened in 2019 , is a small craft bar by the caldene bridge , and is named after an old haunt of the cragg vale coiners which was sited 50 yards away . transport . rail . the village is served by mytholmroyd railway station , located on new road , northern operate a two per-hour service between leeds and manchester . however , more frequent services from hebden bridge are often used by mytholmroyd residents , with direct services to blackpool , manchester , york , leeds , burnley , rochdale and more . the calder valley line railway was completed in 1841 but there was no station at mytholmroyd which shows how few people lived here in 1840 . . road . the village has two bus stops in the village centre—recently equipped with departure screens and new shelters . local bus services are shared between tlc travel ( operating the 597 , 900 and 901 ) and first west yorkshire ( operating the 590 and 592 ) , which serve the village . cycling is very popular in the area since recent investment including the resurfacing of the rochdale canal and route 66 cycleway and le tour de france passing through the village . the tour de yorkshire passed through the village in 2018 , and cragg vale , also in mytholmroyd , has the longest continuous climb in england . . notable people . paul barker , journalist and writer lucy beaumont , writer , actor , comedian eric harrison , footballer ted hughes , british poet laureate innes ireland , racing driver and grand prix winner jane lumb , actress and fashion model danny mcnamara , singer ben myers , writer jon richardson , comedian adelle stripe , writer . see also . listed buildings in hebden royd . references . external links .