Bladder cancer

signs and symptoms . bladder cancer characteristically causes blood in the urine , which may be visible or detectable only by microscope . blood in the urine is the most common symptom in bladder cancer , and is painless . visible blood in the urine may be of only short duration , and a urine test may be required to confirm non-visible blood . between 80 and 90 % of people with bladder cancer initially presented with visible blood . blood in the urine may also be caused by other conditions , such as bladder or ureteric stones , infection , kidney disease , kidney cancers or vascular malformations , though these conditions ( except kidney cancers ) would typically be painful . other possible symptoms include dysuria , frequent urination , or feeling the need to urinate without being able to do so . these signs and symptoms are not specific to bladder cancer , and may also be caused by non-cancerous conditions , including prostate infections , overactive bladder or cystitis . some rare forms of bladder cancer like urachal cancer produce mucin , which is then excreted in the urine causing it to be thick . people with advanced disease may have pelvic or bony pain , lower-extremity edema , or flank pain . rarely , a palpable mass can be detected on physical examination . . causes . tobacco smoking is the main known contributor to urinary bladder cancer ; in most populations , smoking is associated with over half of bladder cancer cases in men and one-third of cases among women , however these proportions have reduced over recent years since there are fewer smokers in europe and north america . there is an almost linear relationship between smoking duration ( in years ) , pack-year and bladder cancer risk . a risk plateau at smoking about 15 cigarettes a day can be observed ( meaning that those who smoke 15 cigarettes a day are approximately at the same risk as those smoking 30 cigarettes a day ) . smoking ( cigar , pipe , egyptian waterpipe and smokeless tobacco ) in any form increases the risk for bladder cancer . quitting smoking reduces the risk . risk of bladder cancer decreases by 30 % within 1–4 years and continues to decrease by 60 % at 25 years after smoking cessation . however , former smokers will most likely always be at a higher risk of bladder cancer compared to people who have never smoked . passive smoking also appear to be a risk . opium consumption increases the risk of bladder cancer by 3-fold and concurrent use of opium and smoking increases the risk of bladder cancer by 5 times compared to the general population . thirty percent of bladder tumors probably result from occupational exposure in the workplace to carcinogens . occupational or circumstantial exposure to the following substances has been implicated as a cause of bladder cancer ; benzidine ( dyes manufacturing ) , 4-aminobiphenyl ( rubber industry ) , 2-naphtylamine ( azo dyes manufacturing , foundry fumes , rubber industry , cigarette smoke and cancer research ) , phenacetin ( analgesic ) , arsenic and chlorinated aliphatic compound in drinking water , auramine ( dye manufacturing ) , magenta ( dye manufacturing ) , ortho-toluidine ( dye manufacturing ) , epoxy and polyurethane resin hardening agents ( plastics industry ) , chlornaphazine , coal tar . occupations at risk are bus drivers , rubber workers , painters , motor mechanics , leather ( including shoe ) workers , blacksmiths , machine setters , and mechanics . hairdressers are thought to be at risk as well because of their frequent exposure to permanent hair dyes . infection with schistosoma haematobium ( bilharzia or schistosomiasis ) may cause bladder cancer , specially of the squamous cell type . schistosoma eggs induces a chronic inflammatory state in the bladder wall resulting in tissue fibrosis . higher levels of n-nitroso compounds has been detected in urine samples of people with schistosomiasis . n-nitroso compounds have been implicated in the pathogenesis of schistosomiasis related bladder cancer . they cause alkylation dna damage , specially guanine to adenine transition mutations in the hras and p53 tumor-suppressor gene . mutations of p53 are detected in 73 % of the tumors , bcl-2 mutations accounting for 32 % and the combination of the two accounting for 13 % . other causes of squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder include chronic catheterizations in people with a spinal cord injury and history of treatment with cyclophosphamide . ingestion of aristolochic acid present in many chinese herbal medicine has been shown to cause urothelial carcinoma and kidney failure . aristolochic acid activates peroxidase in the urothelium and causes transversion mutation in the tp53 tumor suppressor gene . people who undergo external beam radiotherapy ( ebrt ) for prostate cancer have a higher risk of developing invasive bladder cancer . in addition to these major risk factors there are also numerous other modifiable factors that are less strongly ( i.e . 10–20 % risk increase ) associated with bladder cancer , for example , obesity . although these could be considered as minor effects , risk reduction in the general population could still be achieved by reducing the prevalence of a number of smaller risk factor together . . genetics . mutations in fgfr3 , tp53 , pik3ca , kdm6a , arid1a , kmt2d , hras , tert , kras , crebbp , rb1 and tsc1 genes may be associated with some cases of bladder cancer . deletions of parts or whole of chromosome 9 is common in bladder cancer . low grade cancer are known to harbor mutations in ras gtpase and the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 ( fgfr3 ) gene , both of which play a role in the mapk/erk pathway . p53 and rb gene mutations are implicated in high-grade muscle invasive tumors . eighty nine percent of muscle invasive cancers have mutations in chromatin remodeling and histone modifying genes . deletion of both copies of the gstm1 gene has a modest increase in risk of bladder cancer . gstm1 gene product glutathione s-transferase m1 ( gstm1 ) participates in the detoxification process of carcinogens such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons found in cigarette smoke . similarly , mutations in nat2 ( n-acetyltransferase ) is associated with increased risk for bladder cancer . n-acetyltransferase helps in detoxification of carcinogens like aromatic amines ( also present in cigarette smoke ) . various single-nucleotide polymorphisms in psca gene present on chromosome 8 have shown to increase the risk for bladder cancer . psca gene promoter region has an androgen response region . loss of reactivity of this region to androgens is hypothesized as a cause of more number of aggressive tumors in women ( unlike in men who have higher amount of androgen ) . muscle invasive bladder cancer are heterogeneous in nature . in general , they can be genetically classified into basal and luminal subtypes . basal subtype show alterations involving rb and nfe2l2 and luminal type show changes in fgfr3 and kdm6a genes . basal subtype are subdivided into basal and claudin low-type group and are aggressive and show metastasis at presentation , however they respond to platinum based chemotherapy . luminal subtype can be subdivided into p53-like and luminal . p53-like tumors of luminal subtype although not as aggressive as basal type , show resistance to chemotherapy . diagnosis . currently , the best diagnosis of the state of the bladder is by way of cystoscopy , which is a procedure in which a flexible or rigid tube ( called a cystoscope ) bearing a camera and various instruments is introduced into the bladder through the urethra . the flexible procedure allows for a visual inspection of the bladder , for minor remedial work to be undertaken and for samples of suspicious lesions to be taken for a biopsy . a rigid cystoscopy is used under general anesthesia in the operating room and can support remedial work and biopsies as well as more extensive tumor removal . unlike papillary lesion , which grow into the bladder cavity and are readily visible , carcinoma in situ lesion are flat and obscure . detection of carcinoma in situ lesions requires multiple biopsies from different areas of interior bladder wall . photodynamic detection ( blue light cystoscopy ) can aid in the detection of carcinoma in situ . in photodynamic detection , a dye is instilled into the bladder with the help of a catheter . cancer cells take up this dye and are visible under blue light , providing visual clues on areas to biopsied or resected . however , visual detection in any form listed above , is not sufficient for establishing pathological classification , cell type or the stage of the present tumor . a so-called cold cup biopsy during an ordinary cystoscopy ( rigid or flexible ) will not be sufficient for pathological staging either . hence , a visual detection needs to be followed by transurethral surgery . the procedure is called transurethral resection of bladder tumor ( turbt ) . further , a rectal and vaginal bimanual examination should be carried out before and after the turbt to assess whether there is a palpable mass or if the tumour is fixed ( '' tethered '' ) to the pelvic wall . the pathological classification and staging information obtained by the turbt-procedure , is of fundamental importance for making the appropriate choice of ensuing treatment and/or follow-up routines . if invasive or high grade ( includes carcinoma in situ ) cancer is detected on turbt , an mri and/or ct scan of the abdomen and pelvis or urogram and ct scan or x-ray chest should be conducted for disease staging and to look for cancer spread ( metastasis ) . increase in alkaline phosphatase levels without evidence of liver disease should be evaluated for bone metastasis by a bone scan . although 18 positron emission tomography/ct has been explored as a viable method for staging , there is no consensus to support its role in routine clinical evaluations . urine cytology can be obtained in voided urine or at the time of the cystoscopy ( '' bladder washing '' ) . cytology is not very sensitive for low-grade or grade 1 tumors ( a negative result can not reliably exclude bladder cancer ) but has a high specificity ( a positive result reliably detects bladder cancer ) . there are newer non-invasive urine bound markers available as aids in the diagnosis of bladder cancer , including human complement factor h-related protein , high-molecular-weight carcinoembryonic antigen , and nuclear matrix protein 22 ( nmp22 ) . in united states the fda has approved nmp22 , nmp22 bladderchek , and urovysion tests for detection and surveillance of bladder cancer and immunocyt , bta-trak , and bta-stat tests have been approved for surveillance only . bta-stat and bladderchek can be performed in the clinic and others are done in the laboratory . other non-invasive urine based tests include the certndx bladder cancer assay , which detects fgfr3 mutation and urine bladder cancer test ( ubc ) , which is a sandwich elisa for cytokeratin 8/18 fragment . likewise , nmp22 is a sandwich elisa and nmp22 bladderchek is a dipstick immunoassay , both of them detect nuclear mitotic apparatus protein ( numa ) tumor marker ( a type of nuclear matrix protein ) . urovysion is a fluorescence in situ hybridization which detects aneuploidy in chromosomes 3 , 7 , 17 and loss of the 9p21 locus . immunocyt is an immunofluorescence test which detects glycosylated cea and mucin-like antigens ( m344 , ldq10 , 19a11 ) . bta-stat is a dipstick immunoassay for detection of human factor h-related protein . bta-trak is a sandwich elisa which also detects human complement factor h-related protein . sensitivities across biomarkers ranged from 0.57 to 0.82 and specificities from 0.74 to 0.88 . biomarkers fared better when used in combination with urine cytology than when used alone . however , detection accuracy is poor for low grade cancers and 10 % cancers are still missed . current guidelines do not recommended using urinary biomarkers for detection and surveillance . . classification . death from bladder cancer per 100,000 & nbsp ; inhabitants in 2004 . globally , in 2017 , bladder cancer resulted in 196,000 deaths , a 5.4 % ( age adjusted ) decrease from 2007 . in 2018 , the age adjusted rates of new cases of bladder cancer was 6 cases per 100,000 people and age adjusted death rate was 2 deaths per 100,000 people . lebanon and greece have the highest rate of new cases . in lebanon , this high risk is attributed to high number of smokers and petrochemical air pollution . the risk of bladder cancer occurrence is four times higher in men than in women . smoking can only partially explain this higher rates in men in western hemisphere . one other reason is that the androgen receptor , which is much more active in men than in women , may play a part in the development of the cancer . this hypothesis is also supported by the fact that men undergoing androgen suppression therapy for unrelated reason seem to have a lower risk of developing bladder cancer . in africa , men are more prone to do field work and are exposed to infection with schistosoma , this may explain to a certain extent the gap in incidence of squamous cell cancers in areas where bladder cancer is endemic . however , women present with more aggressive disease and have worse outcomes than men . this difference in outcomes is attributed to numerous factors such as , difference in carcinogen exposure , genetics , social and quality of care . one of the common signs of bladder cancer is hematuria and is quite often misdiagnosed as urinary tract infection in women , leading to a delay in diagnosis . moreover , as mentioned earlier psca gene may play a role in aggressive tumors in women . canada . bladder cancer is the sixth most common cancer accounting for 3.7 % of the new cancer cases . in 2018 , 30,700 canadians were living with bladder cancer , 9160 new cases were diagnosed and 2467 died from it . in 2019 , it is estimated that 11,800 new cases will be diagnosed and 2500 will die from it . among the 11,800 new cases , 9100 will be in men and 2700 in women . of the 2500 who would die from it , 1800 will men and 700 will be women . . china . bladder cancer is the 14th most common cancer and 16th most common cause of cancer death . in , 2018 it accounted for 82,300 new cases and 38,200 deaths . the number of new cases is comparatively lower compared to its western counterparts . majority of the people are diagnosed with non-muscle invasive disease ( 75 % ) and the rest have muscle invasive disease ( 25 % ) . carcinoma in situ was present in only 2.4 % of the cases . . europe . in 2015 , 131,000 news cases were diagnosed in the european union with 40,000 deaths . it is the 5th most common cancer and 9th most common cause of cancer deaths . the 5-year relative survival for bladder cancers diagnosed between 2000 and 2007 is 69 % . geographic variation is seen in survival rates with 5-year survival rates of 75 % in northern to 65 % in eastern europe . . united kingdom . bladder cancer is the ninth most common cancer in the uk accounting for 2.7 % of all the new cancers cases . in 2018 , there was 12,200 new cases and 6100 people died from it . . united states . in the united states in 2019 80,470 cases and 17,670 deaths are expected making it the sixth most common type of cancer in the region . bladder cancer is the fourth most common type of cancer in men and the 12th most common cancer in women . around 62,000 men and 19,000 women are diagnosed with bladder cancer in 2019 . between 2012 and 2016 annual rate of new bladder cancer cases decreased by one percent per year .