Fritz Haarmann

suspected victims . . hermann koch . in september 1918 , haarmann is believed to have killed a 14-year-old named hermann koch , a youth who disappeared just weeks prior to his first confirmed victim , friedel rothe . haarmann is known to have kept company with koch . he is also known to have written a letter to koch 's school providing an explanation for the youth 's prolonged absence . monsters of weimar p . 101 as had been the case in the disappearance of friedel rothe , police had searched haarmann 's cellerstraße apartment in search of the youth , although no trace of koch was found and charges against haarmann in relation to the disappearance were dropped . koch 's father had petitioned in 1921 for haarmann to be tried for his son 's murder however his requests were officially rejected . . hans keimes . haarmann is also strongly suspected of the murder of hans keimes , a 17-year-old hanover youth who was reported missing on 17 march 1922 and whose nude , bound body was found in a canal on 6 may . the cause of death was listed as strangulation , and the body bore no signs of mutilation . a distinctive handkerchief bearing grans ' name was found lodged in keimes 's throat . prior to the discovery of keimes 's body , haarmann is known to have both visited the youth 's parents offering to locate their son and to have immediately thereafter informed police that he believed grans was responsible for keimes 's disappearance . however , hans grans is known to have been in custody at the time of the disappearance of keimes . two weeks prior to the disappearance of keimes , haarmann had returned to his neue straße apartment , having served six months in a labour camp for several acts of theft he committed in august 1921 . upon his return , haarmann discovered that grans had stolen much of his personal property and fraudulently obtained and spent his military pension while he had been incarcerated . this resulted in a violent argument between the two men culminating in haarmann evicting grans . shortly thereafter , grans and a criminal acquaintance named hugo wittkowski returned and further ransacked the apartment . it is likely haarmann committed the murder of keimes in an attempt to frame grans in reprisal for the theft of his property and pension . haarmann was not tried for the murder of either koch or keimes . officially , both cases remain unsolved . monsters of weimar p . 101 . aftermath . following haarmann 's execution , sections of his brain were removed for forensic analysis . an examination of slices of haarmann 's brain revealed traces of meningitis , although no sections of haarmann 's brain were permanently preserved . nonetheless , haarmann 's head was preserved in formaldehyde and remained in the possession of the göttingen medical school from 1925 until 2014 , when it was cremated . the remains of haarmann 's victims which had been recovered were buried together in a communal grave in stöckener cemetery in february 1925 . in april 1928 , a large granite memorial in the form of a triptych , inscribed with the names and ages of the victims , was erected over the communal grave . spiegel.de . the discovery of a letter from haarmann declaring hans grans ' innocence subsequently led to grans receiving a second trial . this letter was dated 5 february 1925 , and was addressed to the father of grans . monsters of weimar p . 143 in this letter , haarmann claimed that although he had been frustrated at having been seen as little more than a '' meal ticket '' by grans , grans '' had absolutely no idea that i killed '' . furthermore , haarmann claimed many of his accusations against grans prior to his trial were obtained under extreme duress , and that he falsely accused grans of instigating the murders of hannappel and witzel as a means of revenge . haarmann claimed that his pastor would be informed as to the contents and the authenticity of the letter . monsters of weimar pp . 143-145 hans grans was retried in january 1926 . he was charged with aiding and abetting haarmann in the murders of victims adolf hannappel and fritz wittig . although grans stated in one address to the judge at this second trial that he expected to be acquitted , monsters of weimar p . 152 on 19 january , he was again found guilty of aiding and abetting haarmann in both cases , although in this instance , he was sentenced to two concurrent 12-year sentences . after serving this 12-year sentence , grans was extralegally interned in sachsenhausen concentration camp . following the conclusion of the second world war , he continued to live in hanover until his death in 1975 . the murders committed by haarmann stirred much discussion in germany regarding methods used in police investigation , the treatment of mentally ill offenders , and the validity of the death penalty . . however , the most heated topic of discussion in relation to the murders committed by haarmann were issues relating to the subject of homosexuality , which was then illegal and punishable by imprisonment in germany . the discovery of the murders subsequently stirred a wave of homophobia throughout germany , with one historian noting : '' it split the gay rights movement irreparably , fed every prejudice against homosexuality , and provided new fodder for conservative adversaries of legal sex reform . '' the pink triangle p . 45 . media . film . the first film to draw inspiration from the haarmann case , m , was released in 1931 . directed by fritz lang , m starred peter lorre as a fictional child killer named hans becker . in addition to drawing inspiration from the case of fritz haarmann , m was also inspired by the then-recent and notorious crimes of peter kürten and carl großmann . the film the tenderness of the wolves ( die zärtlichkeit der wölfe ) was directly based upon haarmann 's crimes . this film was released in july 1973 and was directed by ulli lommel . the tenderness of the wolves was both written by and starred kurt raab , who cast himself as fritz haarmann . german film director rainer werner fassbinder produced the film and also appeared in a minor role as haarmann 's criminal accomplice , hugo wittkowski . the most recent film to be directly based upon haarmann 's murder spree , deathmaker ( the deathmaker ) , was released in 1995 . this film starred götz george as haarmann . der totmacher focuses upon the written records of the psychiatric examinations of haarmann conducted by ernst schultze ; one of the main psychiatric experts who was to testify at haarmann 's 1924 trial . the plot of der totmacher revolves around haarmann 's interrogation after his arrest , as he is being interviewed by a court psychiatrist . horror international p . 68 the 2010 film cyrus : mind of a serial killer , written and directed by mark vadik , was loosely based on both haarmann and american serial killer henry lee lucas . . books . nigel cawthorne ; tibballs , geoffrey ( 1993 ) killers : the ruthless exponents of murder lane , brian ; gregg , wilfred ( 1992 ) the encyclopedia of serial killers theodor lessing ( 1925 ) monsters of weimar : haarmann , the story of a werewolf marriner , brian ( 1992 ) cannibalism : the last taboo ! colin wilson ; wilson , damon ( 2006 ) the world 's most evil murderers : real-life stories of infamous killers . see also . capital punishment in germany list of serial killers by country list of serial killers by number of victims weimar republic . notes . references . cited works and further reading . . external links . fritz haarmann at crimelibrary.com contemporary newspaper account pertaining to haarmann 's trial and conviction contemporary newspaper account detailing haarmann 's execution fritz haarmann 's entry at executedtoday.com image depicting haarmann 's severed head , preserved at göttingen medical school until its 2014 cremation