Thurstan

early life . thurstan was the son of a canon of st paul 's in london named anger , auger or ansgar , who held the prebend of cantlers . another son of anger , audoen , was later bishop of évreux . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066-1300 : volume 1 : st . paul 's , london : prebendaries : cantlers hollister henry i p . 242–244 spear '' norman empire and the secular clergy '' journal of british studies p . 5 keats-rohan domesday descendants p . 151 thurstan 's mother was named popelina . thurstan was born sometime about 1070 in bayeux , donald nicholl . thurstan : archbishop of york ( 1114 - 1140 ) . york : stonegate press , 1964 , p . iv . in the bessin region of normandy . before 1104 the father was given the prebend of cantlers by maurice , bishop of london , and the family moved to england . burton '' thurstan '' oxford dictionary of national biography early in his career , thurstan held the prebendary of the sokens in the diocese of london , greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066-1300 : volume 1 : st . paul 's , london : prebendaries : consumpta-per-mare and served both william rufus and henry i as a royal clerk . greenway british history online fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066-1300 : volume 6 : york : archbishops at some point in thurstan 's early career , he visited cluny , where he vowed to become a cluniac monk later in his life . thurstan also served henry as almoner , barlow english church p . 83 and it was henry who obtained thurstan 's election as archbishop of york in august 1114 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 281 he was ordained a deacon in december 1114 and ordained a priest on 6 june 1115 by ranulf flambard , who was bishop of durham . mason '' flambard , ranulf '' oxford dictionary of national biography . controversy and exile . the archbishop of canterbury , ralph d'escures , refused to consecrate thurstan unless the archbishop-elect made a profession of obedience to the southern see . this was part of the long-running canterbury-york dispute , which started in 1070 . barlow english church pp . 39–44 thurstan refused to make such a profession , bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 394 and asked the king for permission to go to rome to consult pope paschal ii . henry i refused to allow him to make the journey , but even without a personal appeal from thurstan , paschal decided against canterbury . at the council of salisbury in 1116 the english king ordered thurstan to submit to canterbury , but instead thurstan publicly resigned the archbishopric . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture pp . 305–309 on his way to the council , thurstan had received letters from paschal ii that supported york and commanded that he should be consecrated without a profession . similar letters had gone to ralph d'escures from the pope , ordering ralph , as archbishop of canterbury , to consecrate thurstan . after the news of the letters became public , thurstan 's resignation was ignored , and he continued to be considered the archbishop-elect . over the next three years , the new popes , gelasius ii and calixtus ii , championed thurstan 's case , and on 19 october 1119 he was consecrated by calixtus at reims . hollister henry i pp . 269–273 calixtus had earlier promised henry that he would not consecrate thurstan without the king 's permission , which had still not been granted . enraged at this , the king refused to allow the newly consecrated archbishop to enter england , and thurstan remained for some time on the continent in the company of the pope . while he was travelling with the pope , he also visited adela of blois , king henry 's sister , who was also thurstan 's spiritual daughter . at about this same time , calixtus issued two bulls in thurstan 's favor : one released york from canterbury 's supremacy forever , and the other demanded the king allow thurstan to return to york . the pope threatened an interdict on england as a punishment if the papal bull was not obeyed . at length , thurstan 's friends , including adela , succeeded in reconciling him with henry , and he rejoined the king in normandy . at easter 1120 , he escorted adela to the monastery of marcigny , where she retired from active secular affairs . loprete '' anglo-norman card '' albion p . 588 he was recalled to england in early 1121 . . archbishop . one of the main weaknesses of the see of york was its lack of suffragan bishops . rose '' cumbrian society '' studies in church history p . 124 thurstan managed to secure the resurrection of the bishop of galloway , or whithorn , in 1125 . it is possible that he compromised with fergus of galloway , who was the lord or sub-king of galloway , in what is now scotland . in this thurstan secured another suffragan , and fergus gained a bishop in his lordship , where previously ecclesiastical matters in his subkingdom had been handled by scottish bishops . the first bishop was the galwegian gaelic & nbsp ; – gille aldan . this provoked the wrath of wimund , who had previously had jurisdiction over galloway ; but the new bishopric survived , and york had a new suffragan , an important step in the battle between york and canterbury over the primacy , which was mainly a battle over the prestige of their respective sees . the number of bishops subject to either archbishop was an important factor in the reputation of each . barlow english church pp . 40–41 in 1133 , thurstan , who had received papal permission to found an entirely new diocese , consecrated æthelwold as the first bishop of the new see of carlisle . thurstan refused to accept that the new archbishop of canterbury , william de corbeil , was his superior , and did not help with william 's consecration . the dispute between the two continued , and both archbishops carried their complaints in person to rome twice . in 1126 , pope honorius ii ruled in favour of york . duggan '' from the conquest to the death of john '' english church and the papacy p . 98 the pope based his decision on the fact that canterbury 's supporting documents had been forged . poole domesday to magna carta p . 184 thurstan supported king stephen after henry i 's death in 1135 , and appeared at stephen 's first court at easter held at westminster . powell and wallis house of lords p . 64 thurstan negotiated a truce at roxburgh in 1138 between england and scotland . it was thurstan who mustered the army which defeated the scots at the battle of the standard on 22 august 1138 near northallerton . barlow feudal kingdom p . 211 huscroft ruling england p . 73 thurstan did not take direct part in the battle . , but he created the standard that gave the battle its name , by putting a ship 's mast in a cart and hanging the banners of saint peter of york , saint john of beverley , and saint wilfrid of ripon on the mast . the scots had invaded attempting to aid the empress matilda , the daughter of henry i and stephen 's rival for the throne . davis king stephen pp . 36–37 on 21 january 1140 thurstan resigned his see and entered the order of the cluniacs at pontefract and he died there on 6 february 1140 . he was buried in the church at pontefract . . legacy . thurstan gave land to many of the churches of his diocese and founded several religious houses . he founded the first abbey in yorkshire when he founded st clement 's between 1125 and 1133 . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 438 he obtained for whitby abbey a papal privilege of protection as well as giving his own privilege to the abbey . dawtry '' benedictine revival '' studies in church history 18 p . 91 he also helped found the cistercian fountains abbey , by giving the site to monks who had been expelled from the st mary 's abbey , york . burton monastic and religious orders p . 70 thurstan helped the hermitess christina of markyate at several points in her career , and tried to persuade her to become the first prioress of his foundation of st . clement's . barlow english church p . 203 he was a patron to the augustinian hexham abbey , founded by his predecessor at york , as well as helping the foundation of bridlington priory , another augustinian house . burton monastic and religious orders p . 48 he was a sincere reformer , and opposed to the election of unfit men to the episcopacy . when pope innocent ii asked thurstan 's opinion on the elevation of anselm of st saba , who was abbot of bury st . edmunds , to become bishop of london , thurstan replied '' if we consider his life and reputation , it would be much more fitting to remove him from his abbacy than to promote him to be bishop of london . '' appleby troubled reign pp . 106–107 anselm was not confirmed as bishop . thurstan 's nephew was osbert de bayeux , who became an archdeacon at york , and in 1154 was accused of the murder of william of york , one of thurstan 's successors at york . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 6 : york : archdeacons : richmond . notes . citations . references . . further reading .