Edible mushroom

history of mushroom use . mycophagy , the act of consuming mushrooms , dates back to ancient times . edible mushroom species have been found in association with 13,000-year-old archaeological sites in chile . ötzi , the mummy of a man who lived between 3400 and 3100 bce in europe , was found with two types of mushroom . the chinese value mushrooms for supposed medicinal properties as well as for food . ancient rome and greeks , particularly the upper classes , used mushrooms for culinary purposes . food tasters were employed by roman emperors to ensure that mushrooms were safe to eat . . current culinary use . commercially cultivated . mushroom cultivation has a long history , with over twenty species commercially cultivated . mushrooms are cultivated in at least 60 countries with china , the united states , poland , netherlands , and india being the top five producers in 2013 . a fraction of the many fungi consumed by humans are currently cultivated and sold commercially . commercial cultivation is important ecologically , as there have been concerns of depletion of larger fungi such as chanterelles in europe , possibly because the group has grown popular , yet remains a challenge to cultivate . agaricus bisporus dominates the edible mushroom market in north america and europe , in several forms . it is an edible basidiomycete mushroom native to grasslands in europe and north america . as it ages , this mushroom turns from small , white and smooth to large and light brown . in its youngest form , it is known as the 'common mushroom ' , 'button mushroom ' , 'cultivated mushroom ' , and 'champignon mushroom ' . its fully mature form is known as 'portobello ' . its semi-mature form is known variously as 'cremini ' , 'baby-bella ' , 'swiss brown ' mushroom , 'roman brown ' mushroom , 'italian brown ' mushroom , or 'chestnut ' mushroom . pleurotus species are commonly grown at industrial scale . lentinula edodes , the shiitake mushroom auricularia auricula-judae , the jew 's ear , wood ear or jelly ear mushroom volvariella volvacea , the paddy straw mushroom or straw mushroom flammulina velutipes , the enoki mushroom , golden needle mushroom , seafood mushroom , lily mushroom , winter mushroom , velvet foot , velvet shank or velvet stem tremella fuciformis , the snow fungus , snow ear , silver ear fungus and white jelly mushroom hypsizygus tessellatus , aka hypsizygus marmoreus , the beech mushroom , also known in its white and brown varieties as bunapi-shimeji and buna-shimeji , respectively stropharia rugosoannulata , the wine cap mushroom , burgundy mushroom , garden giant mushroom or king stropharia cyclocybe aegerita , the pioppino , velvet pioppini , poplar or black poplar mushroom hericium erinaceus , the lion 's mane , monkey head , bearded tooth , satyr 's beard , bearded hedgehog , or pom pom mushroom . commercially harvested wild edibles . some species are difficult to cultivate ; others ( particularly mycorrhizal species ) have not yet been successfully cultivated . some of these species are harvested from the wild , and can be found in markets . when in season they can be purchased fresh , and many species are sold dried as well . the following species are commonly harvested from the wild : boletus edulis or edible boletus , native to europe , known in italian as fungo porcino ( plural 'porcini ' ) ( pig mushroom ) , in german as steinpilz ( stone mushroom ) , in russian as ( white mushroom ) , in albanian as ( wolf mushroom ) , in french as the cèpe and in the uk as the penny bun . it is also known as the king bolete , and is renowned for its delicious flavor . it is sought after worldwide , and can be found in a variety of culinary dishes . calbovista subsculpta commonly known as the sculptured giant puffball is a common puffball of the rocky mountains and pacific coast ranges of western north america . the puffball is more or less round with a diameter of up to , white becoming brownish in age , and covered with shallow pyramid-shaped plates or scales . it fruits singly or in groups along roads and in open woods at high elevations , from summer to autumn . it is considered a choice edible species while its interior flesh ( the gleba ) is still firm and white . as the puffball matures , its insides become dark brown and powdery from mature spores . calvatia gigantea the giant puffball . giant puffballs are considered a choice edible species and are commonly found in meadows , fields , and deciduous forests usually in late summer and autumn . it is found in temperate areas throughout the world . they can reach diameters up to and weights of . the inside of mature giant puffballs is greenish brown , whereas the interior of immature puffballs is white . the large white mushrooms are edible when young . cantharellus cibarius ( the chanterelle ) , the yellow chanterelle is one of the best and most easily recognizable mushrooms , and can be found in asia , europe , north america and australia . there are poisonous mushrooms which resemble it , though these can be confidently distinguished if one is familiar with the chanterelle 's identifying features . craterellus tubaeformis , the tube chanterelle , yellowfoot chanterelle or yellow-leg clitocybe nuda , blewit ( or blewitt ) cortinarius caperatus , the gypsy mushroom craterellus cornucopioides , trompette de la mort ( trumpet of death ) or horn of plenty grifola frondosa , known in japan as maitake ( also '' hen of the woods '' or '' sheep ’ s head '' ) , a large , hearty mushroom commonly found on or near stumps and bases of oak trees , and believed to have macrolepiota procera properties . gyromitra esculenta ( the false morel ) is prized by the finns . this mushroom is deadly poisonous if eaten raw , but highly regarded when parboiled ( see below ) . hericium erinaceus , a tooth fungus ; also called '' lion 's mane mushroom '' hydnum repandum , sweet tooth fungus , hedgehog mushroom or hedgehog fungus , urchin of the woods lactarius deliciosus , saffron milk cap , consumed around the world and prized in russia morchella species , ( morel family ) morels belong to the ascomycete grouping of fungi . they are usually found in open scrub , woodland or open ground in late spring . when collecting this fungus , care must be taken to distinguish it from the poisonous false morels , including gyromitra esculenta . the morel must be cooked before eating . morchella conica var . deliciosa morchella esculenta var . rotunda pleurotus species are sometimes commercially harvested despite ease of cultivation . tricholoma matsutake , the matsutake , a mushroom highly prized in japanese cuisine . tuber , species , ( the truffle ) , truffles have long eluded the modern techniques of domestication known as trufficulture . although the field of trufficulture has greatly expanded since its inception in 1808 , several species still remain uncultivated . domesticated truffles include tuber aestivum , black summer truffle tuber borchii tuber brumale tuber indicum , chinese black truffle tuber macrosporum , smooth black truffle tuber mesentericum , the bagnoli truffle t . mesenterium was first reported in great britain after the wet august 2008 : file : chanterelle cantharellus cibarius.jpg chanterelles in the wild file : steinpilz 2006 08 3.jpg a collection of boletus edulis of varying ages file : dsc04896-hydnum-coralloides.jpg hericium coralloides file : lepista nuda.jpg clitocybe nuda file : tuber brumale - vue sur la tranche coupée.jpg black périgord truffle , cut in half . other edible wild species . many wild species are consumed around the world . the species which can be identified '' in the field '' ( without use of special chemistry or a microscope ) and therefore safely eaten vary widely from country to country , even from region to region . this list is a sampling of lesser-known species that are reported as edible . agaricus arvensis ( horse mushroom ) agaricus silvaticus ( pinewood mushroom ) amanita caesarea ( caesar 's mushroom ) armillaria mellea ( honey mushroom ) boletus badius ( bay bolete ) calocybe gambosa ( st george 's mushroom ) calvatia utriformis ( lycoperdon caelatum ) chroogomphus species ( pine-spikes or spike-caps ) clavariaceae species ( coral fungus family ) clavulinaceae species ( coral fungus family ) coprinus comatus , the shaggy mane , shaggy inkcap or lawyer 's wig . must be cooked as soon as possible after harvesting or the caps will first turn dark and unappetizing , then deliquesce and turn to ink . not found in markets for this reason . corn smut economically important pathogens of cereals . known in mexico as huitlacoche , where it is considered a delicacy . corn smuts can be used as filings in quesadillas , tacos and soups . cortinarius variicolor cyttaria espinosae fistulina hepatica ( beefsteak polypore or the ox tongue ) flammulina velutipes ( velvet shank or winter fungus ) hygrophorus chrysodon kalaharituber pfeilii lactarius deterrimus ( orange milkcap ) lactarius salmonicolor lactarius subdulcis ( mild milkcap ) lactarius volemus ( fishy milkcap ) . also known as '' weeping milkcap '' . laetiporus sulphureus ( sulphur shelf ) . also known by names such as the '' chicken mushroom '' , '' chicken fungus '' , the sulphur shelf is a distinct bracket fungus popular among mushroom hunters . leccinum aurantiacum ( red-capped scaber stalk ) leccinum scabrum ( birch bolete ) leccinum versipelle ( orange birch bolete / boletus testaceoscaber ) macrolepiota procera ( parasol mushroom ) ; globally , it is widespread in temperate regions marasmius oreades ( fairy ring champignon ) polyporus mylittae polyporus squamosus ( dryad 's saddle and pheasant 's back mushroom ) ramariaceae species ( coral fungus family ) rhizopogon luteolus russula , some members of this genus , such as r . laeta , are edible sparassis crispa , also known as '' cauliflower mushroom '' suillus bovinus suillus granulatus ( weeping bolete ) . also known as '' granulated bolete '' . suillus luteus ( slippery jack ) suillus tomentosus tricholoma terreum . conditionally-edible species . amanita fulva ( tawny grisette ) must be cooked before eating . amanita muscaria is edible if parboiled to leach out toxins , fresh mushrooms cause vomiting , twitching , drowsiness , and hallucinations due to the presence of muscimol . although present in a . muscaria , ibotenic acid is not in high enough concentration to produce any physical or psychological effects unless massive amounts are ingested . amanita rubescens ( the blusher ) must be cooked before eating . coprinopsis atramentaria ( coprinus atramentarius - common inkcap ) is edible without special preparation , however , consumption with alcohol is toxic due to the presence of coprine . some other coprinus spp . share this property . gyromitra esculenta ( false morel - turban , brain mushroom ) is eaten by some after it has been parboiled , however , many mycologists do not recommend it . raw gyromitra are toxic due to the presence of gyromitrin , and it is not known whether all of the toxin can be removed by parboiling . lactarius spp . apart from lactarius deliciosus ( saffron milkcap ) , which is universally considered edible , other lactarius spp . that are considered toxic elsewhere in the world are eaten in some eastern european countries and russia after pickling or parboiling . arora , david . mushrooms demystified , 2nd ed . ten speed press , 1986 lepista saeva ( field blewit , blue leg , or tricholoma personatum ) must be cooked before eating . morchella esculenta ( morel ) must be cooked before eating . verpa bohemica is considered choice by some—it even can be found for sale as a '' morel '' —but cases of toxicity have been reported . verpas appear to contain monomethylhydrazine fda import alert ia2502 and similar precautions apply to them as gyromitra species . nutrients . a commonly eaten mushroom is the white mushroom ( agaricus bisporus ) . in a reference serving , agaricus mushrooms provide of food energy and are 92 % water , 3 % carbohydrates , 3 % protein , and 0.3 % fat ( table ) . they contain high levels ( 20 % or more of the daily value , dv ) of riboflavin , niacin , and pantothenic acid ( 24–33 % dv ) , with moderate content of phosphorus ( table ) . otherwise , raw white mushrooms generally have low amounts of essential nutrients ( table ) . although cooking ( by boiling ) lowers mushroom water content only 1 % , the contents per 100 grams for several nutrients increase appreciably , especially for dietary minerals ( table for boiled mushrooms ) . the content of vitamin d is absent or low unless mushrooms are exposed to sunlight or purposely treated with artificial ultraviolet light ( see below ) , even after harvesting and processed into dry powder . . vitamin d . mushrooms exposed to ultraviolet ( uv ) light produce vitamin d2 before or after harvest by converting ergosterol , a chemical found in large concentrations in mushrooms , to vitamin d 2 . this is similar to the reaction in humans , where cholecalciferol is synthesized after exposure to sunlight . testing showed an hour of uv light exposure before harvesting made a serving of mushrooms contain twice the u.s . food and drug administration 's daily recommendation of vitamin d , and 5 minutes of artificial uv light exposure after harvesting made a serving of mushrooms contain four times the fda 's daily recommendation of vitamin d . analysis also demonstrated that natural sunlight produced vitamin d 2 . the ergocalciferol , vitamin d 2 , in uv-irradiated mushrooms is not the same vitamin d synthesis mechanism ( form 3 ) or animal skin , fur , or feathers ( cholecalciferol , vitamin d 3 ) . although vitamin d 2 clearly has vitamin d activity in humans and is widely used in food fortification and in dietary supplement , vitamin d 3 is more commonly used in dairy and cereal products .