Campfire

history . first campfire . a new analysis of burned antelope bones from caves in swartkrans , south africa , confirms that australopithecus robustus and homo erectus built campfires roughly 1.6 million years ago . nearby evidence within wonderwerk cave , at the edge of the kalahari desert , has been called the oldest known controlled fire . microscopic analysis of plant ash and charred bone fragments suggests that materials in the cave were not heated above about . this is consistent with preliminary findings that the fires burned grasses , brush , and leaves . such fuel would not produce hotter flames . the data suggests humans were cooking prey by campfire as far back as the first appearance of homo erectus 1.9 million years ago . . safety . finding a site . ideally , campfires should be made in a fire ring . if a fire ring is not available , a temporary fire site may be constructed . bare rock or unvegetated ground is ideal for a fire site . alternatively , turf may be cut away to form a bare area and carefully replaced after the fire has cooled to minimize damage . another way is to cover the ground with sand , or other soil mostly free of flammable organic material , to a depth of a few inches . a ring of rocks is sometimes constructed around a fire . fire rings , however , do not fully protect material on the ground from catching fire . flying embers are still a threat , and the fire ring may become hot enough to ignite material in contact with it , or the heat the water to a vapor thereby cracking the rocks . . safety measures . campfires can spark wildfires . as such , it is important for the fire builder to take multiple safety precautions , including : avoiding building campfires under hanging branches or over steep slopes , and clear a ten-foot diameter circle around the fire of all flammable debris . '' campfire safety . '' usda forest service . accessed august 2011 . having enough water nearby and a shovel to smother an out-of-control fire with dirt . minimizing the size of the fire to prevent problems from occurring . never leaving a campfire unattended . when extinguishing a campfire , using plenty of water or dirt , then stirring the mixture and add more water , then check that there are no burning embers left whatsoever . never bury hot coals , as they can continue to burn and cause root fires or wildfires . be aware of roots if digging a hole for your fire . making sure the fire pit is large enough for the campfire and there are no combustibles near the campfire , and avoiding the construction of the campfire on a windy day . . types of fuel . there are , by conventional classification , three types of material involved in building a fire without manufactured fuels or modern conveniences such as lighters . tinder lights easily and is used to start an enduring campfire . it is anything that can be lit with a spark and is usually classified as being thinner than your little finger . the tinder of choice before matches and lighters was amadou next to flint and steel . a few decent natural tinders are cotton , birch bark , cedar bark , and fatwood , where available ; followed by dead , dry pine needles or grass ; a more comprehensive list is given in the article on tinder . though not natural steel wool make excellent tinder and can be started with steel and flint , or a 9 volt battery without difficulty . kindling wood is an arbitrary classification including anything bigger than tinder but smaller than fuel wood . in fact , there are gradations of kindling , from sticks thinner than a finger to those as thick as a wrist . a quantity of kindling sufficient to fill a hat may be enough , but more is better . a faggot is a related term indicating a bundle of small branches used to feed a small fire or continue developing a bigger fire out of a small one . fuel wood can be different types of timber . timber ranges from small logs two or three inches ( 76 & nbsp ; mm ) across to larger logs that can burn for hours . it is typically difficult to gather without a hatchet or other cutting tool . in heavily used campsites , fuel wood can be hard to find , so it may have to purchased at a nearby store or be brought from home . however , untreated wood should not be transported due to the probability that invasive species of bugs will be transported with it . heat-treated wood such as kiln-dried lumber is safe to transport . in the united states , areas that allow camping , like state parks and national parks , often let campers collect firewood lying on the ground . some parks do not do this for various reasons , e.g . if they have erosion problems from campgrounds near dunes . parks almost always forbid cutting living trees , and may also prohibit collecting dead parts of standing trees . in most realistic cases nowadays , non-natural additions to the fuels mentioned above will be used . often , charcoal lighters like hexamine fuel tablets or ethyl alcohol will be used to start the fire , as well as various types of scrap paper . with the proliferation of packaged food , it is quite likely that plastics will be incinerated as well , a practice that not only produces toxic smoke but will also leave polluted ashes behind because of incomplete combustion at too-low open fire temperatures . construction styles . there are a variety of designs to choose from in building a campfire . a functional design is important in the early stages of a fire . most of them make no mention of fuelwood—in most designs , fuelwood is never placed on a fire until the kindling is burning strongly . teepee . the tipi ( or teepee ) fire-build takes some patience to construct . first , the tinder is piled up in a compact heap . the smaller kindling is arranged around it , like the poles of a tipi . for added strength , it may be possible to lash some of the sticks together . a tripod lashing is quite difficult to execute with small sticks , so a clove hitch should suffice . ( synthetic rope should be avoided since it produces pollutants when it burns . ) then the larger kindling is arranged above the smaller kindling , taking care not to collapse the tipi . a separate tipi as a shell around the first one may work better . tipi fires are excellent for producing heat to keep people warm . the gases from the bottom quickly come to the top as you add more sticks . one downside to a tipi fire is that when it burns , the logs become unstable and can fall over . this is especially concerning with a large fire . log cabin . a log cabin fire-build likewise begins with a tinder pile . the kindling is then stacked around it , as in the construction of a log cabin . the first two kindling sticks are laid parallel to each other , on opposite sides of the tinder pile . the second pair is laid on top of the first , at right angles to it , and also on opposite sides of the tinder . more kindling is added in the same manner . the smallest kindling is placed over the top of the assembly . of all the fire-builds , the log cabin is the least vulnerable to premature collapse , but it is also inefficient because it makes the worst use of convection to ignite progressively larger pieces of fuel . however , these qualities make the log cabin an ideal cooking fire as it burns for a long period of time and can support cookware . a variation on the log cabin starts with two pieces of fuelwood with a pile of tinder between them , and small kindling laid over the tops of the logs , above the tinder . the tinder is lit , and the kindling is allowed to catch fire . when it is burning briskly , it is broken and pushed down into the consumed tinder , and the larger kindling is placed over the top of the logs . when that is burning well , it is also pushed down . eventually , a pile of kindling burns between two pieces of fuelwood , and soon the logs catch fire from it . another variation is called the funeral pyre method because it is used for building funeral pyres . its main difference from the standard log cabin is that it starts with thin pieces and moves up to thick pieces . if built on a large scale , this type of fire-build collapses in a controlled manner without restricting the airflow . hybrid . a hybrid fire combines the elements of both the tipi and the log cabin creating an easily lit yet stable fire structure . the hybrid is made by first erecting a small tipi and then proceeding to construct a log cabin around it . this fire structure combines benefits of both fire types : the tipi allows the fire to ignite easily and the log cabin sustains the fire for a long time . cross-fire . a cross-fire is built by positioning two pieces of wood with the tinder in between . once the fire is burning well , additional pieces of wood are placed on top in layers that alternate directions . this type of fire creates coals suitable for cooking . lean-to . a lean-to fire-build starts with the same pile of tinder as the tipi fire-build . then , a long , thick piece of kindling is driven into the ground at an angle , so that it overhangs the tinder pile . the smaller pieces of kindling are leaned against the big stick so that the tinder is enclosed between them . in an alternative method , a large piece of fuelwood or log can be placed on the ground next to the tinder pile . then kindling is placed with one end propped up by the larger piece of fuelwood , and the other resting on the ground so that the kindling is leaning over the tinder pile . this method is useful in very high winds , as the piece of fuel wood acts as a windbreak . rakovalkea . the traditional finland rakovalkea , or nying in scandinavian languages , also called by english terms long log fire or gap fire , is constructed by placing one long and thick piece of fuelwood ( log ) atop another , parallel , and bolstering them in place with four sturdy posts driven into the ground . traditionally , whole un-split tree trunks provide the fuelwood . kindling and tinder are placed between the logs in sufficient quantity ( while avoiding the very ends ) to raise the upper log and allow ventilation . the tinder is always lit at the center so the bolstering posts near the ends do not burn prematurely . the rakovalkea has two significant features . first , it burns slowly but steadily when lit ; it does not require arduous maintenance , but burns for a very long time . a well constructed rakovalkea of two thick logs of two meters in length can warm two lean-to shelters for a whole sleeping shift . the construction causes the logs themselves to protect the fire from the wind . thus , exposure to smoke is unlikely for the sleepers ; nevertheless someone should always watch in case of an emergency . second , it can be easily scaled to larger sizes ( for a feast ) limited only by the length of available tree trunks . the arrangement is also useful as beacon fire , i.e . a temporary light signal for ships far in the sea . swedish torch . the swedish torch ( schwedenfackel or schwedenfeuer ) is also known by other names , including swedish ( log ) candle , and swedish log stove . this fire is unique because it uses only one piece of fair-sized wood as its fuel . the log is either cut ( usually only partially , but other variants do include totally splitting ) and then set upright ( ideally , the log needs to be cut evenly and on a level surface for stability ) . tinder and kindling are added to the preformed chamber , from the initial cuts . eventually , the fire is self-feeding . the flat , circular top provides a surface to place a kettle , or pan for cooking , boiling liquids , etc . the elevated position of the fire can serve as a better beacon than the typical ground-based campfire in some instances . . keyhole fire . a keyhole fire is made in a keyhole-shaped fire ring , and is used in cooking . the large round area is used to build a fire to create coals . as coals develop , they are scraped into the rectangular area used for cooking . top lighter . a '' top lighter '' fire is built similar to a log cabin or pyre , but instead of the tinder and kindling being placed inside the cabin , it is placed in a tipi on top . the small tipi is lighted on top , and the coals eventually fall down into the log cabin . outdoor youth organizations often build these fires for '' council fires '' or ceremonial fires . they burn predictably , and with some practice a builder can estimate how long they will last . they also do not throw off much heat , which is n't needed for a ceremonial fire . the fire burns from the top down , with the layer of hot coals and burning stubs igniting the next layer down . another variation to the top lighter , log cabin , or pyre is known by several names , most notably the pyramid , self-feeding , and upside-down method . the reasoning for this method are twofold . first , the layers of fuelwood take in the heat from the initial tinder/kindling , therefore , it is not lost to the surrounding ground . in effect , the fire is '' off the ground '' , and burns its way down through its course . and secondly , this fire type requires minimal labor , thereby making it ideal as a fire of choice before bedding down for the evening without having to get up periodically to add fuelwood and/or stoke the fire to keep it going . start by adding the largest fuelwood in a parallel '' layer '' , then continue to add increasingly smaller and smaller fuelwood layers perpendicularly to the last layer . once enough wood is piled , there should be a decent '' platform '' to make the tipi tinder/kindling to initiate the fire . . dakota smokeless pit fire . dakota smokeless pit fire is a tactical fire used by the united states military as the flame produces a low light signature , reduced smoke , and is easier to ignite under strong wind conditions . two small holes are dug in the ground : one vertical for the firewood and the other slanted to the bottom of the first hole to provide a draft of air for nearly complete combustion . optional are flat stones to partially cover the first hole and provide support for cookery , and a tree over the pits to disperse the smoke . star fire . a star fire , or indian fire , is the fire design often depicted as the campfire of the old west . someone lays six or so logs out like the spokes of a wheel ( star-shaped ) . they start the fire at the '' hub , '' and push each log towards the center as the flames consume the ends . . ignition . once the fire is built , the tinder is lighted , using one of several methods smoking black powder produced by friction between a stick , or bow drill , or pump drill and a hole or crack on dry wood , a magnifying glass focusing sunlight , smoking material produced by a fire piston , smoking black powder produced by a bamboo fire saw smoking material produced by a fire roll ( small amount of cotton mixed with ash or iron rust , rolled vigorously between two flat stones or planks , until it starts smoking ) , smoking material produced by a piece of flint or ferro-rod struck against steel over amadou or other initial tinder , or an combustion , such as a match or a lighter . a reasonably skilful fire-builder using reasonably good material only needs one match . the tinder burns brightly , but reduced to glowing embers within half a minute . if the kindling does not catch fire , the fire-builder must gather more tinder , determine what went wrong and try to fix it . one of five problems can prevent a fire from lighting properly : wet wood , wet weather , too little tinder , too much wind , or a lack of oxygen . rain will douse a fire , but a combination of wind and fog also has a stifling effect . metal fire rings generally do a good job of keeping out wind , but some of them are so high as to impede the circulation of oxygen in a small fire . to make matters worse , these tall fire rings also make it very difficult to blow on the fire properly . a small , enclosed fire that has slowed down may require vigorous blowing to get it going again , but excess blowing can extinguish a fire . most large fires easily create their own circulation , even in unfavourable conditions , but the variant log-cabin fire-build suffers from a chronic lack of air so long as the initial structure is maintained . once large kindling is burning , all kindling is placed in the fire , then the fuel wood is placed on top of it ( unless , as in the rakovalkea fire-build , it is already there ) . activities . campfires have been used for cooking since time immemorial . possibly the simplest method of cooking over a campfire and one of the most common is to roast food on long skewers that can be held above red glowing embers , or on the side near the flames ( not over flames in order to avoid sot and burnt food ) . this is a popular technique for cooking hot dogs or toasting marshmallows for making s'mores . this type of cooking over the fire typically consists of comfort foods that are easy to prepare . there is also no clean up involved unlike an actual kitchen . another technique is to use pie irons—small iron molds with long handles . campers put slices of bread with some kind of filling into the molds and put them over hot coals to cook . campers sometimes use elaborate grills , cast iron pots , and fire irons to cook . often , however , they use portable stoves for cooking instead of campfires . other practical , though not commonly needed , applications for campfires include drying wet clothing , alleviating hypothermia , and distress signaling . most campfires , though , are exclusively for recreation , often as a venue for conversation , storytelling , or song . another traditional campfire activity involves impaling marshmallows on sticks or uncoiled wire coat hangers , and roasting them over the fire . roasted marshmallows may also be used for s'mores . dangers . beside the danger of people receiving burns from the fire or embers , campfires may spread into a larger fire . a campfire may burn out of control in two basic ways : on the ground or in the trees . dead leaf or pine needles on the ground may ignite from direct contact with burning wood , or from thermal radiation . if a root , particularly a dead one , is exposed to fire , it may smoulder underground and ignite the parent tree long after the original fire is doused and the campers have left the area . alternatively , airborne embers ( or their smaller kin , ember ) may ignite dead material in overhanging branches . this latter threat is less likely , but a fire in a branch is extremely difficult to put out without firefighting equipment , and may spread more quickly than a ground fire . embers may simply fall off logs and float away in the air , or exploding pockets of sap may eject them at high speed . with these dangers in mind , some places prohibit all open fires , particularly at times prone to wildfires . many public camping areas prohibit campfires . public areas with large tracts of woodland usually have signs that indicate the fire danger level , which usually depends on recent rain and the amount of deadfall or dry debris . even in safer times , it is common to require registration and permits to build a campfire . such areas are often kept under observation by rangers , who will dispatch someone to investigate any unidentified plume of smoke . extinguishing the fire . leaving a fire unattended can be dangerous . any number of accidents might occur in the absence of people , leading to property damage , personal injury or possibly a wildfire . ash is a good insulator , so embers left overnight only lose a fraction of their heat . it is often possible to restart the new day 's fire using the embers . to properly cool a fire , water is splashed on all embers , including places that are not glowing red . splashing the water is both more effective and efficient in extinguishing the fire . the water boils violently and carries ash in the air with it , dirtying anything nearby but not posing a safety hazard . water is continuously poured until the hissing stops , then the ashes are stirred to ensure that water reaches the entire fire , and more water is added if necessary . when the fire is fully extinguished , the ashes are cool to the touch . if water is scarce , sand is used to deprive the fire of oxygen . sand works well , but is less effective than water at absorbing heat . once the fire is covered thoroughly with sand , water is then added over the fire . when winter or '' snow '' camping with an inch or more of snow on the ground , neither of the above protocols are necessary—simply douse visible flames before leaving . in lightly used wilderness areas , the area around the campfire is cleaned up to make it look untouched after the fire is extinguished . campfire ashes are sometimes used in ceremonies like the campfire ash ceremony . gallery . file : campfire.webm 2017 - camp fire conducted at kv kanhangad in connection with scout guides camp file : dakota_fire_hole.jpg dakota smokeless pit fire file : fire and ashes.jpg campfire file:29rccmak_-_campfire_at_base_camp_susunia_hill.jpg campfire at base camp susunia hill , bankura , wb , india file:29rccmak_-_campfire_at_susunia_base_camp.jpg campfire at basecamp file : fire starting with torch.jpg fire starting with a torch . wood and cardboard are used as tinder file : scoutcampfire.jpg a campfire that seems to produce sparks , due to a long exposure when photographed . file : pancho villa expedition - around the campfire hd-sn-99-02005.jpeg members of the united states army 16th infantry regiment gathered around a campfire in 1916 during the pancho villa expedition file : campfire in tennessee.jpg sparks from campfire file : campfire at night.jpg campfire file : babur and companions warming themselves before a camp fire.jpg the first mughal emperor babur and his servicemen warming themselves before a campfire . file:4 geralt.jpg rock-opera of group '' esse '' - '' road without return '' , based on the saga of andrzej sapkowski - '' the witcher '' . illustration for scene 4 - '' geralt '' . autor - ekaterina kozlovskaya . see also . camping campfire story colored fire fire pan outdoor cooking . references . external links .