Fish migration

classification . as with various other aspects of fish life , zoologists have developed empirical classifications for fish migrations . two terms in particular have been in long-standing wide usage : anadromous fish migrate from the sea up ( greek : ἀνά aná , '' up '' and δρόμος drómos , '' course '' ) into fresh water to spawn , such as salmon , striped bass , moyle , p.b . 2004 . fishes : an introduction to ichthyology . pearson benjamin cummings , san francisco , ca . and the sea lamprey silva , s . , araújo , m . j . , bao , m . , mucientes , g . , & cobo , f . ( 2014 ) . the haematophagous feeding stage of anadromous populations of sea lamprey petromyzon marinus : low host selectivity and wide range of habitats . hydrobiologia , 734 ( 1 ) , 187-199 . catadromous fish migrate from fresh water down ( greek : κατά kata , '' down '' and δρόμος dromos , '' course '' ) into the sea to spawn , such as eels tyus , h.m . 2012 . ecology and conservation of fishes . taylor and francis group , crc press , boca raton , london , new york . diadromous , amphidromous , potamodromous , oceanodromous . in a 1949 journal article , george s . myers coined the inclusive term diadromous to refer to all fish that migrate between the sea and fresh water . like the two well known terms , it was formed from classical greek ( dia , '' through '' ; and dromous , '' running '' ) . diadromous proved a useful word , but terms proposed by myers for other types of diadromous fish did not catch on . these included amphidromous ( fish that migrate from fresh water to the seas , or vice versa , but not for the purpose of breeding ) , potamodromous ( fish whose migrations occur wholly within fresh water ) , and oceanodromous ( fish that live and migrate wholly in the sea ) . although these classifications were originated for fish , they are , in principle , applicable to any aquatic organism . forage fish . image : capelin-iceland.svg thumb right migration of icelandic capelin forage fish often make great migrations between their spawning , feeding and nursery grounds . schools of a particular stock usually travel in a triangle between these grounds . for example , one stock of herrings have their spawning ground in southern norway , their feeding ground in iceland , and their nursery ground in northern norway . wide triangular journeys such as these may be important because forage fish , when feeding , can not distinguish their own offspring . capelin are a forage fish of the smelt family found in the atlantic and arctic oceans . in summer , they graze on dense swarms of plankton at the edge of the ice shelf . larger capelin also eat krill and other crustaceans . the capelin move inshore in large schools to spawn and migrate in spring and summer to feed in plankton rich areas between iceland , greenland , and jan mayen . the migration is affected by ocean currents . around iceland maturing capelin make large northward feeding migrations in spring and summer . the return migration takes place in september to november . the spawning migration starts north of iceland in december or january . the diagram on the right shows the main spawning grounds and larval drift routes . capelin on the way to feeding grounds is coloured green , capelin on the way back is blue , and the breeding grounds are red . in a paper published in 2009 , researchers from iceland recount their application of an interacting particle model to the capelin stock around iceland , successfully predicting the spawning migration route for 2008 . barbaro1 a , einarsson b , birnir1 b , sigurðsson s , valdimarsson s , pálsson ók , sveinbjörnsson s and sigurðsson p ( 2009 ) '' modelling and simulations of the migration of pelagic fish '' journal of marine science , 66 ( 5 ) :826-838 . . highly migratory species . the term highly migratory species ( hms ) has its origins in article 64 of the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) . the convention does not provide an operational definition of the term , but in an annex ( unclos annex 1 ) lists the species considered highly migratory by parties to the convention . united nations convention on the law of the sea : text the list includes : tuna and tuna-like species ( albacore , bluefin , bigeye tuna , skipjack , yellowfin , blackfin , little tunny , southern bluefin and bullet ) , pomfret , marlin , sailfish , swordfish , saury and oceangoing sharks , dolphins and other cetaceans . these high trophic level oceanodromous species undertake migrations of significant but variable distances across oceans for feeding , often on forage fish , or reproduction , and also have wide geographic distributions . thus , these species are found both inside the 200 mile exclusive economic zones and in the high seas outside these zones . they are pelagic species , which means they mostly live in the open ocean and do not live near the sea floor , although they may spend part of their life cycle in nearshore waters . pacific fishery management council : background : highly migratory species highly migratory species can be compared with straddling stock and transboundary stock . straddling stock range both within an eez as well as in the high seas . transboundary stock range in the eezs of at least two countries . a stock can be both transboundary and straddling . fao ( 2007 ) ftp : //ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/i0150e/i0150e00.pdf report of the fao workshop on vulnerable ecosystems and destructive fishing in deep sea fisheries rome , fisheries report no . 829 . it can be challenging to determine the population structure of highly migratory species using physical tagging . traditional genetic markers such as short-range pcr products , microsatellites and snp-arrays have struggled to identify population structure and distinguish fish stocks from separate ocean basins . however , population genomic research using rad sequencing in yellowfin tuna and albacore has been able to distinguish populations from different ocean basins and reveal fine-scale population structure . similar population genomics methods have also provided improved insight towards population structure in striped marlin . . other examples . some of the best-known anadromous fishes are the pacific salmon species , such as chinook ( king ) , coho ( silver ) , chum ( dog ) , pink ( humpback ) and sockeye ( red ) salmon . these salmon hatch in small freshwater streams . from there they migrate to the sea to mature , living there for two to six years . when mature , the salmon return to the same streams where they were hatched to spawn . salmon are capable of going hundreds of kilometers upriver , and humans must install fish ladders in dams to enable the salmon to get past . other examples of anadromous fishes are sea trout , three-spined stickleback , sea lamprey and shad . several pacific salmon ( chinook , coho and steelhead ) have been introduced into the us great lakes , and have become potamodromous , migrating between their natal waters to feeding grounds entirely within fresh water . eel life history are made by freshwater eels . examples are the american eel and the european eel which migrate huge distances from freshwater rivers to spawn in the sargasso sea , and whose subsequent larvae can drift in currents for months and even years before returning to their natal rivers and streams as glass eels or elvers . an example of a euryhaline species is the bull shark , which lives in lake nicaragua of central america and the zambezi of africa . both these habitats are fresh water , yet bull sharks will also migrate to and from the ocean . specifically , lake nicaragua bull sharks migrate to the atlantic ocean and zambezi bull sharks migrate to the indian ocean . diel vertical migration is a common behavior ; many marine species move to the surface at night to feed , then return to the depths during daytime . a number of large marine fishes , such as the tuna , migrate north and south annually , following temperature variations in the ocean . these are of great importance to fishery . freshwater ( potamodromous ) fish migrations are usually shorter , typically from lake to stream or vice versa , for spawning purposes . however , potamodromous migrations of the endangered colorado pikeminnow of the colorado river system can be extensive . migrations to natal spawning grounds can easily be 100 & nbsp ; km , with maximum distances of 300 & nbsp ; km reported from radiotagging studies . lucas , m.c . , and e . baras . ( 2001 ) migration of freshwater fishes . blackwell science ltd . , malden , ma colorado pikeminnow migrations also display a high degree of homing and the fish may make upstream or downstream migrations to reach very specific spawning locations in whitewater canyons . tyus , h.m . 2012 . ecology and conservation of fishes . taylor and francis group , crc press , boca raton , london , new york . sometimes fish can be dispersed by birds that eat fish eggs . they carry eggs in the digestive tracts and then deposit them in their faeces in a new place . the survival rate for fish eggs that have passed through a bird 's digestive tract is low . . historic exploitation . since prehistoric times humans have exploited certain anadromous fishes during their migrations into freshwater streams , when they are more vulnerable to capture . societies dating to the millingstone horizon are known which exploited the anadromous fishery of morro creek c.m . hogan , 2008 and other pacific ocean estuary . in nevada the paiute tribe has harvested migrating lahontan cutthroat trout along the truckee river since prehistoric times . this fishing practice continues to current times , and the u.s . environmental protection agency has supported research to assure the water quality in the truckee can support suitable populations of the lahontan cutthroat trout . myxovirus genes . because salmonids live an anadromous lifestyle , they encounter a larger range of viruses from both freshwater and marine ecosystems . myxovirus resistance ( mx ) proteins are part of a gtpase family that aid in viral immunity , and previously , rainbow trout ( rainbow trout ) have been shown to possess three different mx genes to aid in viral defence in both environments . the number of mx genes can differ among species of fish , with numbers ranging from 1-9 and some outliers like gadiformes that have totally lost their mx genes . a study was performed by wang et al . ( 2019 ) to identify more potential mx genes that resided in rainbow trout . an additional six mx genes were identified in that study , now named mx4-9 . they also concluded that the trout mx genes were “ differentially expressed constitutively in tissues ” and that this expression is increased during development . the mx gene family is expressed at high levels in the blood and intestine during development , suggesting they are a key to immune defense for the growing fish . the idea that these genes play an important role in development against viruses suggests they are critical in the trout 's success in an anadromous lifestyle . see also . . notes . references . blumm , m ( 2002 ) sacrificing the salmon : a legal and policy history of the decline of columbia basin salmon bookworld publications . bond , c e ( 1996 ) biology of fishes , 2nd ed . saunders , pp . & nbsp ; 599–605 . hogan , c m ( 2008 ) morro creek , the megalithic portal , ed . by a . burnham lucas , m.c . , and e . baras . ( 2001 ) migration of freshwater fishes . blackwell science ltd . , malden , ma appendix a : migratory fish species in north america , europe , asia and africa in carolsfield j , harvey b , ross c and anton baer a ( 2004 ) migratory fishes of south america world fisheries trust/world bank/idrc . further reading . ueda h and tsukamoto k ( eds ) ( 2013 ) physiology and ecology of fish migration crc press . external links . united nations : introduction to the convention on migratory species living north sea – international project on tackling fish migration problems in the north sea region fish migration network – worldwide network of specialist working on the theme fish migration