Einar Gerhardsen

early life . einar gerhardsen was born in the municipality of asker , in the county of akershus . his parents were gerhard olsen ( 1867–1949 ) and emma hansen ( 1872–1949 ) . his father was rodemester in public roads administration and was foreman of a trade union committee , fanekomiteen for veivesenets arbeiderforening , and during gerhardsen 's childhood the trade union 's leader carl jørgensen frequently visited their home , and sometimes they would sing the internationale and seieren følger våre faner ( '' victory follows our banners '' ) . in 1932 , he married werna julie koren christie ( 1912–1970 ) , daughter of agent johan werner koren christie and klara rønning . the couple had two sons , truls and rune and a daughter torgunn . his brother was rolf gerhardsen and the pair also had a lifelong working relationship . from the age of seventeen , gerhardsen attended meetings with the labour party 's youth movement . in 1918 , during the finnish civil war , gerhardsen resigned his membership of the church of norway after the church sided with the '' whites '' against the '' reds '' . . political work , imprisonment . originally a road worker , gerhardsen became politically active in the socialist labour movement during the 1920s . he was convicted several times of taking part in subversive activities until he , along with the rest of the labour party , gradually moved from communism to democratic socialism . he participated in the left communist youth league 's military strike action of 1924 . he was convicted for assisting in this crime and sentenced to 75 days in prison . by the mid-1930s , labour was a major force on the national political scene , becoming the party of government under prime minister johan nygaardsvold from 1935 until the nazi invasion in 1940 . gerhardsen was elected to oslo city council in 1932 and became deputy mayor in 1938 . he was deputy leader of the labour party from 1939 . after the german occupation of norway in 1940 , gerhardsen became acting chairman of the labour party , as the chairman , oscar torp had gone into exile . gerhardsen became mayor of oslo on 15 august 1940 , but was forced to resign by the germans on 26 august the same year . in september , the nazi occupation government banned all parliamentary political parties , including the labour party . during world war ii , gerhardsen took part in the organised resistance against the german occupation of norway , and was arrested on 11 september 1941 . having already been under suspicion for a long time , gerhardsen had been detained and subjected to interrogations on 31 previous occasions since the summer of 1940 . initially he was sent to grini concentration camp in norway . in february 1942 , he was accused of leading resistance work from his imprisonment , and removed from the camp for interrogation . initially interrogated at the police station at møllergata 19 , he was soon transferred to the gestapo headquarters at victoria terrasse . at victoria terrasse , he was tortured to reveal information on the resistance , but did not give in . in april 1942 , he was sent to sachsenhausen concentration camp in germany . in september 1944 , he was transferred back to grini , where he spent the rest of the war . after the war , gerhardsen formed the interim government which sat from the end of the occupation in may 1945 until the general election held in october the same year . the election gave labour an absolute majority in parliament , the storting , which it retained until 1961 . gerhardsen served as president of the storting from 10 january 1954 to 22 january 1955 . domestic and foreign policy from 1945 . during and after his periods in office , he was greatly respected by the people ; even those not sharing his social democratic views . the administrations he led forged an eclectic economic policy in which government regulation of commerce , industry and banking was combined with market economics . abject poverty and unemployment were sharply reduced by his government 's policies of industrialisation and redistribution of wealth through progressive taxation , together with the creation of a comprehensive social security system . the norwegian state housing bank law of march 1946 introduced relatively cheap loans for co-operative housing societies and individual private builders . the child allowances law of october 1946 introduced allowances for second and subsequent children under the age of sixteen years , while also providing allowances for single-parent families for the birth of their first child . under a july 1947 law , unemployment insurance coverage was extended to agricultural workers and certain other groups . in 1947 , a loan fund for students was introduced . that same year , housing allowances were introduced for families with two or more children below the age of sixteen years , “ who live in dwellings financed through housing bank and in municipalities which pay one-third of the allowance . ” the comprehensive schooling law of july 1954 established nine-year comprehensive schooling on a trial basis , while the sickness insurance law of march 1956 introduced compulsory insurance for all residents . a law in january 1960 introduced an invalidity pension scheme and a law of june 1961 extended accident coverage to military personnel and conscripts . growth to limits : the western european welfare states since world war 2 : volume 4 by peter flora in 1957 , universal basic pensions were introduced . in 1957 an orphans ’ pension scheme was established , and in 1958 university occupational injury insurance was introduced . in 1957 , housing allowances were made available for single-parent families with children , and that same year , and income and property means test was introduced while the housing allowances law was made compulsory for all municipalities . in 1964 , a national widow ’ s benefit was introduced . in foreign policy , he aligned norway with the western powers at the end of the 1940s after some initial hesitation within the governing party , and norway became a founding member of nato . documents from 1958 reveal that the gerhardsen 's government knew that israel was going to use heavy water supplied by noratom for plutonium production , making it possible for israel to produce nuclear weapons . in november 1962 , an accident in which 21 miners died occurred in the kings bay coal mine on spitsbergen in the svalbard archipelago . in the aftermath , the gerhardsen government was accused of not complying with laws enacted by parliament . in the summer of 1963 a vote of no confidence passed with the support of the socialist people 's party and a centre-right minority coalition government was formed , under john lyng . although this new government lasted only three weeks , until the socialist people 's party realigned itself with labour , it formed the basis for an opposition victory under the leadership of per borten at the 1965 general election . gerhardsen retired from national politics in 1969 but continued to influence public opinion through writing and speeches . gerhardsen 's political legacy is still an important force in norwegian politics , especially within his own party , jens stoltenberg : vi bygger landet speech april 22 , 2010 , office of the prime minister , retrieved 18 september 2012 . although some of the social policies of his government have been revised . ( see also economy of norway ) . soviet intelligence claim . according to vassily mitrokhin gerhardsen became a soviet intelligence operative during his visit to the ussr . . references . further reading . wilsford , david , ed . political leaders of contemporary western europe : a biographical dictionary ( greenwood , 1995 ) pp . 164–170 . external links .