Sunset

occurrence . thumb the time of sunset varies throughout the year , and is determined by the viewer 's position on earth , specified by latitude and longitude , altitude , and time zone . small daily changes and noticeable semi-annual changes in the timing of sunsets are driven by the axial tilt of earth , daily rotation of the earth , the planet 's movement in its annual elliptical orbit around the sun , and the earth and moon 's paired revolutions around each other . during winter and spring , the days get longer and sunsets occur later every day until the day of the latest sunset , which occurs after the summer solstice . in the northern hemisphere , the latest sunset occurs late in june or in early july , but not on the summer solstice of june 21 . this date depends on the viewer 's latitude ( connected with the earth 's slower movement around the aphelion around july 4 ) . likewise , the earliest sunset does not occur on the winter solstice , but rather about two weeks earlier , again depending on the viewer 's latitude . in the northern hemisphere , it occurs in early december or late november ( influenced by the earth 's faster movement near its perihelion , which occurs around january 3 ) . likewise , the same phenomenon exists in the southern hemisphere , but with the respective dates reversed , with the earliest sunsets occurring some time before june 21 in winter , and latest sunsets occurring some time after december 21 in summer , again depending on one 's southern latitude . for a few weeks surrounding both solstices , both sunrise and sunset get slightly later each day . even on the equator , sunrise and sunset shift several minutes back and forth through the year , along with solar noon . these effects are plotted by an analemma . starry night times – january 2007 ( explains why sun appears to cross slow before early january ) the analemma , elliptical orbit effect . 'july 3rd to october 2nd the sun continues to drift to the west until it reaches its maximum '' offset '' in the west . then from october 2 until january 21 , the sun drifts back toward the east ' neglecting atmospheric refraction and the sun 's non-zero size , whenever and wherever sunset occurs , it is always in the northwest quadrant from the march equinox to the september equinox , and in the southwest quadrant from the september equinox to the march equinox . sunsets occur almost exactly due west on the equinoxes for all viewers on earth . exact calculations of the azimuths of sunset on other dates are complex , but they can be estimated with reasonable accuracy by using the analemma . as sunrise and sunset are calculated from the leading and trailing edges of the sun , respectively , and not the center , the duration of a daytime is slightly longer than nighttime ( by about 10 minutes , as seen from temperate latitudes ) . further , because the light from the sun is refracted as it passes through the earth 's atmosphere , the sun is still visible after it is geometrically below the horizon . refraction also affects the apparent shape of the sun when it is very close to the horizon . it makes things appear higher in the sky than they really are . light from the bottom edge of the sun 's disk is refracted more than light from the top , since refraction increases as the angle of elevation decreases . this raises the apparent position of the bottom edge more than the top , reducing the apparent height of the solar disk . its width is unaltered , so the disk appears wider than it is high . ( in reality , the sun is almost exactly spherical . ) the sun also appears larger on the horizon , an optical illusion , similar to the moon illusion . locations north of the arctic circle and south of the antarctic circle experience no sunset or sunrise at least one day of the year , when the polar day or the polar night persist continuously for 24 hours . colors . as a ray of white sunlight travels through the atmosphere to an observer , some of the colors are scattered out of the beam by air molecules and airborne particles , changing the final color of the beam the viewer sees . because the shorter wavelength components , such as blue and green , scatter more strongly , these colors are preferentially removed from the beam . at sunrise and sunset , when the path through the atmosphere is longer , the blue and green components are removed almost completely , leaving the longer wavelength orange and red hues we see at those times . the remaining reddened sunlight can then be scattered by cloud droplets and other relatively large particles to light up the horizon red and orange . the removal of the shorter wavelengths of light is due to rayleigh scattering by air molecules and particles much smaller than the wavelength of visible light ( less than 50 & nbsp ; nm in diameter ) . craig bohren ( ed . ) , selected papers on scattering in the atmosphere , spie optical engineering press , bellingham , wa , 1989 the scattering by cloud droplets and other particles with diameters comparable to or larger than the sunlight 's wavelengths ( > 600 & nbsp ; nm ) is due to mie theory and is not strongly wavelength-dependent . mie scattering is responsible for the light scattered by clouds , and also for the daytime halo of white light around the sun ( forward scattering of white light ) . sunset colors are typically more brilliant than sunrise colors , because the evening air contains more particles than morning air . sometimes just before sunrise or after sunset a green flash can be seen . ash from volcanic eruptions , trapped within the troposphere , tends to mute sunset and sunrise colors , while volcanic ejecta that is instead lofted into the stratosphere ( as thin clouds of tiny sulfuric acid droplets ) , can yield beautiful post-sunset colors called afterglows and pre-sunrise glows . a number of eruptions , including those of mount pinatubo in 1991 and krakatoa in 1883 , have produced sufficiently high stratus clouds containing sulfuric acid to yield remarkable sunset afterglows ( and pre-sunrise glows ) around the world . the high altitude clouds serve to reflect strongly reddened sunlight still striking the stratosphere after sunset , down to the surface . some of the most varied colors at sunset can be found in the opposite or eastern sky after the sun has set during twilight . depending on weather conditions and the types of clouds present , these colors have a wide spectrum , and can produce unusual results . names of compass points . in some languages , points of the compass bear names etymologically derived from words for sunrise and sunset . the english words '' orient '' and '' occident '' , meaning '' east '' and '' west '' , respectively , are descended from latin words meaning '' sunrise '' and '' sunset '' . the word '' levant '' , related e.g . to french '' ( se ) lever '' meaning '' lift '' or '' rise '' ( and also to english '' elevate '' ) , is also used to describe the east . in polish , the word for east wschód ( vskhud ) , is derived from the morpheme '' ws '' – meaning '' up '' , and '' chód '' – signifying '' move '' ( from the verb chodzić – meaning '' walk , move '' ) , due to the act of the sun coming up from behind the horizon . the polish word for west , zachód ( zakhud ) , is similar but with the word '' za '' at the start , meaning '' behind '' , from the act of the sun going behind the horizon . in russian , the word for west , запад ( zapad ) , is derived from the words за – meaning '' behind '' , and пад – signifying '' fall '' ( from the verb падать – padat ) , due to the act of the sun falling behind the horizon . in hebrew , the word for east is 'מזרח ' , which derives from the word for rising , and the word for west is 'מערב ' , which derives from the word for setting . historical view . the 16th-century astronomer nicolaus copernicus was the first to present to the world a detailed and eventually widely accepted mathematical model supporting the premise that the earth is moving and the sun actually stays still , despite the impression from our point of view of a moving sun . . planets . sunsets on other planets appear different because of differences in the distance of the planet from the sun and non-existent or differing atmospheric compositions . mars . on mars , the setting sun appears about two-thirds the size as it appears from earth , due to the greater distance between mars and the sun . the colors are typically hues of blue , but some martian sunsets last significantly longer and appear far redder than is typical on earth . the colors of the martian sunset differ from those on earth . mars has a thin atmosphere , lacking oxygen and nitrogen , so the light scattering is not dominated by a rayleigh scattering process . instead , the air is full of red dust , blown into the atmosphere by high winds , so its sky color is mainly determined by a mie theory process , resulting in more blue hues than an earth sunset . one study also reported that martian dust high in the atmosphere can reflect sunlight up to two hours after the sun has set , casting a diffuse glow across the surface of mars . . gallery . file : sunset by wapta falls.jpg sunset in canada , overlooking a waterfall file : sunsethikkaduwa-april2012.jpg clear half-disk view of a sunset in hikkaduwa , sri lanka file : sunset over hdb block , singapore.jpg just after sunset , woodlands , singapore file : закат над онего - panoramio.jpg sunset in the republic of karelia , russia file : хорватия , закат в брела , 2007-06.jpg sunset in brela , croatia file : sunset with coconut palm tree , fiji.jpg fiji file : red sunset.jpg a red sunset near swifts creek , australia file : audrey jeffers highway trinidad.jpg minutes before sunset near gulf of paria , trinidad and tobago file : dg5artipayallar 036.jpg silhouettes of fishermen during a sunset in payallar , alanya file : pôr do sol - praia do boldro.jpg sunset in fernando de noronha , brazil file : comets and shooting stars dance over paranal.jpg sunset view of the paranal observatory , featuring two comets that were moving across the southern skies file : great ball of fire.jpg the very beginning of sunset over the mojave desert during extreme haze due to fires in california in the summer of 2016 file : downdraft wind shear-2.jpg illuminated downdraft wind shear cloud in the eastern sky at sunset , mimic aurora borealis in the mojave desert file : sonnenuntergang in der namib.jpg sunset in the namib desert file : sunset at sandy point beach , milsons promontory , victoria , australia.jpg sunset of orange and blue reflected onto the beach at sandy point , victoria , australia file : kaanapali beach sunset on maui hawaii ( 45015472644 ) . jpg sunset at the kaanapali beach on maui , hawaii . see also . afterglow analemma astronomy on mars dawn daytime diffuse sky radiation dusk earth 's shadow , visible at sunset golden hour sundown town sunrise sunrise equation twilight . references . external links . full physical explanation in simple terms the colors of twilight and sunset geolocation service to calculate the time of sunrise and sunset