Sunoco

history . 1800s to 1950s : founding and growth . the partnership began as the peoples natural gas company in pittsburgh , pennsylvania . in 1886 , its partners – joseph newton pew , philip pisano , and edward o . emerson – decided to expand their gas business with a stake in the new oil discoveries in ohio and pennsylvania . four years later , the growing enterprise became the sun oil company of ohio . sun oil diversified quickly , active in production and distribution of oil as well as processing and marketing refined products . by 1901 , the company was incorporated in new jersey as sun company . in 1902 , the sun oil refining company was chartered in texas , as it turned its interest to the new spindletop field in texas . joseph pew 's nephew , j . edgar pew , was able to buy the storage and transportation assets of lone star and crescent oil company at a receivership auction . spindletop oil was then shipped to the company 's marcus hook , pennsylvania , refinery . pew 's sons , j . howard pew and joseph n . pew jr . would take over the company after their father 's death . with a growing portfolio of oil fields and refineries , sun opened its first service station in ardmore , pennsylvania in 1920 . in 1922 , it changed its name back to sun oil company and , in 1925 , it became a public company via an initial public offering on the new york stock exchange . sunoco ranked 39th among united states corporations in the value of world war ii production contracts . peck , merton j . & frederic m . scherer the weapons acquisition process : an economic analysis ( 1962 ) harvard business school p . 620 sun expanded internationally following the war . its first canadian refinery was built in 1953 in sarnia , ontario , home to a burgeoning new petrochemical industry . sun established a facility at venezuela 's lake maracaibo in 1957 , which produced over a billion barrels ( 160,000,000 m 3 ) before the operation was nationalized in 1975 . custom blending . in 1956 , sunoco introduced '' custom blending '' pumps , an innovation that allowed customers of sunoco service stations to choose from several octane ratings through a single pump . sunoco stations offered as many as eight grades of '' custom blended '' gasolines from its '' dial a grade '' pumps ranging from subregular sunoco 190 to sunoco 260 , the latter a super-premium grade of 102 octane that was advertised as the '' highest octane pump gas '' and very popular with operators of v8-powered muscle cars of the 1960s . . 1960s to 2000s : acquisitions and branding . in 1967 , sun established its great canadian oil sands limited facility in northern alberta , canada , to help unlock the estimated 300 billion barrels ( 48 & nbsp ; km 3 ) of recoverable oil in the athabasca oil sands . in 1968 , sun oil merged with tulsa , oklahoma-based sunray dx oil company , which refined and marketed gasoline under the dx brand in several midwestern states , and included several refineries . its tulsa refinery was operated by sun until its sale in june 2009 to holly corporation of dallas . this move expanded sun 's marketing area into the mid-continent region . sun oil continued marketing its petroleum products under both the sunoco and dx brands through the 1970s and into the 1980s . in the late 1980s , sun began rebranding dx stations in the midwest to the sunoco brand , but by the early 1990s , they pulled out of virtually all areas in the southeastern u.s . and west of the mississippi , resulting in the closing and rebranding of service stations and jobbers to other brands in those areas , notably sinclair in oklahoma . with increased diversification , sun oil company was renamed sun company in 1976 . in 1980 , sun acquired the u.s . oil and gas properties of texas pacific oil company , inc . , a subsidiary of the seagram company , ltd . , for us 2.3 billion—the second largest acquisition in u.s . history to that date . through the 1980s , sun developed oil interests in the north sea and offshore china and expanded its holdings in both oil and coal with additional u.s . business acquisitions . in 1983 , sun oil launched sunoco ultra 94 , the market 's highest octane unleaded gasoline . then in 1988 , sun undertook a restructuring to segregate its domestic oil and gas exploration and production business and the focus the company on its refining and marketing business . this led to the acquisition of atlantic refining and marketing ( and , in effect , that company 's convenience store chain , a-plus ) , including its philadelphia refinery which was later merged with the former gulf oil refinery next door that sunoco acquired from chevron . by the 1990s , sun had departed the international exploration business and was fully dedicated to its branded products and services . in 1994 , sunoco acquired the philadelphia chevron oil refinery consolidating operations with its own adjacent which it had acquired with atlantic . sun sold its remaining interest in canada 's suncor energy in 1995 , but markets product from two refineries – one in toledo , ohio , and the other sarnia , ontario – in joint ventures . in 1998 , sun company , inc . became sunoco , inc . in 2011 the toledo facility was sold to pbf energy . in 1998 , sun acquired the chemical business of allied signal , including a phenol plant . the business was renamed as '' sunoco chemicals , inc . '' in 2011 , the plant was acquired by honeywell for 85 million . in 2003 , speedway llc , then a subsidiary of marathon petroleum , sold 193 convenience stores to sunoco . it also acquired many service stations from coastal petroleum . in 2004 , sunoco replaced the conocophillips ' 76 brand as the '' official fuel of nascar . '' after conocophillips abandoned the marketing of the mobil brand name in the washington , d.c . , area , sunoco purchased these rights , converted maryland and virginia mobil stations to the sunoco brand , bringing the a-plus convenience store with them – prior to this , these stations had convenience stores under the circle k or on the run brands . in september 2009 , sunoco sold its retail heating oil and propane distribution business to superior plus for 82.5 million in cash . in 2012 , sunoco demolished its eagle point refinery complex in west deptford township , new jersey , which had been idle since 2010 . in canada , the sunoco brand was licensed for the ontario retail gas station operations of suncor energy until 2010 . following suncor 's acquisition of petro-canada , all canadian sunoco outlets were converted to petro-canada branding . . exit from refinery business . in december 2010 , sunoco sold its refinery in toledo , ohio to pbf energy for . effective september 6 , 2011 , sunoco announced that it would exit the crude oil refining business and seek to sell its philadelphia and marcus hook refineries by mid-2012 . the company has said that its cost for exiting the refining business could be as high as . according to one report , the company had lost some on refining operations since 2009 ; an earlier report provided a figure of . on december 1 , 2011 , sunoco announced it would accelerate closure of the marcus hook facility . the marcus hook facility , founded in 1902 and covering 781 acres , was dedicated exclusively to the processing of sweet crude oil ; this processing focus combined with volatility in crude oil prices are considered contributing factors to both this refinery 's closure and sunoco 's exit from the refinery business . . joint venture , bankruptcy , and future closure . in september 2012 , sunoco formed a joint venture with the carlyle group , allowing for the continuation of operations at the philadelphia refinery , and temporarily saving over 800 jobs . however , on january 22 , 2018 , the joint venture , named philadelphia energy solutions , filed for bankruptcy . the bankruptcy announcement was followed by a damaging fire on june 21 , 2019 , which occurred at the 30,000 bpd alkylation unit . the explosion of the alkylation unit triggered a massive fireball and caused nearby homes to shake . a few days later , on june 26 the refinery complex announced it would cease operations and shut down . . sale to energy transfer partners and merger with susser holdings . in 2012 , dallas-based energy company energy transfer partners purchased sunoco . energy transfer partners buys oil refiner sunoco usa today ( 04/30/2012 ) in 2014 , energy transfer partners acquired susser holdings corporation , the parent company of stripes convenience stores , and merged it with sunoco into a master limited partnership , forming sunoco lp . in texas , the sunoco brand replaced valero energy at the stripes locations ; stripes and a-plus remained separate brands . also in 2014 , sunoco lp acquired aloha petroleum . in 2015 , aloha petroleum acquired stores including a subway in hawaii . additionally , sunoco lp purchased eight pico convenience stores in south central texas . in december 2015 , sunoco lp completed its acquisition of alta east , inc . , a wholesale motor fuel distribution business serving the northeast united states . in june 2016 , sunoco lp purchased valentine convenience stores consisting of 18 locations selling more than 20 million gallons of fuel , as well as texas based kolkhorst petroleum , inc . kolkhorst operated 14 convenince stores under the rattler 's brand and distributed more than 46 million gallons of fuel . denny oil , a convenience store and wholesale distributor operator was purchased by sunoco lp in october , adding an additional 90 million gallons of fuel to its distribution business . in november 2016 , sunoco logistics lp acquired energy transfer partners lp for 21 billion . . introduction of sunoco ultratech and top tier fuel . in april 2017 , sunoco introduced at all of its stations sunoco ultratech , a high detergent fuel blend that met top tier standards . sunoco ultratech contains the same detergent level as the fuel sunoco makes for nascar . . sale of stores to seven & i holdings co . in january 2018 , the company sold 1,030 retail stores to 7-eleven and agreed to supply 2.2 billion gallons of fuel to 7-eleven convenience stores annually for 15 years . this included sunoco 's contract to the service plazas along the pennsylvania turnpike . focus on fuel distribution and midstream operations . sunoco diversified its portfolio in august 2016 with the acquisition of emerge energy services lp , entering into the business of processing transmix fuels . on april 2 , sunoco announced the completion of the conversion of its 2017 retail sites located in certain west texas , oklahoma , and new mexico markets to a single commission agent , cal 's convenience inc . that month also saw the acquisition of superior plus energy services , adding three terminals and approximately 200 million gallons to sunoco lp 's wholesale fuels business . additional 2018 acquisitions included sandford energy , llc . in august , brenco marketing corp . in october , and schmitt sales inc . in december . sunoco lp announced the completion of the acquisition of the refined terminalling business from american midstream partners , lp on december 20 , 2018 . in 2019 , sunoco lp announced a 50 percent ownership joint venture with energy transfer on the j.c . nolan diesel fuel pipeline that connects west texas to the gulf coast . on january 18 , 2019 , sunoco lp announced the execution of a definitive asset purchase agreement with attis industries inc . for the sale of sunoco lp 's ethanol plant , including the grain malting operation in fulton , ny . . exclusive deals . sunoco had exclusive deals as the gasoline supplier at the travel plazas along the ohio turnpike , pennsylvania turnpike , new jersey turnpike , garden state parkway , atlantic city expressway , palisades parkway , and delaware turnpike . sunoco also operates some of the filling stations on the new york thruway , as well as the two service areas - chesapeake house and maryland house - along interstate 95 in maryland . . environmental record . in 1993 , when the company owned refineries , it signed the coalition for environmentally responsible economies ( ceres ) principal . in 2000 , sunoco leaked 190,000 gallons of oil into the john heinz national wildlife refuge at tinicum in pennsylvania through a cracked pipe . sunoco 's safety systems did not detect the leak , which was reported by a hiker in the wildlife refuge . on april 4 , 1991 , pennsylvania senator h . john heinz iii was killed when his airplane collided with a sun company helicopter in what is known as the merion air disaster . falling debris killed 2 children at the merion elementary school in the lower merion school district . the national transportation safety board determined that the probable cause of the accident included poor judgment on the part of the captain of the sun company helicopter , and his failure to maintain safe separation from the senator 's airplane . as of march 2016 , records maintained by the pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) show that sunoco has experienced 257 hazardous liquids incidents since 2006 . ( phmsa defines an '' incident '' as an event that involves a release of gas from a pipeline or of liquefied natural gas or gas from an lng facility that results in a death , or injury necessitating hospitalization ; or property damage of 50,000 or more ) . these 257 incidents resulted in 46,936,215 of property damage . in terms of number of incidents , sunoco has the worst safety record of 1,518 active pipeline operators who report operating data to phmsa . in 2014 , sunoco was one of 50 companies sued by pennsylvania , which alleged that the companies polluted waters with mtbe , a gasoline additive . sunoco logistic 's ongoing mariner east pipeline project has been delayed on multiple occasion due to accidental pollution of water supplies in pennsylvania . . sunoco race fuels . sunoco race fuels is a refiner and distributor of racing fuels . originally featuring two high-octane options ( sunoco 260 and 280 ) , sunoco race fuels now produces 18 different high-performance fuel blends , which are used for all types of professional motorsports . all sunoco race fuels products are refined at sunoco lp 's marcus hook facility . sunoco race fuels also holds partnerships as the official fuel or spec fuel of popular racing series including scca , ihra , pass , svra , and trans am . motorsports partnerships . the sunoco fuel brand was team penske 's sponsor of choice for many years , particularly in the scca trans-am series , where roger penske 's sunoco camaros won the championship in 1968 and 1969 . sunoco also sponsored penske porsches in the scca can-am series , and won the indianapolis 500 in 1972 with penske and driver mark donohue . between 1989 and 1992 , sunoco sponsored nascar team owner billy hagan 's no . 94 cup team . sterling marlin drove the 94 sunoco ultra94 oldsmobile during the 1989-90 seasons and terry labonte for the 1991-92 seasons . from 1995 to 1997 , sunoco was the primary sponsor of st motorsports ' 47 chevrolet , driven by jeff fuller . fuller captured his lone nascar busch grand national series ( now nascar xfinity series ) victory at bristol motor speedway on august 23 , 1996 . sunoco was the official fuel supplier of the indycar series ( now the verizon indycar series ) from 2011 through 2018 . in 2013 , sunoco sponsored the 60 panther racing chevrolet in the 97th running of the indianapolis 500 with driver townsend bell . following their participation in that event , sunoco partnered with kv racing and driver tony kanaan , who won the 2013 indianapolis 500 , for a four-race primary sponsorship agreement . in 2015 , sunoco became the official fuel of the national hot rod association . in 2016 , sunoco was the founding partner of the '' daytona rising '' project , which was highlighted by the reimagining of the historic daytona international speedway . the sunoco injector , a branded fan engagement area built as part of the new stadium opened during nascar 's daytona 500 weekend that year . in 2017/2018 , sunoco became the official race fuel for the canadian snow cross circuit , csra . in 2019 , sunoco signed on to be the presenting sponsor of the richmond raceway esports fueled by sunoco , an enascar iracing world championship series team , with malik ray driving the 90 sunoco toyota camry . beginning in 2020 , defending series champion zack novak will pilot the sunoco-sponsored entry , with jimmy mullis as his rr esports teammate in the 46 toyota . . sponsorships . due to its presence in western pennsylvania , sunoco is a longtime sponsor of the pittsburgh pirates . sunoco also held partnerships with additional major league baseball teams , including the new york yankees , philadelphia phillies , detroit tigers , and the boston red sox . with its former headquarters in the philadelphia area , sunoco was a sponsor of the philadelphia union , a major league soccer ( mls ) franchise . sunoco is also a partner with the hersheypark amusement facility in hershey , pa . they are the presenting sponsor of the twin turnpike ride at the park . they are also a sponsor of the hershey bears , an affiliate of the washington capitals in the american hockey league ( ahl ) . references . external links . official webpage sun transport