Busman's Honeymoon

plot introduction . lord peter wimsey and harriet vane marry and go to spend their honeymoon at talboys , an old farmhouse in hertfordshire which he has bought her as a present . the honeymoon is intended as a break from their usual routine of solving crimes ( him ) and writing about them ( her ) , but it turns into a murder investigation when the seller of the house is found dead at the bottom of the cellar steps with severe head injuries . title . a '' busman 's holiday '' is a holiday spent by a bus driver travelling on a bus : it is no break from his usual routine . by analogy , anyone who spends his holiday doing his normal job is taking a '' busman 's holiday '' . plot . after an engagement of some months following the events at the end of gaudy night , lord peter wimsey and harriet vane marry . they plan to spend their honeymoon at talboys , an old farmhouse in harriet 's native hertfordshire which wimsey has bought for her , and they abscond from the wedding reception , evading the assembled reporters . arriving late at night , they are surprised to find the house locked up and not prepared for them . they gain access and spend their wedding night there , but next morning they discover the former owner , noakes , dead in the cellar with head injuries . the quiet honeymoon is ruined as a murder investigation begins and the house fills with policemen , reporters , and brokers ' men distraint noakes ' hideous furniture . noakes was an unpopular man , a miser and ( it turns out ) a blackmailer . he was assumed to be well off , but it transpires that he was bankrupt , owed large amounts of money , and was planning to flee his creditors with the cash paid for talboys . the house had been locked and bolted when the newly-weds arrived , and medical evidence seems to rule out an accident , so it seems he was attacked in the house and died later , having somehow locked up after his attacker . the suspects include noakes ' niece aggie ; mrs ruddle , his neighbour and cleaning lady ; frank crutchley , a local garage mechanic who also tended noakes ' garden ; and the local police constable , who was his blackmail victim . peter 's and harriet 's relationship , always complex and painfully negotiated , is resolved during the process of catching the murderer and bringing him to justice . in a final scene , in which almost the entire cast of characters is gathered in the front room of talboys , reflecting the novel 's origin as a work for the stage , the killer turns out to be crutchley . he planned to marry noakes ' somewhat elderly niece and get his hands on the money he had left her in his will . he set a booby trap with a weighted plant pot on a chain , which was triggered by the victim opening the radio cabinet after locking up for the night . wimsey 's reaction to the case – his arrangement for the defendant to be represented by top defence counsel ; his guilt at condemning a man to be hanged ; the return of his shell-shock – dominates the final chapters of the book . it is mentioned that wimsey had previously also suffered similar pangs of conscience when other murderers had been sent to the gallows . his deep remorse and guilt at having caused crutchley to be executed leave doubt as to whether he would undertake further murder investigations – and in fact sayers completed no further wimsey novels after this one . the 1942 short story talboys , the very last wimsey fiction published by sayers , is both a sequel to the present book , in having the same location and some of the same village characters , and an antithesis in being lighthearted and having no crime worse than the theft of some peaches from a neighbour 's garden . principal characters . lord peter wimsey – protagonist , an aristocratic amateur detective harriet vane , now lady peter wimsey – protagonist , a mystery writer , wife of lord peter mervyn bunter – lord peter 's manservant honoria lucasta , dowager duchess of denver – lord peter 's mother william noakes – previous owner of talboys and murder victim miss agnes twitterton – a spinster niece of the murdered man frank crutchley – a motor mechanic and gardener mrs martha ruddle – neighbour of noakes and his cleaning lady bert ruddle – her son chief superintendent kirk – hertfordshire cid joseph sellon – the local police constable the reverend simon goodacre – vicar of paggleham . literary significance and criticism . in their review of crime novels ( revised edn 1989 ) , the us writers barzun and taylor comment that the novel is '' not near the top of her form , but remarkable as a treatment of the newly wedded and bedded pair of eccentrics . with bunter in the offing and three local characters , chiefly comic . peter 's mother – dowager duchess of denver – peter 's sister , john donne , a case of vintage port , and the handling of '' corroded sut '' provide plenty of garnishing for an indifferent murder , even if we were n't also given an idea of lord peter 's sexual tastes and powers under trying circumstances . '' barzun , jacques and taylor , wendell hertig . a catalogue of crime . new york : harper & row . 1971 , revised and enlarged edition 1989 . . adaptations . busman 's honeymoon first saw the light of day as a stage play by sayers and muriel st . clare byrne . subtitled a detective comedy in three acts , it opened at london 's comedy theatre , in december 1936 . a 1940 film version , based as much on the play as on the novel , stars robert montgomery as peter and constance cummings as harriet . the movie was released in the united states as haunted honeymoon . it was twice adapted for bbc television broadcast . the 1947 adaptation , 90 minutes in length , was directed by john glyn-jones and starred harold warrender as lord peter , ruth lodge as harriet , and ronald adam as bunter ; joan hickson , later to be better known for playing agatha christie 's amateur sleuth miss marple , played miss twitterton . [ the 1957 adaptation , again 90 minutes in length , was directed by brandon acton-bond , and starred peter gray as lord peter , sarah lawson as harriet , and charles lloyd-pack as bunter . there have been three bbc radio adaptations . the first , in 1949 , was adapted for radio by peggy wells , and starred hugh latimer as lord peter , rita vale as harriet , and stanley groome as bunter . the second , again adapted for radio by wells , was broadcast in 1965 , and featured angus mackay as lord peter , dorothy reynolds as harriet , and david monico as bunter . the third adaptation , broadcast in 1983 on bbc radio 4 , was in six parts . this starred ian carmichael as lord peter wimsey , sarah badel as harriet , peter jones as bunter , rosemary leach as miss twitterton , pearl hackney as mrs ruddle , peter vaughan as superintendent kirk and john westbrook as the narrator . a stage production of busman 's honeymoon took place at the lyric theatre , hammersmith from 12th july - 27th august 1988 and starred edward petherbridge as lord peter wimsey and emily richard as harriet ( lady peter ) wimsey . lifeline theatre ( chicago , illinois ) presented an original adaptation of busman 's honeymoon in the spring and summer of 2009 . frances limoncelli adapted the script from dorothy sayers ' novel . the show was directed by paul holmquist . busman 's honeymoon was preceded by adaptations of whose body ? , strong poison , and gaudy night ( all adapted by frances limoncelli and produced at lifeline theatre ) . . references . external links .