Teradata

overview . teradata is an enterprise software company that develops and sells database analytics software subscriptions . the company provides three main services : business analytics , cloud products , and consulting . it operates in north and latin america , europe , the middle east , africa and asia . teradata is headquartered in san diego , california , and has additional major u.s . locations in atlanta and san francisco , where its data center research and development is housed . it is publicly traded on the new york stock exchange ( nyse ) under the stock symbol tdc . steve mcmillan has served as the company 's president and chief executive officer since 2020 . the company reported 1.836 billion in revenue , with a net income of 129 million , and 8,535 employees globally , as of february 9 , 2020 . . history . the concept of teradata grew from research at california institute of technology and from the discussions of citibank 's advanced technology group in the 1970s . in 1979 , the company was incorporated in brentwood , california by jack e . shemer , philip m . neches , walter e . muir , jerold r . modes , william p . worth , carroll reed and david hartke . teradata released its dbc 1012 specialized database computer in 1984 . in 1990 , the company acquired sharebase , originally named britton lee . in september 1991 , at & t corporation acquired ncr corporation , which announced the acquisition of teradata for about 250 million in december . teradata built the first system , over 1 terabyte , for wal-mart in 1992 . ncr acquired strategic technologies & systems in 1999 , and appointed stephen brobst as chief technology officer of teradata solutions group . in 2000 , ncr acquired ceres integrated solutions and its customer relationship management software for 90 million , as well as stirling douglas group and its demand chain management software . teradata acquired financial management software from decisionpoint in 2005 . in january 2007 , ncr announced teradata would become an independent public company , led by michael f . koehler . the new company 's shares started trading in october . in april 2016 , a product line called intelliflex was announced . victor l . lund became the chief executive on may 5 , 2016 . on may 7 , 2020 , teradata announced the appointment of steve mcmillan as president and chief executive officer , effective june 8 , 2020 . acquisitions and divestitures . teradata has acquired several companies since becoming an independent public company in 2008 . in march 2008 , teradata acquired professional services company claraview , which previously had spun out software provider clarabridge . teradata acquired column-oriented dbms vendor kickfire in august 2010 , followed by the marketing software company aprimo for about 550 million in december . in march 2011 , the company acquired aster data systems for about 263 million . teradata acquired email direct marketing company ecircle in may 2012 , which was merged into the aprimo business . in 2014 , teradata acquired the assets of revelytix , a provider of information management products and for a reported 50 million . in september , teradata acquired hadoop service firm think big analytics . in december , teradata acquired rainstor , a company specializing in online data archiving on hadoop . teradata acquired appoxxee , a mobile marketing software as a service provider , for about 20 million in january 2015 , followed by the netherlands-based digital marketing company flxone in september . in july 2016 , the marketing applications division , using the aprimo brand , was sold to private equity firm marlin equity partners for about 90 million with aprimo under ceo john stammen moving its headquarters to chicago . twig , tara ( july 20 , 2016 ) '' stammen named ceo of aprimo '' inside indiana business . retrieved august 31 , 2018 whilst absorbing revenew inc . that had also been bought by marlin . teradata acquired big data partnership , a service company based in the uk , on july 21 , 2016 . in july 2017 , teradata acquired stackiq , maker of the stacki software . . technology and products . teradata offers three main services to its customers : cloud and hardware-based data warehousing , business analytics , and consulting services . in september 2016 , the company launched teradata everywhere , which allows users to submit queries against public and private databases . the service uses massively parallel processing across both its physical data warehouse and cloud storage , including managed environments such as amazon web services , microsoft azure , vmware , and teradata 's managed cloud and intelliflex . teradata offers customers both hybrid cloud and multicloud storage . in march 2017 , teradata introduced teradata intellicloud , a secure managed cloud for data and analytic software as a service . intellicloud is compatible with teradata 's data warehouse platform , intelliflex . the teradata analytics platform was unveiled in 2017 . teradata vantage ( 2018 ) teradata vantage , their pervasive data intelligence platform , deploys on-premises , to the cloud , or as a hybrid model . vantage consists of various analytics engines on a core relational database , including its mpp engine , the aster graph database , and a machine learning engine . spark and tensorflow engines are slated to be added . the idea is to let users access and analyze all their data without having to learn a new tool or language , or worry about where data is located . on top of these engines , teradata will build support for a variety of languages , including sql , r , and python , with scala , go , and javascript in the works . it will also support analytic tools , including its own offerings as well as jupyter , r studio , and sas , with support for dataiku and knime . special accommodations are being made for handling special data types , such as time-series , temporal data , and geo-spatial analytics , as well . vantage provides access to descriptive , predictive and prescriptive analytics to enable autonomous decision making . vantage also has machine learning and visualization functions which can be deployed across public clouds , on-premises , and commodity infrastructure . vantage provides storage and analysis for multi-structured data , including json , bson , avro , csv and xml formats . . big data . teradata began to use the term '' big data '' in 2010 . cto stephen brobst attributed the rise of big data to '' new media sources , such as social media . '' the increase in semi-structured and unstructured data gathered from online interactions prompted teradata to form the '' petabyte club '' in 2011 for its heaviest big data users . the rise of big data resulted in many traditional data warehousing companies updating their products and technology . for teradata , big data prompted the acquisition of aster data systems in 2011 for the company 's mapreduce capabilities and ability to store and analyze semi-structured data .