John Edensor Littlewood

biography . littlewood was born on 9 june 1885 in rochester , kent , the eldest son of edward thornton littlewood and sylvia maud ( née ackland ) . in 1892 , his father accepted the headmastership of a school in wynberg , cape town , in south africa , taking his family there . : '' he later accepted the headmastership of a newly founded school at wynberg near cape town , taking his family there in 1892 . '' littlewood returned to britain in 1900 to attend st paul 's school in london , studying under francis sowerby macaulay , an influential algebraic geometry . : '' in 1900 he returned to england , where he attended st . paul 's school and studied with the talented teacher and mathematician f . s . macaulay . '' in 1903 , littlewood entered the university of cambridge , studying in trinity college . he spent his first two years preparing for the tripos examinations which qualify undergraduates for a bachelor 's degree ( where he emerged in 1905 as senior wrangler , the person who obtained the highest mark in part 1 of the tripos ) . in 1906 , after completing the second part of the tripos , he started his research under ernest barnes . : '' he began his research later that year on asymptotic formulas for integral functions of order zero , under his tutor and director of studies e . w . barnes . '' one of the problems that barnes suggested to littlewood was to prove the riemann hypothesis , an assignment at which he did not succeed . : '' barnes proposed to littlewood the task of proving the riemann hypothesis . he did not succeed in that strenuous assignment . '' he was elected a fellow of trinity college in 1908 and , apart from three years as richardson lecturer in the university of manchester , the balance of his career was spent at the university of cambridge . he was appointed rouse ball professor of mathematics in 1928 , retiring in 1950 . he was elected a fellow of the royal society in 1916 , awarded the royal medal in 1929 , the sylvester medal in 1943 and the copley medal in 1958 . he was president of the london mathematical society from 1941 to 1943 , and was awarded the de morgan medal in 1938 and the berwick prizes in 1960 . littlewood died on 6 september 1977 . work . most of littlewood 's work was in the field of mathematical analysis . he began research under the supervision of ernest william barnes , who suggested that he attempt to prove the riemann hypothesis : littlewood showed that if the riemann hypothesis is true then the prime number theorem follows and obtained the error term . this work won him his trinity fellowship . however , the link between the riemann hypothesis and the prime number theorem had been known before in continental europe , and littlewood wrote later in his book , a mathematician 's miscellany that his rediscovery of the result did not shed a positive light on the isolated nature of british mathematics at the time . he coined littlewood 's law , which states that individuals can expect '' miracles '' to happen to them , at the rate of about one per month . he continued to write papers into his eighties , particularly in analytical areas of what would become the theory of dynamical systems . littlewood is also remembered for his book of reminiscences , a mathematician 's miscellany ( new edition published in 1986 ) . among his own phd students were sarvadaman chowla , harold davenport , and donald c . spencer . spencer reported that in 1941 when he ( spencer ) was about to get on the boat that would take him home to the united states , littlewood reminded him : '' n , n alpha , n beta ! '' ( referring to littlewood 's conjecture ) . littlewood 's collaborative work , carried out by correspondence , covered fields in diophantine approximation and waring 's problem , in particular . in his other work , he collaborated with raymond paley on littlewood–paley theory in fourier theory , and with cyril offord in combinatorial work on random sums , in developments that opened up fields that are still intensively studied . he worked with mary cartwright on problems in differential equations arising out of early research on radar : their work foreshadowed the modern theory of dynamical systems . littlewood 's 4/3 inequality on bilinear forms was a forerunner of the later grothendieck tensor norm theory . with hardy . littlewood collaborated for many years with g . h . hardy . together they devised the first hardy–littlewood conjecture , a strong form of the twin prime conjecture , and the second hardy–littlewood conjecture . he also , with hardy , identified the work of the indian mathematician srinivasa ramanujan as that of a genius , and supported him in travelling to the uk and working at cambridge . hardy ( june 1920 ) , pp494–495 . a self-taught mathematician , ramanujan later became a fellow of the royal society , fellow of trinity college , cambridge , and widely recognised as on a par with other geniuses such as euler and jacobi . in a 1947 lecture , the danish mathematician harald bohr said , '' to illustrate to what extent hardy and littlewood in the course of the years came to be considered as the leaders of recent english mathematical research , i may report what an excellent colleague once jokingly said : 'nowadays , there are only three really great english mathematicians : hardy , littlewood , and hardy–littlewood . ' '' there is a story ( related in the miscellany ) that at a conference littlewood met a german mathematician who said he was most interested to discover that littlewood really existed , as he had always assumed that littlewood was a name used by hardy for lesser work which he did not want to put out under his own name ; littlewood apparently roared with laughter . there are versions of this story involving both norbert wiener and edmund landau , who , it is claimed , '' so doubted the existence of littlewood that he made a special trip to great britain to see the man with his own eyes '' . . cultural references . john littlewood is depicted in two films covering the life of ramanujan – ramanujan in 2014 portrayed by michael lieber and the man who knew infinity in 2015 portrayed by toby jones . see also . critical line theorem hardy–littlewood circle method hardy–littlewood zeta-function conjectures littlewood conjecture littlewood polynomial littlewood 's three principles of real analysis littlewood–offord problem littlewood 's tauberian theorem hardy–littlewood tauberian theorem hardy–littlewood maximal function littlewood subordination theorem . references . bibliography . . further reading . littlewood 's miscellany , edited by b . bollobás , cambridge university press ; 1986 . ( alternative title for a mathematician 's miscellany ) . external links . papers of littlewood on number theory a mathematicians miscellany