Inigo Jones

early life and career . beyond the fact that he was born in smithfield , london , into the welsh speaking family of inigo jones snr . , a welsh cloth worker , and baptised at the church of st bartholomew-the-less , little is known about jones 's early years . he did not approach the architectural profession in the traditional way , namely either by rising up from a craft or through early exposure to the office of works , although there is evidence that christopher wren obtained information that recorded jones as an apprentice joiner in st paul 's cathedral . colvin , howard , a biographical dictionary of british architects : 1600 to 1840 ( 1954 ) at some point before 1603 a rich patron ( possibly the earl of pembroke or the earl of rutland ) sent him to italy to study drawing after being impressed by the quality of his sketches . from italy he travelled to denmark where he worked for christian iv on the design of the palaces of rosenborg and frederiksborg . jones first became famous as a designer of costumes and stage settings , especially after he brought '' masques '' to the stage . under the patronage of anne of denmark ( the consort of king james i ) , he is credited with introducing movable scenery and the proscenium arch to english theatre . between 1605 and 1640 , he was responsible for staging over 500 performances , collaborating with ben jonson for many years , despite a relationship fraught with competition and jealousy : the two had arguments about whether stage design or literature was more important in theatre . ( jonson ridiculed jones in a series of his works , written over a span of two decades . ) see : the masque of augurs ; the staple of news ; a tale of a tub ; love 's welcome at bolsover . jonson 's follower richard brome also took a swipe at jones in the weeding of covent garden . over 450 drawings for the scenery and costumes survive , demonstrating jones 's virtuosity as a draughtsman and his development between 1605 and 1609 from initially showing '' no knowledge of renaissance draughtsmanship '' to exhibiting an '' accomplished italianate manner '' orgel , steven and strong , roy c . , inigo jones and the theatre of the stuart court , 1973 and understanding of italian set design , particularly that of alfonso and giulio parigi . this development suggests a second visit to italy , circa 1606 , gotch , a . j . , inigo jones , 1968 influenced by the ambassador henry wotton . jones learned to speak italian fluently and there is evidence that he owned an italian copy of andrea palladio 's i quattro libri dell'architettura with marginalia that refer to wotton . his architectural work was particularly influenced by palladio . the center for palladian studies in america , inc . , palladio and english-american palladianism to a lesser extent , he also held to the architectural principles of the ancient roman writer vitruvius . jones 's first recorded architectural design is for a monument to frances , lady cotton , commissioned by rowland cotton , circa 1608–1611 , giles worsley , inigo jones and the european classical tradition ( yale , 2007 ) , pp . 6 , 8–9 . at norton-in-hales , shropshire showing early signs of his classical intentions . john newman , '' an early drawing by inigo jones and a monument in shropshire '' , the burlington magazine 115 ( 843 ) ( june 1973 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 360+ in july 1606 jones made scenery for a masque at theobalds for the earl of salisbury . in the following years , jones made drawings for the earl of salisbury 's new exchange in the strand , where work commenced in june 1608 , giles worsley , inigo jones and the european classical tradition ( yale , 2007 ) , p . 7 . and the central tower of st . paul 's cathedral , displaying a similar practical architectural inexperience and immature handling of themes from sources including palladio , serlio and sangallo . in 1609 , having perhaps accompanied salisbury 's son and heir , viscount cranborne , around france , he appears as an architectural consultant at hatfield house , making small modifications to the design as the project progressed , and in 1610 , jones was appointed surveyor to prince henry . he devised the masques the barriers and the masque of oberon for the prince and was possibly involved in some alterations to st james 's palace . edward chaney and timothy wilks , the jacobean grand tour : early stuart travellers in europe ( i.b . tauris : london , 2014 ) , pp . 64–6 , 153 . on 27 april 1613 , jones was appointed the position of surveyor of the king 's works and shortly after , embarked on a tour of italy with the earl of arundel , destined to become one of the most important patrons in the history of english art . on this trip , jones was exposed to the architecture of rome , padua , florence , vicenza , genoa and venice among others . his surviving sketchbook shows his preoccupation with such artists as parmigianino and schiavone . he is also known to have met vincenzo scamozzi at this time . his annotated copy of palladio 's quattro libri dell'architettura also demonstrates his close interest in classical architecture : jones gave priority to roman antiquity rather than observing the contemporary fashion in italy . he was probably the first englishman to study these roman remains first hand and this was key to the new architecture jones introduced in england . . architecture . in september 1615 , jones was appointed surveyor-general of the king 's works , marking the beginning of jones 's career in earnest . fortunately , both james i and charles i spent lavishly on their buildings , contrasting hugely with the economical court of elizabeth i . as the king 's surveyor , jones built some of his key buildings in london . in 1616 , work began on the queen 's house , greenwich , for james i 's wife , anne . with the foundations laid and the first storey built , work stopped suddenly when anne died in 1619 . jemma field , anna of denmark : the material and visual culture of the stuart courts ( manchester , 2020 ) , pp . 67–8 . jones provided a design for the queen 's funeral hearse or catafalque , but it was not implemented . clare mcmanus , women on the renaissance stage ( manchester , 2002 ) , pp . 205–8 . work at greenwich resumed in 1629 , this time for charles i 's queen , henrietta maria . it was finished in 1635 as the first strictly classical building in england , employing ideas found in the architecture of palladio and ancient rome . this is jones 's earliest-surviving work . between 1619 and 1622 , the banqueting house in the palace of whitehall was built , a design derived from buildings by scamozzi and palladio , to which a ceiling painted by peter paul rubens was added several years later . the whitehall palace was one of several projects where jones worked with his personal assistant and nephew by marriage john webb . the queen 's chapel , st . james 's palace , was built between 1623 and 1627 , for charles i 's roman catholic wife , henrietta maria . parts of the design originate in the pantheon of ancient rome and jones evidently intended the church to evoke the roman temple . these buildings show the realisation of a mature architect with a confident grasp of classical principles and an intellectual understanding of how to implement them . the other project in which jones was involved is the design of covent garden square . he was commissioned by the earl of bedford to build a residential square , which he did along the lines of the italian piazza of livorno . it is the first regularly planned square in london . the earl felt obliged to provide a church and he warned jones that he wanted to economise . he told him to simply erect a '' barn '' and jones 's oft-quoted response was that his lordship would have '' the finest barn in europe '' . in the design of st paul 's , jones faithfully adhered to vitruvius 's design for a tuscan temple and it was the first wholly and authentically classical church built in england . the inside of st paul 's , covent garden was gutted by fire in 1795 , but externally it remains much as jones designed it and dominates the west side of the piazza . jones also designed the square of lincoln 's inn fields , and a house in the square , the lindsey house built in 1640 , is often attributed to jones . its design of a rusticated ground floor with giant pilasters above supporting the entablature and balustrade served as a model for other town houses in london such as john nash 's regent 's park terraces , as well as in other english towns such as bath 's royal crescent . another large project jones undertook was the repair and remodelling of st paul 's cathedral . between the years of 1634 and 1642 , jones wrestled with the dilapidated gothicism of old st paul 's , casing it in classical masonry and totally redesigning the west front . jones incorporated the giant scrolls from vignola and della porta 's church of the gesù with a giant corinthian portico , the largest of its type north of the alps , but was destroyed in the great fire of london in 1666 . also around this time , circa 1638 , jones devised drawings completely redesigning the palace of whitehall , but the execution of these designs was frustrated by charles i 's financial and political difficulties . more than 1000 buildings have been attributed to jones but only a very small number of those are certain to be his work . according to architecture historian john summerson , the modern concept of an architect 's artistic responsibility for a building did not exist at that time , and jones 's role in many instances may be that of a civil servant in getting things done rather than as an architect . jones 's contribution to a building may also simply be verbal instructions to a mason or bricklayer and providing an italian engraving or two as a guide , or the correction of drafts . in the 1630s , jones was in high demand and , as surveyor to the king , his services were only available to a very limited circle of people , so often projects were commissioned to other members of the works . stoke bruerne park in northamptonshire was built by sir francis crane , '' receiving the assistance of inigo jones '' , between 1629 and 1635 . jones is also thought to have been involved in another country house , this time in wiltshire . wilton house was renovated from about 1630 onwards , at times worked on by jones , then passed on to isaac de caus when jones was too busy with royal clients . he then returned in 1646 with his student , john webb , to try and complete the project . contemporary equivalent architects included sir balthazar gerbier and nicholas stone . one of jones 's design work was '' double cube '' room , and it was also the foundation stone of his status as the father of british architecture . jones , as the pioneer in his era , had strong influence during their time . his revolutionary ideas even effect beyond the court circle , and today , many scholars believe that he also started the golden age of british architecture . . political and civic life . on 16 february 1621 , in a by-election caused by the ejection of an existing member sir john leedes , jones was elected m.p . in the parliament of england for new shoreham in west sussex , a borough constituency controlled by the earl of arundel , and sat till the dissolution of that parliament in february 1622 . he was named to a committee to improve lighting and increase seating in the house of commons ' chamber , resulting in a new gallery being erected in st stephen 's chapel during the summer recess and was also responsible for a new ceiling put in the house of lords chamber in 1623 . he also served as a justice of the peace ( j.p . ) for the county of middlesex and borough of westminster from 1630 until at least 1640 . he was made a freeman of the borough of southampton in 1623 and in 1633 was offered , but declined , a knighthood by charles i . . later life . jones 's full-time career effectively ended with the outbreak of the english civil war in 1642 and the seizure of the king 's houses in 1643 . jones was captured at the third siege of basing house in october 1645 . unfortunately , as one of the last great strongholds to the cavaliers , the great mansion inside was destroyed by cromwell 's army and even the walls were broken into many pieces . his property was later returned to him ( c . 1646 ) but jones ended his days , unmarried , living in somerset house . he was , however , closely involved in the design of coleshill house , in berkshire , for the pratt family , which he visited with the young apprentice architect roger pratt , to fix a new site for the proposed mansion . he died on 21 june 1652 and was subsequently buried with his parents at st benet paul 's wharf , the welsh church of the city of london . john denham and then christopher wren followed him as king 's surveyor of works . a monument dedicated to him in the church , ironically portraying st paul 's cathedral and other buildings , was destroyed in the great fire in 1666 . legacy . he was an influence on a number of 18th-century architects , notably lord burlington and william kent . there is an inigo jones road in charlton , south east london ( se7 ) , near charlton house , some of whose features were allegedly designed by him . a bridge in llanrwst , north wales , named '' pont fawr '' is also known locally as '' pont inigo jones '' —inigo jones 's bridge . he is also said to be responsible for the masonic document called '' the inigo jones manuscript '' , from around 1607 . a document of the old charges of freemasonry . . . list of architectural works . design for the completion of the central tower , old st paul 's cathedral , not executed ( c . 1608 ) design for the new exchange in the strand , london , not executed ( c.1608 ) the queen 's house , greenwich ( 1616–1619 ) , work suspended on the death of anne of denmark completed ( 1630–1635 ) for henrietta maria of france design for the star chamber building , not executed ( 1617 ) gateway at oatlands palace ( 1617 ) , now at chiswick house gateway at arundel house ( 1618 ) , demolished banqueting house , whitehall ( 1619–22 ) prince 's lodging , newmarket for henry frederick , prince of wales ( 1619 ) , demolished the queen 's chapel , st . james 's palace ( 1623–27 ) , for henrietta maria of france fort amsterdam ( 1625 ) – the dutch east india company asked jones to design a stone fortification on the hudson river , which he did , but the fort was built ( by cryn fredericks ) out of wood instead and was torn down in 1790 . the cockpit theatre , palace of whitehall ( 1629 ) demolished stoke park pavilions , northamptonshire , attributed ( c . 1629–35 ) somerset house chapel ( 1630–35 ) , demolished covent garden , london , houses on the north and east side as well as st paul 's , covent garden on the west ( 1631–1637 ) only the church survives old st paul 's cathedral , new west front and remodelling of the nave and transepts ( 1634–42 ) destroyed in the great fire of london wilton house , wiltshire ( 1636–40 ) the interior burnt c.1647 , rebuilt to the designs of john webb ( 1648 ) sir peter killigrew 's house , blackfriars , london ( 1630s ) not known if built palace of whitehall , various schemes for the complete rebuilding of the palace ( c . 1637–39 ) lord maltravers 's house , lothbury , london ( 1638 ) if built destroyed in the great fire of london temple bar , london , design for triumphal arch , not executed ( 1638 ) screen in winchester cathedral ( c.1638 ) , removed by the dean in 1820 , and its central portion is now found in the museum of archaeology and anthropology , cambridge , incorporated into the building as an architectural feature . design for a row of house in lothbury for thomas howard , 21st earl of arundel ( c.1638 ) , destroyed in the great fire of london lindsey house , lincoln 's inn fields now numbers 59 & 60 , attributed ( c . 1638–40 ) the list is based on , inigo jones , john summerson , 2nd edition 2000 , yale university press milton manor house , milton , abingdon , oxfordshire coleshill house , berkshire ( designed by jones and executed by roger pratt ) . gallery of architectural works . file : banqueting house london.jpg banqueting house whitehall file : banqueting house vit brit edited.jpg banqueting house whitehall file : bottom storey façade banqueting house.jpg detail of the banqueting house whitehall file : banqueting house londres.jpg interior looking north , banqueting house whitehall file : banqueting house 803.jpg ceiling , with rubens paintings , banqueting house whitehall file : ingo jones plan for a new palace at whitehall 1638.jpg design to rebuild whitehall palace file : old st . paul 's cathedral from the west - project gutenberg etext 16531.png west front , nave and transepts , old st . paul 's cathedral , as remodelled by jones file : the queen 's house , greenwich.jpg north front , the queen 's house , greenwich file : queenshouse.jpg south front , the queen 's house , greenwich file : queen 's house vit brit edited.jpg south front , the queen 's house , greenwich file : the queen 's house , greenwich - great hall-8148915844.jpg great hall , the queen 's house , greenwich file : tulipstair queenshouse greenwich.jpg tulip stair , the queen 's house , greenwich file : queen 's house plan.jpg plan , the queen 's house , greenwich file : nebot covent garden market clean.jpg covent garden file : st . paul 's , covent garden.jpg st . paul 's covent garden file : chiswick house 314.jpg gateway from oatlands , now at chiswick house file : wilton house.jpg wilton house , wiltshire file : rollschapel.jpg rolls chapel and rolls house , now part of maughan library , king 's college london file : queenschapellondon.jpg queen 's chapel , st . james palace , london file : stoke park pavilions 2008 08 16.jpg stoke park , attributed . see also . list of architects lists of people from london in-i-go jones . references . sources . christy anderson , inigo jones and the classical tradition ( cambridge , 2007 ) . edward chaney , the evolution of the grand tour : anglo-italian cultural relations since the renaissance , london , routledge , 2000 . edward chaney , 'evelyn , inigo jones , and the collector earl of arundel ' , john evelyn and his milieu , eds f . harris and m . hunter ( the british library , 2003 ) . edward chaney , inigo jones 's 'roman sketchbook , 2 vols , london , the roxburghe club , 2006 . edward chaney , '' roma britannica and the cultural memory of egypt : lord arundel and the obelisk of domitian '' , in roma britannica : art patronage and cultural exchange in eighteenth-century rome , eds . d . marshall , k . wolfe and s . russell , british school at rome , 2011 , pp . & nbsp ; 147–70 . edward chaney and timothy wilks , the jacobean grand tour : early stuart travellers in europe ( i.b . tauris : london , 2014 ) . colvin , howard , '' a biographical dictionary of british architects : 1600 to 1840 '' , 1954 gotch , a j , '' inigo jones '' , 1968 . vaughan hart . art and magic in the court of the stuarts . london , routledge , 1994 . vaughan hart . ‘ imperial seat or ecumenical temple ? on inigo jones ’ s use of ‘ decorum ’ at st paul ’ s cathedral ’ , architectura , 1995 , vol.25 no.2 , pp . & nbsp ; 194–213 . vaughan hart , inigo jones : the architect of kings , london and new haven , yale university press , 2011 . hart , vaughan , tucker , richard . ‘ “ immaginacy set free ” : aristotelian ethics and inigo jones ’ s banqueting house at whitehall ’ , res : journal of anthropology and aesthetics , vol.39 , spring 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 151–67 . hart , vaughan , tucker , richard . ‘ ornament and the work of inigo jones ’ , architectura , vol.32 , autumn 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 36–52 . leapman , michael . inigo : the troubled life of inigo jones , architect of the english renaissance . london , headline book publishing , 2003 . orgel , stephen and strong , roy c . , inigo jones : the theatre of the stuart court , 1973 giles worsley , inigo jones and the european classicist tradition , new haven and london , yale university press , 2007 . external links . biography of inigo jones , royal institute of british architects . oxford dictionary of national biography '' an early drawing by inigo jones and a monument in shropshire '' the burlington magazine , vol . 115 , no . 843 , june 1973 inigo jones at the national portrait gallery , london h . flitcroft , h . hulsbergh , i . cole , p . fourdrinier , iarchive : designsinigojon1jone , 1727