1947 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1947 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . notable films released in 1947 . united states unless stated . . 13 rue madeleine , starring james cagney . a . admiral nakhimov – ( ussr ) along the songhua river ( songhua-jiang shang ) – ( china ) angel and the badman , starring john wayne and gail russell . b . the bachelor and the bobby-soxer , starring cary grant , shirley temple , myrna loy between yesterday and tomorrow , starring hildegard knef – ( germany ) the big fix , starring sheila ryan the bishop 's wife , starring cary grant , loretta young , david niven black narcissus , written and directed by michael powell and emeric pressburger , starring deborah kerr , sabu , jean simmons – ( gb ) body and soul , directed by robert rossen , starring john garfield and lilli palmer boomerang , starring dana andrews born to kill , starring claire trevor and lawrence tierney the brasher doubloon , starring george montgomery brighton rock , a boulting brothers film , starring richard attenborough – ( gb ) brute force , directed by jules dassin , starring burt lancaster buck privates come home , starring bud abbott and lou costello bury me dead , starring june lockhart and hugh beaumont . c . captain boycott , directed by frank launder , starring stewart granger – ( gb ) captain from castile , starring tyrone power carnegie hall , starring marsha hunt cass timberlane , starring spencer tracy and lana turner cinderella ( zolushka ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) copacabana , starring groucho marx and carmen miranda crossfire , starring robert young , robert mitchum , robert ryan , gloria grahame cynthia ( film ) , starring elizabeth taylor and george murphy . d . daisy kenyon , directed by otto preminger , starring joan crawford , henry fonda , dana andrews dancing with crime , starring richard attenborough and sheila sim – ( gb ) dark passage , starring humphrey bogart and lauren bacall' dead reckoning , starring humphrey bogart and lizabeth scott deep valley , directed by jean negulesco , starring ida lupino desert fury , starring john hodiak , burt lancaster , lizabeth scott desperate , directed by anthony mann , starring steve brodie and raymond burr devil in the flesh ( diable au corps ) – ( france ) the devil thumbs a ride , starring lawrence tierney dick tracy meets gruesome , starring boris karloff and ralph byrd driftwood , starring walter brennan and natalie wood a double life , starring ronald colman and shelley winters down to earth , starring rita hayworth and larry parks dreams that money can buy , directed by hans richter . e . the egg and i , starring claudette colbert and fred macmurray eight thousand li of cloud and moon ( ba qian li lu yun he yue ) – ( china ) escape me never , starring ida lupino , eleanor parker , errol flynn the exile , directed by max ophuls , starring douglas fairbanks , jr . and maria montez . f . fame is the spur , a boulting brothers film , with michael redgrave – ( gb ) far away love , directed by chen liting , starring zhao dan and qin yi – ( china ) the farmer 's daughter , starring loretta young fear in the night , starring deforest kelley fireworks , directed by kenneth anger the flame , starring vera ralston and broderick crawford flesh will surrender ( il delitto di giovanni episcopo ) , starring aldo fabrizi – ( italy ) forever amber , starring linda darnell the foxes of harrow , starring rex harrison and maureen o'hara – ( gb/u.s . ) framed , starring glenn ford frieda , directed by basil dearden , starring david farrar , glynis johns , mai zetterling – ( gb ) the fugitive , starring henry fonda and dolores del río fun and fancy free , an animated film from disney and rko . g . the garcias return ! ( ¡vuelven los garcia ! ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) gentleman 's agreement , starring gregory peck , dorothy mcguire , celeste holm , john garfield the ghost and mrs . muir , starring gene tierney and rex harrison golden earrings , starring ray milland and marlene dietrich good news , starring june allyson and peter lawford green dolphin street , starring lana turner and donna reed the guilt of janet ames , starring rosalind russell the guilty , starring bonita granville . h . heaven only knows , starring robert cummings hi-de-ho , starring cab calloway high barbaree , starring van johnson and june allyson high wall , starring robert taylor honeymoon , starring shirley temple the hucksters , starring clark gable and deborah kerr hue and cry , the first ealing comedy , directed by charles crichton – ( gb ) the humpbacked horse ( konyok gorbunok ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) hungry hill , starring margaret lockwood and dennis price – ( gb ) . i . an ideal husband , directed by alexander korda , starring michael wilding and paulette goddard – ( gb ) if winter comes , starring deborah kerr , walter pidgeon , angela lansbury the imperfect lady , starring ray milland and teresa wright in those days ( in jenen tagen ) – ( germany ) it always rains on sunday , starring googie withers and jack warner – ( gb ) it happened in brooklyn , starring frank sinatra , kathryn grayson , peter lawford , and jimmy durante it happened on fifth avenue , starring victor moore , don defore , gale storm , charlie ruggles . j . jenny and the soldier ( soldaten og jenny ) – ( denmark ) johnny o'clock , starring dick powell . k . killer dill , starring stuart erwin and anne gwynne kiss of death , starring victor mature and richard widmark . l . the lady from shanghai , directed by and starring orson welles , with rita hayworth lady in the lake , directed by and starring robert montgomery last of the redskins , starring michael o'shea the last stage ( ostatni etap ) – ( poland ) the late george apley , starring ronald colman law of the lash , starring lash larue life with father , starring william powell and elizabeth taylor a likely story , starring barbara hale and bill williams living in a big way , starring gene kelly and marie mcdonald the long night , starring henry fonda and barbara bel geddes lost honeymoon , starring franchot tone and ann richards the lost moment , starring robert cummings and susan hayward lost youth ( gioventù perduta ) , directed by pietro germi – ( italy ) love from a stranger , starring john hodiak lured , starring george sanders and lucille ball . m . the macomber affair , starring gregory peck and joan bennett the man i love , starring ida lupino and robert alda the mark of cain , directed by brian desmond hurst ( gb ) marriage in the shadows ( ehe im schatten ) – ( east germany ) mine own executioner , starring burgess meredith – ( gb ) miracle on 34th street , starring edmund gwenn , john payne , maureen o'hara monsieur verdoux , directed by and starring charles chaplin monsieur vincent , starring pierre fresnay – ( france ) moss rose , starring peggy cummins and victor mature mother wore tights , starring betty grable mourning becomes electra , starring rosalind russell and michael redgrave my favourite brunette , starring bob hope and dorothy lamour my wild irish rose , a biopic starring dennis morgan ( as chauncey olcott ) . n . neel kamal ( blue lotus ) , first film of madhubala and raj kapoor in adult roles – ( india ) nicholas nickleby , directed by alberto cavalcanti , starring stanley holloway – ( gb ) nightmare alley , starring tyrone power and joan blondell nora prentiss , starring ann sheridan the october man , starring john mills and joan greenwood – ( gb ) . o . odd man out , directed by carol reed , starring james mason and robert newton – ( gb ) one wonderful sunday ( subarashiki nichiyōbi ) , directed by akira kurosawa – ( japan ) l'onorevole angelina ( parliamentarian angelina ) , directed by luigi zampa , starring anna magnani – ( italy ) out of the blue , starring virginia mayo and george brent out of the past , directed by jacques tourneur , starring robert mitchum , jane greer and kirk douglas . p . the paradine case , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring gregory peck , alida valli , ann todd , louis jourdan , charles laughton the pearl ( la perla ) , starring pedro armendáriz – ( mexico ) the perils of pauline , starring betty hutton pirates of monterey , starring rod cameron and maria montez possessed , starring joan crawford and van heflin pursued , starring robert mitchum and teresa wright . q . quai des orfèvres , directed by henri-georges clouzot , starring louis jouvet – ( france ) . r . railroaded ! , directed by anthony mann , starring john ireland and hugh beaumont ramrod , starring joel mccrea and veronica lake the record of a tenement gentleman ( nagaya shinshiroku ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) the red house , starring edward g . robinson and judith anderson repeat performance , starring louis hayward and joan leslie ride the pink horse , directed by and starring robert montgomery riffraff , starring pat o'brien and anne jeffreys road to rio , starring bing crosby , dorothy lamour , bob hope the romance of rosy ridge , starring van johnson , thomas mitchell , janet leigh the root of all evil , starring phyllis calvert and michael rennie – ( gb ) roses are red , starring peggy knudsen . s . scared to death , starring bela lugosi and george zucco school for postmen ( l'école des facteurs ) , a comedy short directed by and starring jacques tati – ( france ) the sea of grass , directed by elia kazan , starring katharine hepburn and spencer tracy secret agent ( podvig razvedchika ) , directed by boris barnet – ( u.s.s.r . ) the secret life of walter mitty , starring danny kaye and virginia mayo the senator was indiscreet , starring william powell a ship to india ( skepp till india land ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) the shocking miss pilgrim , starring betty grable sinbad the sailor smash-up , the story of a woman , starring susan hayward snow trail ( ginrei no hate ) , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) so well remembered , directed by edward dmytryk , starring john mills and martha scott – ( gb ) something in the wind , starring deanna durbin and donald o'connor song of scheherazade , starring yvonne de carlo , jean-pierre aumont , brian donlevy song of the thin man , starring william powell and myrna loy the spring river flows east ( yi jiang chun shui xiang dong liu ) – ( china ) story of a bad woman ( historia de una mala mujer ) – ( argentina ) . t . t-men , directed by anthony mann , starring dennis o'keefe temptation harbour , starring robert newton and simone simon – ( gb ) they made me a fugitive , directed by alberto cavalcanti , starring trevor howard – ( gb ) they wo n't believe me , starring robert young and susan hayward this time for keeps , starring esther williams and jimmy durante los tres garcía ( los tres garcía ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) to live in peace ( vivere in pace ) – ( italy ) the two mrs . carrolls , starring humphrey bogart , barbara stanwyck , alexis smith trail street , starring randolph scott . u . uncle silas , starring jean simmons – ( gb ) unconquered , starring gary cooper and paulette goddard the unfaithful , starring ann sheridan and lew ayres the unsuspected , starring claude rains and joan caulfield . v . the voice of the turtle , starring ronald reagan . w . the web , starring ella raines and edmond o'brien welcome stranger , starring bing crosby and barry fitzgerald whispering city , starring paul lukas – ( canada ) the wistful widow of wagon gap , starring bud abbott and lou costello the woman on the beach , starring joan bennett and robert ryan wyoming , starring wild bill elliott . serials . the black widow , starring bruce edwards brick bradford , starring kane richmond jack armstrong jesse james rides again , starring clayton moore and linda stirling the sea hound , starring buster crabbe son of zorro , starring george turner and peggy stewart the vigilante , starring ralph byrd . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1952 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) donald duck ( 1934–1956 ) andy panda ( 1939–1949 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) the fox and the crow ( 1941–1950 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) chip and dale ( 1943–1956 ) red hot riding hood ( 1943–1949 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) george and junior ( 1946–1948 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) pluto ( 1937–1951 ) goofy ( 1939–1953 ) woody woodpecker ( 1941–1949 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) . births . january 8 – david bowie , english singer , songwriter and actor ( d . 2016 ) january 15 – andrea martin , canadian-american actress january 18 – takeshi kitano , japanese writer-director , actor , comedian , author and video game creator january 31 – jonathan banks , american actor february 2 – farrah fawcett , american actress ( d . 2009 ) february 7 – wayne allwine , american voice actor ( d . 2009 ) february 24 – edward james olmos , american actor february 28 – stephanie beacham , english actress march 6 – rob reiner , american actor , comedian , producer and director march 19 glenn close , american actress dermot crowley , irish stage , film and television actor march 23 – kim hee-ra , south korean movie actor march 26 – john morton , american movie actor , stuntman and writer april 6 – john ratzenberger , american actor april 11 – meshach taylor , american actor ( d . 2014 ) april 15 – lois chiles , american actress april 18 – james woods , american actor april 23 – blair brown , american actress may 4 – richard jenkins , american actor may 25 – jacki weaver , australian actress june 1 – jonathan pryce , welsh actor june 6 – robert englund , american actor june 20 – candy clark , american actress june 22 - david lander , american character actor , comedian , musician and baseball scout ( d . 2020 ) june 24 – peter weller , american actor june 30 - tõnis rätsep , estonian actor july 9 – o . j . simpson , american football player and actor july 22 – albert brooks , american actor , comedian and director july 30 arnold schwarzenegger , austrian-born american actor , bodybuilder and 38th governor of california william atherton , american actor july 31 – richard griffiths , english actor ( d . 2013 ) august 22 – cindy williams , american actress august 24 – anne archer , american actress august 27 – barbara bach , american actress september 14 – sam neill , new zealand actor september 21 – stephen king , american author september 27 – denis lawson , scottish actor and director october 1 – stephen collins , american actor october 17 simi garewal , indian actress and talk show host michael mckean , american actor and comedian october 24 – kevin kline , american actor october 26 – ene järvis , estonian actress october 29 – richard dreyfuss , american actor november 13 – joe mantegna , american actor november 24 – dwight schultz , american actor and voice actor november 30 – stuart baird , english editor , producer and director december 4 – tõnu kark , estonian actor december 8 – bruce kimmel , american actor , director , writer december 11 – teri garr , american actress and comedian december 16 – ben cross , english actor ( d . 2020 ) december 17 - wes studi , cherokee american actor and film producer december 29 – ted danson , american actor december 31 – tim matheson , american actor , director and producer . deaths . january 26 – grace moore , 48 , american opera singer and actress , one night of love , the king steps out , when you 're in love february 12 – sidney toler , 72 , american actor , charlie chan in the secret service , the chinese cat , black magic , the jade mask march 8 – victor potel , 57 , american actor and comedian , sullivan 's travels , the miracle of morgan 's creek , the palm beach story , the egg and i may 31 – adrienne ames , 39 , american actress , the death kiss , you 're telling me ! , slander house , gigolette june 1 – anna hofman-uddgren , 79 , swedish director , actress june 5 – nils olaf chrisander , 63 , swedish actor , director august 30 – gunnar sommerfeldt , 56 , danish actor and director september 21 – harry carey , 69 , american actor , mr . smith goes to washington , angel and the badman , red river , beyond tomorrow october 1 – olive borden , 41 , american actress , 3 bad men , half marriage , leave it to me october 17 – john halliday , 67 , american actor , the philadelphia story , intermezzo october 24 – dudley digges , 68 , irish actor , the maltese falcon , mutiny on the bounty , the fight for life december 21 – mark hellinger , 47 , american producer , high sierra , they drive by night , the two mrs . carrolls . film debuts . anouk aimée – la maison sous la mer george chakiris – song of love arlene dahl – my wild irish rose mel ferrer – the fugitive deforest kelley – fear in the night janet leigh – the romance of rosy ridge toshiro mifune – snow trail marilyn monroe – the shocking miss pilgrim sidney poitier – sepia cinderella denver pyle – the guilt of janet ames richard widmark – kiss of death