John Howard (prison reformer)

birth and early life . howard was born in north london , either in hackney or enfield . his father , also john , was a wealthy upholsterer at smithfield market in the city . his mother ann pettitt died when he was five years old , and , described as a '' sickly child '' , he was sent to live at cardington , bedfordshire , some fifty miles from london , where his father owned property . his father , a strict disciplinarian with strong religious beliefs , sent the young john to a school in hertford and then to list of dissenting academies london area . after school , john was apprenticed to a wholesale grocer to learn business methods , but he was unhappy . when his father died in 1742 , he was left with a sizeable inheritance but no true vocation . his calvinist faith and quiet , serious disposition meant he had little desire for the fashionable endeavours of an english aristocratic lifestyle . in 1748 , he left england for a grand tour of the continent . upon his return , he lived in lodgings in stoke newington , where he again became seriously ill . he was nursed back to health by his landlady , sarah loidore , whom he then married despite her being thirty years older than he was . she died within three years and he distributed her meagre belongings amongst her remaining family and poor neighbours . john howard was considered eccentric by many of his contemporaries . it has been advanced by psychiatrist philip lucas philip lucas , '' john howard and asperger 's syndrome : psychopathology and philanthropy '' in : history of psychiatry 12 ( 45 ) march 2001 , pp . 73-101 . and by mathematician ioan james ioan james , asperger 's syndrome and high achievement : some very remarkable people , jessica kingsley pub , 2005 . that howard might have had asperger 's syndrome . taken prisoner . he then set out for portugal following the 1755 lisbon earthquake , traveling on the hanover , which was captured by french privateers . he was imprisoned in brest for six days before being transferred to another prison on the french coast . he was later exchanged for a french officer held by the british , and he quickly travelled to the sick and hurt commissioners in london to seek help on behalf of his fellow captives . it is widely believed that this personal experience generated howard 's interest in prisons . howard at cardington . having returned from france , he settled again at cardington , bedfordshire to live on a estate which was formerly two farms , the larger of which he had inherited from his grandparents . his grandmother , martha howard , was a relation of the whitbread family , and he became a neighbour and close friend of his cousin , samuel whitbread . he spent the next two years building properties and trying to improve the lives of the tenants living on his land . later , a survey of cardington in 1782 found that he was paying for the teaching of 23 children . he was elected a fellow of the royal society in may 1756 . in 1758 , howard married henrietta leeds who died in 1765 , a week after giving birth to a son , also named john , who was sent to boarding school at a very young age . the younger john was sent down from cambridge for homosexual offences , was judged insane at the age of 21 , and died in 1799 having spent thirteen years in an asylum . high sheriff of bedfordshire . image : howardstatuebedford.jpg left thumb 170px statue of john howard , bedford john howard was appointed high sheriff of bedfordshire in 1773 , initially for a one-year period . such was his dedication , rather than delegating his duties to the under-sheriff as was customary , howard inspected the county prison himself . he was shocked by what he found , and spurred into action to inspect prisons throughout england . of particular concern to howard were those prisoners who were held because they could not pay the jailer 's fee – an amount paid to the owner or keeper of the prison for upkeep . he took this issue to parliament , and in 1774 howard was called to give evidence on prison conditions to a house of commons select committee . members of that committee were so impressed that , unusually , howard was called to the bar of the house of commons and publicly thanked for his '' humanity and zeal '' . having visited several hundred prisons across england , scotland , wales and wider europe , howard published the first edition of the state of the prisons in 1777 . it included very detailed accounts of the prisons he had visited , including plans and maps , together with detailed instructions on the necessary improvements , especially regarding hygiene and cleanliness , the lack of which was causing many deaths . it is this work that has been credited as establishing the practice of single-celling in the united kingdom and , by extension , in the united states . the following account , of the bridewell at abingdon , oxfordshire , is typical : two dirty day-rooms ; and three offensive night-rooms : that for men eight feet square : one of the women 's , nine by eight ; the other four and a half feet square : the straw , worn to dust , swarmed with vermin : no court : no water accessible to prisoners . the petty offenders were in irons : at my last visit , eight were women . howard viewed his work as humanitarian . terry carlson , in his 1990 biographical tract on howard , remarks : howard 's detailed proposals for improvements were designed to enhance the physical and mental health of the prisoners and the security and order of the prison . his recommendations pertaining to such matters as the prison location , plan and furnishings , the provision of adequate water supply , and prisoner 's diet promoted hygiene and physical health . recommendations concerning the quality of prison personnel , rules related to the maintenance of standards of health and order and an independent system of inspection , reflect the need for prison personnel to set a moral example . in april 1777 , howard 's sister died , leaving him £15,000 and her house . he used this inheritance and the revenue from the sale of her house to further his work on prisons . in 1778 , he was again examined by the house of commons , who were this time inquiring into '' hulks '' , or prison ships . two days after giving evidence , he was again travelling europe , beginning in the dutch republic . by 1784 , howard calculated that he had travelled over visiting prisons . he had been awarded an honorary lld by the university of dublin and had been given the freedom of the city of london . his fourth and final tour of english prisons began in march 1787 and two years later he published the state of the prisons in england , and an account of the principal lazarettos of europe . death . image : john govard memorial in kherson-11102010 ( 019 ) . jpg right thumb 180px memorial in kherson . image : shrewsbury landmarks 04.jpg thumb 180px right bust of john howard over the main entrance of shrewsbury prison . his final journey took him into eastern europe , and into crimea . whilst at kherson , howard contracted typhus on a prison visit and died , aged sixty-three . he was buried in a walled field at dophinovka ( stepanovka ) , ukraine . despite requesting a quiet funeral without pomp and ceremony , the event was elaborate and attended by the prince of moldovia . when news of his death reached england in february 1790 , a commemorative series of john howard halfpenny conder tokens were struck , including one that circulated in bath , on the reverse showing '' go forth '' and '' remember the debtors in gaol '' . howard became the first civilian to be honoured with a statue in st . paul 's cathedral , london . a statue was also erected in bedford , and a further one in kherson . his bust features in the architecture of a number of victorian prisons across the uk , such as at shrewsbury . he was elected a foreign honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1790 . . howard 's legacy . howard 's views on keeping prisoners in isolation were unavailingly opposed by elizabeth fry , who believed in the value of association . almost eighty years after his death , the howard association was formed in london , with the aim of '' promotion of the most efficient means of penal treatment and crime prevention '' and to promote '' a reformatory and radically preventive treatment of offenders '' . in its first annual report in 1867 , the association stated that its efforts had been focused on '' the promotion of reformatory and remunerative prison labour , and the abolition of capital punishment . '' the association merged with the penal reform league in 1921 to become the howard league for penal reform . today , the howard league is britain 's biggest penal reform organisation . john howard 's name was adopted by non-profit organizations in canada which call themselves the john howard society of their given geographic area and each society seeks to develop effective , just and humane responses to crime and its consequences . there are currently over 60 john howard societies spread across every province of canada and the northwest territories . the howard association , a benevolent organisation founded in 1855 in norfolk , virginia , united states , was also named after him . there is also a howard league for penal reform in new zealand . the john howard association www.thejha.org of illinois , formed in 1901 , independently monitors correctional facilities , policies and practices , and advances reforms needed to achieve a fair , humane and effective criminal justice system in illinois . a statue to howard is in st paul 's cathedral , the first to a civilian , and a large bronze statue at bedford was erected in 1890 , the centenary of his death . a terracotta bust of john howard is incorporated in the gatehouse of hm prison wormwood scrubs , and another bust over the entrance to shrewsbury prison . the john howard pavilion at st . elizabeths hospital in washington , d.c . , is the forensic psychiatric hospital for the district of columbia . its most notorious inmate was john hinckley , jr . , failed assassin of then us president ronald wilson reagan in 1981 . samford university , located in the us state of alabama , was founded by baptists as howard college in 1841 . samford 's howard college of arts and sciences remains the academic core of the university . the john howard school in clapton , london ( now clapton girls ' academy ) , was named after him . vegetarianism . howard was a teetotalism and vegetarian . he became a vegetarian many years before his death . he once commented that in his london house there were '' not a dozen joints of meat in seven years . '' gibson , edgar charles sumner . ( 1905 ) . john howard . metheun . p . 194 he lived on a diet of milk , fruit , vegetables , butter , tea and water . as a strict vegetarian howard had distaste for the luxuries of life . he was fond of tea and carried a kettle on his travels . stoughton , john . ( 1853 ) . the christian philanthropist . a memorial of john howard . london : jackson and walford . p . 40 whilst visiting sweden , howard found that living on a vegetarian diet was very difficult . this was because few vegetables were eaten in the winter months and were almost impossible to obtain . he diet was limited to coarse bread . howard , derek lionel . ( 1958 ) . john howard : prison reformer . archer house . p . 90 he attributed his immunity from gaol fever found in filthy prisons that he had visited to his vegetarian diet . forward , charles w . ( 1898 ) . fifty years of food reform : a history of the vegetarian movement in england . london : the ideal publishing union . pp . 3-4 however , howard contracted typhus on a prison visit and died in 1790 . see also . morrin centre penitentiary act . notes .