Franz Marc

early life . franz marc was born in 1880 in munich , the then capital of the kingdom of bavaria . his father , wilhelm marc , was a professional landscape painter ; his mother , sophie , was a homemaker and a devout , socially liberal calvinist . at the age of 17 marc wanted to study theology , as his older brother paul had . two years later , however , he enrolled in the arts program of munich university . he was first required to serve in the military for a year , after which , in 1900 , he began studies instead at the academy of fine arts , munich , where his teachers included gabriel von hackl and wilhelm von diez . in 1903 and 1907 , he spent time in france , particularly in paris , visiting the museums in the city and copying many paintings , a traditional way for artists to study and develop technique . in paris , marc frequented artistic circles , meeting numerous artists and the actress sarah bernhardt . he discovered a strong affinity for the work of painter vincent van gogh . after the 1903 trip , he ceased attending the academy of fine arts . during his 20s , marc was involved in a number of stormy relationships , including an affair lasting for many years with annette von eckardt , a married antique dealer nine years his senior . he married twice , first to marie schnür , then to maria marc ; both were artists . career . in 1906 , marc traveled with his elder brother paul , a byzantine expert , to thessaloniki , mount athos , and various other greek locations . a few years later , in 1910 , marc developed an important friendship with the artist august macke . in 1910 marc painted nude with cat and grazing horses , and showed works in the second exhibition of the neue künstlervereinigung ( new artists ' association , of which marc was briefly a member ) at the thannhauser galleries in munich . . der blaue reiter . in 1911 , marc founded the der blaue reiter journal , which became the center of an artist circle , along with macke , wassily kandinsky , and others who had decided to split off from the neue künstlervereinigung movement . though marc showed several of his works in the first der blaue reiter exhibition at the thannhauser galleries in munich between december 1911 and january 1912 , as it was the apex of the german expressionist movement , the exhibit also showed in berlin , cologne , hagen , and frankfurt . in 1912 , marc met robert delaunay , whose use of color and the futurist method was a major influence on marc 's work ; fascinated by futurism and cubism , marc created art that increasingly was stark in nature , painting natural abstract forms which found spiritual value in color . he painted the tiger and red deer in 1912 and the tower of blue horses , foxes , and fate of the animals in 1913 . . wartime . with the outbreak of world war i in 1914 , marc was drafted into the imperial german army as a cavalryman . by february 1916 , as shown in a letter to his wife , he had gravitated to military camouflage . his technique for hiding artillery from aerial observation was to paint canvas covers in broadly pointillist style . he took pleasure in creating a series of nine such tarpaulin covers in styles varying '' from manet to kandinsky '' , suspecting that the latter could be the most effective against aircraft flying at or higher . after mobilization of the german army , the government identified notable artists to be withdrawn from combat for their own safety . marc was on the list but was struck in the head and killed instantly by a shell splinter during the battle of verdun in 1916 before orders for reassignment could reach him . . style . image : franz marc 005.jpg thumb right die großen blauen pferde , blue horses ( 1911 ) marc made some sixty prints in woodcut and lithography . most of his mature work portrays animals , usually in natural settings . his work is characterized by bright primary color , an almost cubist portrayal of animals , stark simplicity and a profound sense of emotion . even in his own time , his work attracted notice in influential circles . marc gave an emotional meaning or purpose to the colors he used in his work : blue was used to portray masculinity and spirituality , yellow represented feminine joy , and red encased the sound of violence . after the national socialists took power , they suppressed modern art ; in 1936 and 1937 , the nazis condemned the late marc as an entarteter künstler ( degenerate artist ) and ordered approximately 130 of his works removed from exhibition in german museums . the blue horses was auctioned off at the infamous theodor fischer gallery '' degenerate art '' sale in lucerne , on 29 june 1939 , and acquired by the musée des beaux-arts in liège . his painting landscape with horses was discovered in 2012 along with more than a thousand other paintings , in the munich apartment of cornelius gurlitt whose father , hildebrand gurlitt , was one of hitler 's four official art dealers of modernist art the nazis called '' degenerate '' which the nazis sold or traded to raise cash for the third reich . in 2017 , marc 's painting the foxes ( 1913 ) , which hung in düsseldorf 's kunstpalast was the object of nazi era claim by the family of kurt grawi , a german jewish banker who had owned the painting before the nazis rose to power . forced to sell some of his paintings well below value in a “ jew auction ” at the leo spik auction house in berlin in 1937 , ’ the foxes ’ was not amongst them . it ended up in the hands of an ernest simon , a german-jewish businessman , in new york in 1940 . grawi was arrested on kristallnacht and incarcerated in sachsenhausen concentration cam p in 1938 , before he managed to flee to chile in 1939 . one of marc 's best-known paintings is tierschicksale ( animal destinies or fate of the animals ) , which hangs in the kunstmuseum basel . marc had completed the work in 1913 , when '' the tension of impending cataclysm had pervaded society '' , as one art historian noted . on the rear of the canvas , marc wrote , '' und alles sein ist flammend leid '' ( '' and all being is flaming agony '' ) . serving in world war i , marc wrote to his wife about the painting , '' it is like a premonition of this warhorrible and shattering . i can hardly conceive that i painted it . '' . legacy and honors . marc 's family house in munich is marked with a historical plaque . the franz marc museum which is located in kochel am see , opened in 1986 and is dedicated to the artist 's life and work . it houses many of his paintings , and also works by other contemporary artists . in october 1998 , several of marc 's paintings garnered record prices at christie 's art auction house in london , including rote rehe & nbsp ; i ( red deer & nbsp ; i ) , which sold for 3.3 million . in october 1999 , his der wasserfall ( the waterfall ) was sold by sotheby 's in london for 5.06 million . this price set a record for franz marc 's work and for twentieth-century german painting . in 2008 , the former record was again broken when marc 's weidende pferde & nbsp ; iii ( grazing horses & nbsp ; iii ) was sold for £12,340,500 ( 24,376,190 ) at sotheby's . . public collections . among the public collections holding works by franz marc are : museum de fundatie , zwolle , netherlands solomon r . guggenheim museum , new york franz marc museum in kochel am see lenbachhaus , munich . selected images . file : franz marc-the yellow cow-1911.jpg die gelbe kuh , the yellow cow ( 1911 ) , solomon r . guggenheim museum , new york file : marc-blue-black fox.jpg fuchs , fox ( 1911 ) , von der heydt museum in wuppertal file : franz marc- die kleinen blauen pferde.jpg die kleinen blauen pferde , the little blue horses ( 1911 ) , staatsgalerie stuttgart file : franz marc roter stier , 1912.jpg roter stier , red bull ( 1912 ) , pushkin museum in moskow file : franz marc - der traum - google art project.jpg der traum , the dream ( 1912 ) , thyssen-bornemisza museum in madrid file : das äffchen ( franz marc , 1912 ) . jpg das äffchen , the little monkey ( 1912 ) , lenbachhaus , munich file : franz marc - the foxes - google art project.jpg füchse , foxes ( 1913 ) , museum kunstpalast in düsseldorf file : marc , franz - the tiger - google art project.jpg der tiger , the tiger ( 1912 ) , lenbachhaus in munich file : franz marc 029a.jpg der turm der blauen pferde , the tower of blue horses ( 1913 ) , missing since 1945 file : franz marc-the fate of the animals-1913.jpg tierschicksale , fate of the animals ( 1913 ) , kunstmuseum basel in basel file : gugg dreaming horse.jpg träumendes pferd , dreaming horse ( 1913 ) , solomon r . guggenheim museum , new york file : gugg young boy with a lamb ; the good shepherd.jpg knabe mit lamm ; der gute hirte , young boy with a lamb ; the good shepherd ( 1911 ) , solomon r . guggenheim museum , new york . see also . the tower of blue horses , 1913 , missing since 1945 . references . further reading . . external links . sortable list of paintings by franz marc franz marc virtual gallery gallery of marc 's work links on marc webmuseum franz marc page franz marc 's cats in art