Darjeeling

flora and fauna . darjeeling is a part of the eastern himalayan zoo-geographic zone . flora around darjeeling comprises sal , oak , semi-evergreen , temperate and alpine forests . dense evergreen forests of sal and oak lie around the town , where a wide variety of rare orchids are found . the lloyd 's botanical garden preserves common and rare species of plants , while the padmaja naidu himalayan zoological park specialises in conserving and breeding endangered himalayan species . the town of darjeeling and surrounding region face deforestation due to increasing demand for wood fuel and timber , as well as air pollution from increasing vehicular traffic . forests and wildlife in the district are managed and protected by the divisional forest officer of the territorial and wildlife wing of the west bengal forest department . the fauna found in darjeeling includes several species of ducks , teals , plovers and gulls that pass darjeeling while migrating to and from tibet . small mammals found in the region include small indian civets , mongooses and badgers . ta conservation centre for red pandas opened at darjeeling zoo in 2014 , building on a prior captive breeding program . . civic administration . the darjeeling urban agglomeration consists of darjeeling municipality and the tukvar tea garden ( tukvar valley ) . established in 1850 , the darjeeling municipality maintains the civic administration of the town , covering an area of . the municipality consists of a board of councillors elected from each of the 32 wards of darjeeling town as well as a few members nominated by the state government . the board of councillors elects a chairman from among its elected members ; the chairman is the executive head of the municipality . , the gorkha janmukti morcha ( gjmm ) holds power in the municipality . from 1988 to 2012 , the gorkha-dominated hill areas of darjeeling district were under the jurisdiction of the darjeeling gorkha hill council ( dghc ) . in 2012 , the dghc was replaced by the gorkhaland territorial administration ( gta ) . the elected members of this body are authorised to manage certain affairs of the hills , including education , health and tourism . law and order in darjeeling town comes under the jurisdiction of the district police force , which is a part of the west bengal police ; a deputy superintendent oversees the town 's security and law affairs . darjeeling municipality area has two police stations at darjeeling and jorebungalow . . civil utilities . natural springs in the senchal lake provide most of darjeeling 's water supply . water collected is routed through stone conduits to two lakes that were constructed in 1910 and 1932 , from where it is piped to the town after purification at the jorebungalow filtration plant . during the dry season , when water supplied by springs is insufficient , water is pumped from khong khola , a nearby small perennial stream . increasing demand has led to a worsening shortfall in water supply ; just over 50 % of the town 's households are connected to the municipal water supply system . various efforts made to augment the water supply , including the construction of a third storage reservoir in 1984 , have failed to yield desired results . the town has an underground sewage system , covering about 40 % of the town area , that collects domestic waste and conveys it to septic tanks for disposal . solid waste is disposed of in a nearby landfill , which also houses the town 's crematorium . kerbside collection of garbage and segregation of biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste have been implemented since 2003 . vermicomposting of vegetable waste is carried out with the help of non-governmental organisations . in june 2009 , in order to reduce waste , the municipality proposed a ban on plastic carrier bags and sachets in the town . from 1897 to the early 1990s , darjeeling was powered by hydroelectricity from the nearby sidrapong hydel power station , and it was the first town in india supplied with hydropower . today , electricity is supplied by the west bengal state electricity board from other locations . the town often suffers from power outages and the electrical supply voltage is unstable , making voltage stabilisers popular with many households . almost all of the primary schools are now maintained by darjeeling gorkha autonomous hill council . the total length of all types of roads within the municipal area is around . the west bengal fire service provides emergency services for the town . economy . the two most significant contributors to darjeeling 's economy are tourism and the tea industry . darjeeling tea , due to the unique agro-climatic conditions of darjeeling , has a distinctive natural flavour , is internationally reputed and recognised as a geographical indicator . the office of the indian tea association ( dita ) is located at darjeeling . darjeeling produces 7 % of india 's tea output , approximately every year . the tea industry has faced competition in recent years from tea produced in other parts of india as well as other countries like nepal . widespread concerns about labour disputes , worker layoffs and closing of estates have affected investment and production . several tea estates are being run on a workers ' cooperative model , while others are being planned for conversion into tourist resorts . more than 60 % of workers in the tea gardens are women . besides tea , the most widely cultivated crops include maize , millets , rice , cardamom , potato and ginger . darjeeling had become an important tourist destination as early as 1860 . it is reported to be the only location in eastern india that witnesses large numbers of foreign tourists . it is also a popular filming destination for bollywood and bengali cinema . satyajit ray shot his film kanchenjungha ( 1962 ) here , and his feluda series story , darjeeling jomjomaat , was also set in the town . bollywood movies such as aradhana ( 1969 ) , main hoon na ( 2004 ) , parineeta ( 2005 ) and more recently barfi ! ( 2012 ) have been filmed here . . tourism . tourist inflow into darjeeling had been affected by the political instability in the region , and agitations in the 1980s and 2000s hit the tourism industry hard . however , since 2012 , darjeeling has once again witnessed a steady inflow of both domestic and international tourists . presently , around 50,000 foreign and 500,000 domestic tourists visit darjeeling each year , and its repute as the '' queen of the hills '' remains unaltered . according to an india today survey published on 23 december 2015 , darjeeling is the third most googled travel destination among all the tourist destinations in india . even though there are political instabilities in darjeeling , its tourism rate is increasing year by year . many visit this place for food specialities like momos , steamed stick rice , and other steamed foods famous in this region , as well as to see the natural beauty of the area . . transport . , functional since 1968 , was closed in 2003 after an accident killed four tourists . it reopened in february 2012 . . demographics . according to provisional results of the 2011 census of india , darjeeling urban agglomeration has a population of 132,016 , out of which 65,839 were males and 66,177 were females . the sex ratio is 1,005 females per 1,000 males . the 0–6 years population is 7,382 . effective literacy rate for the population older than 6 years is 93.17 per cent . according to the 2001 census , the darjeeling urban agglomeration , with an area of , had a population of 109,163 , while the municipal area had a population of 107,530 . the population density of the municipal area was . the sex ratio was 1,017 females per 1,000 males , which was higher than the national average of 933 females per 1000 males . gorkhas , speaking nepali as their native language , form the majority which includes indigenous ethnic groups such as the bhutia , chhetri , gurung , lepcha , limbu , magar , newars , rai , sherpa , tamang , yolmo , along with several other denominations under the indo-aryan khas and the tibeto-burman kiratas . other communities that inhabit darjeeling include the anglo-indians , bengalis , biharis , chinese , marwaris , rajbanshis and tibetans . the prevailing languages are nepali , hindi , bengali and english . bengali is prevalent in the plains while tibetan is used by the refugees and some tribal people . dzongkha is spoken by the bhutias and the tibetans . darjeeling has seen a significant growth in its population , its decadal growth rate being 47 % between 1991 and 2001 . the colonial town was designed for a population of only 10,000 , and subsequent growth has created extensive infrastructural and environmental problems . the district 's forests and other natural wealth have been adversely affected by an ever-growing population . the official languages of darjeeling are bengali and nepali . . religion . the predominant religions of darjeeling are hinduism and buddhism , followed by christianity . dashain , & nbsp ; tihar , losar , & nbsp ; buddha jayanti , & nbsp ; christmas are the main festivals . besides , the diverse ethnic populace of the town also celebrates several local festivals . & nbsp ; buddhist ethnic groups which include the tibetans , lepchas , bhutias , sherpas , yolmos , gurungs , and tamangs celebrate & nbsp ; their new year , & nbsp ; called & nbsp ; losar , & nbsp ; in january/february , & nbsp ; maghe sankranti , chotrul duchen and tendong lho rumfaat . the & nbsp ; kiranti & nbsp ; rai people ( khambus ) celebrate their annual & nbsp ; sakela & nbsp ; festivals of & nbsp ; ubhauli & nbsp ; and udhauli , and & nbsp ; deusi and bhaileni are songs performed by men and women respectively , during the festival of tihar . all these provide a regional distinctness to darjeeling 's local culture from the rest of india . & nbsp ; darjeeling carnival , initiated by a civil society movement known as the darjeeling initiative , is a ten-day carnival held yearly during the winter with portrayal of the darjeeling hill 's musical and cultural heritage as its central theme . . culture . the culture of darjeeling is diverse and includes a variety of indigenous practices and festivals as mentioned above . many of the nepali hindus , as well as the various buddhist and other ethnic groups such as the lepchas , bhutias , kiranti limbus , tibetans , yolmos , gurungs , and tamangs , have their own distinct languages and cultures and yet share a largely harmonious co-existence . colonial architecture characterises many buildings in darjeeling , exemplified by several mock tudor residences , gothic churches , the raj bhawan , planters ' club and various educational institutions . buddhist monasteries showcase the pagoda style architecture . darjeeling is regarded as a centre of music and a niche for musicians and music admirers . singing and playing musical instruments are common pastimes among the resident population , who take pride in the traditions and role of music in cultural life . darjeeling also has a peace pagoda that was built in 1992 by the japanese buddhist organisation nipponzan myohoji . cuisine . due to the varied mix of cultures in darjeeling , the local and ethnic food of darjeeling is also quite varied . rice , noodles , and potatoes seem to make up the dominant part of the cuisine partly due to the cold climate . the most popular local snack food are momos , which are steamed flour dumplings with meat or vegetables fillings served piping hot with a side of clear soup and hot homemade tomato sauce . locals love aloo dom ( spicy steamed potato curry ) and various versions of it are served . for example , they add wai wai mimi instant noodles over a bowl of aloo dom and call it aloo mimi . another popular food is thukpa , which is of tibetan origins . thukpa is homemade noodle soup with meat , eggs and/or vegetables . other popular foods are kinema , chhurpi , gundruk and shaphalay ( tibetan bread stuffed with meat ) . fermented foods and beverages are consumed by a large percentage of the population . fermented foods include preparations of soybean , bamboo shoots , milk and sel roti , which is made from rice . tea ( especially butter tea ) is the most popular delicacy . alcoholic beverages include tongba , jnaard and chhaang , variations of a local beer made from fermenting finger millet . file : alu mimi darjeeling.jpg a bowl of aloo mimi file : tongba at hot stimulating cafe.jpg tongba . education . there are 52 primary schools , 67 high schools and 5 colleges in the town . having been a summer retreat for the british in india , darjeeling became the place of choice for the establishment of public schools on the model of eton , harrow and rugby , allowing the children of british officials to obtain an exclusive education . institutions such as mount hermon school , st . robert 's h.s . school , st . paul 's school , st . joseph 's school - north point , loreto convent are renowned as centres of educational excellence . . political unrest . see article gorkhaland