Prokop Diviš

early life . he was born václav divíšek on 26 march 1698 in helvíkovice , bohemia ( now ústí nad orlicí district , czech republic ) . as a child , he began his studies at the jesuit gymnasium in the town . in 1716 , at the age of 18 , he entered a gymnasium run at the premonstratensian abbey located in the village of louka , where he completed his basic studies in 1719 . divíšek then entered the novitiate of the abbey , taking the name prokop ( or procopius ) . he completed this period of probation the following year and professed his religious vows in the order . he then proceeded to study philosophy and theology in preparation for ordination to the catholic priesthood , which occurred in 1726 . from 1729-1735 he taught philosophy at the abbey gymnasium . memorial during this period , he was sent by his abbot to the paris lodron university in salzburg ( now the university of salzburg ) to pursue advanced studies in theology . in 1733 he completed his doctoral dissertation , and was granted the degree of doctor of theology . radio praha '' prokop divis '' diviš then returned to his abbey and resumed the monastic life of a canon regular , serving as sub-prior of the abbey . in 1736 he was appointed as pastor of a parish in přímětice ( now part of znojmo ) which was served by the abbey . he served in that capacity for five years , before being recalled to the abbey in april 1741 , where he served as its prior . during the spring of the following year , in the course of the first silesian war , the abbot , antonin nolbek , was arrested by the forces of the kingdom of prussia and taken to a prison in prussia . the payment of a large ransom by diviš for the abbot 's release incurred his displeasure , leading him to return diviš to the parish in přímětice . . scientist . back at the parish , diviš became responsible for the management of farmland belonging to it . he undertook the construction of water conduits on the property . as a result , he became interested in a popular new interest in the scientific community of his day , electricity . he began a series of experiments over the next years , mostly on plant growth and therapy with small electrical voltage . he published the results and allegedly demonstrated at the imperial court in vienna . diviš also constructed the denis d'or , which allegedly imitated the sounds of various musical instruments . this instrument is dated to 1753 , though only one prototype was built , and it vanished soon after diviš death . the novelty instrument produced electrical shocks as practical jokes on the player . it is disputed whether the denis d'or sounds were also produced by electricity or if it was an otherwise acoustical instrument . peer sitter : das denis d'or : urahn der 'elektroakustischen ' musikinstrumente ? ( the denis d'or - ancestor of electro-acoustic instruments ? ) ( german ) the news of the death of georg wilhelm richmann , a professor in st . petersburg , who was killed by lightning in 1753 during his attempt at measuring the intensity of the electric field in the atmosphere , caused diviš to become interested in atmospheric electricity . in letters , he proposed to several physicists ( among them the academies of science in st . petersburg and vienna , as well as leonhard euler ) to construct a '' weather-machine '' – a device that would suppress and prevent thunderstorms and lightning by constantly sucking atmospheric electricity out of the air . his theories were already in his time recognized as fringe science , and thus ignored . when diviš did not receive answers , he took it up on himself to build such a machine in his own parish . christa möhring : eine geschichte des blitzableiters . die ableitung des blitzes und die neuordnung des wissens um 1800 ( german dissertation ; the history of the lightning rod . conduction of lightning and the re-ordering of knowledge around 1800 ) p . 83-105 on 15 june 1754 , he erected a forty metres high , free-standing pole in přímětice , on which he mounted his '' weather-machine '' , consisting of several tin boxes and more than 400 metal spikes . a well-established theory in that time was that more pointed spikes would conduct electricity better . the pole was secured by heavy metal chains that inadvertently also grounded his construction , making it actually one of the first grounded lightning rods . he described his invention as being very effective at driving off storms : clouds formed when the pole was taken down and disappeared when erected again . he took these occasional observations as proof of his theory that the pointed spikes extracted latent electricity out of the atmosphere , deposing them safely before lightning could form . several local newspapers and novelty papers from southern germany made reports on his attempts . his findings were not well received in the scientific community that largely decided to ignore him . in 1759 , a drought threatened přímětice 's farmers , who now took action against their priests ' attempts to control the weather and consequently destroyed the first '' weather-machine '' . this led to a dissent between diviš and his '' unruly flock '' , that only ended when the church superiors advised diviš to stop his experiments . he was advised to unmount his second '' weather-machine '' which he had then for security reasons mounted on the tower of his church , and hand it over to the louka abbey . diviš continued to correspond with scientists and promote his own theory which he called magia naturalis . fricker and oetinger , two like-minded priests from württemberg who had visited him during the experiments , helped him publish it abroad under the german name '' längst verlangte theorie von der meteorologischen electricité '' ( much desired theory of the metereological electricity ) , in the same year that diviš died . again , the theory was largely ignored , though tetens reviewed them a few years after and called it a work of fantasy . . death and legacy . diviš died on 21 december 1765 in přímětice . after years of obscurity , memory of diviš was reignited in the late 19th century . now seen as a visionary inventor , supporters saw him as the european inventor of the lightning rod , who invented the lightning rod in the same years as benjamin franklin , probably even independently . despite scientific reviews of diviš 's errors ( among others , german physicist meidinger , who compared evidence about early lightning rods in 1888 ; and czech scientific historians smolka and haubelt in 2004/05 ) , there are still claims that prokop diviš invented the lightning rod . indeed , his free-standing apparatus in 1754 was better grounded than franklin 's experimental lightning rods at that time . zprvu nepochopený vynálezce hromosvodu vynálezce hromosvodu . see also . list of roman catholic scientist-clerics . notes .