Isaac Deutscher

early life and communist involvement in poland . deutscher was born in chrzanów , a town in the galicia region of the austria-hungary ( now in southern poland ) , into a family of religiously observant jews . he studied with a hasidic rebbe and was acclaimed as a prodigy in the study of the torah and the talmud . deutscher , isaac . the non-jewish jew and other essays , introduction . he lived through three pogroms in 1918 that followed the collapse of the austro-hungarian empire . deutscher , isaac . the non-jewish jew and other essays , pp . 33-34 . by the time of his bar mitzvah , however , he had lost his faith . he '' tested god '' by eating non-kosher food at the grave of a tzadik ( holy person ) on yom kippur . when nothing happened , he became an atheism . deutscher first attracted notice as a poet , when he began publishing poems in polish literary periodicals at the age of sixteen . his verse , in yiddish and polish , concerned jewish and polish mysticism , history and mythology , and he attempted to bridge the gulf between the polish and yiddish cultures . he also translated poetry from hebrew , latin , german , and yiddish into polish . david caute , isaac and isaiah : the covert punishment of a cold war heretic , pp . 1–35 . new haven and london : yale university press , 2013 . deutscher studied literature , history , and philosophy as an extramural student at the jagiellonian university in kraków . soon he left kraków for warsaw , where he studied philosophy , economics and marxism . around 1927 , he joined the illegal communist party of poland ( kpp ) and became the editor of the party 's underground press . he wrote for the jewish nasz przegląd ( 'our review ' ) and for the marxist miesięcznik literacki ( 'the literary monthly ' ) . marci shore , caviar and ashes , p . 68 . yale university press , new haven , 2006 . in 1931 he toured the soviet union , seeing the economic conditions under the first five year plan . the university of moscow and the university of minsk offered him posts as professor of history of socialism and of marxist theory , but he declined the offers and returned to poland . deutscher co-founded the first anti-stalinism group in the communist party of poland , protesting the party view that nazism and social democracy were '' not antipodes but twins . '' this contradicted the then third period , according to which social democrats were '' social fascism '' , the greatest enemies of the communist party . in an article '' the danger of barbarism over europe '' , deutscher urged the formation of a united front of socialists and communism against nazism . he was expelled from the kpp in 1932 , officially for '' exaggerating the danger of nazism and spreading panic in the communist ranks . '' tamara deutscher ( 1968 ) , '' isaac deutscher 1907 – 1967 '' , preface to the non-jewish jew & other essays . david caute , isaac and isaiah , pp . 99–106 . . move to britain and journalism ( 1939–1947 ) . in april 1939 , deutscher left poland for london as a correspondent for a polish-jewish newspaper for which he had worked as a proof reader for fourteen years . this move saved his life and paved the way for his future career . he never returned to poland and never saw any of his family again . he became a british subject in 1949 , taking his oath of allegiance on 12 may 1949 . london gazette 21 june 1949 london gazette . germany invaded poland in september 1939 and deutscher 's connection with his newspaper was severed . he taught himself english and began writing for english magazines . he was soon a regular correspondent for the leading weekly the economist . he joined the trotskyism revolutionary workers league . in 1940 , he joined the polish army in scotland , but was interned as a dangerous subversive . released in 1942 , he joined the staff of the economist and became its expert on soviet affairs and military issues , and its chief european correspondent . he also wrote for the observer as a roving european correspondent under the pen-name '' peregrine '' . he was one of the so-called shanghai club ( named after a restaurant in soho ) of left-leaning and emigre journalists that included sebastian haffner ( also on the observer ) , e . h . carr george orwell , barbara ward and jon kimche . he left journalism in 1946–47 to write books . deutscher 's name ( with the remark '' sympathiser only '' ) subsequently appeared on orwell 's list , a list of people ( including many writers and journalists ) which george orwell prepared in march 1949 for the information research department ( ird ) , a propaganda unit set up at the foreign office by the labour government . orwell considered the listed people to have pro-communist leanings and therefore to be inappropriate to write for the ird . '' orwell 's list '' by timothy garton ash . the new york review of books volume 50 , number 14 . 25 september 2003 . . biographer and academic ( 1947–1967 ) . deutscher published his first major work , stalin , a political biography in 1949 . deutscher was still a committed trotskyist , but in the book he gave stalin what he saw as his due for building a form of socialism in the soviet union , even if it was , in deutscher 's view , a perversion of the vision of karl marx , vladimir lenin and leon trotsky . the stalin biography made deutscher a leading authority on soviet affairs and the russian revolution . he followed it up with his most ambitious work , a three-volume biography of trotsky : the prophet armed ( 1954 ) , the prophet unarmed ( 1959 ) and the prophet outcast ( 1963 ) . these books were based on detailed research into the trotsky archives at harvard university . much of the material contained in the third volume was previously unknown , since trotsky 's widow , natalia sedova , gave deutscher access to the closed section of the archives . deutscher planned to conclude his series with a study of lenin , but the life of lenin remained incomplete at the time of deutscher 's death , partly due to a politically motivated denial of a university position to him . m . ignatieff , isaiah berlin : a life ( london , 1998 ) , pp . 93 , 235 ; cited in neil davidson , '' the prophet , his biographer and the watchtower '' , international socialism 104 , 2004 . as later revealed , isaiah berlin , who was asked to evaluate the academic credentials of deutscher , argued against such a promotion because of the profoundly pro-communist militancy of the candidate . david caute , isaac and isaiah . in the 1960s , the upsurge of left-wing sentiment that accompanied the vietnam war made deutscher a popular figure on university campuses in both britain and the united states . by this time deutscher had broken with conventional trotskyism , although he never repudiated trotsky himself and remained a committed marxist . in 1965 , deutscher took part in the first '' teach-in '' on vietnam at the university of california , berkeley , where thousands of students listened to his indictment of the cold war . he was g . m . trevelyan lecturer at the university of cambridge for 1966–67 and also lectured for six weeks at the state university of new york . in spring 1967 , he guest-lectured at new york university , princeton , harvard and columbia . the g . m . trevelyan lectures , under the title the unfinished revolution , were published after deutscher 's sudden and unexpected death in rome in 1967 , where he went for an italy tv broadcast . it was a play about the fall of trotsky , written and directed by marco leto , starring franco parenti as trotsky and renzo giovampietro as stalin . a memorial prize honouring deutscher , called the deutscher memorial prize , is awarded annually to a book '' which exemplifies the best and most innovative new writing in or about the marxist tradition '' . in his works deutscher made the distinction between classical marxism and vulgar marxism . deutscher lecture 1965 . . relation to judaism and zionism . despite being an atheist , deutscher emphasised the importance of his jewish heritage . he coined the expression '' non-jewish jew '' , to apply to himself and other jewish humanists . deutscher admired elisha ben abuyah , a jewish heresy of the 2nd century ce . but he did not engage in specifically jewish politics . in warsaw , he joined the communist party , not the jewish bund , whose '' yiddishist '' views he opposed . deutscher wrote : '' religion ? i am an atheist . zionism ? i am an internationalist . in neither sense am i therefore a jew . i am , however , a jew by force of my unconditional solidarity with the persecuted and exterminated . i am a jew because i feel the pulse of jewish history ; because i should like to do all i can to assure the real , not spurious , security and self-respect of the jews . '' deutscher , isaac . '' who is a jew ? '' in the non-jewish jew and other essays , p . 51 . tamara deutscher , ed . and introduction . new york : oxford university press , 1968 . before world war ii , deutscher opposed zionism as economically retrograde and harmful to the cause of international socialism . but in the aftermath of the holocaust he regretted his pre-war views , lamenting that '' if , instead of arguing against zionism in the 1920s and 1930s , i had urged european jews to go to palestine , i might have helped to save some of the lives that were to be extinguished in hitler 's gas chambers . '' he argued the case for establishing israel as a '' historic necessity '' , to provide a home for the surviving jews of europe ; and conceded that his anti-zionism , which '' i have , of course , long since abandoned . was based on a confidence in the european labour movement , or , more broadly , a confidence in european society and civilisation which that society and civilisation have not justified . '' deutscher , isaac . '' israel 's spiritual climate , '' the reporter , 27 april and 11 may 1954 , available at in the 1960s , he became more critical of israel for its failure to recognise the dispossession of the palestinians , and after the six-day war of 1967 he demanded that israel withdraw from the occupied territories . '' this six-day wonder '' , he commented , '' the latest , all-too-easy triumph of israeli arms will be seen one day . to have been a disaster in the first instance for israel itself . '' deutscher , isaac . an interview : on the israeli-arab war , pp . 30–45 . new left review i/44 ( july–august 1967 ) . regarding the israeli–palestinian conflict , deutscher wrote the following allegory : '' a man once jumped from the top floor of a burning house in which many members of his family had already perished . he managed to save his life ; but as he was falling he hit a person standing down below and broke that person 's legs and arms . the jumping man had no choice ; yet to the man with the broken limbs he was the cause of his misfortune . if both behaved rationally , they would not become enemies . the man who escaped from the blazing house , having recovered , would have tried to help and console the other sufferer ; and the latter might have realized that he was the victim of circumstances over which neither of them had control . but look what happens when these people behave irrationally . the injured man blames the other for his misery and swears to make him pay for it . the other , afraid of the crippled man 's revenge , insults him , kicks him , and beats him up whenever they meet . the kicked man again swears revenge and is again punched and punished . the bitter enmity , so fortuitous at first , hardens and comes to overshadow the whole existence of both men and to poison their minds . '' deutscher , isaac . the non-jewish jew and other essays , pp . 136–137 . deutscher wrote the following passages in '' the israeli arab war , june 1967 '' ( 1967 ) : '' still we must exercise our judgment and must not allow it to be clouded by emotions and memories , however deep or haunting . we should not allow even invocations of auschwitz to blackmail us into supporting the wrong cause . '' ( quoted in prophets outcast , p . 184 , nation books , 2004 . ) '' to justify or condone israel 's wars against the arabs is to render israel a very bad service indeed and to harm its own long-term interest . israel 's security , let me repeat , was not enhanced by the wars of 1956 and 1967 ; it was undermined and compromised by them . the 'friends of israel ' have in fact abetted israel in a ruinous course . '' ( quoted in prophets outcast , p . 184 , nation books , 2004 . ) . selected works . stalin : a political biography ( 1949 ) ; a slightly expanded edition in 1961 soviet trade unions ( 1950 ) russia after stalin ( 1953 ) , first published as russia , what next ? ( 1953 ) the prophet armed : trotsky , 1879–1921 ( 1954 ) heretics and renegades : and other essays ( 1955 ) russia in transition , and other essays ( 1957 ) the prophet unarmed : trotsky , 1921–1929 ( 1959 ) great contest : russia and the west ( 1960 ) the prophet outcast : trotsky , 1929–1940 ( 1963 ) isaac deutscher on the israeli-arab war : an interview with the late isaac deutscher ( 1967 ) the unfinished revolution : russia 1917–1967 ( g . m . trevelyan lectures ) ( 1967 ) non-jewish jew and other essays ( london : oup , 1968 ) an open letter to władysław gomułka and the central committee of the polish workers party ( 1968 ) russia , china , and the west 1953–1966 ( edited by fred halliday ) ( 1970 ) marxism in our time , ( edited by tamara deutscher ) ( london : cape , 1972 ) marxism , wars , and revolutions : essays from four decades ( edited by tamara deutscher ) ( 1984 ) . see also . deutscher memorial prize . references . sources . caute david . isaac and isaiah : the covert punishment of a cold war heretic ( yale university press 2013 ) . tony cliff , the end of the road : isaac deutscher 's capitulation to stalinism , 1963 . david horowitz , isaac deutscher : the man and his work . london : macdonald , 1971 . leopold labedz issac deutscher : historian , prophet , biographer , survey volume 30 , issue 1–2 , march 1988 . walter laqueur the fate of the revolution : interpretations of soviet history from 1917 to the present , new york : scribner , 1987 . neil davidson , the prophet , his biographer and the watchtower , international socialism 104 , 2004 . further reading . bruce robbins , '' the red emigrant '' , the nation , 17 april 2017 . external links . isaac deutscher archive at marxists.org '' russia in transition '' , universities & left review , 1957 '' the failure of khrushchevism '' , socialist register , 1965 '' maoism-its origins , background and outlook '' , socialist register , 1964 '' marxism in our time '' '' the tragedy of the polish communist party '' , socialist register , 1982 the lubitz trotskyananet isaac deutscher speaks ! ( english ) '' i still believe ! '' : berkeley anti-war teach-in , 1965 — youtube recording theodor bergmann , '' rosa luxemburg and isaac deutscher : two jewish communist heretics '' , 1999