Electrical connector

physical construction . in addition to the classes mentioned above , connectors are characterised by their pinout , method of connection , materials , size , contact resistance , insulation , mechanical durability , ip code , lifetime ( number of cycles ) , and ease of use . it is usually desirable for a connector to be easy to identify visually , rapid to assemble , inexpensive , and require only simple tooling . in some cases an equipment manufacturer might choose a connector specifically because it is not compatible with those from other sources , allowing control of what may be connected . no single connector has all the ideal properties for every application ; the proliferation of types is a result of the diverse yet specific requirements of manufacturers . . materials . electrical connectors essentially consist of two classes of materials : conductors and insulators . properties important to conductor materials are contact resistance , conductivity , mechanical strength , formability , and resilience . insulators must have a high electrical resistance , withstand high temperatures , and be easy to manufacture for a precise fit . electrodes in connectors are usually made of copper alloys , due to their good conductivity and malleability . alternatives include brass , phosphor bronze , and beryllium copper . the base electrode metal is often coated with another inert metal such as gold , nickel , or tin . the use of a coating material with good conductivity , mechanical robustness and corrosion resistance helps to reduce the influence of passivating oxide layers and surface adsorbates , which limit metal-to-metal contact patches and contribute to contact resistance . for example , copper alloys have favorable mechanical properties for electrodes , but are hard to solder and prone to corrosion . thus , copper pins are usually coated with gold to alleviate these pitfalls , especially for analog signals and high reliability applications . contact carriers that hold the parts of a connector together are usually made of plastic , due to its insulating properties . housings or backshells can be made of molded plastic or metal . . failure modes . the majority of connector failures result in intermittent connections or open contacts : normalized failure mode distributions were originally compiled from a combination of : mil-hdbk-978 , “ nasa parts application handbook ” , 1991 ; mil-hdbk-338 , “ electronic reliability design handbook ” , 1994 ; “ reliability toolkit : commercial practices edition '' , reliability analysis center ( rac ) , 1998 ; and “ failure mode , effects , and criticality analysis ( fmeca ) ” , rac , 1993 . . methods of connection . whilst technically inaccurate , electrical connectors can be viewed as a type of adapter to convert between two connection methods , which are permanently connected at one end and ( usually ) detachable at the other end . by definition , each end of this '' adapter '' has a different connection methode.g . the solder tabs on a male phone connector , and the male phone connector itself . in this example , the solder tabs connected to the cable represent the permanent connection , whilst the male connector portion interfaces with a female socket forming a detachable connection . there are many ways of applying a connector to a cable or device . some of these methods can be accomplished without specialized tools . other methods , while requiring a special tool , can assemble connectors much faster and more reliably , and make repairs easier . plug and socket connectors . plug and socket connectors are usually made up of a male plug ( typically pin contacts ) and a female socket ( typically receptacle contacts ) . often , but not always , sockets are permanently fixed to a device as in a chassis connector , and plugs are attached to a cable . plugs generally have one or more pins or prongs that are inserted into openings in the mating socket . the connection between the mating metal parts must be sufficiently tight to make a good electrical connection and complete the circuit . an alternative type of plug and socket connection uses hyperboloid contacts , which makes a more reliable electrical connection . when working with multi-pin connectors , it is helpful to have a pinout diagram to identify the wire or circuit node connected to each pin . some connector styles may combine pin and socket connection types in a single unit , referred to as a hermaphroditic connector . these connectors includes mating with both male and female aspects , involving complementary paired identical parts each containing both protrusions and indentations . these mating surfaces are mounted into identical fittings that freely mate with any other , without regard for gender ( provided that the size and type match ) . sometimes both ends of a cable are terminated with the same gender of connector , as in many ethernet patch cables . in other applications the two ends are terminated differently , either with male and female of the same connector ( as in an extension cord ) , or with incompatible connectors , which is sometimes called an adapter cable . plugs and sockets are widely used in various connector systems including blade connectors , breadboards , xlr connectors , car power outlets , banana connectors , and phone connectors . jacks and plugs . a jack is a connector that installs on the surface of a bulkhead or enclosure , and mates with its reciprocal , the plug . according to the asme , the stationary ( more fixed ) connector of a pair is classified as a jack ( denoted j ) , usually attached to a piece of equipment as in a chassis-mount or panel-mount connector . the movable ( less fixed ) connector is classified as a plug ( denoted p ) , designed to attach to a wire , cable or removable electrical assembly . this convention is currently defined in asme y14.44-2008 , which supersedes ieee 200-1975 , which in turn derives from the long-withdrawn mil-std-16 ( from the 1950s ) , highlighting the heritage of this connector naming convention . ieee 315-1975 works alongside asme y14.44-2008 to define jacks and plugs . the term jack occurs in several related terms : the registered jack or modular jack in rj11 , rj45 and other similar connectors used for telecommunication and computer networking the telephone jack of manual telephone switchboards , which is the socket fitting the original telephone plug the phone jack common to many electronic applications in various configurations , sometimes referred to as a headphone jack the rca jack , also known as a phono jack , common to consumer audiovisual electronics the eiaj jack for consumer appliances requiring a power supply of less than 18.0 & nbsp ; volts . crimp-on connectors . crimped connectors are a type of solderless connection , using mechanical friction and uniform deformation to secure a connector to a pre-stripped wire ( usually stranded ) . crimping is used in splice connectors , crimped multipin plugs and sockets , and crimped coaxial connectors . crimping usually requires a specialised crimping tool , but the connectors are quick and easy to install and are a common alternative to solder connections or insulation displacement connectors . effective crimp connections deform the metal of the connector past its yield point so that the compressed wire causes tension in the surrounding connector , and these forces counter each other to create a high degree of static friction . due to the elastic element in crimped connections , they are highly resistant to vibration and thermal shock . crimped contacts are permanent ( i.e . the connectors and wire ends can not be reused ) . crimped plug-and-socket connectors can be classified as rear release or front release . this relates to the side of the connector where the pins are anchored : front release contacts are released from the front ( contact side ) of the connector , and removed from the rear . the removal tool engages with the front portion of the contact and pushes it through to the back of the connector . rear release contacts are released and removed from the rear ( wire side ) of the connector . the removal tool releases the contacts from the rear and pulls the contact out of the retainer . soldered connectors . many plug and socket connectors are attached to a wire or cable by soldering conductors to electrodes on the back of the connector . soldered joints in connectors are robust and reliable if executed correctly , but are usually slower to make than crimped connections . when wires are to be soldered to the back of a connector , a backshell is often used to protect the connection and add strain relief . metal solder buckets or solder cups are provided , which consist of a cylindrical cavity that an installer fills with solder before inserting the wire . when creating soldered connections , it is possible to melt the dielectric between pins or wires . this can cause problems because the thermal conductivity of metals causes heat to quickly distribute through the cable and connector , and when this heat melts plastic dielectric , it can cause short circuits or '' flared '' ( conical ) insulation . solder joints are also more prone to mechanical failure than crimped joints when subjected to vibration and compression . . insulation-displacement connectors . since stripping insulation from wires is time-consuming , many connectors intended for rapid assembly use insulation-displacement connectors which cut the insulation as the wire is inserted . these generally take the form of a fork-shaped opening in the terminal , into which the insulated wire is pressed , which cut through the insulation to contact the conductor . to make these connections reliably on a production line , special tools accurately control the forces applied during assembly . on small scales , these tools tend to cost more than tools for crimped connections . insulation displacement connectors are usually used with small conductors for signal purposes and at low voltage . power conductors carrying more than a few amperes are more reliably terminated with other means , though '' hot tap '' press-on connectors find some use in automotive applications for additions to existing wiring . a common example is the multi-conductor flat ribbon cable used in computer disk drives ; to terminate each of the many ( approximately 40 ) wires individually would be slow and error-prone , but an insulation displacement connector can terminate all the wires in a single action . another very common use is so-called punch-down blocks used for terminating unshielded twisted pair wiring . binding posts . binding posts are a single-wire connection method , where stripped wire is screwed or clamped to a metal electrode . such connectors are frequently used in electronic test equipment and audio . many binding posts also accept a banana plug . screw terminals . screw connections are frequently used for semi-permanent wiring and connections inside devices , due to their simple but reliable construction . the basic principle of all screw terminals involves the tip of a bolt clamping onto a stripped conductor . they can be used to join multiple conductors , to connect wires to a printed circuit board , or to terminate a cable into a plug or socket . the clamping screw may act in the longitudinal axis ( parallel to the wire ) or the transverse axis ( perpendicular to the wire ) , or both . some disadvantages are that connecting wires is more difficult than simply plugging in a cable , and screw terminals are generally not very well protected from contact with persons or foreign conducting materials . left terminal blocks ( also called terminal boards or strips ) provide a convenient means of connecting individual electrical wires without a splice or physically joining the ends . since terminal blocks are readily available for a wide range of wire sizes and terminal quantity , they are one of the most flexible types of electrical connector available . one type of terminal block accepts wires that are prepared only by stripping a short length of insulation from the end . another type , often called barrier strips , accepts wires that have ring or spade terminal lugs crimped onto the wires . printed circuit board ( pcb ) mounted screw terminals let individual wires connect to a pcb through leads soldered to the board . ring and spade connectors . thumb the connectors in the top row of the image are known as ring terminals and spade terminals ( sometimes called fork or split ring terminals ) . electrical contact is made by the flat surface of the ring or spade , while mechanically they are attached by passing a screw or bolt through them . the spade terminal form factor facilitates connections since the screw or bolt can be left partially screwed in as the spade terminal is removed or attached . their sizes can be determined by the gauge of the conducting wire , and the interior and exterior diameters . blade connectors . thumb a blade connector is a type of single wire , plug-and-socket connection using a flat conductive blade that is inserted into a receptacle . wires may be attached to male or female blade connectors by either crimping or soldering . insulated and uninsulated varieties are available . in some cases the blade is an integral manufactured part of a component ( such as a switch or a speaker unit ) , and the reciprocal connector is pushed onto the device 's connector . common types of blade connectors are the faston connectors and lucar connectors . while faston is a trademark of te connectivity ( formerly tyco electronics ) , it has come into common usage . faston connectors come in male and female types . they have been commonly used since the 1970s . other connection methods . crocodile clip – conductive clamps used for temporary connections , e.g . jumper cables board to board connectors – e.g . card-edge connectors or fpga mezzanine card twist-on wire connectors ( e.g . wire nuts ) – used in low-voltage power circuits for wires up to about 10 & nbsp ; awg wire wrapping – used in older circuit boards . see also . adapter bent pin analysis cable gland electrical contacts electrical network electrical splice electrical termination gender of connectors and fasteners lightbulb socket pothead for a termination on a high voltage electric power cable tee connector tube socket wire nut . connectors . ac power plugs and sockets audio and video connector banana connector battery holder battery terminals coaxial power connector computer port ( hardware ) crocodile clip dc connector din connector dock connector d-subminiature edge connector elastomeric connector jst connector mini-din connector optical fiber connector phone connector ( audio ) pin header rca connector rj-xx connector