Homophone

etymology . '' homophone '' derives from the greek homo- & nbsp ; ( ὁμο & 8209 ; ) , '' same '' , and phōnḗ ( φωνή ) , '' voice , utterance '' . in wordplay and games . homophones are often used to create puns and to deceive the reader ( as in crossword ) or to suggest multiple meanings . the last usage is common in poetry and creative literature . an example of this is seen in dylan thomas 's radio play under milk wood : '' the shops in mourning '' where mourning can be heard as mourning or morning . another vivid example is thomas hood 's use of '' birth '' and '' berth '' and '' told '' and '' toll 'd '' ( tolled ) in his poem '' faithless sally brown '' : : his death , which happen 'd in his berth , : at forty-odd befell : : they went and told the sexton , and : the sexton toll 'd the bell . in some accents , various sounds have merged in that they are no longer distinctive , and thus words that differ only by those sounds in an accent that maintains the distinction ( a minimal pair ) are homophonous in the accent with the merger . some examples from english are : : pin and pen in many southern american english . : merry , marry , and mary in most american accents . : the pairs do , due and forward , foreword are homophonous in most american accents but not in most english accents . : the pairs talk , torque , and court , caught are distinguished in rhotic accents such as scottish english and most dialects of american english , but are homophones in many non-rhotic accents such as british received pronunciation . wordplay is particularly common in english because the multiplicity of linguistic influences offers considerable complication in spelling and meaning and pronunciation compared with other languages . malapropisms , which often create a similar comic effect , are usually near-homophones . see also eggcorn . same-sounding phrases . same-sounding ( homophonous , or homophonic ) phrases are often used in various word games . examples of same-sounding phrases ( which may only be true homophones in certain dialects of english ) include : : '' ice cream '' vs . '' i scream '' ( as in the popular song '' i scream . you scream . we all scream for ice cream . '' ) : '' euthanasia '' vs . '' youth in asia '' : '' depend '' vs . '' deep end '' : '' gemini '' vs . '' jim and i '' vs . '' jem in eye '' vs . '' gem in eye '' : '' the sky '' vs . '' this guy '' ( most notably as a mondegreen in purple haze by jimi hendrix ) : '' four candles '' vs . '' fork handles '' : '' sand which is there '' vs . '' sandwiches there '' : '' philanderer '' vs . '' flanders '' : '' example '' vs . '' egg sample '' : '' some others '' vs . '' some mothers '' vs . '' smothers '' in his appalachian comedy routine , american comedian jeff foxworthy frequently uses same-sounding phrases which play on exaggerated '' country '' accents . notable examples include : : initiate : '' my wife ate two sandwiches , initiate and then she ate a bag o ' tater chips . '' mayonnaise : '' mayonnaise man , there is a lot of people here tonight . '' innuendo : '' hey dude i saw a bird fly innuendo in your window . '' moustache : '' i moustache must ask you a question . '' during the 1980s , an attempt was made to promote a distinctive term for same sounding multiple words or phrases , by referring to them as '' oronyms '' . that was first proposed and advocated by gyles brandreth in his book the joy of lex ( 1980 ) , and such use was also accepted in the bbc programme never mind the full stops , which featured brandreth as a guest . since the term oronym was already well established in linguistics as an onomastic designation for a class of toponymic features ( names of mountains , hills , etc . ) , the alternative use of the same term was not universally accepted in scholarly literature . number of homophones . english . there are sites , for example , this archived page , which have lists of homonyms or rather homophones and even 'multinyms ' which have as many as seven spellings . there are differences in such lists due to dialect pronunciations and usage of old words . in english , there are approximately 88 triples ; 24 quadruples ; 2 quintuples ; 1 sextet and 1 septet . the septet is : : raise , rays , rase , raze , rehs , res , reais other than the two common words raise and rays , there are : raze – a verb meaning '' to demolish , level to the ground '' or '' to scrape as if with a razor '' ; rase – a verb meaning '' to erase '' ; rehs – the plural of reh , a mixture of sodium salts found as an efflorescence in india ; res – the plural of re , a name for one step of the musical scale ; reais – the plural of real , a currency unit of portugal and brazil . if proper names are allowed , then a possible nonet would be : ayr ( scottish town ) , aire ( yorkshire river ) , eyre ( legal term and various geographic locations ) , heir , air , err ( some speakers ) , ere ( poetic '' before '' ) , e'er ( poetic '' ever '' , some speakers ) , are ( unit of area ; some speakers ) . german . there are many homophones in present-day standard german . as in other languages , however , there exists regional and/or individual variation in certain groups of words or in single words , so that the number of homophones varies accordingly . regional variation is especially common in words that exhibit the long vowels ä and e . according to the well-known dictionary duden , these vowels should be distinguished as /ɛ : / and /e : / , but this is not always the case , so that words like ähre ( ear of corn ) and ehre ( honor ) may or may not be homophones . individual variation is shown by a pair like gäste ( guests ) – geste ( gesture ) , the latter of which varies between /ˈɡe : stə/ and /ˈɡɛstə/ and by a pair like stiel ( handle , stalk ) – stil ( style ) , the latter of which varies between /ʃtiːl/ and /stiːl/ . besides websites that offer extensive lists of german homophones , see , e.g . , there are others which provide numerous sentences with various types of homophones . see fausto cercignani , beispielsätze mit deutschen homophonen ( example sentences with german homophones ) . in the german language homophones occur in more than 200 cases . of these , a few are triples like waagen ( weighing scales ) , wagen ( cart ) , wagen ( to dare ) and waise ( orphan ) – weise ( way , manner ) – weise ( wise ) . the rest are couples like lehren ( to teach ) – leeren ( to empty ) . japanese . there are many homophones in japanese , due to the use of sino-japanese vocabulary , where borrowed words and morphemes from chinese are widely used in japanese , but many sound differences , such as the original words ' tones , are lost . these are to some extent disambiguated via japanese pitch accent ( i.e . 日本 vs . 二本 , both pronounced nihon , but with different pitches ) , or from context , but many of these words are primarily or almost exclusively used in writing , where they are easily distinguished as they are written with different kanji ; others are used for puns , which are frequent in japanese . an extreme example is kikō ( hiragana : きこう ) , which is the pronunciation of at least 22 words ( some quite rare or specialized , others common ; all these examples are two-character compounds ) , including : 機構 ( organization/mechanism ) , 紀行 ( travelogue ) , 稀覯 ( rare ) , 騎行 ( horseback riding ) , 貴校 ( school ( respectful ) ) , 奇功 ( outstanding achievement ) , 貴公 ( word for '' you '' used by men addressing male equals or inferiors ) , 起稿 ( draft ) , 奇行 ( eccentricity ) , 機巧 ( contrivance ) , 寄港 ( stopping at port ) , 帰校 ( returning to school ) , 気功 ( breathing exercise/qigong ) , 寄稿 ( contribute an article/written piece ) , 機甲 ( armor , e.g . of a tank ) , 帰航 ( homeward voyage ) , 奇効 ( remarkable effect ) , 季候 ( season/climate ) , 気孔 ( stoma ) , 起工 ( setting to work ) , 気候 ( climate ) , 帰港 ( returning to port ) . korean . the korean language contains a combination of words that strictly belong to korean and words that are loanwords from chinese . due to chinese being pronounced with varying tones and korean 's removal of those tones , and because the modern korean writing system , hangeul , has a more finite number of phonemes than , for example , latin-derived alphabets such as that of english , there are many homonyms with both the same spelling and pronunciation . for example , '' : 'to put on makeup ' and '' : 'to cremate ' . also , ' however , even with tones , mandarin retains a very large amount of homophones . yì , for example , has at least 125 homophones , and it is the pronunciation used for chinese characters such as 义 , 意 , 易 , 亿 , 议 , 一 , and 已 . many scholars believe that the chinese language did not always have such a large number of homophones and that the phonological structure of chinese syllables was once more complex , which allowed for a larger amount of possible syllables so that words sounded more distinct from each other . scholars also believe that old chinese had no phonemic tones , but tones emerged in middle chinese to replace sounds that were lost from old chinese . since words in old chinese sounded more distinct from each other at this time , it explains why many words in classical chinese consisted of only one syllable . for example , the standard chinese word 狮子 ( shīzi , meaning '' lion '' ) was simply 狮 ( shī ) in classical chinese , and the standard mandarin word 教育 ( jiàoyù , '' education '' ) was simply 教 ( jiào ) in classical chinese . since many chinese words became homophonic over the centuries , it became difficult to distinguish words when listening to documents written in classical chinese being read aloud . one-syllable articles like those mentioned above are evidence for this . for this reason , many one-syllable words from classical chinese became two-syllable words , like the words mentioned in the previous paragraph . even with the existence of two- or two-syllable words , however , there are even multisyllabic homophones . such homophones even play a major role in daily life throughout china , including spring festival traditions , which gifts to give ( and not give ) , political criticism , texting , and many other aspects of people 's lives . another complication that arises within the chinese language is that in non-rap songs , tones are disregarded in favor of maintaining melody in the song . while in most cases , the lack of phonemic tones in music does not cause confusion among native speakers , there are instances where pun may arise . for example , in the song duìbùqǐ wǒ de zhōngwén bù hǎo ( 对不起我的中文不好 ) by transition , the singer sings about his difficulty communicating with chinese speakers as a native english speaker learning chinese . in one line of the song , the singer says , wo yao shuijiao ( 我要水饺 ) , which means '' i want dumplings '' , but the chinese speaker misunderstands the english speaker and thought he wanted to sleep because if tones are disregarded shuijiao ( 睡觉 ) can also mean '' to sleep '' . although the song lacks mandarin tones , much like most songs in mandarin , it is implied that the english speaker probably used the wrong tones when saying the word . subtitles in chinese characters are usually displayed on music videos and in songs sung on movies and tv shows to disambiguate the song 's lyrics . vietnamese . it is estimated that there are approximately 4,500 to 4,800 possible syllables in vietnamese , depending on the dialect . the exact number is difficult to calculate because there are significant differences in pronunciation among the dialects . for example , the graphemes and digraphs '' d '' , '' gi '' , and '' r '' are all pronounced /z/ in the hanoi dialect , so the words dao ( knife ) , giao ( delivery ) , and rao ( advertise ) are all pronounced /zaw˧/ . in saigon dialect , however , the graphemes and digraphs '' d '' , '' gi '' , and '' v '' are all pronounced /j/ , so the words dao ( knife ) , giao ( delivery ) , and vao ( enter ) are all pronounced /jaw˧/ . pairs of words that are homophones in one dialect may not be homophones in the other . for example , the words sắc ( sharp ) and xắc ( dice ) are both pronounced /săk˧˥/ in hanoi dialect , but pronounced /ʂăk˧˥/ and /săk˧˥/ in saigon dialect respectively . use in psychological research . pseudo-homophones . pseudo-homophones are pseudowords that are phonetically identical to a word . for example , groan/grone and crane/crain are pseudo-homophone pairs , whereas plane/plain is a homophone pair since both letter strings are recognised words . both types of pairs are used in lexical decision tasks to investigate word recognition . martin , r . c . ( 1982 ) . the pseudohomophone effect : the role of visual similarity in nonword decisions . quarterly journal of experimental psychology , 34a , 395-409 . . use as ambiguous information . homophones , specifically heterographs , where one spelling is of a threatening nature and one is not ( e.g . slay/sleigh , war/wore ) have been used in studies of anxiety as a test of cognitive models that those with high anxiety tend to interpret ambiguous information in a threatening manner . mogg k , bradley bp , miller t , potts h , glenwright j , kentish j ( 1994 ) . interpretation of homophones related to threat : anxiety or response bias effects ? cognitive therapy and research , 18 ( 5 ) , 461-77 . . see also . heterography and homography heteronym ( linguistics ) dajare , a type of wordplay involving similar-sounding phrases perfect rhyme ; wiktionary list of dialect-independent homophones list of dialect-dependent homophones . references . sources . . external links . homophone.com – a list of american homophones with a searchable database . reed 's homophones – a book of sound-alike words published in 2012 homophones.ml – a collection of homophones and their definitions homophone machine – swaps homophones in any sentence