Forest gardening

history . since prehistory times hunter-gatherer might have influenced forests , for instance in europe by mesolithic people bringing favored plants like hazel with them . forest gardens are probably the world 's oldest form of land use and most resilient agroecosystem . douglas john mcconnell ( 2003 ) . gardens are probably the world 's oldest form of land use and most resilient agroecosystem . they originated in prehistoric times along jungle-clad river banks and in the wet foothills of monsoon regions . robert hart adapted forest gardening for the united kingdom 's temperate climate during the 1980s.id qybsfujpqxcc & lpg pp1 & dq the % 20forest % 20farms % 20of % 20kandy % 20and % 20other % 20gardens % 20of % 20complete % 20design & pg pa1 v onepage & q & f false the forest farms of kandy : and other gardens of complete design , p.1 , '' forest garden farms are probably the world 's oldest and most resilient agroecosystem . '' they originated in prehistoric times along jungle-clad river banks and in the wet foothills of monsoon regions . in the gradual process of families improving their immediate environment , useful tree and vine species were identified , protected and improved whilst undesirable species were eliminated . eventually superior foreign species were selected and incorporated into the gardens . forest gardens are still common in the tropics and known by various names such as : home gardens in kerala in south india , nepal , zambia , zimbabwe and tanzania ; kandyan forest gardens in sri lanka ; huertos familiares , the '' family orchards '' of mexico . these are also called agroforests and , where the wood components are short-statured , the term shrub garden is employed . forest gardens have been shown to be a significant source of income and food security for local populations . robert hart adapted forest gardening for the united kingdom 's temperate climate during the 1980s . his theories were later developed by martin crawford from the agroforestry research trust and various permaculturalists such as graham bell , patrick whitefield , dave jacke and geoff lawton . in temperate climates . thumb hart began farming at wenlock edge in shropshire with the intention of providing a healthy and therapeutic environment for himself and his brother lacon . starting as relatively conventional smallholding , hart soon discovered that maintaining large annual vegetable beds , rearing livestock and taking care of an orchard were tasks beyond their strength . however , a small bed of perennial vegetables and herbs he planted was looking after itself with little intervention . following hart 's adoption of a raw veganism for health and personal reasons , he replaced his farm animals with plants . the three main products from a forest garden are fruit , nuts and leaf vegetable . he created a model forest garden from a 0.12 acre ( 500 & nbsp ; m 2 ) orchard on his farm and intended naming his gardening method ecological horticulture or ecocultivation . hart later dropped these terms once he became aware that agroforestry and forest gardens were already being used to describe similar systems in other parts of the world . he was inspired by the forest farming methods of toyohiko kagawa and james sholto douglas , and the productivity of the keralan home gardens as hart explains : '' from the agroforestry point of view , perhaps the world 's most advanced country is the indian state of kerala , which boasts no fewer than three and a half million forest gardens . as an example of the extraordinary intensivity of cultivation of some forest gardens , one plot of only was found by a study group to have twenty-three young coconut palms , twelve cloves , fifty-six bananas , and forty-nine pineapples , with thirty pepper vines trained up its trees . in addition , the small holder grew fodder for his house-cow . '' . seven-layer system . thumb robert hart pioneered a system based on the observation that the natural forest can be divided into distinct levels . he used intercropping to develop an existing small orchard of apples and pears into an edible polyculture landscape consisting of the following layers : ‘ canopy layer ’ consisting of the original mature fruit trees . ‘ low-tree layer ’ of smaller nut and fruit trees on dwarfing root stocks . ‘ shrub layer ’ of fruit bushes such as currants and berries . ‘ herbaceous layer ’ of perennial vegetables and herbs . ‘ rhizosphere ’ or ‘ underground ’ dimension of plants grown for their roots and tubers . ‘ ground cover layer ’ of edible plants that spread horizontally . ‘ vertical layer ’ of vines and climbers . a key component of the seven-layer system was the plants he selected . most of the traditional vegetable crops grown today , such as carrots , are sun-loving plants not well selected for the more shady forest garden system . hart favoured shade-tolerant perennial vegetables . further development . the agroforestry research trust , managed by martin crawford , runs experimental forest gardening projects on a number of plots in devon , united kingdom . crawford describes a forest garden as a low-maintenance way of sustainable agriculture and other household products . ken fern had the idea that for a successful temperate forest garden a wider range of edible shade tolerant plants would need to be used . to this end , fern created the organisation plants for a future which compiled a plant database suitable for such a system . fern used the term woodland gardening , rather than forest gardening , in his book plants for a future . kathleen jannaway , the cofounder of movement for compassionate living ( mcl ) with her husband jack , kathleen jannaway 1915-2003 : a life well lived harry mather & malcolm horne . , vegan views 96 ( spring 2003 ) wrote a book outlining a sustainable vegan future called abundant living in the coming age of the tree in 1991 . the mcl promotes forest gardening and other types of vegan organic gardening . in 2009 it provided a grant of £1,000 to the bangor forest garden project in gwynedd , north west wales . kevin bradley in the us called his property and nursery '' edible forest '' in 1985 , which combined trees and field crops . today , his business and the 2005 book edible forest gardens have spawned little '' edible forests '' all over the world . permaculture . bill mollison , who coined the term permaculture , visited robert hart at his forest garden in wenlock edge in october 1990 . hart 's seven-layer system has since been adopted as a common permaculture design element . numerous permaculturalists are proponents of forest gardens , or food forests , such as graham bell , patrick whitefield , dave jacke , eric toensmeier and geoff lawton . bell started building his forest garden in 1991 and wrote the book the permaculture garden in 1995 , whitefield wrote the book how to make a forest garden in 2002 , jacke and toensmeier co-authored the two volume book set edible forest gardens in 2005 , and lawton presented the film establishing a food forest in 2008 . . in tropical climates . forest gardens , or home gardens , are common in the tropics , using intercropping to cultivate trees , crops , and livestock on the same land . in kerala in south india as well as in northeastern india , the home garden is the most common form of land use and is also found in indonesia . one example combines coconut , black pepper , cocoa and pineapple . these gardens exemplify polyculture , and conserve much crop genetic diversity and heirloom plants that are not found in monocultures . forest gardens have been loosely compared to the religious concept of the garden of eden . graham bell ( 2004 ) . the permaculture garden , p.129 , '' the forest garden.this is the original garden of eden . it could be your garden too . '' also see rob hopkins ( foreword ) , martin crawford ( 2010 ) . creating a forest garden : working with nature to grow edible crops , p.10 '' perhaps what hart created was the closest to what we imagine the garden of eden as being . '' helmut lieth ( 1989 ) . tropical rain forest ecosystems : biogeographical and ecological studies , p.611 '' important food plants , such as sago-producing palms , fruit-producing trees and medicinal plants were purposefully aggregated and tended in convenient places . eventually , the forest garden , a kind of garden of eden , emerged . these jungle gardens on good soils of easy access required little maintenance and hardly any hard work . '' dave jacke and eric toensmeier ( 2005 ) . edible forest gardens - volume one , p.1 robert hart ( 1996a ) , p.80 deborha d'arms ( 2011 ) . jardin d'or : a treatise on forest gardening , recreating sustainable gardens of eden . americas . the bbc 's unnatural histories claimed that the amazon rainforest , rather than being a pristine wilderness , has been shaped by humans for at least 11,000 years through practices such as forest gardening and terra preta . since the 1970s , numerous geoglyphs have been discovered on deforested land in the amazon rainforest , furthering the evidence of pre-columbian civilizations . on the yucatán peninsula , much of the maya food supply was grown in '' orchard gardens '' , known as pet kot . the system takes its name from the low wall of stones ( pet meaning 'circular ' and kot , 'wall of loose stones ' ) that characteristically surrounds the gardens . . africa . in many african countries , for example zambia , zimbabwe , ethiopia and tanzania , gardens are widespread in rural , periurban , and urban areas and they play an essential role in establishing food security . most well known are the chaga or chagga gardens on the slopes of mount kilimanjaro in tanzania . these are an example of an agroforestry system . in many countries , women are the main actors in home gardening and food is mainly produced for subsistence . in north africa , oasis-layered gardening with palm trees , fruit trees , and vegetables is a traditional type of forest garden . plants that can plant in forest gardening . some plants , such as wild yam , work as both a root plant and a vine . ground covers : low-growing edible forest garden plants help keep weeds in control and provide a great way to utilize areas that would otherwise be unused . plants . cardamom ginger chervil bergamot sweet woodruff sweet cicely . project . el pilar on the belize–guatemala border features a forest garden to demonstrate agriculture in mesoamerica practices . a further one acre model forest garden , called känan k ’ aax ( meaning 'well-tended garden ' in mayan ) , is funded by the national geographic society and developed at santa familia primary school in cayo . in the united states , the largest known food forest on public land is believed to be the seven acre beacon food forest in seattle , washington . other forest garden projects include those at the central rocky mountain permaculture institute in basalt , colorado and montview neighborhood farm in northampton , massachusetts . the boston food forest coalition promotes local forest gardens . in canada richard walker has been developing and maintaining food forests in british columbia for over 30 years . he developed a three acre food forest that at maturity provided raw materials for a plant nursery and herbal business as well as food for his family . the living centre has developed various forest garden projects in ontario . in the united kingdom , other than those run by the agroforestry research trust ( art ) , there are numerous forest garden projects such as the bangor forest garden in gwynedd , northwest wales . martin crawford from art administers the forest garden network , an informal network of people and organisations who are cultivating forest gardens . . forest gardening in popular culture . a forest garden plays a significant role in the video read-opera '' marisette 's voice , '' where it is the object of political machinations between two candidates for city council in the fictional city of augusta , cy . it is also used as a metaphor for one type of society . . see also . agroecology analog forestry climate-friendly gardening deep ecology forest farming gardening hügelkultur list of companion plants multiple cropping mycoforestry natural farming nutrient cycle orchard pekarangan , the gardens of '' complete design '' , in java polyculture vegan organic gardening . notes . references . bukowski , c . & munsell , j . 2018 . '' the community food forest handbook : how to plan , organize , and nurture edible gathering places '' . chelsea green publishing . pp . & nbsp ; 83–86 crawford , martin 2010 . creating a forest garden : working with nature to grow edible crops . totnes : green books . d'arms , deborha 2011 . jardin d ’ or ( garden of gold ) : a treatise on forest gardening , recreating sustainable gardens of eden . los gatos , ca : robertson publishing . douglas , j . sholto and hart , robert a . de j . 1985 . forest farming . intermediate technology . fern , ken 1997 . plants for a future : edible and useful plants for a healthier world . hampshire : permanent publications . hart , robert a . de j . 1996b . beyond the forest garden . gaia books . jacke , dave , and toensmeier , eric 2005 . edible forest gardens . two volume set . volume one : ecological vision and theory for temperate climate permaculture , . volume two : ecological design and practice for temperate climate permaculture , . white river junction , vt : chelsea green . jannaway , kathleen 1991 . abundant living in the coming age of the tree . movement for compassionate living . smith , joseph russell 1988 ( first published in 1929 ) . tree crops : a permanent agriculture . island press . whitefield , p . 2002 . how to make a forest garden . hampshire : permanent publications . external links . why food forests ? , permaculture research institute plant an edible forest garden , mother earth news the garden of the future ? , the guardian edible forest gardens : an invitation to adventure , the natural farmer forest gardens , permaculture association el pilar forest garden network , information on traditional maya forest gardening de : permakultur waldgarten