Squirtle

design and characteristics . squirtle was designed as one of the starter pokémon of pokémon red and green by atsuko nishida , who based its design on its final form , a turtle-like pokémon that ultimately was scrapped and replaced with blastoise . originally called '' zenigame '' in japanese , nintendo decided to give the various pokémon species '' clever and descriptive names '' related to their appearance or features when translating the game for western audiences as a means to make the characters more relatable to american children . squirtle 's english name comes from a combination of the words '' squirt '' and '' turtle . '' squirtle , known as the tiny turtle pokémon , are turtle pokémon with large eyes and chubby cheeks , capable of moving either on two feet or on all fours . their skin is a light blue , and they possess a long , curled tail . when feeling threatened , squirtle withdraw their limbs into their brown-orange shells and spray water from their mouth with great force , either to attack their opponent or merely to intimidate it . pokédex : shoots water at prey while in the water . withdraws into its shell when in danger . if attacked anyway , their shells are resilient , and provide excellent protection . it shelters itself in its shell , then strikes back with spouts of water at every opportunity . pokédex : it shelters itself in its shell , then strikes back with spouts of water at every opportunity . squirtle 's shell is not merely used for protection . the shell 's rounded shape and the grooves on its surface help minimize resistance in water , enabling this pokémon to swim at high speeds . pokédex : squirtle 's shell is not merely used for protection . the shell 's rounded shape and the grooves on its surface help minimize resistance in water , enabling this pokémon to swim at high speeds . the idea to feature squirtle and the other red and blue starters in a significant role in pokémon x and y came about a year and a half into the development of the games . the mega evolutions for the three pokémon 's final forms were created , and the designers decided that they should give players an opportunity to receive one of these pokémon in order to see their mega evolved form . . appearances . in the video games . the first video game appearance of squirtle was in pokémon red and blue . squirtle is a starter pokémon the player can choose from at the beginning of pokémon red and blue , and their remakes , pokémon firered and leafgreen . squirtle and the other starters from red and blue are replaced by pikachu in pokémon yellow , the only starter available in it . instead , they are each obtained from certain npcs . in pokémon heartgold and soulsilver , as a reward from professor oak after defeating the final boss , red , the player can choose from bulbasaur , charmander , and squirtle . in pokémon x and y , players can also choose between bulbasaur , charmander , and squirtle near the start of the game shortly after having chosen the games ' new starter pokémon , and arriving at lumiose city , after defeating the pokémon professor . in pokémon ultra sun and ultra moon , the player can use the island scan feature on rotom to get squirtle on monday at seaward cavern in melemele island by scanning 10 qr codes . aside from the main games , squirtle appears in hey you , pikachu ! , pokémon snap , pokémon puzzle league , the pokémon mystery dungeon games , the pokémon ranger games , poképark wii : pikachu 's adventure and its sequel , poképark 2 : wonders beyond , and pokémon quest . squirtle appears in super smash bros . melee as one of many pokémon balloon floats in the stage poké floats ; it is the first poké float to appear . in super smash bros . brawl , squirtle is now playable , under the command of the pokémon trainer . the trainer also has an ivysaur and a charizard which must be switched between in order to avoid fatiguing the pokémon . squirtle returns as a playable character in super smash bros . ultimate for nintendo switch , once again linked with ivysaur and charizard , although the removal of the fatigue mechanic means that an entire match can be played effectively using squirtle alone . in anime . in the pokémon ( anime ) , ash ketchum , brock , and misty encounter a gang of five squirtle known as the squirtle squad in his debut episode '' here comes the squirtle squad ! '' . they first appear as delinquents , but their interactions with ash and co . result in them becoming honorary firefighters of their town . the leader of the gang , however , chooses to go with ash and battle for him ; throughout ash 's journey through the kanto region , it is an invaluable member of ash 's team , and proves its strength without ever evolving . eventually , the squirtle parts ways with ash in order to lead its old gang , who were suffering a lack of proper guidance . despite returning to its hometown , squirtle will happily aid ash whenever he requests it . whenever squirtle appears he puts on a pair of black pointed sunglasses . some think he does this because his pokédex number is 007 which relates to the movie james bond . ash 's second female companion , may received her own squirtle from professor oak . may 's squirtle was very young and timid until evolving , despite being recently born , it quickly grows accustomed to the pokémon contests may participates in , even helping may win some , earning ribbons as rewards . after may leaves ash 's group , she temporarily reunites with him in sinnoh , revealing that many of her pokémon had now evolved ; squirtle has since evolved into wartortle . eric stuart does the voice of squirtle up until late in ash 's hoenn adventure ; michelle knotz takes over his role afterwards . squirtle is also the main protagonist of pokémon mystery dungeon : team go-getters out of the gate ! ; this squirtle actually happens to be a young boy , transformed and sent to a world completely inhabited by pokémon . in other media . blue , the original female protagonist in the pokémon adventures , stole a squirtle from professor oak 's laboratory . it was not seen until chapter 15 , '' wartortle wars '' , by which point it had evolved into a wartortle , nicknamed turtley , which she used to try and escape from another trainer , red , chasing her . kusaka , hidenori , & mato . pokémon adventures : legendary pokémon , vol . 2 ; chapter 33 , chapter 15 , '' wartortle wars '' , ( pg 7-20 ) viz media llc , december 6 , 2001 . in the pokémon : pikachu shocks back manga , when pikachu is separated from ash temporarily it meets a cynical squirtle , who believes ash has abandoned pikachu . later , ash has caught a squirtle of his own , which accompanies ash throughout his journeys in the orange islands . reception . since it appeared in the pokémon series , squirtle has received generally positive reception . it has been featured in several forms of merchandise , including figurines , plush toys , and the pokémon trading card game . squirtle was featured among other pokémon as part of burger king kids ' meal cards . analysts predicted that squirtle , along with pikachu , bulbasaur , and charmander , would lead the merchandising of the pokémon series . according to time magazine , squirtle was considered one of the '' more popular '' in the original series . boys ' life named squirtle '' one of the five coolest pokémon from pokémon firered and leafgreen '' , placing second on their list . the richmond times-dispatch editor douglas durden commented that squirtle was a '' favourite pokémon '' of the series . author patrick drazen discussed the anime incarnation and commented that squirtle asserted its alpha male status by '' wearing an even more outrageous pair of sunglasses '' than the other squirtles in its gang . san antonio express-news editor susan yerkes called squirtle '' disgustingly cute '' . an editor for ign called squirtle '' the best between bulbasaur and charmander '' , citing how many pokémon are disadvantageous to squirtle . ign editor '' pokémon of the day chick '' preferred squirtle as well , citing how it is the only one of the three that is only one type when it reaches its final form . however , she commented that squirtle seems '' boring '' due to there being many pure water types . ign stated '' leave it to nintendo to have a cute turtle '' , further calling it '' cuter than the mario series koopa troopas '' . gamesradar editor brett elston noted that while charizard and bulbasaur get '' big props '' from pokémon players , squirtle appears to be '' more popular '' from people who are not fans of the series , suggesting that its appearance may be a part of it . gamesradar editor carolyn gudmundson commented that squirtle was the '' coolest '' of the three starting pokémon in the anime . author maria s . jones called squirtle '' cute and cuddly '' . ign ranked it the 46th best pokémon ever . an author noted that it was '' instantly recognisable '' to anyone who has been '' around an eight year-old at some point in the last 15 years . '' game informer also included it in its list of the best pokémon at 03 ( along with charmander and bulbasaur ) . author o'dell harmon noted the choice between these three pokémon as the '' most important '' one in the series ' history . official nintendo magazines readers voted it as the second best water-type pokémon . author thomas east called it '' one of the cutest '' and '' one of the most popular . '' squirtle was among eleven pokémon chosen as japan 's mascots in the 2014 fifa world cup . . references . external links . squirtle on bulbapedia squirtle on pokemon.com ca : línia evolutiva de squirtle squirtle cs : seznam pokémonů ( 1-20 ) squirtle da : pokémon ( 1-20 ) squirtle es : anexo : pokémon de la primera generación squirtle fr : carapuce et ses évolutions carapuce pl : lista pokémonów ( 1-20 ) squirtle fi : luettelo pokémon-lajeista ( 1–20 ) squirtle