List of years in film

19th century in film . before muybridge 's 1878 work , photo sequences were not recorded in real-time because light-sensitive emulsions needed a long exposure time . the sequences were basically made as time-lapse recordings . it is possible that people at the time actually viewed such photographs come to life with a phénakisticope or zoetrope ( this certainly happened with muybridge 's work ) . 1833 – since 1833 onwards , 'animated films ' or rather animated effects began to be made with the use of phenakistiscope , zoetrope and praxinoscope . 1865 – revolving , self-portrait by french photographer nadar . around 1865 he produced this series of self-portraits consisting of 12 frames showing different angles of him sitting still in a chair . except for a smile in 1 frame , not even a fold in his jacket or a single hair seems to change between the different angles . this could be regarded as a predecessor to the chronophotography which marey and muybridge started to experiment with more than 10 years later . as the sequence revolves around space rather than time it is even more related to the bullet time popularized by the matrix about 135 years later . there 's no clue if more than one camera was used in the shoot , but it 's certainly well-executed . 1874 – first precedent of a film , passage de vénus . on december 9 , 1874 french astronomer pierre janssen and brazilian engineer francisco antônio de almeida using janssen 's 'photographic revolver ' photograph the 1874 transit of venus . they were purportedly taken in japan . it is the oldest film on imdb and letterboxd . 1878 – british photographer eadweard muybridge take a series of '' automatic electro-photographs '' called the horse in motion depicting the movement of a horse . muybridge shot the photographs in june 1878 . an additional card reprinted the single image of the horse '' occident '' trotting at high speed , which had previously been published by muybridge in 1877 . the most famous of these electro-photograhps is '' sallie gardner '' taken on june 19 , 1878 . railroad tycoon leland stanford hired muybridge to settle the questions of whether a galloping horse ever had all four of its feet off the ground . muybridge 's photos showed the horse with all four feet off the ground . muybridge went on a lecture tour showing his photographs on a moving-image device he called the zoopraxiscope . 1887 – man walking around a corner , directed by french inventor louis le prince . the oldest known film . although according to david wilkinson 's 2015 documentary the first film it 's not film , but a series of photographs , 16 in all , each taken from one of the lens from le prince 's camera . pictures from the film were sent in a letter dated 18 august 1887 to his wife . le prince went on to develop the one lens camera and on the 14th october 1888 he finally made the world 's first moving image , roundhay garden scene . 1888 – the lost and earliest surviving film , the roundhay garden scene , by french inventor louis le prince , is shot in leeds , west yorkshire , england , through a groundbreaking 20 frames per second . others short films made at the same time were traffic crossing leeds bridge and accordion player . 1893 – thomas edison creates '' america 's first film studio '' , black maria ; the first film shown publicly on the kinetoscope , a system given to edison , is blacksmiths . 1894 – according to film historian charles musser , carmencita directed and produced by william k.l . dickson , the scottish inventor credited with the invention of the film camera under the employ of thomas edison was the first woman to appear in front of an edison motion picture camera and may have been the first woman to appear in a motion picture within the united states . 1894 – the dickson experimental sound film made by william dickson in late 1894 or early 1895 is the first known film with live-recorded sound and appears to be the first motion picture made for the kinetophone , the proto-sound film system developed by dickson and thomas edison . it is also discussed whether it is considered as the first lgbt film . further in his book the celluloid closet ( 1981 ) , film historian vito russo discusses the film , claiming , without attribution , that it was titled the gay brothers . russo ( 1987 ) , pp . 6–7 . for rebuttal of russo 's claim , see , e.g . , dixon ( 2003 ) , p . 53 ; justin defreitas , '' moving pictures : documentary puts modern gay cinema in context '' , berkeley daily planet , july 7 , 2006 ( available online ) . russo 's unsupported naming of the film has been adopted widely online and in at least three books , and his unsubstantiated assertions that the film 's content is homosexual are frequently echoed . see movies of the 90s , ed . juergen mueller ( bonn : taschen , 2001 ) , p . 147 . see also larry p . gross , up from invisibility : lesbians , gay men , and the media in america ( new york : columbia university press , 2001 ) , p . 57 . gross also erroneously calls it a '' five-minute avant-garde film '' and describes the men as dancing to music '' played on an edison gramophone '' , though he does properly state that '' we do n't know what dickson intended this light-hearted scene to suggest '' ( ibid . ) . the passage is adapted from a section introduction written by gross for the columbia reader on lesbians & gay men in media , society , and politics , ed . larry p . gross and james d . woods ( new york : columbia university press , 1999 ) , p . 291 . in addition to there being no evidence for the title russo gives the film , in fact , the word '' gay '' was not generally used as a synonym for '' homosexual '' at the time the film was made . a particularly relevant example of the way the word '' gay '' was actually used is provided by a later edison manufacturing company film , directed by edwin s . porter . as described by scholar linda williams , the gay shoe clerk ( 1903 ) . 1895 – in paris , france on december 28 , 1895 , the lumière brothers screen ten films at the salon indien du grand café in paris making the first commercial public screening ever made , marked traditionally as the birth date of the movies ; gaumont film company , the oldest ever film studio , is founded by inventor léon gaumont . 1896 – pathé-frères is founded . the lumière brothers release six more short films , one of which is l'arrivée d'un train en gare de la ciotat . 1897 – vitagraph is founded in new york city . 1899 – georges méliès releases the dreyfus affair and cendrillon ( first screen adaptation of the traditional fairy tale cinderella ) ; earliest known use of a colour motion picture film footage by edward raymond turner . . 1900s . 1900 – sherlock holmes baffled , joan of arc , the enchanted drawing 1901 – star theatre , stop thief ! , scrooge , or , marley 's ghost 1902 – a trip to the moon 1903 – the great train robbery 1904 – the impossible voyage ; titanus is founded 1905 – adventures of sherlock holmes ; or , held for ransom 1906 – the story of the kelly gang , dream of a rarebit fiend , humorous phases of funny faces ; nordisk film is founded 1907 – ben-hur , l'enfant prodigue 1908 – fantasmagorie , a visit to the seaside , the taming of the shrew , the thieving hand , the assassination of the duke of guise ; first use of kinemacolor ; pathé news invents the newsreel . 1909 – the country doctor , a corner in wheat , princess nicotine ; or , the smoke fairy , les misérables ; 35 mm film becomes a filmmaking standard across the world . 1910s . 1910 – in old california , in the border states , white fawn 's devotion 1911 – l'inferno , baron munchausen 's dream , defence of sevastopol , the lonedale operator 1912 – independenţa româniei , the musketeers of pig alley ; universal pictures and paramount pictures , hollywood 's two oldest major film studios , are founded ; the british board of film classification is established . 1913 – the bangville police , fantômas , barney oldfield 's race for a life , raja harishchandra ; invention of the film trailer 1914 – the perils of pauline , tillie 's punctured romance , judith of bethulia 1915 – the birth of a nation , the tramp , les vampires , a fool there was 1916 – intolerance , 20,000 leagues under the sea , gertie the dinosaur , the queen of spades ; invention of technicolor 1917 – rebecca of sunnybrook farm , a man there was 1918 – stella maris , mickey , shifting sands 1919 – blind husbands , broken blossoms , true heart susie , dalagang bukid , felix the cat , male and female ; united artists is founded . 1920s . 1920 – the cabinet of dr . caligari , way down east , the flapper , the mark of zorro , dr . jekyll and mr . hyde , the golem : how he came into the world , within our gates 1921 – the four horsemen of the apocalypse , the kid , the phantom carriage , fool 's paradise , the sheik , the mechanical man 1922 – nosferatu , foolish wives , the little rascals , blood and sand , nanook of the north , dr . mabuse the gambler ; motion picture association is established . 1923 – safety last ! , the hunchback of notre dame , the ten commandments ; warner bros . pictures and walt disney pictures are founded ; 16 mm film introduced . 1924 – sherlock jr . , greed , the last laugh , he who gets slapped ; metro-goldwyn-mayer and columbia pictures are founded 1925 – the gold rush , the battleship potemkin , the big parade , the phantom of the opera , ben-hur 1926 – the general , don juan 1927 – the jazz singer , metropolis , laurel & hardy , wings , sunrise : a song of two humans , napoléon , the king of kings 1928 – the passion of joan of arc , mickey mouse , lights of new york , the circus , the crowd ; rko pictures is founded 1929 – blackmail , pandora 's box , man with a movie camera , the broadway melody , disraeli , the virginian ; 1st academy awards . 1930s . 1930 – looney tunes , all quiet on the western front , journey 's end , the blue angel , hell 's angels , the big house 1931 – frankenstein , dracula , the champ , the public enemy , little caesar , cimarron , m , city lights , the front page 1932 – shanghai express , tarzan the ape man , the mummy , betty boop , freaks , the sign of the cross , grand hotel ; 8 mm film introduced . 1933 – king kong , fred & ginger , the invisible man , 42nd street , duck soup , the three stooges , she done him wrong 1934 – l'atalante , it happened one night , the thin man , cleopatra , the goddess , manhattan melodrama , the black cat 1935 – a night at the opera , bride of frankenstein , the 39 steps , mutiny on the bounty ; 20th century fox and the rank organisation are founded 1936 – modern times , mr . deeds goes to town , flash gordon , my man godfrey , the great ziegfeld , come and get it 1937 – snow white and the seven dwarfs , the life of emile zola , la grande illusion , pépé le moko , the prisoner of zenda , lost horizon 1938 – bringing up baby , the adventures of robin hood , alexander nevsky , jezebel , a christmas carol , boys town , angels with dirty faces 1939 – gone with the wind , the wizard of oz , the rules of the game , sherlock holmes , the hunchback of notre dame , of mice and men , mr . smith goes to washington , stagecoach . 1940s . 1940 – his girl friday , the great dictator , tom and jerry , rebecca , pinocchio , fantasia , the grapes of wrath , the philadelphia story , road to . 1941 – citizen kane , the lady eve , sergeant york , dumbo , how green was my valley , woody woodpecker , the maltese falcon , the wolf man 1942 – casablanca , mrs . miniver , the magnificent ambersons , to be or not to be , bambi , yankee doodle dandy , cat people 1943 – the song of bernadette , heaven can wait , phantom of the opera , the life and death of colonel blimp , lassie come home , shadow of a doubt , for whom the bell tolls , the ox-bow incident 1944 – going my way , double indemnity , meet me in st . louis , ivan the terrible , laura , to have and have not , murder , my sweet , gaslight ; 1st golden globe awards 1945 – brief encounter , leave her to heaven , the lost weekend , the naughty nineties , anchors aweigh , the picture of dorian gray , rome , open city , spellbound 1946 – it 's a wonderful life , notorious , my darling clementine , great expectations , the best years of our lives , song of the south , beauty and the beast , the big sleep , blue skies ; 1946 cannes film festival 1947 – miracle on 34th street , the lady from shanghai , monsieur verdoux , out of the past , odd man out 1948 – bicycle thieves , the red shoes , red river , hamlet , easter parade , the paleface , the treasure of the sierra madre ; 1st british academy film awards 1949 – the third man , all the king 's men , white heat , whisky galore ! , stray dog , the heiress , on the town . 1950s . 1950 – sunset boulevard , all about eve , cinderella , harvey , father of the bride , orphée , annie get your gun , in a lonely place , king solomon 's mines , born yesterday 1951 – a streetcar named desire , an american in paris , the day the earth stood still , alice in wonderland , quo vadis , the african queen , the thing from another world , ace in the hole , strangers on a train , a place in the sun , decision before dawn 1952 – singin ' in the rain , high noon , the bad and the beautiful , the quiet man , limelight , this is cinerama , the greatest show on earth ; first 3d films 1953 – peter pan , tokyo story , from here to eternity , shane , the war of the worlds , ugetsu , the robe , trouble in store , calamity jane , the earrings of madame de . , salome , roman holiday , the band wagon , gentlemen prefer blondes ; first use of cinemascope ; british cinema advertisement company pearl & dean is founded . 1954 – godzilla , rear window , the seven samurai , dial m for murder , white christmas , 20,000 leagues under the sea , creature from the black lagoon , sansho the bailiff , a star is born , on the waterfront , three coins in the fountain , seven brides for seven brothers 1955 – rebel without a cause , to catch a thief , the seven year itch , marty , ordet , pather panchali , lady and the tramp , oklahoma ! , the court jester , mister roberts 1956 – the ten commandments , high society , carousel , the king and i , giant , the searchers , forbidden planet , invasion of the body snatchers , around the world in 80 days 1957 – the bridge on the river kwai , 12 angry men , sweet smell of success , old yeller , the seventh seal , jailhouse rock , let 's all go to the lobby , mother india , wild strawberries , paths of glory , throne of blood , the curse of frankenstein 1958 – vertigo , gigi , south pacific , cat on a hot tin roof , carry on , ashes and diamonds , jalsaghar , the fly , the blob , attack of the 50 foot woman 1959 – ben-hur , some like it hot , shake hands with the devil , north by northwest , anatomy of a murder , sleeping beauty , rio bravo , pickpocket , pillow talk . 1960s . 1960 – psycho , spartacus , breathless , the apartment , exodus , the magnificent seven , la dolce vita , l'avventura , the time machine 1961 – west side story , breakfast at tiffany 's , divorce , italian style , judgment at nuremberg , yojimbo , one hundred and one dalmatians 1962 – lawrence of arabia , to kill a mockingbird , james bond , what ever happened to baby jane ? , ivan 's childhood , the manchurian candidate , lolita , sundays and cybele 1963 – the birds , the great escape , the pink panther , tom jones , hud , cleopatra , charade , 8½ , not on your life , lilies in the field , the haunting , how the west was won , the nutty professor , it 's a mad , mad , mad , mad world , yesterday , today and tomorrow , the leopard , high and low , irma la douce 1964 – mary poppins , a hard day 's night , dr . strangelove , dollars trilogy , my fair lady 1965 – the sound of music , doctor zhivago , the great race , cat ballou , repulsion 1966 – persona , fantastic voyage , who 's afraid of virginia woolf ? , a man for all seasons , the wild angels , winnie the pooh , alfie , born free 1967 – bonnie and clyde , the graduate , cool hand luke , in the heat of the night , the jungle book , dont look back , the dirty dozen , the producers , doctor dolittle , thoroughly modern millie 1968 – 2001 : a space odyssey , rosemary 's baby , planet of the apes , once upon a time in the west , night of the living dead , yellow submarine , oliver ! , chitty chitty bang bang , the love bug , bullitt , funny girl , yours , mine and ours 1969 – midnight cowboy , true grit , butch cassidy and the sundance kid , easy rider , z , the italian job , a boy named charlie brown . 1970s . 1970 – love story , performance , patton , m a s h , woodstock , the aristocats , tora ! tora ! tora ! , five easy pieces , airport , let it be ; first imax films 1971 – the french connection , a clockwork orange , willy wonka & the chocolate factory , dirty harry , get carter , the last picture show , fiddler on the roof , harold and maude , straw dogs , duel , shaft , bedknobs and broomsticks 1972 – the godfather , aguirre , the wrath of god , the poseidon adventure , cries and whispers , deep throat , pink flamingos , fritz the cat , what 's up , doc ? , last tango in paris 1973 – the exorcist , enter the dragon , amarcord , the sting , american graffiti , paper moon , mean streets , the wicker man , charlotte 's web , belladonna of sadness , fantastic planet , distant thunder , day for night 1974 – a woman under the influence , the godfather part ii , chinatown , the texas chain saw massacre , phantom of the paradise , young frankenstein , blazing saddles , the conversation , that 's entertainment ! , black christmas , the towering inferno 1975 – jaws , one flew over the cuckoo 's nest , the rocky horror picture show , dog day afternoon , nashville , monty python and the holy grail , dersu uzala , sholay ; videocassette recorders appear on mass markets . 1976 – taxi driver , rocky , network , carrie , all the president 's men , in the realm of the senses , 1900 , the omen , logan 's run , the smurfs and the magic flute , bugsy malone , the outlaw josey wales 1977 – star wars , close encounters of the third kind , annie hall , saturday night fever , a bridge too far , providence , pete 's dragon , house , suspiria , eraserhead 1978 – halloween , the deer hunter , dawn of the dead , grease , superman , midnight express , watership down , the lord of the rings , days of heaven , up in smoke , animal house 1979 – apocalypse now , mad max , alien , kramer vs . kramer , monty python 's life of brian , the muppet movie , the castle of cagliostro , star trek : the motion picture , stalker , manhattan , all that jazz . 1980s . 1980 – the shining , raging bull , airplane ! , the blues brothers , caddyshack , ordinary people , friday the 13th , fame , kagemusha , the elephant man , 9 to 5 , private benjamin , moscow does not believe in tears 1981 – raiders of the lost ark , chariots of fire , reds , the evil dead , on golden pond , pennies from heaven , das boot , blow out , heavy metal , arthur , scanners , time bandits , clash of the titans , an american werewolf in london , escape from new york 1982 – poltergeist , blade runner , e.t . the extra-terrestrial , tron , sophie 's choice , tootsie , fanny and alexander , fitzcarraldo , gandhi , the dark crystal , the secret of nimh , the last unicorn , star trek ii : the wrath of khan , first blood , annie , 48 hrs . , fast times at ridgemont high , the thing , an officer and a gentleman 1983 – michael jackson 's thriller , terms of endearment , risky business , sans soleil , l'argent , the king of comedy , the right stuff , strange brew , monty python 's the meaning of life , national lampoon 's vacation , scarface , nostalghia , flashdance , trading places , sleepaway camp , a christmas story ; thx sound system is developed . 1984 – this is spinal tap , ghostbusters , amadeus , the terminator , gremlins , nausicaä of the valley of the wind , the karate kid , once upon a time in america , paris , texas , footloose , beverly hills cop , a nightmare on elm street , sixteen candles , the neverending story 1985 – back to the future , the breakfast club , out of africa , the color purple , brazil , shoah , ran , come and see , the goonies , the care bears movie , pee-wee 's big adventure , cocoon , a room with a view 1986 – blue velvet , aliens , the sacrifice , ferris bueller 's day off , platoon , hannah and her sisters , stand by me , an american tail , castle in the sky , top gun , luxo jr . , crocodile dundee , three amigos , labyrinth , flight of the navigator , big trouble in little china , short circuit , the great mouse detective , the fly , little shop of horrors 1987 – fatal attraction , dirty dancing , wings of desire , the dead , evil dead ii , the princess bride , full metal jacket , the last emperor , robocop , wall street , the lost boys , hellraiser , predator , moonstruck , hope and glory , planes , trains and automobiles , lethal weapon , mannnequin , innerspace , spaceballs , good morning , vietnam 1988 – my neighbor totoro , rain man , die hard , beetlejuice , akira , who framed roger rabbit , cinema paradiso , child 's play , the accused , big , grave of the fireflies , the last temptation of christ , dead ringers , willow , heathers , the naked gun : from the files of police squad ! 1989 – do the right thing , driving miss daisy , the little mermaid ( first installment of the disney renaissance ) , batman , bill & ted 's excellent adventure , a fish called wanda , the abyss , when harry met sally . , say anything . , crimes and misdemeanors , my left foot , dead poets society , field of dreams , born on the fourth of july , honey , i shrunk the kids ; first publication of empire . 1990s . 1990 – home alone , ghost , goodfellas , close-up , dances with wolves , edward scissorhands , wild at heart , total recall , troll 2 , misery , pretty woman , journey of hope , the hunt for red october 1991 – the silence of the lambs , terminator 2 : judgment day , beauty and the beast , jfk , thelma & louise , a brighter summer day , the addams family , an american tail : fievel goes west , my girl , point break , boyz n the hood 1992 – unforgiven , reservoir dogs , basic instinct , aladdin , a few good men , the player , the crying game , wayne 's world , porco rosso , ferngully : the last rainforest , indochine , candyman , the bodyguard , a league of their own 1993 – schindler 's list , jurassic park , the piano , groundhog day , in the name of the father , the nightmare before christmas , philadelphia , three colours trilogy , free willy , mrs . doubtfire , hocus pocus , cliffhanger , ninja scroll , batman : mask of the phantasm , sleepless in seattle , true romance , dazed and confused 1994 – pulp fiction , forrest gump , the lion king , the shawshank redemption , legends of the fall , clerks , interview with the vampire , speed , true lies , the crow , maverick , léon : the professional , ace ventura : pet detective , the mask , dumb and dumber , through the olive trees , four weddings and a funeral 1995 – toy story , braveheart , se7en , apollo 13 , babe , the usual suspects , heat , 12 monkeys , clueless , mortal kombat , casper , ghost in the shell , jumanji , leaving las vegas , casino , before trilogy , sense and sensibility ; first dvds released . 1996 – independence day , fargo , trainspotting , jerry maguire , mission : impossible , scream , space jam , mars attacks ! , harriet the spy , that thing you do ! , flirting with disaster , the english patient , shall we dance ? , fly away home , matilda 1997 – titanic , men in black , good will hunting , boogie nights , jackie brown , austin powers , l.a . confidential , taste of cherry , hana-bi , the full monty , princess mononoke , anastasia , life is beautiful , the fifth element , i know what you did last summer 1998 – saving private ryan , american history x , shakespeare in love , the big lebowski , buffalo '66 , little voice , the thin red line , blade , the prince of egypt , antz , pokémon : the first movie , bulworth , the mask of zorro , the truman show , the wedding singer , fear and loathing in las vegas , lock , stock and two smoking barrels , rush hour , there 's something about mary 1999 – the matrix , american beauty , the iron giant , south park : bigger , longer & uncut , the sixth sense , fight club , magnolia , notting hill , stuart little , the blair witch project , eyes wide shut , all about my mother , american pie , the green mile , election , office space , galaxy quest , being john malkovich . 2000s . 2000 – crouching tiger , hidden dragon , in the mood for love , gladiator , billy elliot , cast away , platform , memento , chicken run , erin brockovich , almost famous , o brother , where art thou ? , high fidelity , meet the parents , battle royale , x-men , how the grinch stole christmas , final destination , unbreakable , american psycho , battlefield earth , before night falls , the patriot , requiem for a dream ; first digital cinema in europe by phillippe binant . 2001 – shrek , harry potter , the lord of the rings , spirited away , a beautiful mind , the royal tenenbaums , the fast & the furious , moulin rouge ! , mulholland drive , donnie darko , zoolander , training day , black hawk down , final fantasy : the spirits within , monster 's ball , ocean 's eleven , monsters , inc . , amélie , bridget jones 's diary , jimmy neutron : boy genius 2002 – spider-man , city of god , talk to her , chicago , ice age , 8 mile , minority report , the pianist , russian ark , the hours , the quiet american , gangs of new york , bowling for columbine , about a boy , frida , 28 days later , bend it like beckham , my big fat greek wedding , punch-drunk love , lilo & stitch , spirit : stallion of the cimarron , the cat returns , the ring , better luck tomorrow , catch me if you can , the bourne identity , adaptation 2003 – oldboy , kill bill , pirates of the caribbean : the curse of the black pearl , finding nemo , love actually , elf , the room , lost in translation , elephant , monster , big fish , cold mountain , school of rock , once upon a time in mexico 2004 – eternal sunshine of the spotless mind , million dollar baby , the incredibles , the passion of the christ , sideways , hotel rwanda , downfall , friday night lights , the aviator , howl 's moving castle , spider-man 2 , ray , hellboy , saw , shaun of the dead , the polar express , team america : world police , mean girls , anchorman : the legend of ron burgundy , napoleon dynamite , a series of unfortunate events ( film ) , shrek 2 , the spongebob squarepants movie , finding neverland , sky captain and the world of tomorrow , the life aquatic with steve zissou ; anti-piracy campaign '' piracy . it 's a crime '' , which features the first line you would n't steal a car , first advertised . 2005 – caché , the new world , brokeback mountain , the dark knight trilogy , the death of mr . lazarescu , a history of violence , pride & prejudice , walk the line , march of the penguins , madagascar , wallace & gromit : the curse of the were-rabbit , corpse bride , munich , serenity , sin city , good night , and good luck , v for vendetta , the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy , 9 , crash , the 40 year old virgin , capote 2006 – 300 , pan 's labyrinth , happy feet , children of men , the departed , dreamgirls , the lives of others , the prestige , paprika , apocalypto , the girl who leapt through time , the queen , borat , little miss sunshine , the pursuit of happyness , the devil wears prada , an incovenient truth , over the hedge , flushed away , cars , the last king of scotland , snakes on a plane , babel , united 93 ; first blu-rays released 2007 – there will be blood , no country for old men , the simpsons movie , i am legend , persepolis , into the wild , juno , atonement , superbad , hot fuzz , enchanted , ratatouille , bee movie , surf 's up , grindhouse , trick ' r treat , once , transformers , la vie en rose , knocked up , son of rambow , sweeney todd : the demon barber of fleet street 2008 – the marvel cinematic universe , slumdog millionaire , mamma mia ! , gran torino , kung fu panda , the wrestler , milk , vicky cristina barcelona , frost/nixon , cloverfield , ip man , tropic thunder , taken , twilight , ponyo , waltz with bashir , marley & me , in bruges , man on wire , wall-e , revolutionary road , the reader , the curious case of benjamin button 2009 – avatar , coraline , inglourious basterds , the secret in their eyes , fantastic mr . fox , the hangover , district 9 , mary and max , 3 idiots , the princess and the frog , michael jackson 's this is it , star trek , in the loop , zombieland , crazy heart , precious , up , the hurt locker , monsters vs . aliens . 2010s . 2010 – the king 's speech , the social network , how to train your dragon , despicable me , black swan , inception , tangled , winter 's bone , 127 hours , the fighter , scott pilgrim vs . the world , kick-ass , the kids are all right , blue valentine , arrietty 2011 – the artist , bridesmaids , drive , hugo , the intouchables , a separation , the tree of life , the girl with the dragon tattoo , midnight in paris , war horse , moneyball , rango , crazy , stupid , love , the adventures of tintin , arthur christmas , rio , tinker tailor soldier spy , the help , the cabin in the woods , super 8 , rise of the planet of the apes , from up on poppy hill 2012 – life of pi , argo , lincoln , les misérables , django unchained , ted , silver linings playbook , the hunger games , pitch perfect , 21 jump street ( film ) , hotel transylvania , magic mike , looper , the master , beasts of the southern wild , frankenweenie , ernest & celestine , zero dark thirty , iron sky 2013 – the wolf of wall street , gravity , frozen , 12 years a slave , bhaag milkha bhaag , the great beauty , rush , american hustle , dallas buyers club , inside llewyn davis , her , the wind rises , the tale of the princess kaguya , prisoners , the conjuring , nebraska , pacific rim , philomena , the world 's end , blue jasmine , blue is the warmest colour , the best man holiday 2014 – interstellar , boyhood , the grand budapest hotel , paddington , maleficent , birdman , whiplash , kingsman : the secret service , the babadook , american sniper , the book of life , song of the sea , big hero 6 , when marnie was there , selma , stand by me doraemon , edge of tomorrow , the lego movie , ex machina , gone girl , frank , foxcatcher , nightcrawler , john wick , wild , the imitation game , the theory of everything 2015 – star wars : the force awakens , mad max : fury road , the peanuts movie , shaun the sheep movie , the revenant , baahubali : the beginning , the hateful eight , spotlight , the martian , bridge of spies , monster hunt , minions , the little prince , son of saul , the big short , room , inside out , carol , creed , anomalisa , amy , straight outta compton 2016 – la la land , deadpool , dangal , your name , zootopia , kubo and the two strings , moana , sing street , arrival , manchester by the sea , moonlight , hacksaw ridge , fences , lion , the jungle book , the handmaiden , the mermaid , do n't breathe , in this corner of the world , i , daniel blake , silence , sing , hell or high water 2017 – the shape of water , wonder woman , the emoji movie , get out , it , paddington 2 , baahubali 2 : the conclusion , wolf warrior 2 , blade runner 2049 , dunkirk , logan , the disaster artist , baby driver , i , tonya , the silent child , in a heartbeat , coco , captain underpants : the first epic movie , call me by your name , phantom thread , mary and the witch 's flower , the breadwinner , loving vincent , lady bird , girls trip , three billboards outside ebbing , missouri , darkest hour , jumanji : welcome to the jungle , the greatest showman ; the harvey weinstein scandal begins . 2018 – bohemian rhapsody , ready player one , spider-man : into the spider-verse , a star is born , the favourite , roma ( which is released on netflix ) , eighth grade , isle of dogs , bumblebee , mary poppins returns , a quiet place , hereditary , dragon ball super : broly , crazy rich asians , blackkklansman , first man , green book , free solo , shoplifters 2019 – joker , 1917 , parasite , rocketman , little women , the irishman , the farewell , once upon a time in hollywood , pokémon detective pikachu , ne zha , alita : battle angel , bombshell , us , ready or not , the lighthouse , marriage story , knives out , dolemite is my name , jojo rabbit , booksmart , richard jewell , a beautiful day in the neighborhood . 2020s . 2020 – tenet , the eight hundred , hamilton , wolfwalkers , sonic the hedgehog , birds of prey , mank , the invisible man , da 5 bloods , the trial of the chicago 7 , demon slayer : mugen train , dil bechara , nomadland , the willoughbys , soul ; due to the covid-19 pandemic , a number of films shut down production , or are either removed from their originally scheduled releases and moved to new release dates or digital releases . 2021 – dune , rrr , godzilla vs . kong , avatar 2 , the french dispatch , last night in soho , the many saints of newark , wicked , judas and the black messiah , the last duel , k.g.f : chapter 2 . see also . list of cinematic firsts table of years in film . references . the silent cinema reader edited by lee grieveson and peter kramer movies of the 30s , edited by jürgen müller , taschen the magic of méliès , documentary by jacques mény , special collector 's edition dvd , spain