Osmania University

history . the osmania university was brought into existence in 1918 through a firman of mir osman ali khan , the last nizam of hyderabad . the need for a university in hyderabad state was felt for a long time , and in 1917 , akbar hydari , in a memorandum to the education minister , emphasized the need to establish a university with urdu as the medium of instruction '' as it is the language of the widest currency in india '' . after independence and the accession of hyderabad state in 1948 , the university fell under the purview of the state government . english replaced urdu as the medium of instruction , and the nizam 's crown was also removed from the university seal . seal . the original seal featured the nizam 's crown as the crest , along with the phrase noorun ala noor . it also contained the hadith , '' i am the city of knowledge and ali is its gate '' . the present emblem contains inscriptions in telugu and hindi . the new logo has the urdu letter ain in between . campus . the main campus is a chief intellectual centre in hyderabad , and its alumni and faculty members include many distinguished individuals , including former prime minister of india p . v . narasimha rao . admission to main campus departments of genetics , biochemistry , biotechnology , chemistry , engineering , management , and law is highly competitive . the state government has appointed prof s.ramachandram as vice chancellor of the university . the university is accredited by the naac with an ' a + ' grade and conferred with the status of 'university with potential for excellence ' by the ugc , new delhi . the university colleges are located within the main campus of the university . there are eight such colleges : the university college of arts and social sciences , university college of commerce & business management , university college of technology , university college of engineering , university college of law , university college of science , institute of advance study in education , and pg college of physical education . the university offers courses in humanities , arts , sciences , social sciences , law , engineering , medicine , technology , commerce and business management , information technology and oriental languages . in 2001 , osmania was awarded five-star status by the national accreditation and assessment council ( naac ) of the university grants commission , part of the government of india . the university has a campus of nearly 1600 acres ( 6 & nbsp ; km 2 ) with 300,000 students ( counting all the campuses , constituent affiliated colleges and district centres ) making it one of the largest higher education systems in india . nearly 5000 faculty and staff are employed at osmania . it attracts students from across the nation as well as from other countries . . organisation and administration . constituent colleges . osmania university is a confederation of university colleges , constituent colleges , and affiliated colleges . the constituent colleges of the university includes : nizam college post graduate college of law , basheerbhagh university college for women , koti university college of science , saifabad university post graduate college , secunderabad . other autonomous centers . institution of electronics and telecommunication engineers , hyderabad indian council of social science research , hyderabad center for plant molecular biology center for indian ocean studies japal-rangapur observatory research and training unit in navigational electronics regional center for urban and environmental studies national institute of nutrition city college hyderabad center for stem cell science , hyderabad anwar ul uloom college , hyderabad pgrr center for distance education . affiliated engineering colleges . the affiliated engineering colleges of the university are scattered in telangana ( mainly ghmc area ) and offer various undergraduate and post-graduate engineering courses . the affiliated engineering colleges include ( in no particular order ) : chaitanya bharathi institute of technology muffakham jah college of engineering and technology deccan college of engineering and technology maturi venkata subba rao engineering college methodist college of engineering and technology stanley college of engineering and technology for women vasavi college of engineering matrusri engineering college lords institute of engineering and technology neil gogte institute of technology nawab shah alam khan college of engineering and technology isl engineering college . departments . ; college of arts and social sciences ancient history , culture & archeology arabic communication & journalism economics english french german hindi history islamic studies kannada library & information science linguistics marathi persian philosophy political science psychology public administration russian sanskrit sociology tamil telugu urdu theatre arts ; college of commerce and business management commerce business management ; college of engineering biomedical engineering civil engineering computer science and engineering electronics and communication engineering electronics and electrical engineering mechanical engineering automobile engineering production engineering ; college of law law ; college of science astronomy biochemistry biotechnology botany computer science chemistry environmental science forensic science genetics geochemistry geography geo-informatics geology geophysics mathematics microbiology physics statistics zoology ; college of technology chemical engineering chemical technology materials science & technology biochemical engineering biotechnology textile technology food technology pharmacy ; institute of advanced study in education education . academics . admissions . osmania is a non-profit university which is funded and managed by the government . admissions into the bachelor of engineering , masters and doctoral programs in main campus is on a merit basis , evaluated by national entrance examinations ( eamcet , gate , bcfsbtgmes-n & d , tslawcet , o.u . phd entrance exam etc . ) for each of the courses offered . library . the university library is the main library of the university and it was founded in 1918 along with the university . it has close to 500,000 books and more than 6000 manuscripts , which includes rare palm leave manuscripts . it also has various journals , government documents , etc . the main library coordinates a library system , which connects the libraries in the entire campus and other constituent college libraries . . rankings . osmania university has ranked on 301–350 among universities in asia category by the qs asia ranking 2020 , ranked 141 among the universities in brics countries by the qs brics ranking 2019 and ranked on 32 in qs india ranking in 2020 . the times higher education world university rankings ranked it 801–1000 globally in the 2020 ranking 201–250 in asia in 2020 and 201–250 among emerging economies university rankings 2020 . the national institutional ranking framework ( nirf ) ranked it 29 among universities in 2020 . . research . the research activities are funded by various autonomous agencies of the government of india . foreign students are also admitted to the university via ufro ( university foreign relations office ) that allots admissions with minimum criteria . indian students living overseas non-resident indian are also admitted through ufro that are usually ineligible to get admissions via the entrance exams quota . notable alumni and faculty . notable alumni of osmania university include major politicians of india , including 9th prime minister of india p . v . narasimha rao and jaipal reddy , cabinet minister , 16th and last chief minister of united andhra pradesh with telangana nallari kiran kumar reddy , current ceo adobe systems shantanu narayen and senior advocate subodh markandeya . other alumni includes former indian cricket team captain mohammed azharuddin , cricket commentator harsha bhogle , novelist venkatesh kulkarni , pdsu founder george reddy , former union home minister shivraj patil , former governor of the reserve bank of india yaga venugopal reddy , chemist garikapati narahari sastry , metallurgist and former vice chancellor of banaras hindu university patcha ramachandra rao and physicist raziuddin siddiqui . rakesh sharma , cosmonaut and the first indian to travel in space , was a graduate of osmania . karan bilimoria , founder of cobra beer , member of the house of lords , and the seventh chancellor of the university of birmingham earned his bachelor of commerce degree from osmania in 1981 . rafi ahmed , a well-known virologist and immunologist graduated from osmania university in 1968 . notable former faculty members of the university include bhadriraju krishnamurti , dravidianist and linguist , and founder of linguistics department at the university , physicist suri bhagavantam , and linguist masud husain khan .