James Brooke

early life . brooke was born in bandel , near calcutta , bengal , but baptised birth and baptism records in secrole , a suburb of benares . his father , thomas brooke , was an english judge in the court of appeal at bareilly , british india ; his mother , anna maria , born in hertfordshire , was the daughter of scottish peer colonel william stuart , 9th lord blantyre , and his mistress harriott teasdale . brooke stayed at home in india until he was sent , aged 12 , to england for a brief education at norwich school from which he ran away . some home tutoring followed in bath before he returned to india in 1819 as an ensign in the bengal army of the british east india company . he saw action in assam during the first anglo-burmese war until seriously wounded in 1825 , and was sent to england for recovery . in 1830 , he arrived back in madras but was too late to rejoin his unit , and resigned his commission . he remained on the ship he had travelled out in , the castle huntley , and returned home via china . sarawak . brooke attempted to trade in the far east , but was not successful . in 1835 he inherited £30,000 , which he used as capital to purchase a 142-ton schooner , royalist . setting sail for borneo in 1838 , he arrived in kuching in august to find the settlement facing an uprising against the sultan of brunei . greatly impressed with the malay archipelago , in sarawak he met the sultan 's uncle , pangeran muda hashim , to whom he gave assistance in crushing the rebellion , thereby winning the gratitude of the sultan , who in 1841 offered brooke the governorship of sarawak in return for his help . rajah brooke was highly successful in suppressing the widespread piracy of the region . however , some malay nobles in brunei , unhappy over brooke 's measures against piracy , arranged for the murder of muda hashim and his followers . brooke , with assistance from a unit of britain 's china squadron , took over brunei and restored its sultan to the throne . in 1842 omar ali saifuddin ii ceded complete sovereignty of sarawak to brooke . he was granted the title of rajah of sarawak on 24 september 1841 , although the official declaration was not made until 18 august 1842 . cession of labuan to great britain . in 1846 brooke presented the island of labuan to the british government . he was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of labuan in 1848 . reign . during his reign , brooke began to establish and cement his rule over sarawak : reforming the administration , codifying laws and fighting piracy , which proved to be an ongoing issue throughout his rule . brooke returned temporarily to england in 1847 , where he was given the freedom of the city of london , appointed british consul-general in borneo and created a knight commander of the order of the bath ( kcb ) . brooke pacified the native peoples , including the dayaks , and suppressed headhunting and piracy . he had many dayaks in his forces and said that only dayaks can kill dayaks . brooke became the centre of controversy in 1851 when accusations against him of excessive use of force against the native people , under the guise of anti-piracy operations , ultimately led to the appointment of a commission of inquiry in singapore in 1854 . after investigation , the commission dismissed the charges but the accusations continued to haunt him . brooke wrote to alfred russel wallace on leaving england in april 1853 , '' to assure wallace that he would be very glad to see him at sarawak . '' raby , peter . alfred russel wallace : a life . princeton , new jersey : princeton university press , 2001 , p . 87 this was an invitation that helped wallace decide on the malay archipelago for his next expedition , an expedition that lasted for eight years and established him as one of the foremost victorian intellectuals and naturalists of the time . when wallace arrived in singapore in september 1854 , he found rajah brooke '' reluctantly preparing to give evidence to the special commission set up to investigate his controversial anti-piracy activities . '' raby , p . 100 . during his rule , brooke suppressed an uprising by liu shan bang in 1857 and faced threats from sarawak warriors like sharif masahor and rentap and managed to suppress them . . death and burial . brooke ruled sarawak until his death in 1868 , following three strokes over ten years . all three white rajahs are buried at st leonard 's church in the village of sheepstor on dartmoor . successor . having no legitimate children , in 1861 he formally named captain john brooke johnson brooke , his sister 's eldest son , as his successor . two years later , the rajah reacted to criticism by returning to the east : after a brief meeting in singapore , john was deposed and banished from sarawak . james increased the charges to treasonous conduct and later named john 's younger brother , charles anthoni johnson brooke , as successor . personal life . brooke was influenced by the success of previous british adventurers and the exploits of the east india company . his actions in sarawak were directed at expanding the british empire and the benefits of its rule , assisting the local people by fighting piracy and slavery , and securing his own personal wealth to further these activities . his own abilities , and those of his successors , provided sarawak with excellent leadership and wealth generation during difficult times , and resulted in both fame and notoriety in some circles . his appointment as rajah by the sultan , and his subsequent knighthood , are evidence that his efforts were widely applauded in both sarawak and british society . among his alleged relationships was one with badruddin , a sarawak prince , of whom he wrote , '' my love for him was deeper than anyone i knew . '' this phrase led to some considering him to be either homosexual or bisexual . later , in 1848 , brooke is alleged to have formed a relationship with 16‑year‑old charles t . c . grant , grandson of the seventh earl of elgin , who supposedly 'reciprocated' . empire and sexuality : the british experience , ronald hyam ; pp.44–45 whether this relationship was purely a friendship or otherwise has not been fully revealed . one of brooke 's recent biographers wrote that during brooke 's final years in burrator in devon '' there is little doubt . he was carnally involved with the rough trade of totnes . '' barley , p . 208 . however , barley does not note from where he garnered this opinion . others have suggested brooke was instead '' homo-social '' and simply preferred the social company of other men , disagreeing with assertions he was a homosexual . the white rajahs of sarawak : a borneo dynasty by bob reece ( archipelago press , 2004 ) although he died unmarried , he did acknowledge one son . neither the identity of the son 's mother nor his birth date is clear . this son was brought up as reuben george walker in the brighton household of frances walker ( 1841 and 1851 census , apparently born ca . 1836 ) . by 1858 he was aware of his brooke connection and by 1871 he is on the census at the parish of plumtree , nottinghamshire as '' george brooke '' , age '' 40 '' , birthplace '' sarawak , borneo '' . he was married ( in 1862 ) and had seven children , three of whom survived infancy ; the oldest was called james . george died travelling to australia , in the wreck of the ss british admiral on 23 may 1874 . a memorial to this effect – giving a birthdate of 1834 – is in the churchyard at plumtree . james brooke was ' a great admirer ' of the novels of jane austen , and would 'read them and re-read them ' , including aloud to his companions in sarawak . spenser st john , 'the life of sir james brooke , rajah of sarawak ' . in popular culture . fictionalised accounts of brooke 's exploits in sarawak include kalimantaan by c . s . godshalk and the white rajah by nicholas monsarrat . another book , also called the white rajah , by tom williams , was published by jms books in 2010 . brooke is also featured in flashman 's lady , the 6th book in george macdonald fraser 's meticulously researched the flashman papers novels ; and in sandokan : the pirates of malaysia ( i pirati della malesia ) , the second novel in emilio salgari 's sandokan series . brooke was also a model for the hero of joseph conrad 's novel lord jim , and he is briefly mentioned in kipling 's short story '' the man who would be king '' . charles kingsley dedicated the novel westward ho ! ( 1855 ) to brooke . in 1936 , errol flynn intended to star in a film of brooke 's life called the white rajah for warner bros . , based on a script by flynn himself . however , although the project was announced for filming , it was never made . in september 2016 , a film white rajah based on brooks ' life was to be made in sarawak with the support of abang abdul rahman zohari of the government of sarawak , with writer rob allyn and sergei bodrov as its director . the brooke heritage trust , a non-profit organisation , was to serve as the film 's technical advisors , with one of them being jason brooke , the current heir of the brooke family . . honours and legacy . british honours kcb : order of the bath , 1848 some bornean plant species were named in brooke 's honour : rhododendron brookeanum , a flowering plant named by hugh low and john lindley , now included in rhododendron javanicum rajah brooke 's pitcher plant ( nepenthes rajah ) , a pitcher plant named by joseph dalton hooker also insects : rajah brooke 's birdwing ( trogonoptera brookiana ) , a butterfly named by alfred r . wallace rajah brooke 's stag beetle , lucanus brookeanus snellen van vollenhoven , 1861 odontolabis brookeana , collected by alfred r . wallace beccialoni , george three species of reptiles : beolens , bo ; watkins , michael ; grayson , michael ( 2011 ) . the eponym dictionary of reptiles . baltimore : johns hopkins university press . xiii + 296 pp . ( '' brooke '' , p . 39 ) . brooke 's house gecko hemidactylus brookii hydrophis brookii tropidophorus and a snail : bertia ( ryssota ) brookei ( adams & reeve , 1848 ) in 1857 , the native village of newash in grey county , ontario , canada , was renamed brooke and the adjacent township was named sarawak by william coutts keppel ( known as viscount bury , later the 7th earl of albemarle ) who was superintendent of indian affairs in canada . marsh , edith l . a history of the county of grey . owen sound , ont . : fleming , 1931 , pp . 210-211 . james brooke was a close friend of viscount bury 's uncle , henry keppel ; they had met in 1843 while fighting pirates off the coast of borneo . jacob , gertrude l . the raja of saráwak : an account of sir james brooke . london : macmillan , 1876 , vol . 1 , ch . xiii . townships to the northwest of sarawak were named keppel and albemarle . in 2001 , sarawak and keppel became part of the township of georgian bluffs ; albemarle joined the town of south bruce peninsula in 1999 . keppel-sarawak school is located in owen sound , ontario . brooke 's point , a major municipality on the island of palawan , philippines , is named after him . both brooke 's lighthouse and brooke 's port , historical landmarks in brooke 's point , are believed to have been constructed by sir james brooke . today , owing to erosion and the constant movement of the tides , only a few stones can still be seen at the port . the remnants of the original lighthouse tower are still visible , although the area is now occupied by a new lighthouse . notes . : a.the term rajah reflects traditional usage in sarawak and english writing , although raja may be better orthography in malay . references . sources . barley , nigel ( 2002 ) , white rajah , time warner : london . cavendish , richard , '' birth of sir james brooke '' , history today . april 2003 , vol . 53 , issue 4 . doering , jonathan . '' the enigmatic sir james brooke . '' contemporary review , july 2003 . ( book review of white rajah by nigel barley . little , brown . ) jacob , gertrude le grand . the raja of saráwak : an account of sir james brooks . k . c . b . , ll . d . , given chiefly through letters and journals . london : macmillan , 1876 . owen rutter ( ed ) rajah brooke & baroness burdett coutts . consisting of the letters from sir james brooke to miss angela , afterwards baroness , burdett coutts 1935 . wason , charles william . the annual register : a review of public events at home and abroad for the year 1868 . london : rivingtons , waterloo place , 1869 . pp . 162–163 . further reading . hahn , emily ( 1953 ) james brooke of sarawak , london , arthur barker . ingleson , john ( 1979 ) expanding the empire : james brooke and the sarawak lobby , 1839–1868 , nedlands , w.a . : centre for south and southeast asian studies , university of western australia . payne , robert ( 1960 ) the white rajahs of sarawak , robert hale . pybus , cassandra ( 1996 ) 'white rajah : a dynastic intrigue ' university of queensland press . runciman , steve ( 1960 ) the white rajahs : a history of sarawak from 1841 to 1946 , cambridge university press . st . spenser st . john ( 1879 ) the life of sir james brooke : rajah of sarawak : from his personal papers and correspondence , edinburgh & london : blackwood tarling , nicholas ( 1982 ) the burthen , the risk , and the glory : a biography of sir james brooke , kuala lumpur ; new york : oxford university press .