Mystikal

early life and education . michael 's family moved to new orleans when he was young . his father , who ran a small neighborhood store , died when michael was seven . he attended cohen high school and afterward joined the united states army as a combat engineer . as an aspiring rapper , he opened for run-d.m.c . and doug e . fresh at an outdoor concert at the treme center . leroy '' precise '' edwards , the house producer for big boy records , was in the audience , and granted him a contract . . career . 1994–95 : early career . mystikal 's debut album , mystikal , was released on new orleans-based independent record label big boy records in 1994 . the album was one of big boy 's most successful and gained major success for mystikal . in 1995 , he found himself involved in conflict with fellow new orleans rappers signed to rival cash money records , including u.n.l.v . , lil wayne & b.g . they dissed him on tracks like '' drag 'em in tha river '' by u.n.l.v . and '' fuck big boy '' by the b.g . ' z . he struck back with the disses '' beware '' and '' here i go '' which were on his second album , mind of mystikal . mystikal 's sister , michelle tyler , sang the chorus on '' not that nigga '' and her fate became a major influence on mystikal 's music after her murder in september 1994 . the songs '' dedicated to michelle tyler '' , '' murder '' ( both on mind of mystikal ) , '' murder 2 '' , '' shine '' ( both on unpredictable ) and '' murder iii '' ( on let 's get ready ) refer to her murder . it was n't long after their beef that mystikal and lil wayne decided to squash it and become collaborators . . 1995–2000 : mind of mystikal and stint with big boy records . mystikal signed to big boy records ; jive records and released mind of mystikal in 1995 . he signed to no limit records in 1996 and released unpredictable in november 1997 . he appeared on many of the no limit albums released from 1997 through a chunk of 2000 . he also collaborated with mariah carey on her rainbow album on the track 'did i do that ' . in late 1998 , he released ghetto fabulous . that was his last album with the label , and he left later in 2000 to go on his own . 2000–04 : let 's get ready , tarantula and prison . in 1999 he had begun recording his fourth album before leaving no limit . let 's get ready was released in 2000 and contained '' danger ( been so long ) '' , which featured rising pop star nivea , and was the hot r & b/hip-hop songs number-one single in june 2001 . let 's get ready debuted at number one on the billboard 200 , making it mystikal 's only chart-topping album to date . the album also featured the popular , neptunes-produced hit '' shake ya ass '' . the song attained cult-like popularity and can be heard in the background of numerous movies . mystikal 's most recent solo release was the 2001 album tarantula , which contained the hit single , '' bouncin ' back ( bumpin ' me against the wall ) '' . though it presented mystikal 's typical and funky flow style , which had the distinction of drawing comparison to legendary r & b soul screamers little richard and james brown , the song also saw a blending of jazz and swing elements with hip-hop . the well received album was nominated for a grammy award for best rap album in 2003 , and mystikal was nominated for a grammy award for best male rap solo performance that same year . mystikal was also featured prominently in the single , '' move bitch '' by ludacris as well as '' kings of crunk '' by lil jon & the east side boyz along with krayzie bone , both in 2002 . in 2003 he starred in the film 13 dead men . in 2003 , mystikal was indicted on charges of sexual assault and extortion . on january 15 , 2004 , he was sentenced to six years in prison after pleading guilty to forcing his hairstylist to perform sex acts . he served the full six years of his sentence and was released on january 14 , 2010 . 2010–present . mystikal headlined a concert at the mahalia jackson theater of the performing arts on mardi gras , february 16 , 2010 . mystikal 's first song after being released from prison was an underground track with former no limit labelmate fiend entitled '' i do n't like you '' . a few weeks later , atlanta-based , new orleans-born r & b artist lloyd released '' set me free '' featuring mystikal . the music video for '' set me free '' was released on may 18 , 2010 and was shot in new orleans , primarily from the calliope projects . in an interview in may 2010 , he stated that he was still obligated to jive records for one more album and would be taking the necessary time to ensure the album would be his best to date . he made a promo song called '' papercuts '' featuring fiend and lil wayne . in 2011 , he performed at the gathering of the juggalos . mystikal and busta rhymes were signed to cash money records by birdman on november 16 the same year . his first single for the label , '' original '' , was released shortly thereafter and featured new label-mates birdman and lil wayne . in 2014 , mystikal recorded '' feel right '' for mark ronson 's uptown special . the song and video were released in 2015 . also in 2015 , mystikal appeared on stevie stone 's single rain dance with tech n9ne from the 2015 release malta bend . in january 2016 , he performed in shows in bahrain and bulgaria with danny ! in february 2016 , mystikal toured the united states . in april 2016 , mystikal was featured on just a lil ' thick ( she juicy ) by trinidad james along with lil dicky . personal life . mystikal 's sister michelle tyler was murdered in september 1994 . . sexual battery conviction and other legal issues . on june 26 , 2003 , mystikal pleaded guilty to sexual battery and extortion . on january 15 , 2004 , mystikal was sentenced to six years in state prison after pleading guilty to sexually assaulting his hairstylist . the rapper and two bodyguards forced the woman to perform oral sex , and accused her of stealing 80,000 in checks . as part of a plea bargain , all three pleaded guilty . mystikal initially claimed that the incident was consensual , but a videotape of the incident was later found at his home shortly after the charges were made . negotiations during the trial held the videotape from being entered as evidence and mystikal agreed to the plea bargain offered by the prosecution , avoiding the mandatory life sentence for sexual battery in louisiana and expecting to receive probation . however , the case took a twist when the judge viewed the videotape at the sentencing , took into account mystikal 's two prior arrests ( for drug and gun possession ) , and had him remanded into custody to begin serving a six-year sentence immediately . mystikal 's bodyguards , leland ellis and vercy carter , also pleaded guilty to sexual battery . in august 2005 , while incarcerated on the state sexual battery and extortion charges , mystikal was charged federally with two misdemeanor counts of failing to file tax returns for 1998 and 1999 . on january 12 , 2006 , he was convicted in federal court of the tax offenses , but was allowed to serve the one-year federal sentence concurrent with his six-year state sentence . mystikal was incarcerated at louisiana 's elayn hunt correctional center . on january 19 , 2006 , mystikal was denied parole at a parole board hearing . on january 11 , 2007 , mystikal was released from custody on the federal misdemeanor tax convictions ( as his one-year sentence had expired ) , but he remained in custody on the six-year sentence for the louisiana state felony convictions . the news of his release caused confusion among fans who heard the news and mistakenly thought he had been released on parole . he was released january 14 , 2010 . after his release , mystikal was registered as a sex offender . on february 22 , 2012 , mystikal was arrested again following a dispute with his domestic partner and was later given a misdemeanor charge of domestic abuse battery . he was detained for nine days and then released on bail . on april 16 , he was given a three-month jail sentence for violating the terms of his probation he was given following his release from prison in january 2010 . he was given credit for the nine days already served , reducing his confinement to 81 days . he began serving his sentence on may 14 at the east baton rouge parish jail . during his incarceration , he appeared in court to be heard on the domestic battery charges as well as for a hearing to determine child support payments for his two youngest children . mystikal was released from jail in august 2012 . on august 21 , 2017 , mystikal turned himself into the caddo parish sheriff 's department after a warrant was issued for his arrest . he was subsequently charged with rape . he was held at the caddo correctional center on a 3 million bond until february 14 , 2019 , when he was able to post bond . december 17 , 2020 , the rape charges were dismissed due to lack of evidence . discography . ; studio albums mystikal ( 1994 ) mind of mystikal ( 1995 ) unpredictable ( 1997 ) ghetto fabulous ( 1998 ) let 's get ready ( 2000 ) tarantula ( 2001 ) . references . external links . allmusic biography - mystikal