Mulled wine

origins . wine was first recorded as spiced and heated in rome during the 2nd century . the romans travelled across europe , conquering much of it and trading with the rest . the legions brought wine and viticulture with them up to the rhine and danube rivers and to the scotland border , along with their recipes . j . robinson ( ed . ) the oxford companion to winethird edition . oxford university press , 2006 . 589–590 the forme of cury , pegge , s . , 2007 . the forme of cury . bibliolife . a medieval english cookery book from 1390 , which mentioned mulled wine , says : '' pur fait ypocras . '' grinding together cinnamon , ginger , galangal , cloves , long pepper , nutmeg , marjoram , cardamom , and grains of paradise ( '' spykenard de spayn '' , rosemary may be substituted ) . this is mixed with red wine and sugar ( form and quantity unstated ) . britain . mulled wine is very popular and traditional in the united kingdom at christmas , and less commonly throughout winter . mulled cider ( and sometimes mulled ale , ( 2011 ) . oldandinteresting.com ( accessed 6/12/2015 ) traditional yet no longer common ) is also served , with a mulled apple juice as a non-alcoholic alternative . lewis , e . ( 2009 ) . mulled apple juice . bbc good food . bbcgoodfood.com ( accessed 6/12/2015 ) . in traditional culture . over the years the recipe for mulled wine has evolved with the tastes and fashions of the time . one victorian example of this is smoking bishop , mentioned by charles dickens but no longer drunk or known in modern culture . a more traditional recipe can be found in mrs beeton 's book of household management at paragraph 1961 on page 929 to 930 of the revised edition dated 1869 : mayson , i.m . , ( 1861 ) . mrs beeton 's book of household management . london and melbourne : warde , lock and company ltd . . in contemporary culture . in contemporary british culture , there is no specific recipe for mulled wine and the spices involved in its recipe . it is commonly a combination of orange , lemon , cinnamon , nutmeg , fennel seed ( or star anise ) , cloves , cardamom , and ginger . the spices may be combined and boiled in a sugar syrup before red wine is added , heated , and served . variations include adding brandy or ginger wine . a tea bag of spices can be added to the wine , which is heated along with slices of orange as a convenient alternative to a full recipe . mulled wine is often served in small ( 200 & nbsp ; ml ) porcelain or glass mugs , sometimes with an orange slice garnish studded with cloves . mulled wine and ales infused with mulling spices are available in the uk in the winter months . wassail punch is a warm mulled beer or cider drunk in winter in victorian times . . glühwein . glühwein ( roughly translated as '' smouldering-wine '' , from the temperature the wine is heated to ) is popular in german-speaking countries and in the region of alsace in france . it is a traditional beverage offered during the christmas holidays . in alsace christmas markets , it is traditionally the only alcoholic beverage served . the oldest documented glühwein tankard is attributed to count john iv of katzenelnbogen , a german nobleman who was the first grower of riesling grapes . this gold-plated lockable silver tankard is dated to c . 1420 . glühwein is usually prepared from red wine , heated and spiced with cinnamon sticks , cloves , star aniseed , orange , sugar and at times vanilla pods . it is sometimes drunk mit schuss ( with a shot ) , which means that rum or some other liquor has been added . fruit wines , such as blueberry wine and cherry wine , are occasionally used instead of grape wine in some parts of germany . a variation of glühwein is made with white wine , but it is less popular than its red counterpart . for children , the non-alcoholic kinderpunsch is offered on christmas markets , which is a punch with similar spices . another popular variant of glühwein in germany is feuerzangenbowle . it shares the same recipe , but for this drink a rum-soaked sugarloaf is set on fire and allowed to drip into the wine . nordic glögg . glögg , gløgg , glögi and similar words are the terms used for mulled wine in the nordic countries ( sometimes spelled as glog or glug ) . it is spelled gløgg in norwegian , danish and faroese , glögg in swedish and icelandic and glögi in finnish and estonian . in denmark , norway , sweden and finland gløgg or glögg is often drunk at christmas events . non-alcoholic and alcoholic versions of glögg can be bought ready-made or prepared with fruit juices instead of wine . the main ingredients of alcoholic glögg are red wine , sugar , spices such as cinnamon , cardamom , ginger , cloves , and bitter orange , and optionally also stronger spirits such as vodka , akvavit , rum or cognac . throughout scandinavia , glögg spice extract and ready-mixed spices can be purchased in grocery stores . to prepare glögg , spices or spice extract are mixed into the wine , which is then heated to 60-70 & nbsp ; °c . when preparing homemade glögg using spices , the hot mixture is allowed to infuse for at least an hour , often longer , and then reheated before serving . ready-made wine glögg , as well as low- or non-alcoholic varieties , is normally sold at systembolaget in sweden , and in alko in finland , ready to heat and serve , and not in concentrate or extract form . glögg is generally served with raisins , dried cloves , blanched almonds and ginger biscuits ( ginger snaps ) , and is a popular hot drink during the christmas season . in sweden , ginger bread and saffron bun ( also called lussekatter ) , a type of sweet bun with saffron and raisins , are typically served on december 13 to celebrate saint lucia 's day . it is also traditionally served at the julbord , the christmas version of the classic , swedish buffet smörgåsbord . in denmark , gløgg pairings typically include æbleskiver sprinkled with powdered sugar and accompanied with strawberry marmalade . in norway , gløgg is paired with rice pudding ( norwegian : riskrem ) . in such cases , the word graut-/grøtfest is more precise , taking the name from the rice pudding which is served as a course . typically , gløgg is drunk before eating the rice pudding , which is often served with cold , red liqueur ( saus ) . glögg recipes vary widely ; variations with white wine or sweet wine such as port or madeira , or spirits such as brandy or whisky are also popular . glögg can also be made without alcohol by replacing the wine with fruit or berry juices ( often blackcurrant ) or by boiling the glögg to evaporate the alcohol . glögg is similar in taste to modern wassail or apple cider . other countries . in croatia , bosnia and herzegovina , montenegro , n . macedonia and serbia , kuhano vino/kuvano vino/кувано вино ( '' cooked wine '' ) , is made from red or white wine and various combinations of nutmeg , cloves , cinnamon , aniseed sugar/honey or orange zest , often served with slices of orange or lemon . in the south and southeast of brazil , where a large amount of european descendants live , it is called vinho quente or quentão . it is typically made with red wine , cinnamon sticks and cloves . cachaça may be added to increase the alcohol content . it is served as part of the festa junina , celebrated during winter in the month of june . in bulgaria , it is called greyano vino ( '' heated wine '' ) , and consists of red wine , honey and peppercorn . sometimes apples or citrus fruits , such as lemon or oranges , can be added . in chile it is called '' candola '' in the south and '' vino navega ' o '' in the north ( 'navegado ' is considered a hypercorrection ) 'sailor ; navigated ' . navega ' o is a hot drink made from red wine , orange peels , cinnamon sticks , cloves , and sugar . although being considered a southern chile beverage , it is served throughout the country . many people regard it as winter drink . saint john 's eve ( spanish tradition which replaced 'wetripantru ' , the mapuche new year 's day that coincides with the winter solstice in the southern hemisphere—midsummer in the northern hemisphere ) on the evening of 23 june would be , for example , a good moment to drink 'navega ' o ' . in the czechia , mulled wine is called svařené víno ( '' boiled wine '' ) , colloquially svařák . in slovakia , mulled wine is called varené víno ( “ boiled wine ” ) , and is usually served during the christmas season . in france , vin chaud ( '' hot wine '' ) typically consists of red wine mixed with honey , cinnamon , and orange . it must not be too sweet . beverage noted in the alps for winter sports . in hungary , forralt bor ( '' boiled wine '' ) is typically made from the country 's popular egri bikavér and spiced with cinnamon , sugar and cloves . sometimes amaretto is added for extra taste . in italy , mulled wine is typical in the northern part of the country and is called vin brulé ( from the french vin brûlé , '' burnt wine '' , though the expression is not used in france ) . in latvia , it is called karstvīns ( '' hot wine '' ) . when out of wine , it is prepared using grape ( or currant ) juice and riga black balsam . in lithuania , it is called '' glintveinas '' or karštas vynas ( '' hot wine '' ) . in moldova and romania , the izvar is made from red wine with black pepper and honey . in the netherlands , the drink is known as bisschopswijn ( literally '' bishop 's wine '' ) . bisschopswijn is drunk during the sinterklaas holidays . holton , n . ( 2014 ) . bisschopswijn . thedutchtable.com ( accessed 21/12/2015 ) . jansen , r . ( 2012 ) . sinterklaas en bisschopswijn . wijnbloggers.nl ( accessed 21/12/2015 ) . in north macedonia , it is called vareno vino , boiled wine ) or greeno vino , heated wine ) and is usually served in late autumn or winter . it is made of red wine , usually from the tikvešh region , combined with cinnamon and sugar or honey . the wine heated in a combination with pepper is used as a prevention from flu or cold . in poland , grzane wino ( '' heated wine '' ) , or grzaniec in highlander dialect , is very similar to the czech variant , especially in the southern regions . there is also a similar method for preparing mulled beer or '' grzane piwo '' which is popular with belgian beers because of the sweet flavor of that particular type of beer , which uses the same spices as mulled wine and is heated . in portugal , mainly in the douro and minho provinces it is called vinho quente and made with madeira wine and port wine , in the porto region porto quente is more popular . in russia and ukraine , глинтвейн ( '' glintvein '' ) is a popular drink during winters and has same recipe as the german glühwein . additionally , the traditional russian winter herbal drink sbiten , although usually a non-alcoholic tisane made with hot water , may also be made with red wine replacing some or all of the water . in geneva , switzerland , '' vin chaud '' is consumed during the festivities surrounding l'escalade .