Yogurt

varieties and presentation . dahi is a yogurt from the indian subcontinent , known for its characteristic taste and consistency . the word dahi seems to be derived from the sanskrit word dadhi ( '' sour milk '' ) , one of the five elixirs , or panchamrita , often used in hindu ritual . sweetened dahi ( mishti doi or meethi dahi ) is common in eastern parts of india , made by fermenting sweetened milk . while cow 's milk is currently the primary ingredient for yogurt , goat and buffalo milk were widely used in the past , and valued for the fat content ( see buffalo curd ) . dadiah or dadih is a traditional west sumatran yogurt made from water buffalo milk , fermented in bamboo tubes . yogurt is common in nepal , where it is served as both an appetizer and dessert . locally called dahi , it is a part of the nepali culture , used in local festivals , marriage ceremonies , parties , religious occasions , family gatherings , and so on . one nepalese yogurt is called dhau , originating from the city of bhaktapur . in tibet , yak milk ( technically dri milk , as the word yak refers to the male animal ) is made into yogurt ( and butter and cheese ) and consumed . in northern iran , mâst chekide is a variety of kefir yogurt with a distinct sour taste . it is usually mixed with a pesto water and fresh herb purée called delal . common appetizers are spinach or eggplant borani , mâst-o-khiâr with cucumber , spring onions and herbs , and mâst-musir with wild shallots . in the summertime , yogurt and ice cubes are mixed together with cucumbers , raisins , salt , pepper and onions and topped with some croutons made of persian traditional bread and served as a cold soup . ashe-mâst is a warm yogurt soup with fresh herbs , spinach and lentils . even the leftover water extracted when strained yogurt is cooked to make a sour cream sauce called kashk , which is usually used as a topping on soups and stews . matsoni is a georgian yogurt in the caucasus and russia . tarator and cacık are cold soups made from yogurt during summertime in eastern europe . they are made with ayran , cucumbers , dill , salt , olive oil , and optionally garlic and ground walnuts . tzatziki in greece and milk salad in bulgaria are thick yogurt-based salads similar to tarator . khyar w laban ( cucumber and yogurt salad ) is a dish in lebanon and syria . also , a wide variety of local lebanese and syrian dishes are cooked with yogurt like '' kibbi bi laban '' rahmjoghurt , a creamy yogurt with much higher fat content ( 10 % ) than many yogurts offered in english-speaking countries . dovga , a yogurt soup cooked with a variety of herbs and rice , is served warm in winter or refreshingly cold in summer . jameed , yogurt salted and dried to preserve it , is consumed in jordan . zabadi is the type of yogurt made in egypt , usually from the milk of the water buffalo egypt . it is particularly associated with ramadan fasting , as it is thought to prevent thirst during all-day fasting . acidified milk in different countries . fao.org . retrieved on 9 april 2013 . . sweetened and flavored . to offset its natural sourness , yogurt is also sold sweetened , sweetened and flavored or in containers with fruit or fruit jam on the bottom . the two styles of yogurt commonly found in the grocery store are set-style yogurt and swiss-style yogurt . set-style yogurt is poured into individual containers to set , while swiss-style yogurt is stirred prior to packaging . either may have fruit added to increase sweetness . lassi is a common indian beverage made from stirred liquified yogurt that is either salted or sweetened with sugar commonly , less commonly honey and combined with fruit pulp to create flavored lassi . consistency can vary widely , with urban and commercial lassis having uniform texture through being processed , whereas rural and rustic lassi has discernible curds or fruit pulp . large amounts of sugar – or other sweeteners for low-energy yogurts – are often used in commercial yogurt . some yogurts contain added modified starch , pectin ( found naturally in fruit ) or gelatin to create thickness and creaminess . this type of yogurt may be marketed under the name swiss-style , although it is unrelated to conventional swiss yogurt . some yogurts , often called '' cream line '' , are made with whole milk which has not been homogenized so the cream rises to the top . in many countries , sweetened , flavored yogurt is common , typically sold in single-use plastic cups . common flavors may include vanilla , honey , and toffee , and various fruits . in the early 21st century , yogurt flavors inspired by desserts , such as chocolate or cheesecake , became common . there is concern about the nutrition and health due to its high sugar content , although research indicates that use of sugar in yogurt manufacturing has decreased since 2016 in response to who and government initiatives to combat obesity . . straining . strained yogurt has been strained through a filter , traditionally made of muslin and more recently of paper or non-muslin cloth . this removes the whey , giving a much thicker consistency . strained yogurt is made at home , especially if using skimmed milk which results in a thinner consistency . yogurt that has been strained to filter or remove the whey is known as labneh in middle eastern countries . it has a consistency between that of yogurt and cheese . it may be used for sandwiches in middle eastern countries . olive oil , cucumber slices , olives , and various green herbs may be added . it can be thickened further and rolled into balls , preserved in olive oil , and fermented for a few more weeks . it is sometimes used with onions , meat , and nuts as a stuffing for a variety of pies or kibbeh balls . some types of strained yogurts are boiled in open vats first , so that the liquid content is reduced . the east indian dessert , a variation of traditional dahi called mishti doi , offers a thicker , more custard-like consistency , and is usually sweeter than western yogurts . in western indian ( marathi and gujarati ) cuisine , strained yogurt is macerated with sugar and spices such as saffron , cardamom and nutmeg to make the dessert '' shrikhand '' . strained yogurt is also enjoyed in greece and is the main component of tzatziki ( from turkish '' cacık '' ) , a well-known accompaniment to gyros and souvlaki pita sandwiches : it is a yogurt sauce or dip made with the addition of grated cucumber , olive oil , salt and , optionally , mashed garlic . srikhand , a dessert in india , is made from strained yogurt , saffron , cardamom , nutmeg and sugar and sometimes fruits such as mango or pineapple . in north america , strained yogurt is commonly called '' greek yogurt '' . powdered milk is sometimes added in lieu of straining to achieve thickness . in britain as '' greek-style yogurt '' . in britain the name '' greek '' may only be applied to yogurt made in greece . 'greek ' yogurt chobani firm loses legal battle . bbc ( 29 january 2014 ) . . beverages . ayran , doogh ( '' dawghe '' in neo-aramaic ) or dhallë is a yogurt-based , salty drink . it is made by mixing yogurt with water and ( sometimes ) salt . borhani ( or burhani ) is a spicy yogurt drink from bangladesh . it is usually served with kacchi biryani at weddings and special feasts . key ingredients are yogurt blended with mint leaves ( mentha ) , mustard seeds and black rock salt ( kala namak ) . ground roasted cumin , ground white pepper , green chili pepper paste and sugar are often added . lassi is a yogurt-based beverage that is usually slightly salty or sweet , and may be commercially flavored with rosewater , mango or other fruit juice . salty lassi is usually flavored with ground , roasted cumin and red chilies , may be made with buttermilk . an unsweetened and unsalted yogurt drink usually called simply jogurt is consumed with burek and other baked goods in the balkans . sweetened yogurt drinks are the usual form in europe ( including the uk ) and the us , containing fruit and added sweeteners . these are typically called '' drinkable yogurt '' . also available are '' yogurt smoothies '' , which contain a higher proportion of fruit and are more like smoothies . plant-based yogurt . a variety of plant milk yogurts appeared in the 2000s , using soy milk , rice milk , and nut milks such as almond milk and coconut milk fermented with cultures . these yogurts may be suitable for people with lactose intolerance or those who prefer plant-based foods such as vegetarians or vegans . plant milk have different structures and components than dairy milk . though they can be used to make many products similar to those made from dairy , there are differences in taste and texture . for example , '' soy , almond , and coconut yogurts do not have the same delicate and smooth structure that conventional yogurts have . '' since plant-based milks do not contain lactose ( the food of streptococcus thermophilus and lactobacillus bulgaricus ) , plant-based yogurts usually contain different bacterial strains than a dairy yogurt , such as lactobacillus casei , lactobacillus rhamnosus , and bifidobacterium bifidum . plant-based yogurts also vary considerably in their nutrition and ingredients , and may contain gums , stabilizers , high-intensity sweeteners , and artificial colors . . production . yogurt is made by heating milk to a temperature that denaturates its proteins ( scalding ) , essential for making yogurt , cooling it to a temperature that will not kill the live microorganisms that turn the milk into yogurt , inoculating certain bacteria ( starter culture ) , usually streptococcus thermophilus and lactobacillus bulgaricus , into the milk , and finally keeping it warm for several hours . the milk may be held at for a few minutes , or boiled ( giving a somewhat different result ) . it must be cooled to or somewhat less , typically . starter culture must then be mixed in well , and the mixture must be kept undisturbed and warm for some time , anywhere between 5 and 12 hours . longer fermentation times produces a more acidic yogurt . the starter culture may be a small amount of live ( not sterilized ) existing yogurt or commercially available dried starter culture . milk with a higher concentration of solids than normal milk may be used ; the higher solids content produces a firmer yogurt . solids can be increased by adding dried milk . the yogurt-making process provides two significant barriers to pathogen growth , heat and acidity ( low ph ) . both are necessary to ensure a safe product . acidity alone has been questioned by recent outbreaks of food poisoning by e . coli o157 : h7 that is acid-tolerant . e . coli o157 : h7 is easily destroyed by pasteurization ( heating ) ; the initial heating of the milk kills pathogens as well as denaturing proteins . the microorganisms that turn milk into yogurt can tolerate higher temperatures than most pathogens , so that a suitable temperature not only encourages the formation of yogurt , but inhibits pathogenic microorganisms . once the yogurt has formed it can , if desired , be strained to reduce the whey content and thicken it . commercial yogurt . two types of yogurt are supported by the codex alimentarius for import and export . pasteurized yogurt ( '' heat treated fermented milk '' ) is yogurt pasteurized to kill bacteria . probiotic yogurt ( labeled as '' live yogurt '' or '' active yogurt '' ) is yogurt pasteurized to kill bacteria , with lactobacillus added in measured units before packaging . yogurt probiotic drink is a drinkable yogurt pasteurized to kill bacteria , with lactobacillus added before packaging . under us food and drug administration regulations , milk must be pasteurized before it is cultured , and may optionally be heat treated after culturing to increase shelf life . most commercial yogurts in the united states are not heat treated after culturing , and contain live cultures . yogurt with live cultures is more beneficial than pasteurized yogurt for people with lactose malabsorption . . lactose intolerance . lactose intolerance is a condition in which people have symptoms due to the decreased ability to digest lactose , a sugar found in dairy products . in 2010 , the european food safety authority ( efsa ) determined that lactose intolerance can be alleviated by ingesting live yogurt cultures ( lactobacilli ) that are able to digest the lactose in other dairy products . the scientific review by efsa enabled yogurt manufacturers to use a health claim on product labels , provided that the '' yogurt should contain at least 10 8 cfu live starter microorganisms ( lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp . bulgaricus and streptococcus thermophilus ) per gram . the target population is individuals with lactose maldigestion . '' . gallery . file : fresh ayran.jpg doogh is a savory yogurt-based beverage , traditionally served cold and is sometimes carbonated and seasoned with mint and salt . file : skyr.is með vanillu.jpg skyr is an icelandic cultured dairy product , similar to strained yogurt traditionally served cold with milk and a topping of sugar file : raita with cucumber and mint.jpg raita is a condiment made with yogurt in the indian subcontinent file : dadiah1.jpg dadiah in a market file : vegan yogurt , march 2012.jpg plant milk yogurt file : homemade yogurt maker - 01.jpg home yogurt maker file : yogurtjf.jpg a drinkable yogurt made from water buffalo milk