Do not resuscitate

basis for choice . interviews with 26 dnr patients and 16 full code patients in toronto in 2006-9 suggest that the decision to choose do-not-resuscitate status was based on personal factors including health and lifestyle ; relational factors ( to family or to society as a whole ) ; and philosophical factors . audio recordings of 19 discussions about dnr status between doctors and patients in 2 us hospitals ( san francisco and durham ) in 2008-9 found that patients '' mentioned risks , benefits , and outcomes of cpr , '' and doctors '' explored preferences for short- versus long-term use of life-sustaining therapy . '' . outcomes of cpr . when medical institutions explain dnr , they describe survival from cpr , in order to address patients ' concerns about outcomes . after cpr in hospitals in 2017 , 7,000 patients survived to leave the hospital alive , out of 26,000 cpr attempts , or 26 % . after cpr outside hospitals in 2018 , 8,000 patients survived to leave the hospital alive , out of 80,000 cpr attempts , or 10 % . success was 21 % in a public setting , where someone was more likely to see the person collapse and give help than in a home . success was 35 % when bystanders used an automated external defibrillator ( aed ) , outside health facilities and nursing homes . in information on dnr , medical institutions compare survival for patients with multiple chronic illnesses ; patients with heart , lung or kidney disease ; liver disease ; widespread cancer or infection ; and residents of nursing homes . research shows that cpr survival is the same as the average cpr survival rate , or nearly so , for patients with multiple chronic illnesses , or diabetes , heart or lung diseases . survival is about half as good as the average rate , for patients with kidney or liver disease , or widespread cancer or infection . for people who live in nursing homes , survival after cpr is about half to three quarters of the average rate . in health facilities and nursing homes where aeds are available and used , survival rates are twice as high as the average survival found in nursing homes overall . few nursing homes have aeds . research on 26,000 patients found similarities in the health situations of patients with and without dnrs . for each of 10 levels of illness , from healthiest to sickest , 7 % to 36 % of patients had dnr orders ; the rest had full code . . risks . as noted above , patients considering dnr mention the risks of cpr . physical injuries , such as broken bones , affect 13 % of cpr patients , and an unknown additional number have broken cartilage which can sound like breaking bones . mental problems affect some patients , both before and after cpr . after cpr , up to 1 more person , among each 100 survivors , is in a coma than before cpr ( and most people come out of comas ) . 5 to 10 more people , of each 100 survivors , need more help with daily life than they did before cpr . 5 to 21 more people , of each 100 survivors , decline mentally , but stay independent . the ranges given in the text above represent outcomes inside and outside of hospitals : in us hospitals a study of 12,500 survivors after cpr , 2000-2009 , found : 1 % more survivors of cpr were in comas than before cpr ( 3 % before , 4 % after ) , 5 % more survivors were dependent on other people , and 5 % more had moderate mental problems but were still independent . outside hospitals , half a percent more survivors were in comas after cpr ( 0.5 % before , 1 % after ) , 10 % more survivors were dependent on other people because of mental problems , and 21 % more had moderate mental problems which still let them stay independent . this study covered 419 survivors of cpr in copenhagen in 2007-2011 . and works cited . . organ donation . organ donation is possible after cpr , but not usually after a death with a dnr . if cpr does not revive the patient , and continues until an operating room is available , kidneys and liver can be considered for donation . us guidelines endorse organ donation , '' patients who do not have rosc return of spontaneous circulation after resuscitation efforts and who would otherwise have termination of efforts may be considered candidates for kidney or liver donation in settings where programs exist . '' european guidelines encourage donation , '' after stopping cpr , the possibility of ongoing support of the circulation and transport to a dedicated centre in perspective of organ donation should be considered . '' cpr revives 64 % of patients in hospitals and 43 % outside ( rosc ) , which gives families a chance to say goodbye , and all organs can be considered for donation , '' we recommend that all patients who are resuscitated from cardiac arrest but who subsequently progress to death or brain death be evaluated for organ donation . '' 1,000 organs per year in the us are transplanted from patients who had cpr . donations can be taken from 40 % of patients who have rosc and later become brain dead , and an average of 3 organs are taken from each patient who donates organs . dnr does not usually allow organ donation . less care for dnr patients . reductions in other care are not supposed to result from dnr , but they do . some patients choose dnr because they prefer less care : half of oregon patients with dnr orders who filled out a polst . middle east . dnrs are not recognized by jordan . physicians attempt to resuscitate all patients regardless of individual or familial wishes . the uae have laws forcing healthcare staff to resuscitate a patient even if the patient has a dnr or does not wish to live . there are penalties for breaching the laws . in saudi arabia patients can not legally sign a dnr , but a dnr can be accepted by order of the primary physician in case of terminally ill patients . in israel , it is possible to sign a dnr form as long as the patient is dying and aware of their actions . united kingdom . . england and wales . in england and wales , cpr is presumed in the event of a cardiac arrest unless a do not resuscitate order is in place . if they have capacity as defined under the mental capacity act 2005 the patient may decline resuscitation . patients may also specify their wishes and/or devolve their decision-making to a proxy using an advance directive , which are commonly referred to as 'living wills ' , or an emergency care and treatment plan ( ectp ) , such as respect . discussion between patient and doctor is integral to decisions made in advance directives and ectps , where resuscitation recommendations should be made within a more holistic consideration of all treatment options . patients and relatives can not demand treatment ( including cpr ) which the doctor believes is futile and in this situation , it is their doctor 's duty to act in their 'best interest ' , whether that means continuing or discontinuing treatment , using their clinical judgment . if the patient lacks capacity , relatives will often be asked for their opinion out of respect . evaluation of respect ( an ectp ) found that resuscitation status remained a central component of conversations , and that there was variability in the discussion of other emergency treatments . in 2020 the care quality commission found that residents of care homes had been given inappropriate orders of do not attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( dnacpr ) without notice to residents or their families , causing avoidable deaths . in 2021 the mencap charity found that people with learning disabilities also had inappropriate dnacpr orders . medical providers have said that any discussion with patients and families is not in reference to consent to resuscitation and instead should be an explanation . . scotland . in scotland , the terminology used is '' do not attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation '' or '' dnacpr '' . there is a single policy used across all of nhs scotland . the legal standing is similar to that in england and wales , in that cpr is viewed as a treatment and , although there is a general presumption that cpr will be performed in the case of cardiac arrest , this is not the case if it is viewed by the treating clinician to be futile . patients and families can not demand cpr to be performed if it is felt to be futile ( as with any medical treatment ) and a dnacpr can be issued despite disagreement , although it is good practice to involve all parties in the discussion . . united states . in the united states the documentation is especially complicated in that each state accepts different forms , and advance directives and living wills may not be accepted by ems as legally valid forms . if a patient has a living will that specifies the patient requests dnr but does not have a properly filled out state-sponsored form that is co-signed by a physician , ems may attempt resuscitation . the dnr decision by patients was first litigated in 1976 in in re quinlan . the new jersey supreme court upheld the right of karen ann quinlan 's parents to order her removal from artificial ventilation . in 1991 congress passed into law the patient self-determination act that mandated hospitals honor an person 's decision in their healthcare . forty-nine states currently permit the next of kin to make medical decisions of incapacitated relatives , the exception being missouri . missouri has a living will statute that requires two witnesses to any signed advance directive that results in a dnr/dni code status in the hospital . in the united states , cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( cpr ) and advanced cardiac life support ( acls ) will not be performed if a valid written dnr order is present . many states do not recognize living wills or health care proxy in the prehospital setting and prehospital personnel in those areas may be required to initiate resuscitation measures unless a specific state-sponsored form is properly filled out and cosigned by a physician . . canada . do not resuscitate orders are similar to those used in the united states . in 1995 , the canadian medical association , canadian hospital association , canadian nursing association , and catholic health association of canada worked with the canadian bar association to clarify and create a joint statement on resuscitative interventions guideline for use to determine when and how dnr orders are assigned . dnr orders must be discussed by doctors with the patient or patient agents or patient 's significant others . unilateral dnr by medical professionals can only be used if the patient is in a vegetative state . . australia . in australia , do not resuscitate orders are covered by legislation on a state-by-state basis . in victoria , a refusal of medical treatment certificate is a legal means to refuse medical treatments of current medical conditions . it does not apply to palliative care ( reasonable pain relief ; food and drink ) . an advanced care directive legally defines the medical treatments that a person may choose to receive ( or not to receive ) in various defined circumstances . it can be used to refuse resuscitation , so as avoid needless suffering . in nsw , a resuscitation plan is a medically authorised order to use or withhold resuscitation measures , and which documents other aspects of treatment relevant at end of life . such plans are only valid for patients of a doctor who is a nsw health staff member . the plan allows for the refusal of any and all life-sustaining treatments , the advance refusal for a time of future incapacity , and the decision to move to purely palliative care . . italy . in italy dnr is included in the italian law no . 219 of december 22th 2017 '' disposizioni anticipate di trattamento '' or dat , also called '' biotestamento '' . the law no.219 '' rules on informed consent and advance treatment provisions '' , reaffirm the freedom of choice of the individual and make concrete the right to health protection , respecting the dignity of the person and the quality of life . the dat are the provisions that every person of age and capable of understanding and wanting can express regarding the acceptance or rejection of certain diagnostic tests or therapeutic choices and individual health treatments , in anticipation of a possible future inability to self-determine . to be valid , the dats must have been drawn up only after the person has acquired adequate medical information on the consequences of the choices he intends to make through the dat . with the entry into force of law 219/2017 , every person of age and capable of understanding and willing can draw up his dat . furthermore , the dats must be drawn up with : public act authenticated private writing simple private deed delivered personally to the registry office of the municipality of residence or to the health structures of the regions that have regulated the dat due to particular physical conditions of disability , the dat can be expressed through video recording or with devices that allow the person with disabilities to communicate . the dats do not expire . they can be renewed , modified or revoked at any time , with the same forms in which they can be drawn up . with the dat it is also possible to appoint a trustee , as long as he is of age and capable of understanding and willing , who is called to represent the signatory of the dat who has become incapable in relations with the doctor and health facilities . with the decree of 22 march 2018 , the ministry of health established a national database for the registration of advance treatment provisions . without the expression of any preference by the patient , physicians must attempt to resuscitate all patients regardless of familial wishes . : it : law no.219 . taiwan . in taiwan , patients sign their own dnr orders , and are required to do so to receive hospice care . however , one study looking at insights into chinese perspectives on dnr showed that the majority of dnr orders in taiwan were signed by surrogates . typically doctors discuss the issue of dnr with the patients family rather than the patient themselves . in taiwan , there are two separate types of dnr forms : dnr-p which the patient themselves sign and dnr-s in which a designated surrogate can sign . typically , the time period between signing the dnr and death is very short , showing that signing a dnr in taiwan is typically delayed . two witnesses must also be present in order for a dnr to be signed . dnr orders have been legal in taiwan since may 2000 and were enacted by the hospice and palliative regulation . also included in the hospice and palliative regulation is the requirement to inform a patient of their terminal condition , however , the requirement is not explicitly defined leading to interpretation of exact truth telling . . japan . in japan , dnr orders are known as do not attempt resuscitation ( dnar ) . currently , there are no laws or guidelines in place regarding dnar orders but they are still routinely used . a request to withdraw from life support can be completed by the patient or a surrogate . in addition , it is common for japanese doctors and nurses to be involved in the decision making process for the dnar form . . france . in 2005 , france implemented its '' patients ' rights and end of life care '' act . this act allows the withholding/withdrawal of life support treatment and as well as the intensified usage of certain medications that can quicken the action of death . this act also specifies the requirements of the act . the '' patients ' rights and end of life care '' act includes three main measures . first , it prohibits the continuation of futile medical treatments . secondly , it empowers the right to palliative care that may also include the intensification of the doses of certain medications that can result in the shortening the patient 's life span . lastly , it strengthens the principle of patient autonomy . if the patient is unable to make a decision , the discussion , thus , goes to a trusted third party . . see also .