Redmond Barry

early life . barry was the third son of major-general henry green barry , of ballyclough , kilworth , county cork , ireland , and his wife phoebe drought , daughter of john armstrong drought and letita head . barry had five brothers and six sisters and was educated at a military school , hall place , near bexley , in kent . returning to ireland in 1829 , he was unable to obtain a military commission so began his own further education . following his own classics programme , translating classical authors into english verse , reading old and new writers , he gained a working knowledge of nearly every subject . in 1832 , he entered trinity college , dublin , graduated in 1835 with the usual bachelor of arts degree , and was called to the bar in dublin in 1838 . after his father 's death , barry sailed for sydney , capital of the british colony of new south wales . life and work in australia . barry arrived in new south wales in april 1837 and was admitted to the new south wales bar . galbally , ann , redmond barry : an anglo-irish australian ( carlton , vic . , melbourne university press , 1995 ) after two years in sydney , barry moved to melbourne , a city with which he was ever afterwards closely identified , arriving at the new port phillip settlement on 13 november 1839 . in 1841 , barry served as the defence lawyer for tunnerminnerwait and maulboyheenner , two indigenous rebels on trial for murder . barry questioned the legal basis of british authority over aborigines who were not citizens and claimed that the evidence was dubious and circumstantial . despite his best efforts , the two men were found guilty and subsequently hanged on 20 january 1842 , becoming list of people legally executed in australia . wikipedia page : tunnerminnerwait after practising his profession for some years , he became commissioner of the court of requests , and after the creation in 1851 of the colony of victoria , out of the port phillip district of new south wales , he became the first solicitor-general of victoria , with a seat in both the legislative and executive councils . in 1852 he was appointed a judge of the supreme court of victoria . later he also served as acting chief justice and administrator of the government . barry was noted for his service to the community , and he convinced the state government to spend money on public works , particularly on education . he was instrumental in the foundation of the royal melbourne hospital ( 1848 ) , the university of melbourne ( 1853 ) , and the state library of victoria ( 1854 ) . he served as the first chancellor of the university until his death and was also president of the trustees of the state library . he was the first president of the ballarat school of mines ( 1870 ) , which later became the ballarat university and now federation university australia . barry was the judge in the eureka stockade treason trials in the supreme court in 1855 . the thirteen miners were all acquitted . in 1857 , barry conducted the inquest into the murder of inspector-general john giles price , who was beaten to death by a group of at least 15 convicts during an inspection of the prison quarries in williamstown , victoria . seven of the convicts involved in the attack on price were found guilty , and sentenced to death by hanging . the seven men were executed at melbourne gaol within a three-day period from 28 to 30 april . barry , john vincent ; the life and death of john price : a study of the exercise of naked power ; melbourne university press ; 1964 he chaired the committee for the victorian intercolonial exhibition in melbourne , represented victoria at the international exhibition ( 1862 ) of 1862 and at the centennial exposition of 1876 . he was made a knight bachelor in 1860 , and was created a knight commander of the order of st michael and st george ( kcmg ) in 1877 . . kelly cases . in october 1878 , at beechworth court , barry presided over a case in which mrs ellen kelly ( king ) and two men were accused of aiding and abetting the attempted murder of a victoria police constable named alexander fitzpatrick . after sentencing mrs kelly to three years with hard labour , barry said , 'if your son ned were here i would make an example of him for the whole of australia – i would give him fifteen years ' . in 1880 , barry presided at the final trial of ned kelly , who was tried and convicted of murdering three other victoria police constables . the trial and sentencing have since been the subject of many articles and books by lawyers and historians . when he sentenced kelly to hanging , barry uttered the customary words '' may god have mercy on your soul '' . according to the transcripts , kelly replied '' i will go a little further than that , and say i will see you there when i go '' . on 23 november 1880 , only twelve days after kelly 's execution , sir redmond barry died from what the doctors described as 'congestion of the lungs and a carbuncle in the neck ' . contribution to libraries . barry laid the foundations of the supreme court library ( melbourne ) supreme court and was the prime mover establishing the melbourne public library . as a legislator he promoted the parliamentary library . he organised the governor , sir charles hotham , to lay the foundation stones of university of melbourne , melbourne public library and sunbury industrial school later sunbury lunatic asylum in 1854 – all on the same day . '' his honor sir redmond barry , kt . , m.a . , ll.d . , & c . '' illustrated australian news for home readers ( melbourne ) ( national library of australia ) : p . 63 . 29 february 1872 . retrieved 9 february 2012 . sir redmond barry virtually single-handedly planned the melbourne public library building and its contents . he had a 'hands-on ' approach personally writing book selection and acquisition procedures – even to getting his hands dirty shelving books for the library 's 1856 opening . in 1862 and 1877-78 he went to europe , england and america , purchasing books and pictures for university , law and public libraries and art gallery . as board of trustees chairman he was responsible for starting travelling libraries and supporting extended library hours . in september 1870 he '' acquired '' marcus clarke as public library trustees clerk ( later secretary ) , who until his death in 1881 worked as sub-librarian . there can be fewer men with greater concern for and a greater and better vision for the young colonial society in which redmond barry made his life . blainey , geoffrey , a centenary history of the university of melbourne . carlton , vic . ; melbourne university press ; 1957 books and reading were intrinsic to barry 's own educational and intellectual development so he wanted these advantages for other people . the reason for his support of the melbourne public library , the law library and his support of mechanic institutes was free access to libraries for all not just a select few . personal life . barry never married , but had four children to louisa barrow , all of whom he acknowledged and supported . . death . the argus reported sir redmond barry had been suffering from diabetes for about 10 years , but on his return from his trip to europe and america it was apparent that the disease had affected his system . on monday , 15 november , he was first troubled with the carbuncle on his neck . sir redmond was counselled by his medical adviser to at once rest from duty , but he was reluctant to do so , and continued to attend the court until he was compelled to take rest . he was constantly attended by dr . gunst , who however , could scarcely impress his patient with a sense of the very serious nature of his disease , which he regarded somewhat lightly . he became restless , and it was deemed advisable to place him under the constant care of a nurse . despite the precautions , barry caught cold through exposure , and congestion of the left lung set in . dr . gunst held a consultation with dr . teague , and pronounced the case hopeless . the left lung had become greatly congested , and this , together with the exhaustion and wasting away of the system resulting from the previous disease , proved fatal . . memorials and legacy . the state library of victoria has named a reading room after sir redmond barry , who was the first chair of the board of trustees of the melbourne public library . the university of melbourne of which he was the first chancellor has a redmond barry building named for him . a plaque marking the location of sir redmond barry 's residence is located near the corner of josephine avenue and high street road in mount waverley . the university of melbourne has also established the redmond barry distinguished professor , a title awarded to professors within the university who display outstanding research and leadership . the australian library and information association 's highest honour that can be bestowed on an individual not eligible for membership of the association is the redmond barry award , awarded in recognition of outstanding service to or promotion of a library and information service or libraries and information services , or to the theory or practice of library and information science , or an associated field . . portrayals in film . barry has appeared as a character in three dramatizations of the ned kelly story : he appears in tony richardson 1970 biopic about the bushranger , played by acting veteran frank thring . corfield , justin the ned kelly encyclopaedia ( 2003 ) ; lothian books ; p . 158 he has a prominent role in the 1977 television drama trial of ned kelly , where he was played by john frawley . and he appeared in the 1980 miniseries the last outlaw , played by david clendinning . corfield , justin the ned kelly encyclopaedia ( 2003 ) ; lothian books ; p . 160 barry is also a minor character in philippe mora bushranger legacy mad dog morgan , where he is played by peter collingwood . works . address on the opening of the free public library of ballarat east , on friday , 1st . january , 1869 . see also . judiciary of australia list of judges of the supreme court of victoria . references . sources . blainey , geoffrey a centenary history of the university of melbourne . carlton , vic . ; melbourne university press ; 1957 corfield , justin the ned kelly encyclopaedia ; lothian books ; 2003 cowan , ( sir ) zelman the redmond barry centenary oration . delivered at wilson hall , university of melbourne ; melbourne ; royal historical society of victoria ; 1980 galbally , ann redmond barry : an anglo-irish australian . carlton , vic . ; melbourne university press ; 1995 jones , david j . the australian librarian 's manual : volume 3 : glossary . sydney , library association of australia 1985 kenneally , j . j . the inner history of the kelly gang and their pursuers , ( first printed 1929 ) ; ( quote above from 1969 ( 8th ) edition p . & nbsp ; 188 ) ryan , peter ( 1980 ) . redmond barry : a colonial life 1813–1880 ( revised edition ) . melbourne : melbourne university press . small pamphlet . further reading . bright sparcs trial of ned kelly ned kelly : an overview . external links . supreme court of victoria website redmond barry 's gravesite peter ryan , ' barry , sir redmond ( 1813–1880 ) ' , australian dictionary of biography , volume 3 , melbourne university press , 1969 , pp 108–111 . redmond barry award , australian library and information association ballyclough/ballyclogh house