Bohuslav Martinů

life . 1890–1923 : polička and prague . the setting of martinů 's birth was unusual . he was born in the tower of the st . jakub church in polička , a town in bohemia , close to the moravian border . his father ferdinand , a shoemaker , also worked as the church sexton and town fire watchman . for this , he and his family were allowed to live in the tower apartment . as a small boy bohuslav was sickly , and frequently had to be carried up the 193 steps to the tower on the back of his father or his older sister . in school he was known to be very shy , and did not participate in the plays or pageants with his classmates . but as violinist , he excelled and developed a strong reputation , giving his first public concert in his hometown in 1905 . the townspeople raised enough money to fund his schooling , and in 1906 he left the countryside to begin studies at the prague conservatory . whilst there he fared poorly as a student , showing little interest in the rigid pedagogy , nor the hours of violin practice required . he was far more interested in exploring prague and learning on his own , attending concerts and reading books on many subjects . this was in contrast to his roommate , stanislav novák , who was an excellent student and a brilliant violinist . they frequently attended concerts together at which martinů became engrossed in analysing new music , particularly french impressionist works . he could memorize much of it , to the extent that when back in their room , he could write out large parts of the score almost perfectly . novák became astonished at how meticulously martinů could do this . he became convinced that his roommate , while lacking in other subjects , possessed an incredible brain for analysing and memorizing music . rybka , f . james , p 22 . they became friends for life . dropped from the violin program , martinů was moved to the organ department that taught composition , but he was finally dismissed in 1910 for '' incorrigible negligence '' . jan smaczny , '' martinů , bohuslav '' , grove dictionary of music and musicians , second edition , edited by stanley sadie and john tyrrell ( london : macmillan publishers , 2001 ) , vol . 15 , 939 . martinů spent the next several years living back home in polička , attempting to gain some standing in the musical world . he had written several compositions by this time , including the elegie for violin and piano , and the symphonic poems angel of death ( anděl smrti ) and death of tintagiles ( smrt tintagilova ) , and submitted samples of his work to josef suk , a leading czech composer . suk encouraged him to pursue formal composition training , but this would not be possible until years later . in the meantime , he passed the state teaching examination and maintained a studio in polička throughout world war i , while continuing to compose and study on his own . it was during this time that he studied the ancient choral hymns of the bohemian brethren , which would influence his style and musical scope . as world war i drew to a close and czechoslovakia was declared an independent republic , martinů composed the celebratory cantata czech rhapsody ( česká rapsodie ) , which was premiered in 1919 to great acclaim . he toured europe as a violinist with the national theatre orchestra , and in 1920 became a full member of the czech philharmonic orchestra that was led by the inspired young conductor václav talich , who was the first major conductor to promote martinů . he also began formal composition study under suk . during these last years in prague he completed his first string quartet and two ballets : who is the most powerful in the world ? ( kdo je na světě nejmocnější ? ) and istar . 1923–40 : paris . martinů finally departed for paris in 1923 , having received a small scholarship from the czechoslovak ministry of education . he sought out albert roussel , whose individualistic style he respected , and began a series of informal lessons with him . roussel would teach martinů until his death in 1937 by helping him focus and bring order to his compositions , rather than instructing him in a specific style . during his first years in paris , martinů incorporated many of the trends at the time , including jazz , neoclassicism , and surrealism . he was particularly attracted to stravinsky , whose novel , angular , propulsive rhythms and sonorities reflected the industrial revolution , sports events and motorised transportation . martinu , bohuslav , 1924 texts on stravinsky , lucie berna , editor , martinu revue , may–august 2013 , vol xiii , no 2 . ballets were his favorite medium for experimentation , including the revolt ( 1925 ) , the butterfly that stamped ( 1926 ) , le raid merveilleux ( 1927 ) , la revue de cuisine ( 1927 ) , and les larmes du couteau ( 1928 ) . martinů found friends in the czechoslovak artistic community in paris and would always retain close ties to his homeland , frequently returning during the summer . he continued to look to his bohemian and moravian roots for musical ideas . his best-known work from this time is the ballet špalíček ( 1932–33 ) , which incorporates czech folk tunes and nursery rhymes . the prime leader of new symphonic music in paris at this time was serge koussevitzsky , who presented the biannual concerts koussevitzsky ( 1921–29 ) . he became the conductor of the boston symphony orchestra in 1924 , but still returned to paris each summer to conduct his concerts . in 1927 , martinů happened to see him at a café , introduced himself , and gave him the score of a symphonic triptych , la bagarre , that was inspired by charles lindbergh 's recent landing . the maestro was impressed , and scheduled its premiere with the boston symphony in november 1927 . safranek , milos , bohuslav martinů , the man and his music , pp . 32–33 . in 1926 , martinů met charlotte quennehen ( 1894–1978 ) , a french seamstress from picardy . she was employed at a large garment factory and , after their romance began , she moved into his small flat and helped to support him . she would become an important force in his life , handling the cuisine and business matters that he found trying . they married in 1931 . culturally , however , the two were quite different , a fact that would cause problems in their marriage over the years . rybka , pp.62–63 by 1930 , martinů had withdrawn from his seven years of experimentation to settle on a neo-classical style . in 1932 , he won the coolidge prize for the best of 145 chamber music works for his string sextet with orchestra . this was performed by koussevitzsky with the boston symphony orchestra in 1932 . safranek , m . p . 43 . martinu finished his opera julietta in 1936 ; this was based upon a surrealistic play by georges neveux that he had seen in 1927 . its premiere was given in prague under václav talich on 14 march 1938 . in 1937 , martinů became acquainted with a young czech woman , vítězslava kaprálová . born in brno in 1915 , she was already a highly accomplished musician when she arrived in paris , supported by a small czech government grant to study conducting with charles munch and composition with martinů . their relationship soon developed beyond that of student-teacher as he fell madly in love with her . after she returned to czechoslovakia , martinů wrote her many long , passionate letters . in one of these , he proposed that he would divorce charlotte and then take her to america . it was while he was in this distraught , frenzied state that martinů composed one of his greatest works , the double concerto for two string orchestras , piano and timpani . it was finished just a few days before the munich agreement was sealed between hitler and chamberlain ( 30 september 1938 ) . rybka , fj pp . 82–83 . after the munich agreement , president edvard beneš began to form a czechoslovak government in exile set up in france and england . as a significant number of troops became organized into a czech resistance force , martinů tried to join them but was rejected because of his age . however , in 1939 , he composed a tribute to this force , the field mass for baritone , chorus and orchestra . it was broadcast from england and was picked up in occupied czechoslovakia . for this , martinů was blacklisted by the nazis and sentenced in absentia . in 1940 , as the german army approached paris , the martinůs fled . they were sheltered by charles munch who had a place near limoges . soon , they journeyed on to aix-en-provence , where they stayed for six months while trying to find transit out of vichy france . he was helped by the czech artistic community , particularly rudolf kundera , along with edmonde charles-roux and the countess lily pastré . despite the harsh conditions , he found inspiration in aix and composed several works , notably the sinfonietta giocosa . charlotte wrote : '' we fell in love with aix : the delicate murmur of its fountains calmed our agitated feelings and later bohus was inspired by them . '' charlotte martinů , my life with bohuslav martinů , prague : orbis , 1978 . finally , on 8 january 1941 , they left marseilles for madrid and portugal , eventually reaching the united states in 1941 with the help of his friend , the diplomat miloš šafránek , and especially from martinů 's swiss benefactor , paul sacher , the conductor of the basel chamber orchestra , who arranged and paid for their passages . rybka , fj p 93 . 1941–53 : us . life in the united states was difficult for him initially , just as it was for many other artist émigrés in similar circumstances . lack of knowledge of english , of funds , and of opportunities to use their talents were common to them . when they first arrived in new york , the martinůs rented a studio apartment at the great northern hotel on 57th st . they were helped by several musician friends , including pianist rudolf firkušný , violinist samuel dushkin , cellist frank rybka , diplomat miloš šafránek , and multi-lingual lawyer jan löwenbach . martinů soon found that he was unable to resume composing in noisy manhattan , so for the following season they leased a small apartment in jamaica estates , queens , close to the rybkas . this leafy , residential neighborhood was conducive for him to take long solitary walks at night , during which he would work out music scores in his head . on several occasions he would '' zone out '' in deep concentration about the music , becoming oblivious of his surroundings and getting lost , and would then call a friend with a car to come find him and take him back home . rybka , fj p . 110p thereafter , he began to compose actively . when he contacted serge koussevitzsky , the conductor told him that his concerto grosso would receive its premiere in boston the following season . one of the first compositions martinů wrote in new york was the concerto da camera for violin and small orchestra , in fulfillment of a commission he had been awarded before the war by paul sacher . rybka , fj pp . 59 , 105 the following year , they moved back to manhattan into an apartment in a brownstone on 58th st , across from the hotel plaza . that was where they lived for the rest of their years in america . composer david diamond , who sub-leased this apartment in 1954 , has described it in an interview . rybka , fj pp . & nbsp ; 126–127 . as the war was coming to an end , the martinůs encountered marital difficulties . charlotte , who never did like america , wanted strongly to return to france . he did not , so when he accepted koussevitzky 's offer to teach at the berkshire music school for the summer of 1946 , she went to france alone for a prolonged visit . in great barrington , massachusetts , he was lodged with the students in searles castle , and his magnificent master bedroom opened onto a terrace . one night , martinů took his customary walk on the terrace , a section of which had no railing , and he fell off , landing on concrete , and was hospitalized with a fractured skull and concussion . he drifted in and out of a coma , but survived . after several weeks he was released to recuperate with friends . by this time , roe barstow had entered his life . she was an attractive divorcee of independent means , who lived alone in greenwich village . with charlotte away in france , she was at martinů 's side , assisting in his recovery , during which their relationship deepened . after charlotte returned in the late fall , she found that her husband was a different man : gaunt , irritable , crippled and in pain from the accident . rybka , fj pp 151–154 , 157 , 161–165 . it required a few years before he was able to return to his former state as a solid composer . apart from his domestic problems , martinů was unsure about which country he would live in . he had considered returning to czechoslovakia as a teacher , despite having a powerful enemy there in the communist politician zdeněk nejedlý . any plans to return were further hampered by the 1948 czechoslovak coup d'état . with the communists ' seizure of power , music , along with the other arts , became an instrument of propaganda along soviet ideological lines . martinů was branded as a formalist and émigré traitor , and he chose wisely not to pursue any kind of professional engagement in his native land from this time forward . svatos , thomas , '' sovietizing czechoslovak music : the '' hatchet man '' miroslav barvik and his speech , the composers go with the people music and politics vol iv/1 ( 2010 ) 1–35 martinů was indeed reluctant to leave america which had been very supportive of him . he taught at the mannes college of music for most of the period from 1948 to 1956 . he also taught at princeton university rybka , fj pp 182–87 and the berkshire music school ( tanglewood ) . at princeton he was warmly received by faculty and students . his six symphonies were written in the eleven-year period 1942–1953 , the first five being produced between 1942 and 1946 . in addition , he composed the violin concerto no . 2 , memorial to lidice ( památník lidicím ) for orchestra , concerto for two pianos and orchestra , piano concerto no . 3 , concerto da camera for violin and small orchestra , sinfonietta la jolla for piano and small orchestra , sonatas nos . 2 and 3 for cello and piano , many chamber compositions , and a television opera , the marriage ( ženitba ) . his symphonic scores were performed by most of the major orchestras : boston , new york , philadelphia , cleveland , chicago , and he generally received fine reviews from the leading critics . owing to the extraordinary volume of martinů 's oeuvre , some critics who never knew the man have stated that he composed too much , too fast , and therefore must have been careless in quality . however , he has been defended strongly by musicians and critics who did know him . olin downes knew martinů better . for his interviews of martinů , he had the benefit of having jan löwenbach , a friend of both men , present as an interpreter . downes ' defense of the composer came out in an article , '' martinu at 60 '' . the new york times january 7 , 1951 . '' martinu … is incapable of an unthorough or conscienceless job . he works very hard , systematically , scrupulously , modestly . he produces so much music because in the first place , his nature necessitates this . he has to write music . in the second place , he knows his business and loves it . '' rybka , fj , pp . 321–22 . the composer david diamond knew martinů both in paris and new york . in an interview years later , he expressed amazement at how extraordinary martinů 's mind was in developing a whole orchestral score while taking a walk . rybka , fj pp . 134–35 . martinů 's notable students include burt bacharach , alan hovhaness , vítězslava kaprálová , louis lane , jan novák , h . owen reed , howard shanet and chou wen-chung . 1953–59 : europe . in 1953 , martinů left the united states for france and settled in nice , and completed his fantaisies symphoniques ; the following year he composed mirandolina and piano sonata , and met nikos kazantzakis , beginning work on the greek passion . during 1955 he created several key works : the oratorio gilgames ( the epic of gilgamesh ) , the oboe concerto , les fresques de piero della francesca , and the cantata otvirani studanek ( the opening of the wells ) ; charles munch conducted the fantaisies symphoniques premiere in boston which gained the composer the annual new york critics ' prize for the work . bohuslav martinů 1890-1959 : life and work . divadelni ustav , praha , 1990 , p7-8 . in 1956 , he took up an appointment as composer-in-residence at the american academy in rome and composed incantation ( his fourth piano concerto ) and much of the greek passion , which he completed in january the following year . jan smaczny commented that in the compositions of martinů 's last years '' we find the composer attempting through his music a vicarious homecoming '' , smaczny , jan . the mystery which unites . in : welsh national opera , the greek passion - programme book . 1984 , p33 . although he never returned to czechoslovakia . his prolific output continued in 1958 with the parables for orchestra and the opera ariane . the following year he attended the first production of julietta since the premiere in prague , in wiesbaden . further composition continued up to his death : the second version of the greek passion , the nonet , the madrigaly , and the cantatas mikeš z hor ( mikeš from the mountains ) and the prophecy of isaiah . he died of stomach cancer in liestal , switzerland , on 28 august 1959 . his remains were moved and buried in polička , czechoslovakia , in 1979 . . music . : for a comprehensive list , see list of compositions by bohuslav martinů martinů was a prolific composer who wrote almost 400 pieces . many of his works are regularly performed or recorded , among them his oratorio the epic of gilgamesh ( 1955 , epos o gilgamešovi ) , his six symphonies , concertos ( these number almost thirty – four violin concertos , eight compositions for solo piano , four cello concertos , one of each for harpsichord , viola , and oboe , five double concertos , two triple concertos , and two concertos for four solo instruments and orchestra ) , an anti-war opera comedy on the bridge ( veselohra na mostě ) , chamber music ( including eight string quartets , martinů is usually credited with seven string quartets , but his string quartet in e-flat major of 1917 ( halbreich no . 103 ) was premièred in 1994 . there is also believed to have been a string quartet from 1912 , given the number h . 60 but which is missing , and likewise two other missing quartet works from 1912 ( h . 63 and 64 ) ; the composer 's first known work , three horsemen ( tři jezdci , h . 1 , ca . 1902 ) , is also for string quartet ( simon , pp . 35–6 . ) three piano quintets , from 1911 ( premiered 2012 ) ( h.35 ) , 1933 ( premiered 1934 ) ( h.229 ) and 1944 ( premiered 1945 ) ( h.298 ) . see simon , pp . 36–38 . a piano quartet and one other quartet with piano , one with oboe , violin and cello from 1947 ) , a flute sonata , a clarinet sonatina and many others . simon , p.39 a characteristic feature of his orchestral writing is the near-omnipresent piano ; many of his orchestral works include a prominent part for piano , including his small concerto for harpsichord and chamber orchestra . the bulk of his writing from the 1930s into the 1950s was in a neoclassical vein , but with his last works he opened up his style to include more rhapsodic gestures and a looser , more spontaneous sense of form . this is easiest to hear by comparing his fantaisies symphoniques ( symphony no . 6 ) , h 343 , with its five predecessors , all from the 1940s . one of martinů 's lesser known works features the theremin . martinů started working on his fantasia for theremin , oboe , string quartet and piano in the summer of 1944 , and finished it on october 1 . he dedicated it to lucie bigelow rosen , who had commissioned it and was the theremin soloist at its premiere at new york 's town hall on 3 november 1945 , joined by the koutzen quartet , robert bloom ( oboe ) , and carlos salzedo ( piano ) . simon , p.38 his opera the greek passion is based on the greek passion by nikos kazantzakis , and his orchestral work memorial to lidice ( památník lidicím ) was written in remembrance of the lidice that was destroyed by the nazis in reprisal for the assassination of reinhard heydrich in the late spring of 1942 . it was completed in august 1943 whilst he was in new york , and premiered there in october of that year . simon , pp.22 , 197–98 , and sources summarised especially döge , klaus . '' das entsetzliche grauen zum ausdruck gebracht : anmerkungen zu martinůs memorial to lidice , in bohuslav martinů ( ed . by ulrich tadday ) , munich : text und kritik , 2009 . . personality . there has been many discussions about martinů 's personality , manners and possible asperger syndrome . frank james rybka has promoted the idea that martinů suffered from this kind of autism spectrum disorder . he met martinů in 1941 , when the composer was 51 and rybka was only six years old ; later on he met him in 1951 and then in 1959 , a month before the composer died . according to rybka , martinů was quiet , introverted , and emotionally stolid when meeting persons he did not know well . he typically answered questions very slowly , even when conversing in his native czech . he might fail to reciprocate socially when people would compliment his music , or do favors for him . rybka and osonoff , p . 42 . close friends found him to be a kind , gentle , self-effacing , unbiased person . in 2009 , rybka launched a retrospective study of the composer 's unusual personality , based upon interviews of people who knew him , as well as a study of letters he had written to his family and friends . evidence of his having an autism spectrum disorder was compiled and evaluated , using the established criteria found in the diagnostic and statistical manual for mental disease ( dsm-iv ) . this evidence was reviewed by a well-known autism neuroscientist who concurred that the composer had good evidence of having had an autistic spectrum disorder , most likely asperger syndrome . this was described in their publication . martinu 's impressive quiet , czech music , 23 ( 2009 ) , 31–50 in 2011 , rybka published a martinů biography , in which such traits are reviewed , such as his failure of social reciprocity , his flat affect and stolidity , his phobias and extreme stage fright , his strict adherence to a ritualized schedule , and his zoning out into an aura , while walking with his mind deeply engrossed in composing . rybka , fj pp . & nbsp ; 293–307 . the biography concludes that there were both positive and negative ways asperger 's affected his life . it seems to have facilitated his extraordinary memory for music , and his ability to compose prolifically and skillfully , but it also left him unable to promote or showcase his music in public . rybka , fj pp 315–23 . against this , eric entwistle in his review of rybka 's publication emphasized three main points contradicting rybka 's conclusions . these are : firstly , that it is impossible to diagnose someone so many years after his death ; secondly , that asperger syndrome officially does not exist as a separate syndrome ; and finally , that according to entwistle , rybka became obsessed with the idea of martinů 's disorder , finding evidence for his claim everywhere .