Comparison of analog and digital recording

dynamic range . the dynamic range of an audio system is a measure of the difference between the smallest and largest amplitude values that can be represented in a medium . digital and analog differ in both the methods of transfer and storage , as well as the behavior exhibited by the systems due to these methods . the dynamic range of digital audio systems can exceed that of analog audio systems . consumer analog cassette tapes have a dynamic range of 60 to 70 & nbsp ; db . analog fm broadcasts rarely have a dynamic range exceeding 50 & nbsp ; db . the dynamic range of a direct-cut vinyl record may surpass 70 & nbsp ; db . analog studio master tapes can have a dynamic range of up to 77 & nbsp ; db . an lp made out of perfect diamond has an atomic feature size of about 0.5 nanometer , which , with a groove size of 8 micron , yields a theoretical dynamic range of 110 & nbsp ; db . an lp made out of perfect vinyl lp would have a theoretical dynamic range of 70 & nbsp ; db . measurements indicate maximum actual performance in the 60 to 70 & nbsp ; db range . typically , a 16-bit analog-to-digital converter may have a dynamic range of between 90 and 95 & nbsp ; db , whereas the signal-to-noise ratio ( roughly the equivalent of dynamic range , noting the absence of quantization noise but presence of tape hiss ) of a professional reel-to-reel ¼-inch tape recorder would be between 60 and 70 & nbsp ; db at the recorder 's rated output . the benefits of using digital recorders with greater than 16-bit accuracy can be applied to the 16 bits of audio cd . stuart stresses that with the correct dither , the resolution of a digital system is theoretically infinite , and that it is possible , for example , to resolve sounds at −110 & nbsp ; db ( below digital full-scale ) in a well-designed 16 bit channel . . overload conditions . there are some differences in the behaviour of analog and digital systems when high level signals are present , where there is the possibility that such signals could push the system into overload . with high level signals , analog magnetic tape approaches saturation , and high frequency response drops in proportion to low frequency response . while undesirable , the audible effect of this can be reasonably unobjectionable . in contrast , digital pcm recorders show non-benign behaviour in overload ; samples that exceed the peak quantization level are simply truncated , clipping the waveform squarely , which introduces distortion in the form of large quantities of higher-frequency harmonics . in principle , pcm digital systems have the lowest level of nonlinear distortion at full signal amplitude . the opposite is usually true of analog systems , where distortion tends to increase at high signal levels . a study by manson ( 1980 ) considered the requirements of a digital audio system for high quality broadcasting . it concluded that a 16-bit system would be sufficient , but noted the small reserve the system provided in ordinary operating conditions . for this reason , it was suggested that a fast-acting signal limiter or 'soft clipper ' be used to prevent the system from becoming overloaded . with many recordings , high level distortions at signal peaks may be audibly masked by the original signal , thus large amounts of distortion may be acceptable at peak signal levels . the difference between analog and digital systems is the form of high-level signal error . some early analog-to-digital converters displayed non-benign behaviour when in overload , where the overloading signals were 'wrapped ' from positive to negative full-scale . modern converter designs based on sigma-delta modulation may become unstable in overload conditions . it is usually a design goal of digital systems to limit high-level signals to prevent overload . to prevent overload , a modern digital system may compress input signals so that digital full-scale can not be reached . physical degradation . unlike analog duplication , digital copies are exact replicas that can be duplicated indefinitely and without generation loss , in principle . error correction allows digital formats to tolerate significant media deterioration though digital media is not immune to data loss . consumer cd-r compact discs have a limited and variable lifespan due to both inherent and manufacturing quality issues . with vinyl records , there will be some loss in fidelity on each playing of the disc . this is due to the wear of the stylus in contact with the record surface . magnetic tapes , both analog and digital , wear from friction between the tape and the heads , guides , and other parts of the tape transport as the tape slides over them . the brown residue deposited on swabs during cleaning of a tape machine 's tape path is actually particles of magnetic coating shed from tapes . sticky-shed syndrome is a prevalent problem with older tapes . tapes can also suffer creasing , stretching , and frilling of the edges of the plastic tape base , particularly from low-quality or out-of-alignment tape decks . when a cd is played , there is no physical contact involved as the data is read optically using a laser beam . therefore , no such media deterioration takes place , and the cd will , with proper care , sound exactly the same every time it is played ( discounting aging of the player and cd itself ) ; however , this is a benefit of the optical system , not of digital recording , and the laserdisc format enjoys the same non-contact benefit with analog optical signals . cds suffer from disc rot and slowly degrade with time , even if they are stored properly and not played . m-disc , a recordable optical technology which markets itself as remaining readable for 1,000 years , is available in certain markets , but as of late 2020 has never been sold in the cd-r format . ( sound could , however , be stored on an m-disc dvd-r using the dvd-audio format . ) . noise . for electronic audio signals , sources of noise include mechanical , electrical and thermal noise in the recording and playback cycle . the amount of noise that a piece of audio equipment adds to the original signal can be quantified . mathematically , this can be expressed by means of the signal to noise ratio ( snr or s/n ratio ) . sometimes the maximum possible dynamic range of the system is quoted instead . with digital systems , the quality of reproduction depends on the analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion steps , and does not depend on the quality of the recording medium , provided it is adequate to retain the digital values without error . digital media capable of bit-perfect storage and retrieval have been commonplace for some time , since they were generally developed for software storage which has no tolerance for error . the process of analog-to-digital conversion will , according to theory , always introduce quantization distortion . this distortion can be rendered as uncorrelated quantization noise through the use of dither . the magnitude of this noise or distortion is determined by the number of quantization levels . in binary systems this is determined by and typically stated in terms of the number of bits . each additional bit adds approximately 6 & nbsp ; db in possible snr , e.g . 24 x 6 144 & nbsp ; db for 24 bit quantization , 126 & nbsp ; db for 21-bit , and 120 & nbsp ; db for 20-bit . the 16-bit digital system of red book audio cd has 2 16 65,536 possible signal amplitudes , theoretically allowing for an snr of 98 & nbsp ; db . . rumble . rumble is a form of noise characteristic caused by imperfections in the bearings of turntables , the platter tends to have a slight amount of motion besides the desired rotation—the turntable surface also moves up-and-down and side-to-side slightly . this additional motion is added to the desired signal as noise , usually of very low frequencies , creating a rumbling sound during quiet passages . very inexpensive turntables sometimes used ball bearings , which are very likely to generate audible amounts of rumble . more expensive turntables tend to use massive sleeve bearings , which are much less likely to generate offensive amounts of rumble . increased turntable mass also tends to lead to reduced rumble . a good turntable should have rumble at least 60 & nbsp ; db below the specified output level from the pick-up . driscoll , r . ( 1980 ) . practical hi-fi sound , 'analogue and digital ' , pages 61–64 ; 'the pick-up , arm and turntable ' , pages 79–82 . hamlyn . because they have no moving parts in the signal path , digital systems are not subject to rumble . wow and flutter . wow ( recording ) are a change in frequency of an analog device and are the result of mechanical imperfections , with wow being a slower rate form of flutter . wow and flutter are most noticeable on signals which contain pure tones . for lp records , the quality of the turntable will have a large effect on the level of wow and flutter . a good turntable will have wow and flutter values of less than 0.05 % , which is the speed variation from the mean value . wow and flutter can also be present in the recording , as a result of the imperfect operation of the recorder . owing to their use of precision crystal oscillators for their timebase , digital systems are not subject to wow and flutter . frequency response . for digital systems , the upper limit of the frequency response is determined by the sampling frequency . the choice of sample sampling frequency in a digital system is based on the nyquist–shannon sampling theorem . this states that a sampled signal can be reproduced exactly as long as it is sampled at a frequency greater than twice the bandwidth of the signal , the nyquist frequency . therefore , a sampling frequency of 40 & nbsp ; khz is mathematically sufficient to capture all the information contained in a signal having frequency components less than or equal to 20 & nbsp ; khz . the sampling theorem also requires that frequency content above the nyquist frequency be removed from the signal before sampling it . this is accomplished using anti-aliasing filters which require a transition band to sufficiently reduce aliasing . the bandwidth provided by the 44,100 hz sampling frequency used by the red book ( cd standard ) is sufficiently wide to cover the entire human hearing range , which roughly extends from 20 & nbsp ; hz to 20 & nbsp ; khz . professional digital recorders may record higher frequencies , while some consumer and telecommunications systems record a more restricted frequency range . high quality reel-to-reel machines can extend from 10 & nbsp ; hz to above 20 & nbsp ; khz . some analog tape manufacturers specify frequency responses up to 20 & nbsp ; khz , but these measurements may have been made at lower signal levels . compact cassettes may have a response extending up to 15 & nbsp ; khz at full ( 0 & nbsp ; db ) recording level . at lower levels ( −10 & nbsp ; db ) , cassettes are typically limited to 20 & nbsp ; khz due to self-erasure of the tape media . the frequency response for a conventional lp player might be 20 & nbsp ; hz to 20 & nbsp ; khz , ±3 & nbsp ; db . the low frequency response of vinyl records is restricted by rumble noise ( described above ) , as well as the physical and electrical characteristics of the entire pickup arm and transducer assembly . the high frequency response of vinyl depends on the cartridge . cd4 records contained frequencies up to 50 & nbsp ; khz . frequencies of up to 122 & nbsp ; khz have been experimentally cut on lp records . . aliasing . digital systems require that all high frequency signal content above the nyquist frequency must be removed prior to sampling , which , if not done , will result in these ultrasound frequencies '' folding over '' into frequencies which are in the audible range , producing a kind of distortion called aliasing . aliasing is prevented in digital systems by an anti-aliasing filter . however , designing an analog filter which precisely removes all frequency content exactly above or below a certain cutoff frequency , is impractical . thompson , dan . understanding audio . berklee press , 2005 , ch . 14 . instead , a sample rate is usually chosen which is above the nyquist requirement . this solution is called oversampling , and allows a less aggressive and lower-cost anti-aliasing filter to be used . early digital systems may have suffered from a number of signal degradations related to the use of analog anti-aliasing filters , e.g . , time dispersion , nonlinear distortion , ripple , temperature dependence of filters etc . using an oversampling design and delta-sigma modulation , the less aggressive analog anti-aliasing filter can be supplemented by a digital filter . this approach has several advantages . the digital filter can be made to have a near-ideal transfer function , with low in-band ripple , and no aging or thermal drift . analog systems are not subject to a nyquist limit or aliasing and thus do not require anti-aliasing filters or any of the design considerations associated with them . instead , the limits of analog storage formats are determined by the physical properties of their construction . sampling rates . cd quality audio is sampled at 44,100 hz ( nyquist frequency 22.05 & nbsp ; khz ) and at 16 bits . sampling the waveform at higher frequencies and allowing for a greater number of bits per sample allows noise and distortion to be reduced further . dat can sample audio at up to 48 & nbsp ; khz , while dvd-audio can be 96 or 192 & nbsp ; khz and up to 24 bits resolution . with any of these sampling rates , signal information is captured above what is generally considered to be the human hearing range . work done in 1981 by muraoka et al . showed that music signals with frequency components above 20 & nbsp ; khz were only distinguished from those without by a few of the 176 test subjects . a perceptual study by nishiguchi et al . ( 2004 ) concluded that '' no significant difference was found between sounds with and without very high frequency components among the sound stimuli and the subjects . however , nishiguchi et al can still neither confirm nor deny the possibility that some subjects could discriminate between musical sounds with and without very high frequency components . '' in blind listening tests conducted by bob katz in 1996 , recounted in his book mastering audio : the art and the science , subjects using the same high-sample-rate reproduction equipment could not discern any audible difference between program material identically filtered to remove frequencies above 20 & nbsp ; khz versus 40 & nbsp ; khz . this demonstrates that presence or absence of ultrasonic content does not explain aural variation between sample rates . he posits that variation is due largely to performance of the band-limiting filters in converters . these results suggest that the main benefit to using higher sample rates is that it pushes consequential phase distortion from the band-limiting filters out of the audible range and that , under ideal conditions , higher sample rates may not be necessary . dunn ( 1998 ) examined the performance of digital converters to see if these differences in performance could be explained by the band-limiting filters used in converters and looking for the artifacts they introduce . . quantization . a signal is recorded digitally by an analog-to-digital converter , which measures the amplitude of an analog signal at regular intervals specified by the sampling rate , and then stores these sampled numbers in computer hardware . numbers on computers represent a finite set of discrete values , which means that if an analog signal is digitally sampled using native methods ( without dither ) , the amplitude of the audio signal will simply be rounded to the nearest representation . this process is called quantization , and these small errors in the measurements are manifested aurally as low level noise or distortion . this form of distortion , sometimes called granular or quantization distortion , has been pointed to as a fault of some digital systems and recordings particularly some early digital recordings , where the digital release was said to be inferior to the analog version . however , '' if the quantisation is performed using the right dither , then the only consequence of the digitisation is effectively the addition of a white , uncorrelated , benign , random noise floor . the level of the noise depends on the number of the bits in the channel . '' the range of possible values that can be represented numerically by a sample is determined by the number of binary digits used . this is called the resolution , and is usually referred to as the bit depth in the context of pcm audio . the quantization noise level is directly determined by this number , decreasing exponentially ( linearly in db units ) as the resolution increases . with an adequate bit depth , random noise from other sources will dominate and completely mask the quantization noise . the redbook cd standard uses 16 bits , which keeps the quantization noise 96 & nbsp ; db below maximum amplitude , far below a discernible level with almost any source material . the addition of effective dither means that , '' in practical terms , the resolution is limited by our ability to resolve sounds in noise . we have no problem measuring ( and hearing ) signals of –110db in a well-designed 16- bit channel . '' dvd-audio and most modern professional recording equipment allows for samples of 24 bits . analog systems do not necessarily have discrete digital levels in which the signal is encoded . consequently , the accuracy to which the original signal can be preserved is instead limited by the intrinsic noise-floor and maximum signal level of the media and the playback equipment . quantization in analog media . since analog media is composed of molecules , the smallest microscopic structure represents the smallest quantization unit of the recorded signal . natural dithering processes , like random thermal movements of molecules , the nonzero size of the reading instrument , and other averaging effects , make the practical limit larger than that of the smallest molecular structural feature . a theoretical lp composed of perfect diamond , with a groove size of 8 micron and a feature size of 0.5 nanometer , has a quantization that is similar to a 16-bit digital sample . . dither as a solution . it is possible to make quantization noise audibly benign by applying dither . to do this , noise is added to the original signal before quantization . optimal use of dither has the effect of making quantization error independent of the signal , and allows signal information to be retained below the least significant bit of the digital system . dither algorithms also commonly have an option to employ some kind of noise shaping , which pushes the frequency of much of the dither noise to areas that are less audible to human ears , lowering the level of the noise floor apparent to the listener . dither is commonly applied during mastering before final bit depth reduction , and also at various stages of dsp . timing jitter . one aspect that may degrade the performance of a digital system is jitter . this is the phenomenon of variations in time from what should be the correct spacing of discrete samples according to the sample rate . this can be due to timing inaccuracies of the digital clock . ideally , a digital clock should produce a timing pulse at exactly regular intervals . other sources of jitter within digital electronic circuits are data-induced jitter , where one part of the digital stream affects a subsequent part as it flows through the system , and power supply induced jitter , where noise from the power supply causes irregularities in the timing of signals in the circuits it powers . the accuracy of a digital system is dependent on the sampled amplitude values , but it is also dependent on the temporal regularity of these values . the analog versions of this temporal dependence are known as pitch error and wow-and-flutter . periodic jitter produces modulation noise and can be thought of as being the equivalent of analog flutter . random jitter alters the noise floor of the digital system . the sensitivity of the converter to jitter depends on the design of the converter . it has been shown that a random jitter of 5 & nbsp ; ns may be significant for 16 bit digital systems . in 1998 , benjamin and gannon researched the audibility of jitter using listening tests . they found that the lowest level of jitter to be audible was around 10 & nbsp ; ns ( rms ) . this was on a 17 & nbsp ; khz sine wave test signal . with music , no listeners found jitter audible at levels lower than 20 & nbsp ; ns . a paper by ashihara et al . ( 2005 ) attempted to determine the detection thresholds for random jitter in music signals . their method involved abx test . when discussing their results , the authors commented that : so far , actual jitter in consumer products seems to be too small to be detected at least for reproduction of music signals . it is not clear , however , if detection thresholds obtained in the present study would really represent the limit of auditory resolution or it would be limited by resolution of equipment . distortions due to very small jitter may be smaller than distortions due to non-linear characteristics of loudspeakers . ashihara and kiryu 8 evaluated linearity of loudspeaker and headphones . according to their observation , headphones seem to be more preferable to produce sufficient sound pressure at the ear drums with smaller distortions than loudspeakers . . signal processing . after initial recording , it is common for the audio signal to be altered in some way , such as with the use of compression , equalization , delays and reverb . with analog , this comes in the form of outboard gear , and with digital , the same is typically accomplished with plug-ins in a digital audio workstation ( daw ) . a comparison of analog and digital filtering shows technical advantages to both methods . digital filters are more precise and flexible . analog filters are simpler , can be more efficient and do not introduce latency . analog hardware . when altering a signal with a filter , the outputted signal may differ in time from the signal at the input , which is measured as its phase response . many equalizers exhibit this behavior , with the amount of phase shift differing in some pattern , and centered around the band that is being adjusted . although this effect alters the signal in a way other than a strict change in frequency response , this coloration can sometimes have a positive effect on the perception of the sound of the audio signal . digital filters . because the variables involved can be precisely specified in the calculations , digital filters can be made to objectively perform better than analog components . other processing such as delay and mixing can be done exactly . digital filters are also more flexible . for example the linear phase equalizer does not introduce frequency-dependent phase shift . this filter may be implemented digitally using a finite impulse response filter but has no practical implementation using analog components . a practical advantage of digital processing is the more convenient recall of settings . plug-in parameters can be stored on the computer , whereas parameter details on an analog unit must be written down or otherwise recorded if the unit needs to be reused . this can be cumbersome when entire mixes must be recalled manually using an analog console and outboard gear . when working digitally , all parameters can simply be stored in a daw project file and recalled instantly . most modern professional daws also process plug-ins in real time , which means that processing can be largely non-destructive until final mix-down . analog modeling . many plug-ins exist now that incorporate analog modeling . there are audio engineers that endorse them and feel that they compare equally in sound to the analog processes that they imitate . analog modeling carries some benefits over their analog counterparts , such as the ability to remove noise from the algorithms and modifications to make the parameters more flexible . on the other hand , other engineers also feel that the modeling is still inferior to the genuine outboard components and still prefer to mix '' outside the box '' . . sound quality . subjective evaluation . subjective evaluation attempts to measure how well an audio component performs according to the human ear . the most common form of subjective test is a listening test , where the audio component is simply used in the context for which it was designed . this test is popular with hi-fi reviewers , where the component is used for a length of time by the reviewer who then will describe the performance in subjective terms . common descriptions include whether the component has a bright or dull sound , or how well the component manages to present a spatial image . another type of subjective test is done under more controlled conditions and attempts to remove possible bias from listening tests . these sorts of tests are done with the component hidden from the listener , and are called blind tests . to prevent possible bias from the person running the test , the blind test may be done so that this person is also unaware of the component under test . this type of test is called a double-blind test . this sort of test is often used to evaluate the performance of lossy audio compression . critics of double-blind tests see them as not allowing the listener to feel fully relaxed when evaluating the system component , and can therefore not judge differences between different components as well as in sighted ( non-blind ) tests . those who employ the double-blind testing method may try to reduce listener stress by allowing a certain amount of time for listener training . . early digital recordings . early digital audio machines had disappointing results , with digital converters introducing errors that the ear could detect . record companies released their first lps based on digital audio masters in the late 1970s . cds became available in the early 1980s . at this time analog sound reproduction was a mature technology . there was a mixed critical response to early digital recordings released on cd . compared to vinyl record , it was noticed that cd was far more revealing of the acoustics and ambient background noise of the recording environment . for this reason , recording techniques developed for analog disc , e.g . , microphone placement , needed to be adapted to suit the new digital format . some analog recordings were remastered for digital formats . analog recordings made in natural concert hall acoustics tended to benefit from remastering . the remastering process was occasionally criticised for being poorly handled . when the original analog recording was fairly bright , remastering sometimes resulted in an unnatural treble emphasis . . super audio cd and dvd-audio . the super audio cd ( sacd ) format was created by sony and philips , who were also the developers of the earlier standard audio cd format . sacd uses direct stream digital ( dsd ) based on delta-sigma modulation . using this technique , the audio data is stored as a sequence of fixed amplitude ( i.e . 1- bit ) values at a sample rate of 2.884 & nbsp ; mhz , which is 64 times the 44.1 & nbsp ; khz sample rate used by cd . at any point in time , the amplitude of the original analog signal is represented by the relative preponderance of 1 's over 0 's in the data stream . this digital data stream can therefore be converted to analog by passing it through an analog low-pass filter . the dvd-audio format uses standard , linear pcm at variable sampling rates and bit depths , which at the very least match and usually greatly surpass those of a standard cd audio ( 16 bits , 44.1 & nbsp ; khz ) . in the popular hi-fi press , it had been suggested that linear pcm '' creates a stress reaction in people '' , and that dsd '' is the only digital recording system that does not . have these effects '' . this claim appears to originate from a 1980 article by dr john diamond . the core of the claim that pcm recordings ( the only digital recording technique available at the time ) created a stress reaction rested on using the pseudoscientific technique of applied kinesiology , for example by dr diamond at an aes 66th convention ( 1980 ) presentation with the same title . diamond had previously used a similar technique to demonstrate that rock music ( as opposed to classical ) was bad for your health due to the presence of the '' stopped anapestic beat '' . diamond 's claims regarding digital audio were taken up by mark levinson , who asserted that while pcm recordings resulted in a stress reaction , dsd recordings did not . however , a double-blind subjective test between high resolution linear pcm ( dvd-audio ) and dsd did not reveal a statistically significant difference . listeners involved in this test noted their great difficulty in hearing any difference between the two formats . . analog preference . the vinyl revival is in part because of analog audio 's imperfection , which adds '' warmth '' . some listeners prefer such audio over that of a cd . founder and editor harry pearson of the absolute sound journal says that '' lps are decisively more musical . cds drain the soul from music . the emotional involvement disappears '' . dub producer adrian sherwood has similar feelings about the analog cassette tape , which he prefers because of its '' warmer '' sound . those who favour the digital format point to the results of blind tests , which demonstrate the high performance possible with digital recorders . the assertion is that the 'analog sound ' is more a product of analog format inaccuracies than anything else . one of the first and largest supporters of digital audio was the classical conductor herbert von karajan , who said that digital recording was '' definitely superior to any other form of recording we know '' . he also pioneered the unsuccessful digital compact cassette and conducted the first recording ever to be commercially released on cd : richard strauss 's alpine symphony . hybrid systems . while the words analog audio usually imply that the sound is described using a continuous time/continuous amplitudes approach in both the media and the reproduction/recording systems , and the words digital audio imply a discrete time/discrete amplitudes approach , there are methods of encoding audio that fall somewhere between the two , e.g . continuous time/discrete levels and discrete time/continuous levels . while not as common as '' pure analog '' or '' pure digital '' methods , these situations do occur in practice . indeed , all analog systems show discrete ( quantized ) behaviour at the microscopic scale , and asynchronously operated class-d amplifiers even consciously incorporate continuous time , discrete amplitude designs . continuous amplitude , discrete time systems have also been used in many early analog-to-digital converters , in the form of sample-and-hold circuits . the boundary is further blurred by digital systems which statistically aim at analog-like behavior , most often by utilizing stochastic dithering and noise shaping techniques . while vinyl records and common compact cassettes are analog media and use quasi-linear physical encoding methods ( e.g . spiral groove depth , tape magnetic field strength ) without noticeable quantization or aliasing , there are analog non-linear systems that exhibit effects similar to those encountered on digital ones , such as aliasing and '' hard '' dynamic floors ( e.g . frequency modulated hi-fi audio on videotapes , pwm encoded signals ) . although those '' hybrid '' techniques are usually more common in telecommunications systems than in consumer audio , their existence alone blurs the distinctive line between certain digital and analog systems , at least for what regards some of their alleged advantages or disadvantages . there are many benefits to using digital recording over analog recording because “ numbers are more easily manipulated than are grooves on a record or magnetized particles on a tape ” . because numerical coding represents the sound waves perfectly , the sound can be played back without background noise . see also . audiophile audio quality measurement audio system measurements history of sound recording . references . bibliography . pohlmann , k . ( 2005 ) . principles of digital audio 5th edn , mcgraw-hill comp . external links .