Mr. Weatherbee

fictional character biography . pre-new riverdale . mr . weatherbee 's first appearance may be in pep comics 25 ( march 1942 ) , as a passenger of a taxi driven by archie . the man grumbles about the poor driving and remarks to himself how his headmastership of the high school will prevent '' go-nowheres '' like him . when he begins school , he suddenly again runs into archie , realizing that he is also a student at his high school , and that chance ride has caused archie to start off on the wrong foot . however , this character is not named , and he is not overweight . the first unambiguous appearance of mr . weatherbee is in jackpot comics 5 ( spring 1942 ) , where he is named , and has his customary girth . mr . weatherbee is sometimes stated as having once been in the united states military , and saw conflict in war . due to retconning and the '' floating timeline '' principle , the specific war has changed over time . weatherbee 's stated specific branch of the military has also varied over the years . according to a story in one of the digest magazines , weatherbee was a helicopter pilot in the vietnam war ; however , a previous story had placed him as a veteran of world war ii 's battle of the bulge . another story states mr . weatherbee was a former member of the united states marine corps . in a later story mr . weatherbee jests that his claim towards being in the '' battle of the bulge '' refers to his own battle against weight gain , which he has lost . mr . weatherbee is shown in little archie stories as having been the principal of riverdale elementary school during the gang 's grade school years . he eventually transferred to riverdale high school at about the same time archie started high school , as shown in a 2008 storyline . archie 587-591 , september 2008-january 2009 in one story , coach kleats , explaining to archie and his friends the value of not underestimating weatherbee 's physical prowess , mentions that weatherbee was a good athlete in high school , excelling in football and baseball . in archie at riverdale high 6 ( april 1973 ) , archie 's father accidentally reveals that weatherbee was known as '' wild willie '' in high school . archie at riverdale high 6 ( april 1973 all subsequent reprints replaced '' william '' with '' waldo '' and '' wild willie '' with '' wild wally '' . wild wally was a troublemaker , and , after the kids find out , contrary to what he expects , they learn to appreciate it . however , this conflicts with other stories suggesting waldo was quite studious in his teen years . many stories feature archie and his friends discovering that mr . weatherbee in his younger days was thin with red hair and had many adventures similar to archie 's . these stories often result in archie worrying that as an adult , he will become more like mr . weatherbee . he is a semi-active explorer and discovered some malooka indian relics on mr . lodge 's grounds . archie 's double digest 130 : lonely lobo feb 2002 weatherbee is constantly annoyed by archie , so he often tries to avoid him . however , he can not escape from archie even in the summer months , as seen in various stories . one such story featured mr . weatherbee as the head of the camp where the riverdale teens serve as junior counselors . he constantly dreams of the day when ( or if ) archie graduates from high school and keeps a special calendar that counts the day until that event , although there are numerous stories in which archie and his friends save him from various crises . there are also times when weatherbee takes an interest in teaching archie valuable lessons about life , nature , or things he enjoys . at times he even tries to hang out with the gang to be , as he says , more '' in '' . although archie often annoys weatherbee , weatherbee has admitted on several occasions that he is '' really fond '' of archie and that he is one of his '' favorite '' students . mr . weatherbee was particularly prominent in the comic series archie and me . running from 1964 to 1987 , the series featured stories specifically starring mr . weatherbee and archie . new riverdale . waldo weatherbee first appears in archie 1 ( july 2015 ) while archie is setting up for the school dance . archie ( vol . 2 ) 1 ( july 2015 ) in jughead 1 ( october 2015 ) , he is forced into an early retirement due to the school board 's decision to update to a modern curriculum meaning some of the teaching staff was replaced . jughead ( vol . 3 ) 1 ( october 2015 ) but later , he is reinstated to his old position as principal . it is shown in jughead 7 ( vol.3 ) that he has a wife named ramona . relationships . despite archie and mr . weatherbee 's conflicts , weatherbee is friends with archie 's father , fred , even inviting him to lead the parents ' association during one story . during that episode , weatherbee also acknowledged that while archie 's school work has been careless at times , his grades were quite adequate . while weatherbee appears to be unpartnered , there has been speculation about the nature of his relationship with fellow riverdale high veteran teacher miss grundy . a flashback in veronica 200 ( july 2010 ) showed the two having dated in their teen years . in one archie story where dilton builds a time-machine , mr . weatherbee is shown to have been in love with a fellow student named gwendolyn in his youth . after hearing his regrets about not getting together with her , archie and dilton go back in time to help him get the girl . initially successful in introducing weatherbee to gwen , the plan ultimately fails when she finds out his ambition to become a teacher , which she says has no money in it . she then dumps waldo . this was her only appearance in the series . despite the students ' fear of weatherbee , they still recognize his affection for the school and appreciate his efforts . in a story titled '' sheer gratitude '' in archie 's double digest 167 ( march 2006 ) , weatherbee 's age is said to be 65 , the required age of retirement according to the rules of the board of education . archie produces a petition from the entire school , however , and the board agrees to let weatherbee continue working at the high school . mr.weatherbee used to have a wife in the golden age era . however , she was retconned out from the series . she is later reintroduced in the new riverdale era as ramona weatherbee . relatives . in one story , mr . weatherbee 's motorcycle-riding mother visits the school . during her visit , she refers to him as '' willy '' . mr . weatherbee 's niece wendy weatherbee first appeared in tales from riverdale digest 10 ( may 2006 ) . she became a minor recurring character , noted for her quirky , eccentric interests , such as odd fashions and exotic pets . she is the daughter of mr . weatherbee 's twin brother , tony , as revealed in tales from riverdale digest 28 ( may 2008 ) . the weatherbee twins were very different as teenagers : waldo focused on his career and education , while tony focused more on girls and motorcycles ( he opened his own motorcycle shop ) . tony dated miss grundy when they were teenagers , but they parted . his friend hiram lodge apparently wanted to follow tony 's example , but instead settled down as a businessman and married hermione . friends . the staff of riverdale high school , archie andrews , reggie mantle , betty cooper , veronica lodge , dilton doiley , moose mason , big ethel , chuck clayton , nancy woods , midge klump , kevin keller , and other characters from archie comics . alternate versions . in the alternate futures shown in the series life with archie , miss grundy and mr . weatherbee realized they loved each other , and the couple finally married . however , in this series , the former miss grundy died from kidney disease soon afterwards , leaving the portly principal a broken-hearted widower . life with archie 6 , february 2011 in afterlife with archie , mr . weatherbee is chaperoning the school dance with miss grundy . while on break , he reminisces with her about the time they snuck into cypress cemetery on halloween when they were younger and makes references to night of the living dead . he tells her there 's nothing to be afraid of but is then mauled by a zombified jughead . in other media . mr . weatherbee has appeared to date in most archie media adaptions . in the the archie show , mr . weatherbee has certain fears about his mental health , owing to the '' hallucinations '' that he sometimes experiences . however , his fears are wholly unfounded and stem entirely from his accidental witnessing of sabrina spellman 's ( or sometimes her aunt hilda 's ) witchcraft . typically , upon seeing such things as an elephant and a giraffe poking their heads out of the windows at sabrina 's house ( as in the episode hexter 's day out ) or pop , the local malt shop proprietor flying by an aircraft window on a broom followed by sabrina ( as in zelda 's racing broom ) , he turns away and in a rather perturbed voice says '' i did n't see that ! i did not see that ! '' and often shouting '' nurse ! '' in archie : to riverdale and back again , david doyle portrayed him . in the cw tv series riverdale , mr . weatherbee is portrayed by peter james bryant . see also . wendy weatherbee riverdale high school ( archie comics )