Cauliflower

history . in the 1st century ad , pliny included what he called cyma among his descriptions of cultivated plants in natural history : '' ex omnibus brassicae generibus suavissima est cyma , '' ( '' of all the varieties of cabbage the most pleasant-tasted is cyma '' ) . pliny 's descriptions likely refer to the flowering heads of an earlier cultivated variety of brassica oleracea , but comes close to describing modern cauliflower . in the middle ages early forms of cauliflower were associated with the island of cyprus , with the 12th- and 13th-century arab botanists ibn al-'awwam and ibn al-baitar claiming its origin to be cyprus . this association continued into western europe , where cauliflowers were sometimes known as cyprus colewort , and there was extensive trade in western europe in cauliflower seeds from cyprus , under the french lusignan rulers of the island , until well into the 16th century . jon gregerson , good earth ( portland : graphic arts center publishing company , 1990 ) p.41 françois pierre la varenne employed chouxfleurs in le cuisinier françois . wheaton , barbara ketcham ( 1996 ) savoring the past : the french kitchen and table from 1300 to 1789 , touchstone , p . 118 , . they were introduced to france from genoa in the 16th century , and are featured in olivier de serres ' théâtre de l'agriculture ( 1600 ) , as cauli-fiori '' as the italians call it , which are still rather rare in france ; they hold an honorable place in the garden because of their delicacy '' , wheaton , barbara ketcham ( 1996 ) savoring the past : the french kitchen and table from 1300 to 1789 , touchstone , p . 66 , . but they did not commonly appear on grand tables until the time of louis xiv . toussaint-samat , maguelonne ( 2009 ) a history of food , 2nd ed . , john wiley & sons , pp . 625f , . it was introduced to india in 1822 by the british . . etymology . the word '' cauliflower '' derives from the italian cavolfiore , meaning '' cabbage flower '' . the ultimate origin of the name is from the latin words caulis ( cabbage ) and flōs ( flower ) . . horticulture . cauliflower is relatively difficult to grow compared to cabbage , with common problems such as an underdeveloped head and poor curd quality . . climate . because weather is a limiting factor for producing cauliflower , the plant grows best in moderate daytime temperatures , with plentiful sun , and moist soil conditions high in organic matter and sandy soils . the earliest maturity possible for cauliflower is 7 to 12 weeks from transplanting . in the northern hemisphere , fall season plantings in july may enable harvesting before autumn frost . long periods of sun exposure in hot summer weather may cause cauliflower heads to discolor with a red-purple hue . . seeding and transplanting . transplantable cauliflowers can be produced in containers as flats , hotbeds , or in the field . in soil that is loose , well-drained and fertile , field seedlings are shallow-planted and thinned by ample space – about 12 plants per . ideal growing temperatures are about when seedlings are 25 to 35 days old . applications of fertilizer to developing seedlings begin when leaves appear , usually with a starter solution weekly . transplanting to the field normally begins late spring and may continue until mid-summer . row spacing is about . rapid vegetative growth after transplanting may benefit from such procedures as avoiding spring frosts , using starter solutions high in phosphorus , irrigating weekly , and applying fertilizer . . disorders , pests , and diseases . the most important disorders affecting cauliflower quality are a hollow stem , stunted head growth or buttoning , ricing , browning and leaf-tip burn . among major pests affecting cauliflower are aphids , root maggots , cutworms , moths , and flea beetles . the plant is susceptible to black rot , black leg , club root , black leaf spot , and downy mildew . . harvesting . when cauliflower is mature , heads appear as clear white , compact , and in diameter , and should be cooled shortly after harvest . forced air cooling to remove heat from the field during hot weather may be needed for optimal preservation . short-term storage is possible using cool , high-humidity storage conditions . . pollination . many species of blowflies , including calliphora vomitoria , are known pollinators of cauliflower . . classification and identification . there are four major groups of cauliflower . italian : this specimen is diverse in appearance , biennial and annual in type . this group also includes white , romanesco , various brown , green , purple , and yellow cultivars . this type is the ancestral form from which the others were derived . northern european annuals : used in europe and north america for summer and fall harvest , it was developed in germany in the 18th century and includes the old cultivars erfurt and snowball . northwest european biennial : used in europe for winter and early spring harvest , this was developed in france in the 19th century and includes the old cultivars angers and roscoff . asian : a tropical cauliflower used in china and india , it was developed in india during the 19th century from the now-abandoned cornish type and includes old varieties early benaras and early patna . varieties . there are hundreds of historic and current commercial varieties used around the world . a comprehensive list of about 80 north american varieties is maintained at north carolina state university . . colours . ; white : white cauliflower is the most common color of cauliflower , having a contrasting white head ( also called '' curd '' ) surrounded by green leaves . ; orange : orange cauliflower contains beta-carotene as the orange pigment , a provitamin a compound . this orange trait originated from a natural mutant found in a cauliflower field in canada . cultivars include 'cheddar ' and 'orange bouquet ' . ; green : green cauliflower in the b . oleracea botrytis group is sometimes called broccoflower . it is available in the normal curd ( head ) shape and with a fractal spiral curd called romanesco broccoli . both have been commercially available in the u.s . and europe since the early 1990s . green-headed varieties include 'alverda ' , 'green goddess ' and 'vorda ' . romanesco varieties include 'minaret ' and 'veronica ' . ; purple : the purple color in this cauliflower is caused by the presence of anthocyanins , water-soluble pigments that are found in many other plants and plant-based products , such as red cabbage and red wine . varieties include 'graffiti ' and 'purple cape ' . : in great britain and southern italy , a broccoli with tiny flower buds is sold as a vegetable under the name '' purple cauliflower '' ; it is not the same as standard cauliflower with a purple head . file : cauliflower broccoflower.jpg white and green cauliflower file : cauliflower romanesco.jpg green romanesco cauliflower file:7367-brassica oleracea var . botrytis.jpg orange cauliflower file : purplec.png purple cauliflower . production . in 2016 , global production of cauliflowers ( combined for production reports with broccoli ) was 25.2 million tonnes , led by china and india which , combined , had 73 % of the world total . secondary producers , having 0.4–1.3 million tonnes annually , were the united states , spain , mexico and italy . . nutrition . raw cauliflower is 92 % water , 5 % carbohydrates , 2 % protein , and contains negligible fat ( table ) . a reference amount of raw cauliflower provides of food energy , and has a high content ( 20 % or more of the daily value , dv ) of vitamin c ( 58 % dv ) and moderate levels of several b vitamins and vitamin k ( 13–15 % dv ; table ) . contents of dietary minerals are low ( 7 % dv or less ) . phytochemicals . cauliflower contains several non-nutrient phytochemicals common in the brassicaceae that are under preliminary research for their potential properties , including isothiocyanates and glucosinolates . boiling reduces the levels of cauliflower glucosinolates , while other cooking methods , such as steaming , microwaving , and stir frying , have no significant effect on glucosinolate levels . . cuisine . cauliflower heads can be roasted , grilled , boiled , fried , steamed , pickled , or eaten raw . when cooking , the outer leaves and thick stalks are typically removed , leaving only the florets ( the edible '' curd '' or '' head '' ) . the leaves are also edible but are often discarded . cauliflower is a popular low-calorie , gluten-free alternative to rice and flour . between 2012 and 2016 , cauliflower production in the united states increased 63 % , and cauliflower-based product sales increased 71 % between 2017 and 2018 . cauliflower rice is made by pulsing cauliflower florets followed by cooking the result in oil . cauliflower pizza crust is made from cauliflower flour and is popular in pizza restaurants . . fractal dimension . cauliflower has been noticed by mathematicians for its distinct fractal dimension , walker , john . ( 2005-03-22 ) fractal food . fourmilab.ch . retrieved on 2013-09-03 . description of the julia sets of the cabbage fractal . iwriteiam.nl . retrieved on 2013-09-03 . calculated to be roughly 2.8 . one of the fractal properties of cauliflower is that every branch , or '' module '' , is similar to the entire cauliflower . another quality , also present in other plant species , is that the angle between '' modules , '' as they become more distant from the center , is 360 degrees divided by the golden ratio .