New Imperialism

imperial rivalries . the extension of european control over africa and asia added a further dimension to the rivalry and mutual suspicion which characterized international diplomacy in the decades preceding world war i . france 's seizure of tunisia in 1881 initiated fifteen years of tension with italy , which had hoped to take the country , retaliating by allying with germany and waging a decade-long tariff war with france . britain 's takeover of egypt a year later caused a marked cooling of her relations with france . the most striking conflicts of the era were the spanish–american war of 1898 and the russo-japanese war of 1904–05 , each signaling the advent of a new imperial great power ; the united states and japan , respectively . the fashoda incident of 1898 represented the worst anglo-french crisis in decades , but france 's buckling in the face of british demands foreshadowed improved relations as the two countries set about resolving their overseas claims . british policy in south africa and german actions in the far east contributed to dramatic policy shifts , which in the 1900s , aligned hitherto isolationist britain first with japan as an ally , and then with france and russia in the looser triple entente . german efforts to break the entente by challenging french hegemony in morocco resulted in the tangier crisis of 1905 and the agadir crisis of 1911 , adding to tension and anti-german sentiment in the years preceding world war i . in the pacific conflicts between germany and the united states and the united kingdom contributed to the first and second samoan civil war . another crisis occurred in 1902–03 when there was a stand-off between venezuela backed by argentina , the united states ( see monroe doctrine ) and a coalition of european countries . motivation . humanitarianism . one of the biggest motivations behind new imperialism was the idea of humanitarianism and '' civilizing '' the '' lower '' class people in africa and in other undeveloped places . this was a religious motive for many christian missionaries , in an attempt to save the souls of the '' uncivilized '' people , and based on the idea that christians and the people of the united kingdom were morally superior . most of the missionaries that supported imperialism did so because they felt the only true religion was their own . similarly , roman catholic missionaries opposed british missionaries because the british missionaries were protestant . at times , however , imperialism did help the people of the colonies because the missionaries ended up stopping some of the slavery in some areas . therefore , europeans claimed that they were only there because they wanted to protect the weaker tribal groups they conquered . the missionaries and other leaders suggested that they should stop such practices as cannibalism , child marriage , and other '' savage things '' . this humanitarian ideal was described in poems such as the white man 's burden and other literature . often , the humanitarianism was sincere , but with misguided choices . although some imperialists were trying to be sincere with the notion of humanitarianism , at times their choices might not have been best for the areas they were conquering and the natives living there . winks , robin w . '' imperialism . '' encyclopedia americana . grolier online , 2010 . web . 18 november 2010 . . dutch ethical policy . the dutch ethical policy was the dominant reformist and liberal political character of colonial policy in the dutch east indies during the 20th century . in 1901 , the dutch queen wilhelmina announced that the netherlands accepted an ethical responsibility for the welfare of their colonial subjects . this announcement was a sharp contrast with the former official doctrine that indonesia was mainly a wingewest ( region for making profit ) . it marked the start of modern development policy , implemented and practised by alexander willem frederik idenburg , whereas other colonial powers usually talked of a civilizing mission , which mainly involved spreading their culture to colonized peoples . the dutch ethical policy ( dutch : emphasised improvement in material living conditions . the policy suffered , however , from serious underfunding , inflated expectations and lack of acceptance in the dutch colonial establishment , and it had largely ceased to exist by the onset of the great depression in 1929 . robert cribb , 'development policy in the early 20th century ' , in jan-paul dirkse , frans hüsken and mario rutten , eds , development and social welfare : indonesia ’ s experiences under the new order ( leiden : koninklijk instituut voor taal- , land- en volkenkunde , 1993 ) , pp . 225–245 . it did however create an educated indigenous elite able to articulate and eventually establish independence from the netherlands . theories . the '' accumulation theory '' adopted by karl kautsky , john a . hobson and popularized by vladimir lenin centered on the accumulation of surplus capital during and after the industrial revolution : restricted opportunities at home , the argument goes , drove financial interests to seek more profitable investments in less-developed lands with lower labor costs , unexploited raw materials and little competition . hobson 's analysis fails to explain colonial expansion on the part of less industrialized nations with little surplus capital , such as italy , or the great powers of the next century—the united states and russia—which were in fact net borrowers of foreign capital . also , military and bureaucratic costs of occupation frequently exceeded financial returns . in africa ( exclusive of what would become the union of south africa in 1909 ) the amount of capital investment by europeans was relatively small before and after the 1880 's , and the companies involved in tropical african commerce exerted limited political influence . the '' world-systems theory '' approach of immanuel wallerstein sees imperialism as part of a general , gradual extension of capital investment from the '' core '' of the industrial countries to a less developed '' periphery . '' protectionism and formal empire were the major tools of '' semi-peripheral , '' newly industrialized states , such as germany , seeking to usurp britain 's position at the '' core '' of the global capitalist system . echoing wallerstein 's global perspective to an extent , imperial historian bernard porter views britain 's adoption of formal imperialism as a symptom and an effect of her relative decline in the world , and not of strength : '' stuck with outmoded physical plants and outmoded forms of business organization , britain now felt the less favorable effects of being the first to modernize . '' . timeline . 1815 : congress of vienna . 1816 : portuguese conquest of the banda oriental . creation american colonization society in liberia ( 1816-1847 ) . 1818 : argentina occupied manila and california for a short time 1820 : argentina protectorate over peru . russia protectorate over principality of serbia . 1822 : argentina annexed falkland islands . 1830 : france annexed algeria 1832 : ecuador annexed the galápagos islands . 1833 : britain annexed falkland islands . 1838 : britain annexed pitcairn islands . 1839 : britain conquered aden from sultanate of lahej . argentina annexed salta and jujuy 1841 : britain established colony of new zealand . 1842 : britain received hong kong island from qing dynasty . 1843 : argentina protectorate over gobierno del cerrito 1848 : usa annexed texas and california . 1849 : britain annexed sikh empire in punjab . 1853 : france annexed new caledonia . 1855 : division of kuril islands and sakhalin between russia and japan . 1857 : britain annexed cocos ( keeling ) islands and perim , french conquest of algeria completed . 1861 : mexico annexed revillagigedo islands in oceania . 1862 : creation of french cochinchina , british honduras declared a colony . 1867 : usa annexed midway atoll . 1867 : alaska purchase . 1869 : japan annexed hokkaido . 1870 : russia annexed novaya zemlya . argentina annexed formosa . brazil annexed mato grosso do sul . 1874 : britain established colony of fiji . 1875 : japan annexed bonin islands . 1876 : british protectorate over socotra . 1877 : britain annexed laccadive islands . 1879 : japan annexed ryukyu islands . 1881 : britain annexed rotuma . 1881 : france annexed tunisia . 1882 : britain conquered egypt . 1884 : argentina completed conquest of the desert in patagonia . 1885 : britain completed conquest of burma/myanmar , belgian king established congo free state , germany established protectorate over marshall islands . 1887 : british protectorate over maldives , french somaliland created . 1888 : britain annexed christmas island , british somaliland created , germany annexed nauru . 1889 : creation of french polynesia . 1890 : british protectorate over zanzibar , italian eritrea created . 1892 : britain annexed banaba island and gilbert islands . 1895 : qing dynasty ceded taiwan and penghu to japan . 1897 : france annexed madagascar . 1898 : usa annexed hawaii . 1898 : usa annexed puerto rico , cuba , guam and the philippine islands . 1899 : division of samoan islands into german samoa and american samoa . 1900 : britain established protectorate over tonga . 1903 : brazil annexed the acre region 1906-1913 : mexico annexed the clipperton island . 1906 : britain and france established new hebrides condominium . 1908 : france annexed comoro islands . 1910 : japan annexed korean empire . 1914 : britain annexed cyprus . 1917 : argentina completed conquest of the chaco 1926 : soviet union annexed franz josef land and wrangel island . 1931 : france annexed the clipperton island 1933 : soviet union annexed severnaya zemlya . 1935–1937 : abyssinia crisis and second italo-ethiopian war : italy conquered and annexed ethiopia as part of italian east africa