Riesling

history . riesling has a long history , and there are several written references to the variety dating from the 15th century , although with varying orthography . freddy price , riesling renaissance mitchell beazley 2004 , pg . 16-18 . the earliest of these references ( '' rüssling '' ) is from 1402 in the city of worms , germany . wine atlas of germany by dieter braatz et al . , p.178 . another early mention dates from march 13 , 1435 , when the storage inventory of count john iv of katzenelnbogen in rüsselsheim ( a small principality on the rhine , close to today 's rheingau ) lists '' 22 ß umb seczreben rießlingen in die wingarten '' ( '' 22 shillings for riesling vine cuttings for the vineyard '' ) . the history of the county of katzenelnbogen and the first riesling of the world . winzerfreunde rüsselsheim - facsimile and translation of the 1435 document . the spelling rießlingen is repeated in many other documents of the time . the modern spelling riesling was first documented in 1552 when it was mentioned in hieronymus bock latin herbal . oz clarke , the encyclopedia of grapes websters international publishers 2001 , pg . 192 . a map of kintzheim in alsace from 1348 contains the text zu dem russelinge , but it is not certain that this reference is to the grape variety . however , in 1477 , riesling was documented in alsace under the spelling rissling . freddy price , riesling renaissance mitchell beazley 2004 , pg . 90-92 . in wachau in austria , there is a small stream and a small vineyard both called ritzling , which are claimed locally to have given riesling its name . however , there seems to be no documentary evidence to back this up , so this claim is not widely believed to be correct . freddy price , riesling renaissance mitchell beazley 2004 , pg . 118 . . parentage . earlier , riesling was sometimes claimed to have originated from wild vines of the rhine region , without much support to back up that claim . more recently , dna fingerprinting by ferdinand regner indicated that one parent of riesling is gouais blanc , known to the germans as weißer heunisch , a variety that , while rare today , was widely grown by the french and german peasantry of the middle ages . the other parent is a cross between a wild vine and traminer . it is presumed that the riesling was born somewhere in the valley of the rhine , since both heunisch and traminer have a long documented history in germany , but with parents from either side of the adriatic the cross could have happened anywhere on the way . it has also been suggested , but not proved , that the red riesling of riesling is the forerunner of the common , '' white '' riesling . wein-plus glossar : roter riesling , accessed on january 23 , 2013 . the genetic differences between white and red riesling are minuscule , as is also the case between pinot noir and pinot gris . longevity . riesling wines are often consumed when young , when they make a fruity and aromatic wine which may have aromas of green or other apples , grapefruit , peach , gooseberry , honey , rose blossom or cut green grass , and usually a crisp taste due to the high acidity . owen bird , rheingold - the german wine renaissance , arima publishing 2005 , pp . 91 however , riesling 's naturally high acidity and range of flavours make it suitable for extended aging . international wine expert michael broadbent rates aged german rieslings , some hundreds of years old , highly . michael broadbent , vintage wines little , brown 2002 pg 343 sweet riesling wines , such as german trockenbeerenauslese are especially suited for cellaring since the high sugar content provides for additional preservation . however , high quality dry or off-dry riesling wine is also known to have not just survived but also been enjoyable at an age exceeding 100 years . robinson . com : exploding myths about german wine . the townhall of bremen , germany , stores various german wines , including riesling based wines , in barrel back to the 1653 vintage . michael broadbent , vintage wines little , brown 2002 pg 344 . more common aging periods for riesling wines would be 5–15 years for dry , 10–20 years for semi-sweet and 10–30+ for sweet versions . riesling report issue 13 march/april 2002 , pp . 8-13 : the rewards of cellaring riesling . . petroleum notes in aged riesling wines . on release , certain riesling wines reveal a striking petrol note owen bird , rheingold - the german wine renaissance , arima publishing 2005 , pp . 90-97 . ( goût de pétrole in french ) which is sometimes described with associations to kerosene , lubricant or rubber . while an integral part of the aroma profile of mature riesling and sought after by many experienced drinkers , it may be off-putting to those unaccustomed to it , and those who primarily seek young and fruity aromas in their wine . the negative attitude to petrol aromas in young riesling , and the preference for fruitier young wines of this variety , seem more common in germany than in alsace or on the export market , and some german producers , especially the volume-oriented ones , have even gone so far as to consider the petrol notes a defect which they try to avoid , even at the cost of producing wines that are less suited to extended cellar aging . in that vein , the german wine institute has gone so far as to omit the mentioning of '' petrol '' as a possible aroma on their german-language wine aroma wheel , which is supposed to be specially adapted to german wines , and despite the fact that professor ann c . noble had included petrol in her original version of the wheel . the petrol note is considered to be caused by the compound 1,1,6-trimethyl-1,2-dihydronaphthalene ( tdn ) , p . winterhalter , '' 1,1,6-trimethyl-1,2-dihydronaphthalene ( tdn ) formation in wine . 1 . studies on the hydrolysis of 2,6,10,10-tetramethyl-1-oxaspiro4.5dec-6-ene-2,8-diol rationalizing the origin of tdn and related c13 norisoprenoids in riesling wine '' , journal of agricultural and food chemistry , 1991 , vol . 39 ( 10 ) , pages 1825-1829 , . which during the aging process is created from carotenoid precursors by acid hydrolysis . the initial concentration of precursors in the wine determines the wine 's potential to develop tdn and petrol notes over time . from what is known of the production of carotenoids in grapes , factors that are likely to increase the tdn potential are : ripe grapes , i.e . , low yields and late harvest high sun exposure water stress , which is most likely in regions which do not practice irrigation , and there primarily in certain dry vineyard sites in hot and dry years high acid content these factors are usually also considered to contribute to high quality riesling wines , so the petrol note is in fact more likely to develop in top wines than in simpler wines made from high-yielding vineyards , especially those from the new world , where irrigation is common . noble rot . the most expensive wines made from riesling are late harvest dessert wines , produced by letting the grapes hang on the vines well past normal picking time . through evaporation caused by the fungus botrytis cinerea ( '' noble rot '' ) or by freezing , as in the case of ice wine ( in german , eiswein ) , water is removed and the resulting wine is felt to offer richer layers on the palate . these concentrated wines have more sugar ( in extreme cases hundreds of grams per litre ) , more acid ( to give balance to the sugar ) , more flavour , and more complexity . these elements combine to make wines which are amongst the most long lived of all white wines . the beneficial use of '' noble rot '' in riesling grapes was discovered in the late 18th century at schloss johannisberg . permission from the abbey of fulda ( which owned the vineyard ) to start picking riesling grapes arrived too late and the grapes had begun to rot ; yet it turned out that the wine made from them was still of excellent quality . history of schloss johannisberg . . production regions . riesling is considered one of the grape varieties that best expresses the terroir of the place where it is grown . oz clarke , the encyclopedia of grapes websters international publishers 2001 , pg . 194 . it is particularly well suited for slate and sandy clay soil . jancis robinson , vines , grapes and wines mitchell beazley 2002 pg 105 . . germany . today riesling is germany ’ s leading grape variety , known for its characteristic “ transparency ” in flavour and presentation of terroir , andrew ellson , roll out the riesling , german wines are making a comeback , in : the times dated 9 december 2019 . wine spectator magazine , wine in northern europe september 30th , 2006 pg . 124 . and its balance between fruit and mineral flavours . in germany , riesling normally ripens between late september and late november , and late harvest riesling can be picked as late as january . two common characteristics of german riesling are that they are rarely blended with other varieties and usually never exposed to oak flavour ( despite some vintners fermenting in '' traditionel '' old oak barrels already leached ) . to this last item there is an exception with some vinters in the wine regions of palatinate ( pfalz ) and baden using new oak aging . the warmer temperatures in those regions produce heavier wines with a higher alcohol content that can better contend with the new oak . oz clarke , the encyclopedia of grapes websters international publishers 2001 , pg . 195 . while clearer in individual flavours when it is young , a german riesling will harmonize more as it ages , particularly around ten years of age . in germany , sugar levels at time of harvest are an important consideration in the wine 's production with prädikat levels measuring the sweetness of the wine . equally important to winegrowers is the balance of acidity between the green tasting malic acid and the more citrus tasting tartaric acid . in cool years , some growers will wait until november to harvest in expectation of having a higher level of ripeness and subsequent tartaric acid . oz clarke , the encyclopedia of grapes websters international publishers 2001 , pg . 197 . before technology in wineries could stabilize temperatures , the low temperatures in winter of the northern german regions would halt fermentation and leave the resulting wines with natural sugars and a low alcohol content . according to local tradition , in the mosel region the wine would then be bottled in tall , tapered , and green hock bottles . similar bottles , although brown , are used for riesling produced in the rhine region . stuart walton , understanding , choosing and enjoying wine hermes house 2006 , pg . 70 . riesling is also the preferred grape in production of deutscher sekt , german sparkling wine . riesling wines from germany cover a vast array of tastes from sweet to off-dry halbtrocken to dry trocken . late harvest rieslings can ripen to become very sweet dessert wines of the beerenauslese ( ba ) and trockenbeerenauslese ( tba ) class . france . riesling is on record as being planted in the alsace region by 1477 when its quality was praised by the duke of lorraine . oz clarke , the encyclopedia of grapes websters international publishers 2001 , pg . 193 . today over a fifth of alsace 's vineyards are covered with riesling vines , mostly in the haut-rhin district , with the varietal being very different from neighboring german riesling . stuart walton , understanding , choosing and enjoying wine hermes house 2006 , pg . 74 . according to french regulations as of 2011 , this variety may only be planted in moselle , bas-rhin and haut-rhin . this is partly from difference in the soil with the clay alsatian soil being more dominately calcareous than the slate composition of rheingau . the other differences come in wine making styles , with the alsatian preferring more french-oriented methods that produce wines of higher alcohol content ( normally around 12 % ) and more roundness due to longer time spent in neutral oak barrels or steel tanks . in contrast to german wine laws , alsatian rieslings can be chaptalized , a process in which the alcoholic content is increased through the addition of sugar to the must . oz clarke , the encyclopedia of grapes websters international publishers 2001 , pg . 198 . in contrast to other alsatian wines , rieslings d'alsace are usually not meant to be drunk young , but many are still best in the first years . rieslings d'alsace tend to be mostly very dry with a cleansing acidity . they are thick-bodied wines that coat the palate . these wines age exceptionally well with a quality vintage aging up to 20 years . this is beneficial since the flavours in an alsace wine will often open up after three years , developing softer and fruitier flavours . riesling is very suitable for the late harvest vendange tardive and the botrytized sélection de grains nobles , with good acidity keeping up the sweetness of the wine . in addition to muscat , gewürztraminer and pinot gris , riesling is one of the acceptable varieties whose planting is allowed in alsace grand cru sites . stuart walton , understanding , choosing and enjoying wine hermes house 2006 , pg . 121 . . australia and new zealand . in 1838 william macarthur planted riesling vines near penrith in new south wales . queensland government wine development-riesling . riesling was the most planted white grape in australia until the early 1990s when chardonnay greatly increased in popularity . riesling still flourishes in the great southern ( in particular mt barker , frankland river and porongorup ) , clare valley , in particular the areas of watervale and around the polish hill river , and the cooler eden valley and high eden regions . the warmer australian climate produces thicker skinned grapes , sometimes seven times the thickness of german grown grape . the grapes ripening in free drain soil composed of red soil over limestone and shale , producing a lean wine that as it matures produces toasty , honeycomb and lime aromas and flavors . it is common for australian rieslings to be fermented at low temperatures in stainless steel tanks with no oxidation of the wine and followed by earlier bottling . oz clarke , the encyclopedia of grapes websters international publishers 2001 , pg . 199 . australian rieslings are noted for their oily texture and citrus fruit flavors in their youth and a smooth balance of freshness and acid as they age . the botrytized rieslings have immense levels of flavor concentrations that have been favorably compared to lemon marmalade . stuart walton , understanding , choosing and enjoying wine hermes house 2006 , pg . 75 . riesling was first planted in new zealand in the 1970s and has flourished in the relatively cool climate of the marlborough area and for late harvests in the nelson region . in comparison to australian riesling , new zealand produces lighter and more delicate wines that range from sweet to dry . stuart walton , understanding , choosing and enjoying wine hermes house 2006 , pg . 71 . home of cool climate wines , central otago , has recently emerged as another area producing terroir driven wines . austria . riesling is the second leading white grape varietal after the indigenous grüner veltliner . karen macneil , the wine bible workman publishing 2001 page 569 . austrian riesling is generally thick bodied , coating the palate and producing a strong clarity of flavour coupled with a mouthwatering aroma . a particular austrian riesling trademark is a long finish that includes hints of white pepper . it flourishes in the cool climate and free-draining granite and mica soil of the wachau region where austrian wine laws allow for irrigation . with levels normally around 13 % it has a relatively high alcohol content for riesling and is generally at its peak after 5 years . austrian riesling is not known for its sweetness and is mostly dry with very few grapes affected by botrytis . united states . in the late nineteenth century german-american brought with them riesling vines , named johannisberg riesling to qualify them as “ legitimate ” german riesling . new york , particularly in the finger lakes region , was one of the earliest u.s . producers of riesling . plantings started to appear in california by 1857 and followed in washington wine in 1871 . new york riesling generally has a characteristic effervescent light body with a similarly light , mellow flavor . the wine can be dynamic though rarely robust , and ranges from dry to sweet . new york is also a notable producer of riesling-based ice wine , although a large majority of new york ice wine is made from vidal blanc and vignoles . in california , riesling lags far behind chardonnay in popularity and is not as commonly planted . a notable exception is the growing development of high quality late harvest dessert wines . so far , the late harvest wines most successfully produced are in the anderson and alexander valleys where the weather is more likely to encourage the needed botrytis to develop . the riesling that does come out of california tends to be softer , fuller , and having more diverse flavours than a '' typical '' german riesling . in the pacific northwest there is a stark contrast in riesling production . the grape is currently on the rise in washington state but on the decline in neighboring oregon . riesling from this area ranges from dry to sweet , and has a crisp lightness that bodes well for easy drinking . often there will be an easily detectable peach and mineral complex . some washington state winemakers , such as chateau ste . michelle , are adapting german-style riesling production methods , and even partnering with well-known german vintners like dr . ernest loosen to create specialty wines such as the eroica riesling . with annual productions of over 2,000,000 cases a year , chateau ste . michelle is the worldwide leader in the production of riesling wines by volume . in 2007 pacific rim winemakers , another pacific northwest winery and owned by randall grahm of bonny doon , has built the first wine facility in red mountain ava dedicated completely to riesling production . a . king '' bonny doon has crush on washington riesling '' pg 26 wine press northwest spring 2007 . in michigan , whose old mission peninsula and leelanau peninsula avas ( near traverse city ) are known for their ice wine , riesling is a fairly common variety , in part on account of its suitability for that purpose . fruit production 2005 , u.s . department of agriculture , national agricultural statistics service , michigan field office , january 25 , 2006 , , accessed july 20 , 2006 riesling is grown in other regions as well , including colder parts of relatively warm states such as oklahoma ( where it has even been made into an eiswein and texas . riesling is also grown throughout all the regions in ohio and is produced and sold at award-winning wineries across the state . canada . in ontario , riesling is commonly used for icewine , where the wine is noted for its breadth and complexity . niagara is a major producer of ice wine in general , putting it neck-and-neck with germany . late harvest wines and some sparkling wines are produced with riesling in niagara but it is table wines from dry to off-dry that hold the largest share of production . the climate of the region is typically quite warm in the summertime which adds a layer of richness in the wines . the founder of st . urbanshoff in the mosel , herman weiss , was an early pioneer in niagara 's modern viticulture , selling his strain of mosel clone riesling to many producers in west niagara ( these vines are well over 20 years old now ) . this clone and niagara 's summer heat make for uniquely bright wines and often show up in interesting dry styled versions . many producers and wine critics will argue that niagara 's best offerings come from the niagara escarpment region which encompasses the short hills bench , 20 mile bench and beamsville bench . in british columbia , riesling is commonly grown for use in icewine , table wine , and sekt style sparkling wines , a notable example of which is cipes brut . in nova scotia , particularly in the annapolis valley region , riesling is showing significant promise , being shaped by the warm summer days with cool nights and the extension of the growing season that is being observed . the maritime climate combined with glacial soils contribute to the interesting expressions that are showing . other regions . riesling is also widely grown in hungary , italy , particularly friuli-venezia giulia , croatia , south africa , chile and central europe , particularly romania and moldova , serbia , kazakhstan and uzbekistan . production . in wine making , the delicate nature of the riesling grape requires special handling during harvesting to avoid crushing or bruising the skin . without this care , the broken skins could leak tannin into the juice , giving a markedly coarse taste and throwing off balance the riesling 's range of flavors and aromas . a wine that is best at its '' freshest '' states , the grapes and juice may be chilled often throughout the vinification process . once , right after picking to preserve the grapes ' more delicate flavours . second , after it has been processed through a wine press and right before fermentation . during fermentation , the wine is cooled in temperature controlled stainless steel fermentation tanks kept between . this differs from red wines that normally ferment at unlike chardonnay , most riesling do not undergo malolactic fermentation . this helps preserve the tart , acidic characteristic of the wine that gives riesling its '' thirst-quenching '' quality . ( producers of sauvignon blanc and pinot grigio often avoid malolactic fermentation for the same reason . ) riesling is often put through a process of cold stabilization , where the wine is stored just above its freezing point . the wine is kept at this temperature until much of the tartaric acid has crystallized and precipitated out of the wine . this helps prevent crystallization of the acid ( often called '' wine diamonds '' ) in the bottle . dr . yair margalit , winery technology & operations a handbook for small wineries the wine appreciation guild 1996 , pg . 89 . after this , the wine is normally filtered again to remove any remaining yeast or impurities . in viticulture , the two main components in growing riesling grapes are to keep it '' long & low '' meaning that the ideal situation for riesling is a climate that allows for a long , slow ripening and proper pruning to keep the yield low and the flavor concentrated . . with food . riesling is a versatile wine for pairing with food , because of its balance of sugar and acidity . it can be paired with white fish or pork , and is one of the few wines that can stand up to the stronger flavours and spices of thai and chinese cuisine . karen macneil , the wine bible workman publishing 2001 pg . 554 . a riesling 's typical aromas are of flowers , tropical fruits , and mineral stone ( such as slate or quartz ) , although , with time , the wine acquires a petrol note as mentioned above . riesling is almost never fermented or aged in new oak ( although large old oak barrels are often used to store and stabilize riesling-based wines in germany and alsace ) . '' riesling and germany 2005 '' , andrew corrigan , ewineconsult.com . this means that riesling tends to be lighter weight and therefore suitable to a wider range of foods . the sharp acidity/sweetness in rieslings can serve as a good balance to foods that have a high salt content . in germany , cabbage is sometimes cooked with riesling to reduce the vegetable 's smell . as with other white wines , dry riesling is generally served at a cool . sweeter rieslings are often served warmer . clones . there exists a large number of commercial clones of riesling , with slightly different properties . in germany , approximately 60 clones are allowed , and the most famous of these have been propagated from vines in the vineyards of schloss johannisberg . most other countries have sourced their riesling clones directly from germany , but they are sometimes propagated under different designations . red riesling . a very rare version of riesling which has recently received more attention is red riesling ( roter riesling ) . as the name suggests , this is a red-skinned clone of riesling ( a skin color commonly found for e.g . gewürztraminer ) , but not a dark-skinned clone , i.e . , it is still a white wine grape . it is considered a mutation of white riesling , but some experts have suggested the opposite relationship , i.e . , that red riesling could be the forerunner of white riesling . small amounts of red riesling are grown in germany and austria . in 2006 , the rheingau winery fritz allendorf planted what has been claimed to be the first commercial amounts of red riesling . wein-plus magazine september 6 , 2006 : allendorf sees red . to confuse matters , '' red riesling '' has also been used as a synonym for red-skinned traminer grapes ( such as the savagnin rose of klevener de heiligenstein ) and the obscure variety hanns , which is a seed plant of roter veltliner . roter riesling has nothing to do with pinot meunier . crosses . in the late 19th century german horticulturalists devoted many efforts to develop new riesling hybrids that would create a more flexible , less temperamental grape that could still retain some of the elegant characteristics of riesling . the most notable is the müller-thurgau developed in the geisenheim grape breeding institute in 1882 , which is a cross of riesling and madeleine royale ( although long believed to be riesling x silvaner ) . other riesling/silvaner crosses include the palatinate regional favorite scheurebe and rieslaner . kerner , a cross between riesling and the red wine grape trollinger is a high quality cross that has recently eclipsed riesling in plantings . stuart walton , understanding , choosing and enjoying wine hermes house 2006 , pg . 181 . the vivc lists the following crosses with riesling as the first parent : alb de yaloven , arnsburger , augustriesling , beutelriesling , bouquetriesling , dalkauer , edelmuskat , ehrenfelser , feinriesling , floricica , frühriesling , geisenheim 195 , geisenheim 643-10 , geisenheim 643-20 , geisenheim 649 , johanniter , kocsis zsuzsa , manzoni bianco , marienriesling , müller thurgau , multaner , muscat de la republique , naumburg 231-52 , oraniensteiner , osiris , osteiner , quanyu b , rabaner , rieslina , riesling magaracha , romeo , weinsberg s186 , weinsberg s195 and as the second parent : aris , arnsburger , aurelius , dalmasso 12-40 , dona emilia , dr . deckerrebe , elbriesling , freiburg 3-29 , geilweilerhof f.s . 4-208-13 , geilweilerhof koe-49-81 , geilweilerhof koe-68-107 , geilweilerhof koe-70-4 , geilweilerhof koe-70-96 , geilweilerhof sbl . 2-19-43 , geisenheim 154 , geisenheim 156 , kamchia , kerner , lafayette , misket varnenski , negritienok , president carnot , rabaner , rieslaner , riesling bulgarski , ruling , thurling , weinsberg s509 , weinsberg s516 , weinsberg s523 , weinsberg s2630 . naming . many grapes that incorporate the name riesling are not true riesling . for example : welschriesling is an unrelated variety , which is common in austria , croatia , czech republic , hungary and romania which may also be labelled as riesling italico , welsch rizling , olasz rizling or laski rizling . schwarzriesling ( black riesling ) is the german name for pinot meunier , a grape used in champagne , but which is also grown in southern germany . cape riesling is the south african name for the french grape crouchen . gray riesling is actually trousseau gris , a white mutant of the bastardo port wine grape . white riesling is the 'real ' riesling , which is also called johannisberg riesling ( named after the famed schloss johannisberg ) and rhine riesling ( riesling renano in italy , occasionally rheinriesling in austria ) . . see also . german wine labels international variety . notes and references . external links . a history of german riesling a case study of chateau ste . michelle in marketing riesling ( ppt download ) the riesling report the myth of sweet riesling riesling aromas