Rōnin

etymology . the word rōnin literally means '' wave man '' . it is an idiomatic expression for '' vagrant '' or '' wandering man '' , someone who finds the way without belonging to one place . the term originated in the nara and heian periods , when it referred to a serf who had fled or deserted his master 's land . in medieval times , the ronin were depicted as the shadows of samurai , master-less and less honorable . it then came to be used for a samurai who had no master ( hence the term '' wave man '' illustrating one who is socially adrift ) . . status . according to the bushido ( the '' code of the warrior '' ) , a samurai was supposed to commit seppuku ( also harakiri , '' belly cutting '' , a form of ritual suicide ) upon the loss of his master . one who chose not to honor the code was '' on his own '' and was meant to suffer great shame . the undesirability of rōnin status was mainly a discrimination imposed by other samurai and by daimyō , the feudal lords . like other samurai , rōnin wore daishō . rōnin used a variety of other weapons as well . some rōnin—usually those who lacked money—would carry a bō ( staff around or jō ( smaller staff or walking stick around or a yumi ( bow ) . most weapons would reflect the ryū ( martial arts school ) from which they came if they were students . during the edo period , with the shogun 's rigid class system and laws , the number of rōnin greatly increased . confiscation of fiefs during the rule of the third tokugawa shōgun iemitsu resulted in an especially large increase of rōnin . during previous ages , samurai were able to move between masters and even between occupations . they could also marry between classes . however , during the edo period , samurai were restricted , and were—above all—forbidden to become employed by another master without their previous master 's permission . because the former samurai could not legally take up a new trade , or because of pride were loath to do so , many rōnin looked for other ways to make a living with their swords . those rōnin who desired steady , legal employment became mercenary that guarded trade caravans , or bodyguards for wealthy merchants . many other rōnin became criminals , operating as bandits and highwaymen , or joining organized crime in towns and cities . rōnin were known to operate or serve as hired muscle for gangs that ran gambling rings , brothels , protection rackets , and similar activities . many were petty thieves and muggers . the criminal segment gave the rōnin of the edo period a persistent reputation of disgrace , with an image of being thugs , bullies , cutthroats , and wandering vagrants . history . in the kamakura and muromachi periods , when warriors held lands that they occupied , a rōnin was a warrior who had lost his lands . during these periods , as small-scale wars frequently occurred throughout japan , the daimyō needed to augment their armies , so rōnin had opportunities to serve new masters . also , some rōnin joined in bands , engaging in robbery and uprisings . especially in the sengoku period , daimyō needed additional fighting men , and even if a master had perished , his rōnin were able to serve new lords . in contrast to the later edo period , the bond between the lord and the samurai was loose , and some samurai who were dissatisfied with their treatment left their masters and sought new lords . many warriors served a succession of masters , and some even became daimyō . as an example , tōdō takatora served ten lords . additionally , the division of the population into classes had not yet taken place , so it was possible to change one 's occupation from warrior to merchant or farmer , or the reverse . saitō dōsan was one merchant who rose through the warrior ranks to become a daimyō . as toyotomi hideyoshi unified progressively larger parts of the country , daimyō found it unnecessary to recruit new soldiers . the battle of sekigahara in 1600 resulted in the confiscation or reduction of the fiefs of large numbers of daimyō on the losing side ; consequently , many samurai became rōnin . as many as a hundred thousand rōnin joined forces with toyotomi hideyori and fought at the siege of osaka . in the ensuing years of peace , there was less need to maintain expensive standing armies , and many surviving rōnin turned to farming or became townspeople . a few , such as yamada nagamasa , sought adventure overseas as mercenaries . still , the majority lived in poverty as rōnin . under the third tokugawa shōgun iemitsu , their number approached half a million . initially , the shogunate viewed them as dangerous and banished them from the cities or restricted the quarters where they could live . they also prohibited serving new masters . as rōnin found themselves with fewer options , they joined in the keian uprising in 1651 . this forced the shogunate to rethink its policy . it relaxed restrictions on daimyō inheritance , resulting in fewer confiscations of fiefs , and it permitted rōnin to join new masters . not having the status or power of employed samurai , rōnin were often disreputable and festive , and the group was a target of humiliation or satire . it was undesirable to be a rōnin , as it meant being without a stipend or land . as an indication of the humiliation felt by samurai who became rōnin , lord redesdale recorded that a rōnin killed himself at the graves of the forty-seven rōnin . he left a note saying that he had tried to enter the service of the daimyō of chōshū domain but was refused . wanting to serve no other master , and hating being a rōnin , he killed himself . on the other hand , the famous 18th-century writer kyokutei bakin renounced his allegiance to matsudaira nobunari , in whose service bakin 's samurai father had spent his life . bakin voluntarily became a rōnin , and eventually spent his time writing books ( many of them about samurai ) and engaging in festivities . notable rōnin . forty-seven ronin forbes , andrew ; henley , david ( 2012 ) . forty-seven ronin : tsukioka yoshitoshi edition'david ( 2012 ) . forty-seven ronin : utagawa kuniyoshi edition . chiang mai : cognoscenti books . asin : b00adqm8ii takizawa bakin miyamoto musashi sakamoto ryōma yamada nagamasa . portrayals in media . numerous modern works of japanese fiction set in the edo period cast characters who are rōnin . film . rōnin are often depicted in the jidaigeki of akira kurosawa , in particular yojimbo , sanjuro and seven samurai . the 1954 film seven samurai follows the story of a village of farmers that hire seven rōnin to combat bandits who will return after the harvest to steal their crops . the 1961 film yojimbo tells the story of a rōnin who arrives in a small town where competing crime lords vie for supremacy . the two bosses each try to hire the newcomer as a bodyguard . the film inspired the spaghetti western films a fistful of dollars and django . the 1962 film sanjuro is a sequel to kurosawa 's 1961 yojimbo . the 1962 film harakiri is set in edo period japan ( early 17th century ) and concerns two ronin who present themselves at the palace of the ii clan and request permission to commit ritual suicide . the 1998 film ronin portrays former special forces and intelligence operatives who find themselves unemployed at the end of the cold war . devoid of purpose , they become high-paid mercenaries . there is also a direct comparison of the characters to the forty-seven rōnin . the film 47 ronin is a 2013 japanese-american fantasy action film depicting a fictional account of the forty-seven rōnin . television . in the manga and anime rurouni kenshin , the hitokiri himura kenshin becomes a rōnin after the end of the edo period , wandering for ten years in order to mend his sins and to complete the restoration . samurai jack , the main protagonist of samurai jack , is technically a rōnin because he serves no master and is mostly seen wandering the land , searching for a resolution to his quest to defeat his nemesis , the demon wizard aku , after he casts a time travel spell that sends jack into a future where aku reigns supreme . in the 2004 anime series samurai champloo , one of the main protagonists is the rōnin jin . along with the vagrant swordsman mugen , he accompanies a young girl named fuu on a quest to find the '' samurai who smells of sunflowers '' . video games . the 2020 video game ghost of tsushima features many rōnin as part of the story , including ryuzo , the childhood friend of the protagonist jin sakai . see also . gonin gumi – groups of households which united for collective protection against rōnin knight-errant , a similar figure in western literature youxia . references .