Corpus Christi, Texas

state and federal representation . the texas courts of appeals is located in the nueces county courthouse in corpus christi . '' contact information . '' thirteenth eleventh court of appeals . retrieved on march 10 , 2010 . the texas department of criminal justice operates the corpus christi parole office in corpus christi . '' parole division region iv . '' texas department of criminal justice . retrieved on may 21 , 2010 . the united states postal service operates the corpus christi post office , the city 's main post office , '' post office location – corpus christi . '' united states postal service . retrieved on may 21 , 2010 . and several station post offices . education . colleges and universities . corpus christi is home to several institutions of higher learning : texas a & m university-corpus christi , del mar college , saint leo university-corpus christi and numerous vocational schools , including southern careers institute , south texas vo-tech , career centers of texas-corpus christi , and vogue cosmetology school . the city is also home to stark college and seminary ( formerly known as the south texas school of christian studies ) located on ward island alongside texas a & m-corpus christi . texas a & m university-corpus christi is a component of the texas a & m university system . it was formerly known as corpus christi state university , texas a & i university at corpus christi , and the university of corpus christi . saint leo university-corpus christi education center is located at corpus christi 's naval air station . del mar college is a local community college begun in the 1940s at a location behind wynn seale jr . high school . the main campus began with the administration building , which was constructed after world war ii on del mar . the college grew to encompass a good portion of a residential addition called southmoreland built from the bohemian farmlands in the late 1930s . del mar now includes a west campus located in the area of corpus christi that once was cliff maus airport . southern careers institute offers career training at two corpus christi locations , primarily in the medical , business , and cosmetology fields . in 2015 , wallethub ranked corpus christi near the bottom , 138 out of 150 cities in america , for its low educational level and low-income opportunities . to improve literacy levels in the city , a multiyear effort has been made to promote reading through annual literacy festivals . started by first lady laura bush and the texas book festival , a series of book festivals is held each spring . and revolves around the concept that '' literacy is the foundation to a child 's academic success . '' -- > . schools . six school districts provide primary and secondary education for area residents : corpus christi independent school district , calallen isd , flour bluff isd , tuloso-midway isd , west oso isd , and london isd . the roman catholic diocese of corpus christi provides the primary and secondary education for catholic schools . several open enrollment charter schools are in corpus christi . these public schools are : accelerated learning center , cesar e chavez academy , corpus christi college preparatory hs , corpus christi montessori school , dr ml garza-gonzalez charter school , gcclr institute of technology , premier hs of corpus christi , richard milburn academy , school of science and technology , seashore learning center , and seashore middle academy . corpus christi independent school district . high schools mary carroll high school richard king high school roy miller high school foy h . moody high school health science academy w . b . ray high school collegiate high school solomon coles high school branch academy for career and technical education veterans memorial high school middle schools marvin p . baker middle school tom browne middle school cullen place middle school claude cunningham middle school robert driscoll middle school elliott grant middle school carl o . hamlin middle school r . haas middle school harold kaffie middle school martin middle school south park middle school wynn seale academy of fine arts magnet middle school elementary schools allen elementary school barnes elementary school berlanga elementary school calk elementary school club estates elementary school crockett elementary school dawson elementary school early childhood development center evans elementary school fannin elementary school galvan elementary school garcia elementary school gibson elementary school hicks elementary school houston elementary school jones elementary school kolda elementary school kostoryz elementary school los encinos ses elementary school meadowbrook elementary school menger elementary school metropolitan elementary school of design mireles elementary school montclair elementary school moore elementary school oak park elementary school sanders elementary school schanen estates elementary school shaw elementary school smith elementary school travis elementary school webb elementary school wilson elementary school windsor park elementary school woodlawn elementary school yeager elementary school zavala elementary school alternative student learning and guidance center mary grett school . flour bluff independent school district . flour bluff high school grades 9–12 flour bluff jr . high school grades 7–8 flour bluff intermediate school grades 5–6 flour bluff elementary school grades 3–4 flour bluff primary school grades 1–2 early childhood center prekindergarten and kindergarten head start ages 1–4 . west oso independent school district . west oso high school grades 9–12 west oso junior high school grades 6–8 west oso elementary grades 2–5 west oso john f . kennedy elementary prekindergarten to grade 1 . tuloso-midway independent school district . tuloso-midway high school tuloso-midway middle school tuloso-midway intermediate school tuloso-midway primary school tuloso-midway academic career center . calallen independent school district . calallen high school calallen middle school magee intermediate school and grades 4–5 east primary school grades pre-kinder-3 wood river primary school grades pre-kinder-3 . london independent school district . london high school london middle school london elementary school . private/charter/other . john paul ii high school ( 8-12 ) st . james episcopal ( primary , k-8 ) corpus christi montessori school ( grades 1–8 ) incarnate word academy ( k-12 ) annapolis christian academy ( k-12 ) yorktown christian academy ( k-12 ) . libraries . libraries in the city include : corpus christi public libraries dr . clotilde p . garcia , 5930 brockhampton ben f . mcdonald , 4044 greenwood janet f . harte , 2629 waldron la retama , 805 comanche owen r.hopkins , 3202 mckinzie anita & w.t . neyland , 1230 carmel pkwy texshare card holders also have limited borrowing privileges at these area libraries : texshare card program – patron information page . accessed 7 april 2009 . nueces county public library in robstown , texas mary and jeff bell library at texas a & m university-corpus christi del mar college libraries . transportation . corpus christi is served by corpus christi international airport and interstate 37 . interstate 69e/u.s . highway 77 connects the city to brownsville and victoria . texas state highway 44 is a main thoroughfare that connects corpus christi to laredo and the western part of south texas by way of interstate 69w/u.s . highway 59 , interstate 35 , and u.s . highway 83 . the inner-city public transportation is provided by corpus christi regional transportation authority with its 28 bus routes . corpus christi once had a streetcar system functioning from 1910 to 1931 and a railway station ( passenger service ended in 1965 ) . despite the convenience of a large harbor , the city does not have a passenger port . the city of corpus christi has a lower than average percentage of households without a car . in 2015 , 8.5 % of corpus christi households lacked a car , and decreased slightly to 7.9 % in 2016 . the national average was 8.7 % in 2016 . corpus christi averaged 1.77 cars per household in 2016 , compared to a national average of 1.8 . the city is accessed by two major bridges , the harbor bridge ( us 181 ) and the john f . kennedy causeway ( pr 22 ) . both bridges are maintained by the texas department of transportation . freight service from san antonio to corpus christi is provided by the union pacific railroad , but the original line , both freight and passenger , was the san antonio , uvalde and gulf railroad , which operated to corpus christi from 1913 to 1956 . then the sau & g , or '' the sausage '' , as it was commonly called , was merged into the missouri pacific railroad . it was subsequently procured by the union pacific . . major highways . ; under construction and extension following us 77 ( crosstown expressway ) ( north padre island drive and south padre island drive ) . notable people . kevin abstract , musician , founding member of brockhampton . amy acuff , five-time olympic high jumper mike adams , mlb pitcher for philadelphia phillies a.a . allen , pentecostal evangelist and '' faith healer '' , pastored an assemblies of god church in corpus christi in the late 1940s marshall applewhite , founder of the heaven 's gate suicide cult , graduated from corpus christi high school barbara barrie , actress raymond berry , wide receiver and coach , pro football hall of famer justin brantly , nfl punter john a . brieden , american legion commander tammie brown , drag queen and musician johnny canales , tv host dabney coleman , actor roger creager , country music singer-songwriter henry cuesta , clarinetist on the lawrence welk show dave davies , american broadcaster and contributor to npr 's fresh air program paula deanda , musician tom delay , u.s . congressman and disgraced house majority leader carlos deluna , executed for murder , controversial conviction causing concerns about wrongful executions helen donath , opera singer ramón h . dovalina , college administrator and president roberto elizondo , boxer , two time world title challenger farrah fawcett , actress and artist blake farenthold , former u.s . congressman from texas 27th district joe bertram frantz , historian david freese , mlb player for pittsburgh pirates clint gresham , seattle seahawks long snapper , super bowl champion stephanie griest , author steven a . hickham jr . , racing driver jim heath , musician known as reverend horton heat burt hooton , baseball pitcher , all-star and world series champion todd ames hunter , member of texas house of representatives , 1989–1997 and since january 2009 ernestine jackson , actress and singer bret anthony johnston , author of corpus christi : stories jeremy jordan , supergirl ( tv series ) actor , broadway performer larry kelm , nfl player , an original member of texas a & m '' wrecking crew '' , linebacker for los angeles rams and san francisco 49ers mifflin kenedy , rancher and businessman ashley kidd , world champion wakesurfer brooks kieschnick , baseball player bobby labonte , nascar sprint cup driver and 2000 champion terry labonte , nascar sprint cup series driver and 1984 and 1996 champion colleen larose , indicted in 2010 for trying to recruit islamic terrorists to wage jihad chris layton , drummer for stevie ray vaughan and double trouble brian leetch , nhl defenseman , born in corpus christi , but grew up in connecticut danny lohner , musician eva longoria , actress allen ludden , tv game show host terrence mcnally , playwright irlene mandrell , musician , actress , model , sister of barbara and louise mandrell louise mandrell , singer and entertainer , sister of barbara and irlene mandrell victoria moroles , actress mitch morris , actor roger narvaez , mixed martial artist joe nixon , state representative from houston , reared in corpus christi larry norman , musician and songwriter todd oldham , fashion designer revilo p . oliver , 20th-century fascist scholar , professor , a founder of john birch society solomon p . ortiz , u.s . congressman , represented corpus christi for 28 years jessie pavelka , actor and model jennifer peña , latin pop and tejano singer and actress cliff pennington , mlb player for the los angeles angels paul peress , drummer , composer , producer lou diamond phillips , actor billy powell , keyboardist selena , mexican/american tejano singer , queen of tejano music a.b . quintanilla , singer , songwriter with kumbia all starz , selena 's older brother suzette quintanilla , drummer for selena y los dinos , selena 's older sister dody roach , professional poker player , two-time world series of poker bracelet winner johnny roland , nfl player and coach lester roloff , radio evangelist leslie sanchez , political pundit pepe serna , actor sid sheinberg , ex-president of universal studios , helped make jaws bart shirley , mlb player for los angeles dodgers and new york mets ormond r . simpson , lieutenant general in the marine corps robert simpson , meteorologist and hurricane specialist lori singer , actress marc singer , actor justin storms , artist , musician martha tilton , singer and actress raul torres , state representative from nueces county carlos truan , politician george conrad westervelt , naval officer and engineer ; co-founder of the boeing company don williams , country and western singer rob zastryzny , pitcher for the chicago cubs . sister cities . corpus christi keeps a thriving and active relationship with these sister cities : agen , lot-et-garonne , france keelung , taiwan yokosuka , kanagawa , japan . in popular culture . a season 4 episode of the discovery channel series a haunting , called stalked by evil , takes place in corpus christi in 2005 . see also . corpus christi museum of science and history list of mayors of corpus christi , texas mirador de la flor nueces hotel old bayview cemetery oso creek ( texas ) parkdale plaza port of corpus christi south texas botanical gardens & nature center texas state aquarium . references . notes . further reading . lessoff , alan . where texas meets the sea : corpus christi and its history ( university of texas press , 2015 ) 360 pp . givens , murphy . corpus christi : a history . external links . city of corpus christi corpus christi public library digital archive , features local history photographs and materials