List of fictional dogs

literature . prose and poetry . buck , in jack london 's the call of the wild bull's-eye , bill sikes ' dog in oliver twist by charles dickens ripper , marjorie dursley 's pet dog in j.k rowling 's harry potter and the prisoner of azkaban jip ( short for gypsy ) , dora spenlow 's spaniel in charles dickens ' david copperfield baleia , the dog-companion that follows a poor family throughout the hardships of the 1915-drought in brazil in vidas secas , by graciliano ramos quincas borba , the dog whose name is the same as his human 's in machado de assis ' quincas borba tentação , the dog in the homonymous short-story by clarice lispector pingo de ouro , miguilim 's companion in the novella campo geral , by joão guimarães rosa biruta , the dog in the homonymous short-story by lygia fagundes telles bruno lichtenstein , the dog in the homonymous short-story by rubem braga toto , dorothy 's dog in the wizard of oz , by l . frank baum sharik , the astray dog who undergoes a transformation surgery in heart of a dog , by mikhail bulgakov mr . bones , the companion dog in timbuktu , by paul auster . comics . . media . film ( live-action ) . . television ( live-action ) . . film ( animation ) . . television ( animation ) . . animation . . song . : only songs with dog characters are included in this section . not metaphorical dogs or songs with '' dog '' in the title . apollo , from various coheed & cambria songs , whose name appears in the titles of their third and fourth albums arrow , from harry nilsson 's single '' me and my arrow '' , also featured in the point ! '' atomic dog '' by george clinton bingo , from the spelling song of the same name . it 's worth noting that the lyrics do not make it clear whether bingo is the name of the dog or the farmer . '' black shuck '' , song by the darkness about the spectral black dog , black shuck boo , from '' me and you and a dog named boo '' , 1971 song by lobo ( aka roland kent lavoie ) '' bow wow wow wow ( wild dog on the prowl ) '' sung by mitch ryder with was ( not was ) carlos , '' a little chihuahua . that had some kind of skin disease and was totally blind '' in the song '' frank 's wild years '' by tom waits . catalessi , '' torna catalessi '' by caparezza '' death of a martian '' , red hot chili peppers song about the death of flea 's dog martian , from the 2006 album stadium arcadium . '' evelyn , a modified dog '' , from the eponymous song on frank zappa 's one size fits all ( 1975 ) . '' feed jake '' , song about a dog named jake by pirates of the mississippi fido , talking dog from the frank zappa song '' stinkfoot '' from his album over-nite sensation ( 1973 ) . frank , in '' classified '' by c . w . mccall frunobulax , a large poodle , appears on the frank zappa and the mothers album roxy and elsewhere ( 1973 ) . '' gon na buy me a dog '' , by the monkees '' ( how much is ) that doggie in the window ? '' , popular song by bob merrill , 1953 , recorded by patti page '' i love my dog '' , by cat stevens jack , crazy chester 's dog in '' the weight '' by the band '' martha my dear '' by the beatles ( paul mccartney 's sheepdog ) '' old king '' by neil young '' ol ' red '' , prison dog from the song of the same name , recorded by george jones , kenny rogers and blake shelton '' old shep '' by red foley as also sung by elvis presley and many other country performers '' old tige '' , by jim reeves quiche lorraine , two-inch tall green poodle , from a song of the same name by the b-52 's from the album wild planet seamus , in song by same name ( from meddle ) by pink floyd septimus winner , with his ears cut short and his tail cut long '' shannon '' , from the henry gross song of that name , inspired by gross 's and carl wilson 's irish setters , both named shannon sinatra , dog named after the singer for its blue eyes in the 2002 song '' sinatra '' by canadian folk singer james keelaghan strider , merle dog in over the hills and far away by led zeppelin the dog who '' up and died '' in '' mr . bojangles '' , written by jerry jeff walker stubb , from the song '' stubb ( a dub ) '' by mr . bungle a dog that wo n't get off the furniture in '' get down '' by gilbert o'sullivan '' the puppy song '' by harry nilsson '' the nudist & mr . pendleton '' by fictional band the lavender fudge experience ( from the tv series whatever happened to robot jones ? ) queenie , dog who was shot and killed in '' queenie 's song '' by guy clark ( co-written with terry allen ) , 2002 '' who let the dogs out ? '' by baha men . video games . sporting and advertising mascots . axelrod , in advertisements for tidewater petroleum big mo for alpo dog food boo , the citadel , named after lt . col . thomas nugent courvoisie , known by most as '' the boo '' . in 2013 they introduced boo x brutus , mascot for the canterbury bankstown bulldogs bullseye , bull terrier mascot of target corporation colin curly , bulldog mascot for quavers . voice by lenny henry cobi , catalan sheepdog as the mascot for the 1992 summer olympics dinky , chihuahua for taco bell fast food restaurant dubs , mascot of the washington huskies duke , in advertisements for bush baked beans general the citadel introduced 2003 , in 2013 introduced general ii aka g2 farfel the dog , in advertisements for nesquik chocolate handsome dan , mascot of the yale bulldogs jack the bulldog , mascot of the georgetown hoyas jason , in advertisements for hush puppies johnathan , mascot of the uconn huskies lady greyhound , mascot of the greyhound lines bus company mcgruff the crime dog , for the national crime prevention council moondog , mascot of the nba , cleveland cavaliers nipper , in advertisements for rca reveille , mascot of texas a & m university rhett , mascot of the boston university terriers rocket , cartoon canine in life is good company advertisements striker , mascot of the 1994 fifa world cup smokey , mascot of the tennessee volunteers sparky , fire dog icon for national fire protection association spuds mackenzie , budweiser beer mascot uga , mascot of georgia bulldogs walkie talkie , the dog of bazooka joe woofer dog whitten , mascot of the western bulldogs . other fictional dogs . boggins in the radio show adam and joe on bbc 6 music , 2009 , voiced by adam buxton . fairfield industrial dog object , very large moving dog sculpture in australia '' froofie the dog '' , fictional cartoon dog from a bill cosby monologue of the same name from inside the mind of bill cosby power pup , superhero dog from the microsoft office assistant fidonet logo dog on the tuckerbox , allegorical dog depicted at an historical monument in new south wales , australia jasper t . jowls , a bloodhound and one of the characters from the pizza chain chuck e . cheese's lapák the dachshund in leoš janáček 's opera the cunning little vixen cheek , timothy ( 2003 ) . pr'hody lisky bystrousky , the cunning little vixen : translations and pronunciation , vol . 1 , p . 89 . scarecrow press hairy maclary from donaldson 's dairy , the protagonist in an eponymous story book . see also . list of famous dogs list of fictional canines list of robotic dogs dogs playing poker list of fictional cats and other felines : category : films about dogs . references . further reading . . sources . some of the prose in this article was copied from and related pages , which are available under the creative commons attribution-share alike 3.0 unported license and the gnu free documentation license .