Cosplay

etymology . the term '' cosplay '' is a japanese portmanteau of the english terms costume and play . the term was coined by nobuyuki takahashi of studio hard after he attended the 42nd world science fiction convention ( worldcon ) in los angeles and saw costumed fans , which he later wrote about in an article for the japanese magazine my anime . takahashi decided to coin a new word rather than use the existing translation of the english term '' masquerade '' because that translates into japanese as '' an aristocratic costume '' , which did not match his experience of the worldcon . the coinage reflects a common japanese method of abbreviation in which the first two moras of a pair of words are used to form an independent compound : 'costume ' becomes kosu ( コス ) and 'play ' becomes pure ( プレ ) . history . pre-20th century . masquerade balls were a feature of the carnival season in the 15th century , and involved increasingly elaborate allegorical royal entry , pageants , and triumphal processions celebrating marriages and other dynastic events of late medieval court life . they were extended into costumed public festivities in italy during the 16th century renaissance , generally elaborate dances held for members of the upper classes , which were particularly popular in venice . costume parties ( american english ) or fancy dress parties ( british english ) were popular from the 19th century onwards . costuming guides of the period , such as samuel miller 's male character costumes ( 1884 ) or ardern holt 's fancy dresses described ( 1887 ) , feature mostly generic costumes , whether that be period costumes , national costumes , objects or abstract concepts such as '' autumn '' or '' night '' . most specific costumes described therein are for historical figures although some are sourced from fiction , like the three musketeers or shakespeare characters . fan costuming . a.d . condo 's science fiction comic strip character mr . skygack , from mars ( a martian ethnographer who comically misunderstands many earthly affairs ) is arguably the first fictional character that people emulated by wearing costumes , as in 1908 mr . and mrs . william fell of cincinnati , ohio are reported to have attended a masquerade at a skating rink wearing mr . skygack and miss dillpickles costumes . later , in 1910 , an unnamed woman won first prize at masquerade ball in tacoma , washington wearing another skygack costume . the first people to wear costumes to attend a convention were science fiction fans forrest j ackerman and myrtle r . douglas , known in fandom as morojo . they attended the 1939 1st world science fiction convention ( nycon or 1st worldcon ) in the caravan hall , new york , usa dressed in '' futuristicostumes '' , including green cape and breeches , based on the pulp magazine artwork of frank r . paul and the 1936 film things to come , designed and created by douglas . ackerman later stated that he thought everyone was supposed to wear a costume at a science fiction convention , although only he and douglas did . fan costuming caught on , however , and the 2nd worldcon ( 1940 ) had both an unofficial masquerade held in douglas ' room and an official masquerade as part of the programme . david kyle won the masquerade wearing a ming the merciless costume created by leslie perri , while robert a . w . lowndes received second place with a bar senestro costume ( from the novel the blind spot by austin hall and homer eon flint ) . other costumed attendees included guest of honor e . e . smith as northwest smith ( from c . l . moore 's series of short stories ) and both ackerman and douglas wearing their futuristicostumes again . masquerades and costume balls continued to be part of world science fiction convention tradition thereafter . early worldcon masquerade balls featured a band , dancing , food and drinks . contestants either walked across a stage or a cleared area of the dance floor . ackerman wore a '' hunchbackerman of notre dame '' costume to the 3rd worldcon ( 1941 ) , which included a mask designed and created by ray harryhausen , but soon stopped wearing costumes to conventions . douglas wore an akka costume ( from a . merritt 's novel the moon pool ) , the mask again made by harryhausen , to the 3rd worldcon and a snake mother costume ( another merritt costume , from the snake mother ) to the 4th worldcon ( 1946 ) . terminology was yet unsettled ; the 1944 edition of jack speer 's fancyclopedia used the term costume party . rules governing costumes became established in response to specific costumes and costuming trends . the first nude contestant at a worldcon masquerade was in 1952 ; but the height of this trend was in the 1970s and early 1980s , with a few every year . this eventually led to '' no costume is no costume '' rule , which banned full nudity , although partial nudity was still allowed as long as it was a legitimate representation of the character . mike resnick describes the best of the nude costumes as kris lundi wearing a harpy costume to the 32nd worldcon ( 1974 ) ( she received an honorable mention in the competition ) . another costume that instigated a rule change was an attendee at the 20th worldcon ( 1962 ) whose blaster prop fired a jet of real flame ; which led to fire being banned . at the 30th worldcon ( 1972 ) , artist scott shaw wore a costume composed largely of peanut butter to represent his own underground comix character called '' the turd '' . the peanut butter rubbed off , doing damage to soft furnishings and other peoples ' costumes , and then began to go rancid under the heat of the lighting . food , odious , and messy substances were banned as costume elements after that event . costuming spread with the science fiction conventions and the interaction of fandom . the earliest known instance of costuming at a convention in the united kingdom was at the eastercon ( 1953 ) but this was only as part of a play . however , members of the liverpool science fantasy society attended the 1st cytricon ( 1955 ) , in kettering , wearing costumes and continued to do so in subsequent years . the 15th worldcon ( 1957 ) brought the first official convention masquerade to the uk . the 1960 eastercon in london may have been the first british-based convention to hold an official fancy dress party as part of its programme . the joint winners were ethel lindsay and ina shorrock as two of the titular witches from the novel the witches of karres by james h . schmitz . based on and star trek conventions began in 1969 and major conventions began in 1972 and they have featured cosplay throughout . in japan , costuming at conventions was a fan activity from at least the 1970s , especially after the launch of the comiket convention in december 1975 . costuming at this time was known as . the first documented case of costuming at a fan event in japan was at ashinocon ( 1978 ) , in hakone , at which future science fiction critic mari kotani wore a costume based on the cover art for edgar rice burroughs ' novel a fighting man of mars . mari kotani 's costume has sometimes been misreported as a triton costume ( from the manga triton of the sea ) due to its visual similarity and because kotani was known as a member of the triton fan club . in an interview kotani states that there were about twenty costumed attendees at the convention 's costume party—made up of members of her triton of the sea fan club and , antecedent of the gainax anime studio—with most attendees in ordinary clothing . one of the kansai group , an unnamed friend of yasuhiro takeda , wore an impromptu tusken raider costume ( from the film star wars ) made from one of the host-hotel 's rolls of toilet paper . costume contests became a permanent part of the nihon sf taikai conventions from tokon vii in 1980 . possibly the first costume contest held at a comic book convention was at the 1st academy con held at grand central hotel , new york in august 1965 . roy thomas , future editor-in-chief of marvel comics but then just transitioning from a fanzine editor to a professional comic book writer , attended in a plastic man costume . the first masquerade ball held at san diego comic-con was in 1974 during the convention 's 6th event . voice actress june foray was the master of ceremonies . future scream queen brinke stevens won first place wearing a vampirella costume . forrest j ackerman , the creator of vampirella , was in attendance and posed with stevens for photographs . they became friends and , according to stevens '' forry and his wife , wendayne , soon became like my god parents . '' photographer dan golden saw a photograph of stevens in the vampirella costume while visiting ackerman 's house , leading to him hiring her for a non-speaking role in her first student film , zyzak is king ( 1980 ) , and later photographing her for the cover of the first issue of femme fatales ( 1992 ) . stevens attributes these events to launching her acting career . as early as a year after the 1975 release of the rocky horror picture show , audience members began dressing as characters from the movie and role-playing ( although the initial incentive for dressing-up was free admission ) in often highly accurate costumes . costume-con , a convention dedicated to costuming , was first held in january 1983 . the international costumers guild , originally known as the greater columbia fantasy costumer 's guild , was launched after the 3rd costume-con ( 1984 or 1985 ) as a parent organization and to support costuming . . cosplay . cosplay is the practice of dressing up as a character from a movie , book , or video game , especially one from the japanese genres of manga and anime . cosplay started in 1984 , nobuyuki takahashi , founder of studio hard , attended the 42nd worldcon in los angeles . he was impressed with the masquerade and reported on it in my anime , coining the term kosupure ( from which cosplay is derived ) in the process . the term '' cosplay '' was coined in japan in 1984 , meaning '' costume '' and '' play '' . cosplay is very popular among all genders . it was inspired by and grew out of the practice of fan costuming at science fiction conventions , beginning with morojo 's '' '' futuristicostumes '' created for the 1st world science fiction convention in new york city in 1939 . as stated above , costuming had been a fan activity in japan from the 1970s , and it became much more popular in the wake of takahashi 's report . the new term did not catch on immediately , however . it was a year or two after the article was published before it was in common use among fans at conventions . it was in the 1990s , after exposure on television and in magazines , that the term and practice of cosplaying became common knowledge in japan . the first cosplay cafés appeared in the akihabara area of tokyo in the late 1990s . a temporary maid café was set up at the tokyo character collection event in august 1998 to promote the video game welcome to pia carrot ( 1997 ) . an occasional pia carrot restaurant was held at the shop gamers in akihabara in the years up to 2000 . being linked to specific intellectual properties limited the lifespan of these cafés , which was solved by using generic maids , leading to the first permanent establishment , cure maid café , which opened in march 2001 . the first world cosplay summit was held on october 12 , 2003 at the rose court hotel in nagoya , japan , with five cosplayers invited from germany , france and italy . there was no contest until 2005 , when the world cosplay championship began . the first winners were the italian team of giorgia vecchini , francesca dani and emilia fata livia . worldcon masquerade attendance peaked in the 1980s and started to fall thereafter . this trend was reversed when the concept of cosplay was re-imported from japan . practice of cosplay . cosplay costumes vary greatly and can range from simple themed clothing to highly detailed costumes . it is generally considered different from halloween and mardi gras costume wear , as the intention is to replicate a specific character , rather than to reflect the culture and symbolism of a holiday event . as such , when in costume , some cosplayers often seek to adopt the affect , mannerisms , and body language of the characters they portray ( with '' out of character '' breaks ) . the characters chosen to be cosplayed may be sourced from any movie , tv series , book , comic book , video game , music band , anime , or manga . some cosplayers even choose to cosplay an original character of their own design or a fusion of different genres ( e.g . , a steampunk version of a character ) , and it is a part of the ethos of cosplay that anybody can be anything , as with genderbending , crossplay , or drag , a cosplayer playing a character of another ethnicity , or a hijabi portraying captain america . . costumes . cosplayers obtain their apparel through many different methods . manufacturers produce and sell packaged outfits for use in cosplay , with varying levels of quality . these costumes are often sold online , but also can be purchased from dealers at conventions . japanese manufacturers of cosplay costumes reported a profit of 35 & nbsp ; billion yen in 2008 . a number of individuals also work on commission , creating custom costumes , props , or wigs designed and fitted to the individual . other cosplayers , who prefer to create their own costumes , still provide a market for individual elements , and various raw materials , such as unstyled wigs , hair dye , cloth and sewing notions , liquid latex , body paint , costume jewelry , and prop weapons . cosplay represents an act of embodiment . cosplay has been closely linked to the presentation of self , yet cosplayers ' ability to perform is limited by their physical features . the accuracy of a cosplay is judged based on the ability to accurately represent a character through the body , and individual cosplayers frequently are faced by their own '' bodily limits '' such as level of attractiveness , body size , and disability that often restrict and confine how accurate the cosplay is perceived to be . authenticity is measured by a cosplayer 's individual ability to translate on-screen manifestation to the cosplay itself . some have argued that cosplay can never be a true representation of the character ; instead , it can only be read through the body , and that true embodiment of a character is judged based on nearness to the original character form . cosplaying can also help some of those with self-esteem problems . many cosplayers create their own outfits , referencing images of the characters in the process . in the creation of the outfits , much time is given to detail and qualities , thus the skill of a cosplayer may be measured by how difficult the details of the outfit are and how well they have been replicated . because of the difficulty of replicating some details and materials , cosplayers often educate themselves in crafting specialties such as textiles , sculpture , face paint , fiberglass , fashion design , woodworking , and other uses of materials in the effort to render the look and texture of a costume accurately . cosplayers often wear wigs in conjunction with their outfit to further improve the resemblance to the character . this is especially necessary for anime and manga or video-game characters who often have unnaturally colored and uniquely styled hair . simpler outfits may be compensated for their lack of complexity by paying attention to material choice and overall high quality . to look more like the characters they are portraying , cosplayers might also engage in various forms of body modification . cosplayers may opt to change their skin color utilizing make-up to more simulate the race of the character they are adopting . contact lenses that match the color of their character 's eyes are a common form of this , especially in the case of characters with particularly unique eyes as part of their trademark look . contact lenses that make the pupil look enlarged to visually echo the large eyes of anime and manga characters are also used . another form of body modification in which cosplayers engage is to copy any tattoos or special markings their character might have . temporary tattoos , permanent marker , body paint , and in rare cases , permanent tattoos , are all methods used by cosplayers to achieve the desired look . permanent and temporary hair dye , spray-in hair coloring , and specialized extreme styling products are all used by some cosplayers whose natural hair can achieve the desired hairstyle . it is also commonplace for them to shave off their eyebrows to gain a more accurate look . some anime and video game characters have weapons or other accessories that are hard to replicate , and conventions have strict rules regarding those weapons , but most cosplayers engage in some combination of methods to obtain all the items necessary for their costumes ; for example , they may commission a prop weapon , sew their own clothing , buy character jewelry from a cosplay accessory manufacturer , or buy a pair of off-the-rack shoes , and modify them to match the desired look . presentation . cosplay may be presented in a number of ways and places . a subset of cosplay culture is centered on sex appeal , with cosplayers specifically choosing characters known for their attractiveness or revealing costumes . however , wearing a revealing costume can be a sensitive issue while appearing in public . people appearing naked at american science fiction fandom conventions during the 1970s were so common , a '' no costume is no costume '' rule was introduced . some conventions throughout the united states , such as phoenix comicon and penny arcade expo , have also issued rules upon which they reserve the right to ask attendees to leave or change their costumes if deemed to be inappropriate to a family-friendly environment or something of a similar nature . conventions . the most popular form of presenting a cosplay publicly is by wearing it to a fan convention . multiple conventions dedicated to anime and manga , comics , tv shows , video games , science fiction , and fantasy may be found all around the world . cosplay-centered conventions include cosplay mania in the philippines and eoy cosplay festival in singapore . the single largest event featuring cosplay is the semiannual doujinshi market , comic market ( comiket ) , held in japan during summer and winter . comiket attracts hundreds of thousands of manga and anime fans , where thousands of cosplayers congregate on the roof of the exhibition center . in north america , the highest-attended fan conventions featuring cosplayers are the san diego comic-con and new york comic con held in the united states , and the anime-specific anime north in toronto , otakon held in baltimore md and anime expo held in los angeles . europe 's largest event is japan expo held in paris , while the london mcm expo and the london super comic convention are the most notable in the uk . supanova pop culture expo is australia 's biggest event . star trek conventions have featured cosplay for many decades . these include destination star trek , a uk convention , and star trek las vegas , a us convention . in different comic fairs , '' thematic areas '' are set up where cosplayers can take photos in an environment that follows that of the game or animation product from which they are taken . sometimes the cosplayers are part of the area , playing the role of staff with the task of entertaining the other visitors . some examples are the thematic areas dedicated to star wars or to fallout . the areas are set up by not for profit associations of fans , but in some major fairs it is possible to visit areas set up directly by the developers of the video games or the producers of the anime . photography . the appearance of cosplayers at public events makes them a popular draw for photographers . as this became apparent in the late 1980s , a new variant of cosplay developed in which cosplayers attended events mainly for the purpose of modeling their characters for still photography rather than engaging in continuous role play . rules of etiquette were developed to minimize awkward situations involving boundaries . cosplayers pose for photographers and photographers do not press them for personal contact information or private sessions , follow them out of the area , or take photos without permission . the rules allow the collaborative relationship between photographers and cosplayers to continue with the least inconvenience to each other . some cosplayers choose to have a professional photographer take high quality images of them in their costumes posing as the character . cosplayers and photographers frequently exhibit their work online and sometimes sell their images . . competitions . as the popularity of cosplay has grown , many conventions have come to feature a contest surrounding cosplay that may be the main feature of the convention . contestants present their cosplay , and often to be judged for an award , the cosplay must be self-made . the contestants may choose to perform a skit , which may consist of a short performed script or dance with optional accompanying audio , video , or images shown on a screen overhead . other contestants may simply choose to pose as their characters . often , contestants are briefly interviewed on stage by a master of ceremonies . the audience is given a chance to take photos of the cosplayers . cosplayers may compete solo or in a group . awards are presented , and these awards may vary greatly . generally , a best cosplayer award , a best group award , and runner-up prizes are given . awards may also go to the best skit and a number of cosplay skill subcategories , such as master tailor , master weapon-maker , master armorer , and so forth . the most well-known cosplay contest event is the world cosplay summit , selecting cosplayers from 40 countries to compete in the final round in nagoya , japan . some other international events include european cosplay gathering ( finals taking place at japan expo in paris , france ) , eurocosplay ( finals taking place at london mcm comic con ) , and the nordic cosplay championship ( finals taking place at närcon in linköping , sweden ) . . common cosplay judging criteria . this table contains a list of the most common cosplay competition judging criteria , as seen from world cosplay summit , cyprus comic con , and replayfx .