Otto of Bavaria

childhood and youth . prince otto was born on 27 april 1848 , two months premature , in the munich residenz . his parents were king maximilian ii of bavaria and marie of prussia . his uncle , king otto i of greece , served as his godparent . otto had an older brother , crown prince ludwig . they spent most of their childhood with servants and teachers at hohenschwangau castle . their parents were distant and formal , and they were at such a loss about what to say to otto and ludwig that they often ignored and even avoided them . greg king , the mad king : a biography of ludwig ii of bavaria , p 18-21 their mother took an interest in what the brothers wore : she ordered for ludwig to be always dressed in blue and for otto to wear always red . their father was strict with the brothers , particularly ludwig , the heir apparent . between 1853 and 1863 , the brothers spent their summer holidays at the royal villa in berchtesgaden , which had been specially built for their father . walter flemmer : stationen eines märchenkönigs . orte und landschaften könig ludwigs ii . in : georg jenal , with stephanie haarländer ( eds . ) : gegenwart in vergangenheit . beiträge zur kultur und geschichte der neueren und neuesten zeit . festgabe für friedrich prinz zu seinem 65 . geburtstag , munich , 1993 , p . 419 heinz häfner writes , in ein könig wird beseitigt , münchen , 2008 , p 38 : a court official found otto bound and gagged by ludwig , with ludwig violently tugging at the rope . the official had to use force to free otto . the king was shocked and angered by ludwig 's behaviour and demanded severe punishment . ludwig was so embittered that he took a violent dislike of berchtesgaden and did not return there for a long time . otto served in the bavarian army from 1863 . he was appointed sub-lieutenant on 27 april 1863 and admitted to the cadet corps on 1 march 1864 . on 26 may 1864 , he was promoted to full lieutenant . on 10 march 1864 , otto 's father died and his brother , ludwig , succeeded as king of bavaria . between 18 june and 15 july 1864 , the two brothers received state visits by the emperors of austria and russia . otto was promoted to captain on 27 april 1866 and entered active military service in the royal bavarian infantry guards . he participated in the austro-prussian war of 1866 and as colonel in the franco-prussian war of 1870–1871 . his experiences on the battlefield traumatized him and caused him to suffer from depression and insomnia . greg king , '' the mad king : a biography of ludwig ii of bavaria '' , p.253 when wilhelm i was proclaimed german emperor on 18 january 1871 at the palace of versailles , prince otto and his uncle , luitpold , represented king ludwig ii , who refused to participate . dr . theodor toeche-mittler : die kaiserproklamation in versailles am 18 . januar 1871 mit einem verzeichniß der festtheilnehmer , ernst siegfried mittler und sohn , berlin , 1896 h . schnaebeli : fotoaufnahmen der kaiserproklamation in versailles , berlin , 1871 otto then criticized the celebration as ostentatious and heartless in a letter to his brother . ludwig and otto despised their ambitious prussian relatives and cordially disliked their prussian mother and so they were appalled by the creation of the new german empire . the hostility of both was no secret to the prussian government . otto and ludwig were often seen together during the early years of ludwig 's reign , but they became estranged over time . ludwig was shy and introverted and eventually became a recluse . otto was cheerful , outgoing and extroverted until the franco-prussian war . in 1868 , otto received the royal order of saint george for the defense of the immaculate conception , the house order of the house of wittelsbach . in 1869 , he joined the order of the holy sepulchre , on the initiative of cardinal karl-august von reisach . hans jürgen brandt : jerusalem hat freunde . münchen und der ritterorden vom heiligen grab , eos , 2010 , p . 58 f . mental incapacity . after the franco-prussian war , otto became very depressed and anxious , which worried his family . otto had spells during which he slept poorly for days and acted out , followed by periods of time during which he was perfectly normal and lucid . his illness progressively grew worse . ludwig was horrified because he had been counting on otto to marry and have a son who could eventually inherit the throne . otto was placed under medical supervision , and reports about his condition were sent by spies working for the prussian chancellor , otto von bismarck . doctors reported that otto was mentally ill in january 1872 . from 1873 , he was held in isolation in the southern pavilion of nymphenburg palace . his attending physician was dr . bernhard von gudden , who later diagnosed otto 's brother , ludwig , as mentally ill without bothering to examine him and without asking him a single question , which raises questions about his competence and his motives . both ludwig and otto despised prussia , and their uncle , luitpold , and gudden supported prussia 's rise to dominance . some contemporaries believed that gudden 's diagnoses of otto and ludwig were motivated by political considerations and that more could and should have been done to help and treat otto . some contemporaries also believed that bismarck did not want ludwig or otto to remain in power and decided to replace the brothers with their malleable uncle , luitpold . catherine radziwill , '' the tragedy of a throne '' , p 170-172 , 314–318 during corpus christi mass in 1875 in the munich frauenkirche , otto , who had not attended the church service , rushed into the church wearing hunting clothes and fell on his knees before the celebrant , archbishop gregor von scherr , to ask forgiveness for his sins . the high mass was interrupted , and the prince did not resist when he was led away by two church ministers . otto was then moved to schleissheim palace and was effectively held prisoner there , much to his dismay . gudden made no effort to treat him ; it is possible that otto was heavily drugged . otto 's last public appearance was his presence at the side of his brother at the king 's parade on 22 august 1875 , at the marsfeld in munich . from 1 june 1876 , he stayed for a few weeks in the castle at ludwigsthal in the bavarian forest . in the spring of 1880 , his condition worsened . in 1883 , he was confined under medical supervision in fürstenried palace near munich , where he would remain for the rest of his life . the palace had been specially converted for his confinement . ludwig occasionally visited him at night and ordered for no violence to be used against him . otto became king after ludwig died , but he was never truly allowed to reign . in 1886 , the senior royal medical officer wrote a statement declaring that otto was severely mentally ill . the university department of psychiatry in munich : from kraepelin and his predecessors to molecular psychiatry . by hanns hippius , hans-jürgen möller , hans-jürgen müller , gabriele neundörfer-kohl , p.27 it has been claimed that ludwig had a schizotypal personality disorder and that otto suffered from schizophrenia . prof . hans förstl , '' ludwig ii . von bayern – schizotype persönlichkeit und frontotemporale degeneration ? '' , in : deutsche medizinische wochenschrift , nr . 132/2007 it has also been persuasively argued that otto 's problems were the result of contracting syphilis , which would also account for his physical problems , particularly the paralysis from which he suffered in later years . christopher mcintosh , '' the swan king : ludwig ii of bavaria '' , p.279-280 . king of bavaria . when king ludwig ii was incapacitated by his ministers on 10 june 1886 , his uncle luitpold took over the reign of the kingdom of bavaria and led the affairs of state in ludwig 's place as prince regent ; his official title in this function was '' administrator of the kingdom of bavaria '' . only three days later ludwig ii died under unknown circumstances , and prince otto succeeded him as king of bavaria on 13 june 1886 in accordance with the wittelsbach succession law . since otto was unable to lead the government due to his mental illness ( officially it was said : '' the king is melancholic '' ) , prince regent luitpold also reigned for him . he did not understand his proclamation of his accession to the throne , which was proclaimed to king otto at fürstenried palace the next day after his accession . he thought his uncle luitpold was the rightful king . shortly thereafter , the bavarian troops were sworn in the name of king otto i and coins were minted with his portrait . a . schweiggert , e . adami : ludwig ii . die letzten tage des königs von bayern . münchenverlag 2014 , p . 236 . end of reign and death . luitpold kept his role as prince regent until he died in 1912 and was succeeded by his son ludwig , who was otto 's first cousin . by then , it had been obvious for some time that otto would never emerge from seclusion or be mentally capable of actively reigning . almost as soon as ludwig became regent , elements in the press and larger society clamoured for ludwig to become king in his own right . accordingly , the constitution of bavaria was amended on 4 november 1913 to include a clause specifying that if a regency for reasons of incapacity lasted for ten years , with no expectation that the king would ever be able to reign , the regent could end the regency , depose the king and assume the crown himself with the assent of the legislature . the following day , prince regent ludwig ended the regency and proclaimed his own reign as ludwig iii . the parliament assented on 6 november , and ludwig iii took the constitutional oath on 8 november . king otto was permitted to retain his title and honours for life . otto died unexpectedly on 11 october 1916 from a volvulus ( an obstruction of the bowel ) . his remains were interred in the crypt of the michaelskirche in munich . bavarian tradition caused the heart of the king to be placed in a silver urn and sent to the ( chapel of the miraculous image ) in altötting , beside those of his brother , father and grandfather . honours . : knight of the order of st . hubert grand prior of upper bavaria of the royal bavarian house equestrian order of st . george : grand cross of the ludwig order , 27 april 1866 hof- und staats-handbuch des großherzogtum hessen ( 1879 ) , '' großherzogliche orden und ehrenzeichen '' p . 12 : knight of the order of the black eagle justus perthes , almanach de gotha ( 1913 ) p . 14 : knight of the order of the golden fleece , 1869 : knight of the order of st . andrew : grand cross of the order of charles iii , 26 june 1868 . ancestors . footnotes .