Autochrome Lumière

structure and use . autochrome is an additive color '' mosaic screen plate '' process . the medium consists of a glass plate coated on one side with a random mosaic of microscopic grains of potato starch dyed red-orange , green , and blue-violet ( an unusual but functional variant of the standard red , green , and blue additive colors ) ; the grains of starch act as color filters . lampblack fills the spaces between grains , and a black-and-white panchromatic silver halide emulsion is coated on top of the filter layer . unlike ordinary black-and-white plates , the autochrome was loaded into the camera with the bare glass side facing the lens so that the light passed through the mosaic filter layer before reaching the emulsion . the use of an additional special orange-yellow filter in the camera was required to block ultraviolet light and restrain the effects of violet and blue light , parts of the spectrum to which the emulsion was overly sensitive . because of the light loss due to all the filtering , autochrome plates required much longer exposures than black-and-white plates and films , which meant that a tripod or other stand had to be used and that it was not practical to photograph moving subjects . the plate was reversal-processed into a positive transparency — that is , the plate was first developed into a negative image but not '' fixed '' , then the silver forming the negative image was chemically removed , then the remaining silver halide was exposed to light and developed , producing a positive image . the luminance filter ( silver halide layer ) and the mosaic chrominance filter ( the colored potato starch grain layer ) remained precisely aligned and were distributed together , so that light was filtered in situ . each starch grain remained in alignment with the corresponding microscopic area of silver halide emulsion coated over it . when the finished image was viewed by transmitted light , each bit of the silver image acted as a micro-filter , allowing more or less light to pass through the corresponding colored starch grain , recreating the original proportions of the three colors . at normal viewing distances , the light coming through the individual grains blended together in the eye , reconstructing the color of the light photographed through the filter grains . manufacturing techniques . to create the autochrome color filter mosaic , a thin glass plate was first coated with a transparent adhesive layer . the dyed starch grains were graded to between 5 and 10 micrometers in size and the three colors were thoroughly intermingled in proportions which made the mixture appear gray to the unaided eye . they were then spread onto the adhesive , creating a layer with approximately 4,000,000 grains per square inch but only one grain thick . the exact means by which significant gaps and overlapping grains were avoided still remains unclear . it was found that the application of extreme pressure would produce a mosaic that more efficiently transmitted light to the emulsion , because the grains would be flattened slightly , making them more transparent , and pressed into more intimate contact with each other , reducing wasted space between them . as it was impractical to apply such pressure to the entire plate all at once , a steamroller approach was used which flattened only one very small area at a time . lampblack was used to block up the slight spaces that remained . the plate was then coated with shellac to protect the moisture-vulnerable grains and dyes from the water-based gelatin emulsion , which was coated onto the plate after the shellac had dried . the resulting finished plate was cut up into smaller plates of the desired size , which were packaged in boxes of four . each plate was accompanied by a thin piece of cardboard colored black on the side facing the emulsion . this was to be retained when loading and exposing the plate and served both to protect the delicate emulsion and to inhibit halation . the 1906 u.s . patent describes the process more generally : the grains can be orange , violet , and green , or red , yellow , and blue ( or '' any number of colors '' ) , optionally with black powder filling the gaps . experimentations within the early twentieth century provided solutions to many issues , including the addition of screen plates , a yellow filter designed to balance the blue , and adjustments to the size of the silver halide crystals to allow for a broader spectrum of colour and control over the frequency of light . lavedrine , bertrand and jean-paul gandolfo . the lumiere autochrome : history , technology , and preservation . los angeles : the getty conservation institute ( 2013 ) , p . 85 . . viewing techniques . because the presence of the mosaic color screen made the finished autochrome image very dark overall , bright light and special viewing arrangements were needed for satisfactory results . stereoscope autochromes were especially popular , the combined color and depth proving to be a bewitching experience to early 20th century eyes . usually of a small size , they were most commonly viewed in a small hand-held box-type stereoscope . larger , non-stereoscopic plates were most commonly displayed in a diascope , which was a folding case with the autochrome image and a ground glass diffuser fitted into an opening on one side , and a mirror framed into the other side . the user would place the diascope near a window or other light source so that light passed through the diffuser and the autochrome , and the resulting back-lit , dark-surrounded image would be viewed in the mirror . slide projectors , then known as magic lanterns and stereopticons , were a less common but especially effective display technique , more suitable for public exhibitions . unfortunately , projection required an extremely bright and therefore hot light source ( a arc lamp or a 500 watt bulb were typical ) and could visibly '' fry '' the plate if continued for more than two or three minutes , causing serious damage to the color . '' maximum time limit for leaving color plates in the stereopticon '' ( article subsection ) . american annual of photography , 1931 , 45:69 more than a few surviving autochromes suffer from such '' tanning '' and conventional projection is not a recommended means of displaying these irreplaceable images today . however , a projector-like optical system ( i.e . , using condenser lenses for illumination , with a viewing lens in place of the projection lens ) , employing daylight ( not direct sunlight ) for the light source , can produce comparably excellent visual results—although for only one viewer at a time—without the unacceptable hazards of actual projection . the use of a '' light box '' or similar highly diffused artificial light source for viewing autochromes , although now nearly universal , is unfortunate , as the heavy scattering of light within and among the several layers of coatings on the plate degrades the color saturation . the slight pinkish tinge caused by colloidal scattering ( the effect seen through a glass of water into which a couple of drops of milk have been mixed ) is exacerbated , and the use of artificial light—especially fluorescent light—upsets the color rendition of a system which the lumière brothers carefully balanced for use with natural daylight . making modern film or digital copies of autochromes introduces other problems , because a color system based on red , green , and blue is used to copy an image that exists within the red-orange , green , and blue-violet system , providing further opportunities for color degradation . vintage reproductions of autochromes in old books and magazines have often been noticeably hand-adjusted by the photoengravers in an effort to compensate for some of the difficulties of reproduction , and as a result they sometimes look more like hand-colored photographs than '' natural color '' ones . in short , it is very difficult to form an accurate impression of the appearance of any autochrome image without seeing the original '' in person '' and correctly illuminated . the lamination of the grains , varnish and emulsion makes autochrome plates susceptible to deterioration with each layer being vulnerable to changes in environment including moisture , oxidation , cracking , or flaking as well as physical damage from handling ; solutions include conservative lighting conditions , chemical free materials , medium-range humidity control of between 63 and 68 degrees fahrenheit , and a well designed preservation plan . penichon , sylvie . twentieth-century colour photographs . los angeles : the getty conservation institute ( 2013 ) , p 61 , 78 . . artistic considerations . if an autochrome was well made and has been well preserved , color values can be very good . the dyed starch grains are somewhat coarse , giving a hazy , pointillist effect , with faint stray colors often visible , especially in open light areas such as skies . the smaller the image , the more noticeable these effects are . autochrome has been touted as “ the colour of dreams . ” this term was first coined by john wood in his book the art of autochrome : the birth of colour photography ( iowa city : university of iowa press , 1993 ) and has subsequently become familiar terminology used in reference to autochrome images . josef maria eder , history of photography ( new york : dover publications inc , 1978 ) , 639 . the resulting '' dream-like '' impressionist quality may have been one reason behind the enduring popularity of the medium even after more starkly realistic color processes had become available . although difficult to manufacture and relatively expensive , autochromes were relatively easy to use and were immensely popular among enthusiastic amateur photographers , at least among those who could bear the cost and were willing to sacrifice the convenience of black and white hand-held '' snapshooting . '' autochromes failed to sustain the initial interest of more serious '' artistic '' practitioners , largely due to their inflexibility . not only did the need for diascopes and projectors make them extremely difficult to publicly exhibit , they allowed little in the way of the manipulation much loved by aficionados of the then-popular pictorialist approach . . advent of film-based versions . autochromes continued to be produced as glass plates into the 1930s , when film-based versions were introduced , first lumière filmcolor sheet film in 1931 , then lumicolor roll film in 1933 . although these soon completely replaced glass plate autochromes , their triumph was short-lived , as kodak and agfa soon began to produce multi-layer subtractive color films ( kodachrome and agfacolor respectively ) . nevertheless , the lumière products had a devoted following , above all in france , and their use persisted long after modern color films had become available . the final version , alticolor , was introduced in 1952 and discontinued in 1955 , marking the end of the nearly fifty-year-long public life of the autochrome . . important autochrome collections . between 1909 and 1931 , a collection of 72,000 autochrome photographs , documenting life at the time in 50 countries around the world , was created by french banker albert kahn . the collection , one of the biggest of its kind in the world , is housed in the albert kahn museum ( musée albert-kahn ) on the outskirts of paris . a new compilation of images from the albert kahn collection was published in 2008 . the national geographic society made extensive use of autochromes and other mosaic color screen plates for over twenty years . 15,000 original autochrome plates are still preserved in the society 's archives . the collection contains unique photographs , including numerous autochromes from paris by auguste léon from 1925 and by w . robert moore from 1936 just before wwii . in the u.s . library of congress 's huge collection of american pictorialist photographer arnold genthe 's work , 384 of his autochrome plates were among the holdings as of 1955 . vanderbilt , p . ( compiled by ) , guide to the special collections of prints & photographs in the library of congress , the library of congress , washington , d.c . , 1955 , page 63 the george eastman museum in rochester , n.y . has an extensive collection of early colour photography , including louise ducos du hauron 's earliest autochrome images and materials used by the lumiere brothers . bassetlaw museum in retford , nottinghamshire holds a collection of over 700 autochromes by stephen pegler . this includes a collection of over 100 plates purchased by the museum in 2017 thanks to the generosity of local individuals and organisations . the images cover a range of subjects from still lifes , posed studies , local people and landscapes , and his travels abroad , and were taken between 1910 and the early 1930s . the pegler collection of autochromes is thought to be the largest collection of autochromes by one photographer in britain today . the royal horticultural society , uk has among the earliest colour photographs of plants and gardens taken by amateur photographer william van sommer ( 1859 - 1941 ) , including of rhs garden wisley taken around 1913 . . commercial use . one of the first books published with color photography used this technique . the 12 volumes of '' luther burbank : his methods and discoveries , their practical application '' included 1,260 color photographs and a chapter on how this process worked . in the early 1900s ethel standiford-mehlingan was an experimental photographer and artist and owner of the standiford studio in louisville , kentucky . she was commissioned by louisville artist and art patron eleanor belknap humphrey to create an autochrome diascope of her two oldest children . both the autochrome photograph of the humphrey children and the diascope mirror viewing device , which closes into itself in a leather-bound case similar in size and appearance to a book , are well preserved and still viewable in 2015 . ethel standiford-mehlingan later moved her louisville enterprise standiford studios to cleveland , ohio and it is not known if any other examples of her autochrome diascopes still exist . vladimír jindřich bufka was a pioneer and popularizer of autochrome in bohemia . neo-autochromists . there has been a revival of interest in the process by some , including a few groups in france working with original lumiere machinery and notes . one such recreation is a series of images from 2008 by the french photographer frédéric mocellin . . in popular culture . the 2006 film the illusionist tried to recreate the look of autochrome , although apparently basing that '' look '' on published reproductions rather than on actual autochrome plates . modern image sensors in digital cameras most commonly use a bayer filter , which works in essentially the same way as the colored starch grains in an autochrome plate—by breaking up the image into microscopically small color-filtered elements . in physical arrangement , however , the bayer filter mosaic much more closely resembles the regular geometric pattern used in other color screen plates of the autochrome era , such as the paget and finlay plates . gallery . file : taj mahal 1921.jpg an autochrome of the taj mahal reproduced in the national geographic magazine , march 1921 . file : paris 1925 59878912.jpg an autochrome of the pavilion of poland in paris 1925 . file : nieuport 23 c.1.jpg an autochrome of a world war i nieuport 23 biplane fighter , circa 1917 . file : percy-mackaye-alwyn-genthe-diascope.jpeg mirror view in a diascope of a 1913 autochrome of percy mackaye , photographed by arnold genthe . file : stockholmsutställningen 1930 villa 48.jpg house in stockholm , autochrome , 1930 . file : genthe nude edit.jpg autochrome nude study by arnold genthe file : unused box of autochrome plates ( 1921 ) . jpg original , unused box of autochrome plates ( 1921 ) file : autochrome box - reverse side.jpg original , unused box of autochrome plates ( 1921 ) - reverse side , featuring different languages file : original autochrome instruction manual - front cover ( scan ) . jpg original autochrome instruction manual - front cover ( scan ) file : autochrome price list pamphlet - front ( scan ) . jpg autochrome price list pamphlet - front ( scan ) file : autochrome price list pamphlet - reverse ( scan ) . jpg autochrome price list pamphlet - reverse ( scan )