Acute accent

uses . history . an early precursor of the acute accent was the apex , used in latin inscriptions to mark long vowels . pitch . . ancient greek . the acute accent was first used in the greek diacritics of ancient greek , where it indicated a syllable with a high pitch . in modern greek , a stress accent has replaced the pitch accent , and the acute marks the stressed syllable of a word . the greek name of the accented syllable was and is ( oxeîa , modern greek oxía ) '' sharp '' or '' high '' , which was calqued ( loan-translated ) into latin as '' sharpened '' . stress . the acute accent marks the stressed vowel of a word in several languages : blackfoot uses acute accents to show the place of stress in a word : soyópokistsi '' leaves '' . bulgarian : stress , which is variable in bulgarian , is not usually indicated in bulgarian except in dictionaries and sometimes in homonyms that are distinguished only by stress . however , bulgarian usually uses the grave accent to mark the vowel in a stressed syllable , unlike russian , which uses the acute accent . catalan uses it in stressed vowels : é , í , ó , ú . dutch uses it to mark stress ( vóórkomen – voorkómen , meaning occur and prevent respectively ) or a more closed vowel ( hé – hè , equivalent to english hey and heh ) if it is not clear from context . sometimes , it is simply used for disambiguation , as in één – een , meaning '' one '' and '' a ( n ) '' . galician hopi has acute to mark a higher tone . italian the accent is used to indicate the stress in a word , or whether the vowel is '' open '' or '' wide '' , or '' closed '' , or '' narrow '' . for example , pèsca '' peach '' ( '' open '' or '' wide '' vowel , as in '' pen '' ) and pésca '' fishing '' ( '' closed '' or '' narrow '' vowel , as in '' pain '' ) . lakota . for example , kákhi '' in that direction '' but kakhí '' take something to someone back there '' . leonese uses it for marking stress or disambiguation . modern greek marks the stressed vowel of every polysyllabic word : ( á ) , ( é ) , ( í ) , ( í ) , ( ó ) , ( í ) , ( ó ) . navajo where the acute marks a higher tone . norwegian , swedish and danish use the acute accent to indicate that a terminal syllable with the e is stressed and is often omitted if it does not change the meaning : armen ( first syllable stressed ) means '' the arm '' while armé ( e ) n means '' the army '' ; ide ( first syllable stressed ) means '' bear 's den '' while idé means '' idea '' . also stress-related are the different spellings of the words en/én and et/ét ( the indefinite article and the word '' one '' in danish and norwegian ) . in norwegian , however , the neuter word '' one '' is spelled ett . then , the acute points out that there is one and only one of the object , which derives from the obsolete spelling ( s ) een and eet . some loanwords , mainly from french , are also written with the acute accent , such as norwegian and swedish kafé and danish café ( also cafe ) . occitan portuguese : á , é , í , ó , ú . it may also indicate height ( see below ) . russian . stress is irregular in russian , and in reference and teaching materials ( dictionaries and books for children or foreigners ) , stress is indicated by an acute accent above the stressed vowel . the acute accent can be used both in the cyrillic and sometimes in the romanised text . spanish marks stressed syllables in words that deviate from the standardized stress patterns . it is also used to distinguish homophones such as el ( the ) and él ( he ) . ukrainian : marks the stress , but in regular typography is only used when it can help to distinguish between homographs : за́мок ( castle ) vs . замо́к ( lock ) . commonly used in dictionaries and some children books . welsh : word stress usually falls on the penultimate syllable , but one way of indicating stress on a final ( short ) vowel is by the use of the acute accent . in the welsh orthography , it can be on any vowel : á , é , í , ó , ú , ẃ , or ý . examples : '' to hate '' , '' cigarette '' , '' umbrella '' . height . the acute accent marks the height of some stressed vowels in various romance languages . to mark high vowels : bislama . the acute is used only on é , but only in one of the two orthographies . it distinguishes é from e . the orthography after 1995 ( which has no diacritics ) , does not distinguish these sounds . catalan . the acute marks the quality of the vowels é ( as opposed to è , and ó ( as opposed to ò . french . the acute is used on é . it is known as accent aigu , in contrast to the grave accent which is the accent sloped the other way . it distinguishes é from è , ê , and e . unlike in other romance languages , the accent marks do not imply stress in french . italian . the acute accent ( sometimes called accento chiuso , '' closed accent '' in italian ) is compulsory only in words of more than one syllable stressed on their final vowel ( and a few other words ) . words ending in stressed -o are never marked with an acute accent ( ó ) , but with a grave accent ( ò ) . therefore , only é and è are normally contrasted , typically in words ending in -ché , such as perché ( '' why/because '' ) ; in the conjugated copula è ( '' is '' ) ; in ambiguous monosyllables such as né ( 'neither ' ) vs . ne ( 'of it ' ) and sé ( 'itself ' ) vs . se ( 'if ' ) ; and some verb forms , e.g . poté ( '' he/she/it could '' ( past tense ) ) . the symbol ó can be used in the body of a word for disambiguation , for instance between bótte ( '' barrel '' ) and bòtte ( '' beating '' ) , though this is not mandatory : in fact standard italian keyboards lack a dedicated ó key . occitan . the acute marks the quality of the vowels é ( as opposed to è , ó ( as opposed to ò and á ( as opposed to à . scottish gaelic ( a celtic rather than romance language ) uses/used a system in which é is contrasted with è and ó with ò . both the grave and acute indicate length ; é/è and ó/ò are thus contrasted with e and o respectively . besides , á appears in the words á , ám and ás in order to distinguish them from a , am and as respectively . the other vowels ( i and u ) only appear either without an accent or with a grave . since the 1980s the sqa ( which sets school standards and thus the de facto standard language ) and most publishers have abandoned the acute accent , using grave accents in all situations ( analogous to length ) . however , universities , some publishers and many speakers continue to use acute accents . to mark low vowels : portuguese . the vowels á , é and ó are stressed low vowels , in opposition to â , ê and ô which are stressed high vowels . however , the accent is only used in words whose stressed syllable is in an unpredictable location within the word : where the location of the stressed syllable is predictable , no accent is used , and the height of the stressed vowel can not then usually be determined solely from the word 's spelling . length . . long vowels . arabic and persian : á , í , ú were used in western transliteration of islamic language texts from the 18th to early 20th centuries . representing the long vowels , they are typically transcribed with a macron today except in bahá ' í orthography . classical latin ( the apex ) czech : á , é , í , ó , ú , ý are the long versions of a , e , i , o , u , y . the accent is known as . to indicate a long u in the middle or at the end of a word , a kroužek ( ring ) is used instead , to form ů . hungarian : í , ó , ú are the long equivalents of the vowels i , o , u . the ő , ű ( see double acute accent ) are the long equivalents of ö , ü . both type of accents are known as means long ) . the letters á and é are two long vowels but they are two vowels on their own rather than the long equivalents of a and e ( see below in letter extension ) . irish : á , é , í , ó , ú are the long equivalents of the vowels a , e , i , o , u . the accent is known as a ( length accent ) , usually abbreviated to . the fada can affect pronunciation or meaning ; for instance , seán is '' john '' in irish but sean means '' old '' . old norse : á , é , í , ó , ú , ý are the long versions of a , e , i , o , u , y . sometimes , is used as the long version of , but is used more often . sometimes , the short-lived old icelandic long ( also written is written using an acute-accented form , , or a version with a macron , , but usually it is not distinguished from from which it is derived by u-mutation . slovak : the acute accent is called in slovak . in addition to the long vowels á , é , í , ó , ú and ý , dĺžeň is used to mark two syllabic consonants ŕ and ĺ , which are the long counterparts of syllabic r and l . short vowels . ligurian : in the official orthography , é is used for short , and ó is used for short . palatalization . a graphically similar , but not identical , mark is indicative of a palatalized sound in several languages . in polish , such a mark is known as a and is an integral part of several letters : four consonants and one vowel . when appearing in consonants , it indicates palatalization , similar to the use of the in czech and other slavic languages ( e.g . '' six '' ) . however , in contrast to the which is usually used for postalveolar consonants , the denotes alveolo-palatal consonants . in traditional polish typography , the is more nearly vertical than the acute accent , and placed slightly right of center . a similar rule applies to the belarusian latin alphabet . however , for computer use , unicode conflates the codepoints for these letters with those of the accented latin letters of similar appearance . in serbo-croatian , as in polish , the letter is used to represent a palatalized . in the romanization of macedonian , and represent the cyrillic letters ( gje ) and ( kje ) , which stand for palatal or alveolo-palatal consonants , though and ( or and are more commonly used for this purpose . the same two letters are used to transcribe the postulated proto-indo-european phonemes and . sorbian uses the acute for palatalization as in polish : . lower sorbian also uses , and lower sorbian previously used and , also written as ; these are now spelt as and . tone . in the quốc ngữ system for vietnamese , the yale romanization for cantonese , the pinyin romanization for standard chinese , and the bopomofo semi-syllabary , the acute accent indicates a rising tone . in mandarin , the alternative to the acute accent is the number 2 after the syllable : lái lai2 . in cantonese yale , the acute accent is either tone 2 , or tone 5 if the vowel ( s ) are followed by ' h ' ( if the number form is used , ' h ' is omitted ) : má ma2 , máh ma5 . in african languages and athabaskan languages , it frequently marks a high tone , e.g . , yoruba apá 'arm ' , nobiin féntí 'sweet date ' , ekoti kaláwa 'boat ' , navajo t ’ áá 'just ' . the acute accent is used in serbo-croatian dictionaries and linguistic publications to indicate a high-rising accent . it is not used in everyday writing . disambiguation . the acute accent is used to disambiguate certain words which would otherwise be homographs in the following languages : catalan . examples : són '' they are '' vs . son '' tiredness '' , més '' more '' vs . mes '' month '' . danish . examples : én '' one '' vs . en '' a/an '' ; fór '' went '' vs . for '' for '' ; véd '' know ( s ) '' vs . ved '' by '' ; gǿr '' bark ( s ) '' vs . gør '' do ( es ) '' ; dǿr '' die ( s ) '' vs . dør '' door '' ; allé '' alley '' vs . alle '' everybody '' . furthermore , it is also used for the imperative form of verbs ending in -ere , which lose their final e and might be mistaken for plurals of a noun ( which most often end in -er ) : analysér is the imperative form of at analysere '' to analyse '' , analyser is '' analyses '' , plural of the noun analyse '' analysis '' . using an acute accent is always optional , never required . dutch . examples : één '' one '' vs . een '' a/an '' ; vóór '' before '' vs . voor '' for '' ; vóórkomen '' to exist/to happen '' vs . voorkómen '' to prevent/to avoid '' . using an acute accent is mostly optional . modern greek . although all polysyllabic words have an acute accent on the stressed syllable , in monosyllabic words the presence or absence of an accent may disambiguate . the most common case is , the feminine definite article ( '' the '' ) , versus , meaning '' or '' . other cases include ( '' who '' / '' which '' ) versus ( '' where '' ) and ( '' that '' , as in '' he told me that . '' ) versus ( '' how '' ) . norwegian . it is used to indicate stress on a vowel otherwise not expected to have stress . most words are stressed on the first syllable and diacritical marks are rarely used . although incorrect , it is frequently used to mark the imperative form of verbs ending in -ere as it is in danish : kontrollér is the imperative form of '' to control '' , kontroller is the noun '' controls '' . the simple past of the verb å fare , '' to travel '' , can optionally be written fór , to distinguish it from for ( preposition '' for '' as in english ) , fôr '' feed '' n./ '' lining '' , or fòr ( only in nynorsk ) '' narrow ditch , trail by plow '' ( all the diacritics in these examples are optional . norwegian language council , diacritics ( in norwegian ) ) portuguese . examples : avô '' grandfather '' vs . avó '' grandmother '' , nós '' subject pronoun we '' vs . nos '' oblique case '' . russian . acute accents ( technically , stress ) are used in dictionaries to indicate the stressed syllable . they may also be optionally used to disambiguate both between minimal pairs , such as за́мок ( read as zámak , means '' castle '' ) and замо́к ( read as zamók , means '' lock '' ) , and between question words and relative pronouns such as что ( '' what '' , stressed , or '' that '' , unstressed ) , similarly to spanish . this is rare , however , as usually meaning is determined by context and no stress mark is written . the same rules apply to ukrainian , rusyn , belarusian and bulgarian . spanish . covers various question word / relative pronoun pairs where the first is stressed and the second is a clitic , such as cómo ( interrogative '' how '' ) and como ( non-interrogative '' how '' , comparative '' like '' , '' i eat '' this makes '' ¿cómo como ? como como como . '' correct sentences ( how i eat ? i eat like i eat . ) ) , differentiates qué ( what ) from que ( that ) , dónde and donde '' where '' , and some other words such as tú '' you '' and tu '' your , '' té '' tea '' and te '' you '' ( direct/indirect object ) , él '' he/him '' and el ( '' the '' , masculine ) , sólo '' only '' ( as in '' solamente '' ) and solo '' alone '' . this usage of the acute accent is called tilde diacrítica . emphasis . & nbsp ; in danish , the acute accent can also be used for emphasis , especially on the word der ( there ) , as in der kan ikke være mange mennesker dér , meaning '' there ca n't be many people there '' or dér skal vi hen meaning '' that 's where we 're going '' . in dutch , the acute accent can also be used to emphasize an individual word within a sentence . for example , dit is ónze auto , niet die van jullie , '' this is our car , not yours . '' in this example , ónze is merely an emphasized form of onze . also in family names like piét , piél , plusjé , hofsté . in the armenian script emphasis on a word is marked by an acute accent above the word 's stressed vowel ; it is traditionally grouped with the armenian question and exclamation marks which are also diacritics applied to the stressed vowel . letter extension . in faroese , the acute accent is used on five of the vowels ( a , i , o , u and y ) , but these letters , á , í , ó , ú and ý are considered separate letters with separate pronunciations . : á : long , short and before : : í/ý : long , short : ó : long , or , short : , except suðuroy : : : when ó is followed by the skerping -gv , it is pronounced , except in suðuroy where it is : ú : long , short : : when ú is followed by the skerping -gv , it is pronounced in hungarian , the acute accent marks a difference in quality on two vowels , apart from vowel length : : the ( short ) vowel a is open back rounded ( ɒ ) , but á is open front unrounded ( a ) ( and long ) . : similarly , the ( short ) vowel e is open-mid front unrounded ( ɛ ) , while ( long ) é is close-mid front unrounded ( e ) . : despite this difference , in most of the cases , these two pairs are arranged as equal in collation , just like the other pairs ( see above ) that only differ in length . in icelandic the acute accent is used on all 6 of the vowels ( a , e , i , o , u and y ) , and , like in faroese , these are considered separate letters . : á : : é : long , short : í/ý : : ó : : ú : : all can be either short or long , but note that the pronunciation of é is not the same short and long . : etymologically , vowels with an acute accent in these languages correspond to their old norse counterparts , which were long vowels but in many cases have become diphthongs . the only exception is é , which in faroese has become æ . in kashubian , polish , and sorbian , the acute on '' ó '' , historically used to indicate a lengthening of '' o '' , now indicates higher pronunciation , and , respectively . in turkmen , the letter ý is a consonant : . other uses . in some basque texts predating standard basque , the letters and carry acute accents ( an invention by sabino arana trask , l . the history of basque routledge : 1997 ) , which are otherwise indicated by double letters . in such cases , is used to represent ( a trilled , this spelling is used even at the end of a syllable , lecciones de ortografía del euskera bizkaino , page 40 , arana eta goiri'tar sabin , bilbao , bizkaya'ren edestija ta izkerea pizkundia , 1896 ( sebastián de amorrortu ) . to differentiate from -- , an alveolar tap in basque in word-final positions is always trilled ) and for ( a palatalized . in transliterating texts written in cuneiform , an acute accent over the vowel indicates that the original sign is the second representing that value in the canonical lists . thus su is used to transliterate the first sign with the phonetic value , while sú transliterates the second sign with the value . in emilian-romagnol , é ó denote both length and height . in romagnol they represent eː , oː , while in emilian they represent e , o . in indonesian dictionaries , is used to represent , while is used to represent . in northern sámi , an acute accent was placed over the corresponding latin letter to represent the letters peculiar to this language ( áá , čč , đđ , ŋŋ , šš , ŧŧ , žž ) when typing when there was no way of entering these letters correctly otherwise . many norwegian words of french origin retain an acute accent , such as allé , kafé , idé , komité . popular usage can be sketchy and often neglects the accent , or results in the grave accent erroneously being used in its place . likewise , in swedish , the acute accent is used only for the letter , mostly in words of french origin and in some names . it is used both to indicate a change in vowel quantity as well as quality and that the stress should be on this , normally unstressed , syllable . examples include café ( '' café '' ) and resumé ( '' résumé '' , noun ) . there are two pairs of homographs that are differentiated only by the accent : armé ( '' army '' ) versus arme ( '' poor ; pitiful '' , masculine gender ) and idé ( '' idea '' ) versus ide ( '' winter quarters '' ) . and are used in pashto in the latin alphabet , equivalent to and , respectively . english . as with other diacritical marks , a number of ( usually french ) loanwords are sometimes spelled in english with an acute accent as used in the original language : these include attaché , blasé , canapé , cliché , communiqué , café , décor , déjà vu , détente , élite , entrée , exposé , mêlée , fiancé , fiancée , papier-mâché , passé , pâté , piqué , plié , repoussé , résumé , risqué , sauté , roué , séance , naïveté , toupée and touché . retention of the accent is common only in the french ending é or ée , as in these examples , where its absence would tend to suggest a different pronunciation . thus the french word résumé is commonly seen in english as , with only one accent ( but also with both or none ) . acute accents are sometimes added to loanwords where a final e is not silent , for example , maté from spanish mate , the maldivian capital malé , saké from japanese sake , and pokémon from the japanese compound for pocket monster , the last three from languages which do not use the roman alphabet , and where transcriptions do not normally use acute accents . for foreign terms used in english that have not been assimilated into english or are not in general english usage , italics are generally used with the appropriate accents : for example , coup d'état , pièce de résistance , crème brûlée and ancien régime . the acute accent is sometimes ( though rarely ) used for poetic purposes : it can mark stress on an unusual syllable : for example , caléndar to indicate ( rather than the standard . it can disambiguate stress where the distinction is metrically important : for example , rébel ( as opposed to rebél ) , or áll trádes , to show that the phrase is pronounced as a spondee , rather than the more natural iamb . it can indicate the sounding of an ordinarily silent letter : for example , pickéd to indicate the pronunciation , rather than standard ( the grave accent is more common for this last purpose ) . the layout of some european pc keyboards , combined with problematic keyboard-driver semantics , causes some users to use an acute accent or a grave accent instead of an apostrophe when typing in english ( e.g . typing or instead of john 's ) . . typographic form . western typographic and calligraphic traditions generally design the acute accent as going from top to bottom . french even has the definition of acute is the accent , meaning that it descends from top right to lower left . in polish , is instead used which usually has a different shape and style compared to other western languages . it features a more vertical steep form and is moved more to the right side of center line than acute . as unicode did not differentiate the from acute , letters from western font and polish font had to share the same set of characters which make designing conflicting characters ( e.g . oacute , more troublesome . opentype tried to solve this problem by giving language-sensitive glyph substitution to designers so that the font will automatically switch between western and polish based on language settings . new fonts are sensitive to this issue and their design for the diacritics tends toward a more '' universal design '' so that there will be less need for localization , for example roboto and noto typefaces . pinyin uses the acute accent to mark the second tone ( rising or high-rising tone ) , which indicate a tone rising from low to high , causing the writing stroke of acute accent to go from lower left to top right . this contradicts the western typographic tradition which makes designing the acute accent in chinese fonts a problem . designers approach this problem in 3 ways : either keep the original western form of going top right ( thicker ) to bottom left ( thinner ) ( e.g . arial/times new roman ) , flip the stroke to go from bottom left ( thicker ) to top right ( thinner ) ( e.g . adobe heiti std/simsun ) , or just make the accents without stroke variation ( e.g . simhei ) . . technical notes . the codes ( which come from the code page 437 ) are : 160 for á 130 for é 161 for í 162 for ó 163 for ú on some non-us keyboard layouts ( e.g . hiberno-english ) , these letters can also be made by holding ctrl+alt ( or alt gr ) and the desired letter . microsoft office . to input an accented letter in a microsoft office software ( word , powerpoint , excel , access , etc . ) , hold the ctrl key , press the apostrophe ( ' ) key once , release the ctrl key , and then press the desired letter . macos . on macos computers , an acute accent is placed on a vowel by pressing and then the vowel , which can also be capitalised ; for example , á is formed by pressing and then , and á is formed by pressing and then . keyboards . because keyboards have only a limited number of keys , english keyboards do not have keys for accented characters . the concept of dead key , a key that modified the meaning of the next key press , was developed to overcome this problem . this acute accent key was already present on typewriters where it typed the accent without moving the carriage , so a normal letter could be written on the same place . internet . some sites , such as wikipedia or the alta vista automatic translator , allow inserting such symbols by clicking on a link in a box . see also . acute ( phonetics ) circumflex double acute accent grave accent