Lucayan people

origin and settlement . sometime between 500 and 800 ce , tainos began crossing in dugout canoes from hispaniola and/or cuba to the bahamas . hypothesized routes for the earliest migrations have been from hispaniola to the caicos islands , from hispaniola or eastern cuba to great inagua island , and from central cuba to long island ( in the central bahamas ) . the settlement sites in the caicos islands differ from those found elsewhere in the bahamas , resembling sites in hispaniola associated with the classic taino settlements that arose after 1200 . william keegan argues that the sites on caicos therefore represent a colonization after 1200 by tainos from hispaniola seeking salt from the natural salt pans on the island . great inagua is closer to both hispaniola and cuba than any other island in the bahamas , and sites on great inagua contain large quantities of sand-tempered pottery imported from cuba and/or hispaniola , while sites on other islands in the bahamas contain more shell-tempered pottery ( '' palmetto ware '' ) , which developed in the bahamas . while trade ( in dugout canoes ) between cuba and long island was reported by columbus , this involved a voyage of at least over open water , although much of that was on the very shallow waters of the great bahama bank . moreover , the tainos probably did not settle in central cuba until after 1000 , and there is no particular evidence that this was the route of the initial settlement of the bahamas . craton:17 keegan:48–62 from an initial settlement of great inagua island , the lucayans expanded throughout the bahamas islands in some 800 years ( c . & nbsp ; 700 & nbsp ; – c . & nbsp ; 1500 ) , growing to a population of about 40,000 . population density at the time of first european contact was highest in the south central area of the bahamas , declining towards the north , reflecting the progressively shorter time of occupation of the northern islands . known lucayan settlement sites are confined to the nineteen largest islands in the archipelago , or to smaller cays located less than one kilometre from those islands . keegan posits a north-ward migration route from great inagua island to acklins and crooked islands , then on to long island . from long island expansion would have gone east to rum cay and san salvador island , north to cat island and west to great and little exuma islands . from cat island the expansion proceeded to eleuthera , from which new providence and andros to the west and great and little abaco islands and grand bahama to the north were reached . lucayan village sites are also known on mayaguana , east of acklins island , and samana cay , north of acklins . there are also village sites on east , middle and north caicos and on providenciales , in the caicos islands , at least some of which keegan attributes to a later settlement wave from hispaniola . population density in the southernmost bahamas remained lower , probably due to the drier climate there ( less than of rain a year on great inagua island and the turks and caicos islands and only slightly higher on acklins and crooked islands and mayaguana ) . keegan:25 , 54–58 , 86 , 170–173 based on lucayan names for the islands , granberry and vescelius argue for two origins of settlement ; one from hispaniola to the turks and caicos islands through mayaguana and acklins and crooked islands to long island and the great and little exuma islands , and another from cuba through great inagua island , little inagua island and ragged island to long island and the exumas . granberry & vescelius also state that around 1200 the turks and caicos islands were resettled from hispaniola and were thereafter part of the classical taino culture and language area , and no longer lucayan . granberry and vescelius:80–86 . connections . the lucayans were part of a larger taino community in the greater antilles . the lucayans , along with the tainos in jamaica , most of cuba and parts of western hispaniola have been classified as part of a sub-taino , western taino or ciboney taino cultural and language group . keegan describes any distinctions between lucayans and classical tainos ( of hispaniola and eastern cuba ) as largely arbitrary . the lucayans lived in smaller political units ( simple chiefdoms , compared to the more elaborate political structures in hispaniola ) , and their language and culture showed differences , but they remained tainos , although a '' hinterland '' of the wider taino world . the lucayans were connected to a caribbean-wide trade network . columbus observed trade carried between long island and cuba by dugout canoe . a piece of jadeite found on san salvador island appears to have originated in guatemala , based on a trace element analysis . granberry and vescelius:14 , 38 , 43 keegan:104 , 162 , 203 . people . columbus thought the lucayans resembled the guanche of the canary islands ( in part because they were intermediate in skin color between europeans and africans ) . he described the lucayans as handsome , graceful , well-proportioned , gentle , generous and peaceful , and customarily going almost completely naked . peter martyr d'anghiera said that the lucayan women were so beautiful that men from '' other countries '' moved to the islands to be near them . women past puberty wore a small skirt of cotton , and the men might wear a loincloth made of plaited leaves or cotton . some people wore head bands , waist bands , feathers , bones and ear and nose jewelry on occasion . they were often tattooed and usually applied paint to their bodies and/or faces . they also practiced head flattening . their hair was black and straight , and they kept it cut short except for a few hairs in back which were never cut . columbus reported seeing scars on the bodies of some of the men , which were explained to him as resulting from attempts by people from other islands to capture them . albury:14–16 craton:17 , 18 , 20–21 sauer:31–32 . genetics . in 2018 , researchers successfully extracted dna from a tooth found in a burial context in preacher 's cave on eleuthera island . the tooth was directly dated to around 776–992 ad . genetic analysis revealed that the tooth belonged to a woman . when compared against contemporary populations , the ancient individual shows closest genetic affinity to arawakan speakers from the amazon and orinoco basins , with closest affinity to the palikur . the individual was assigned to mtdna haplogroup b2 . customs . lucayan society was based on matrilineal succession , which was typical of taino culture as a whole . the spanish reported that a woman resided with her husband 's family , but keegan argues that this was not patrilocal residence in the strict sense , but rather residence in the husband 's uncle 's household ( avunculocal residence ) . keegan:91 , 102–103 . houses . lucayans , like other tainos , lived in multi-household houses . descriptions of lucayan houses by the spanish match those of houses used by tainos in hispaniola and cuba : shaped like a round tent , tall , made of poles and thatch , with an opening at the top to let smoke out . columbus described the houses of the lucayans as clean and well-swept . the houses were furnished with cotton nets ( some kind of hammocks ) for beds and furnishings , and were used mainly for sleeping . each house sheltered an extended family . there are no surviving reports of the size of lucayan houses , but estimates of about 20 people per house in taino communities in pre-contact cuba are cited by keegan as a reasonable estimate for lucayan houses . while not mentioned for lucayan houses , the houses in cuba were described as having two doors . classic taino villages in hispaniola and eastern cuba typically had houses arranged around a central plaza , and often located along rivers with access to good agricultural land . on the other hand , lucayan villages were linear , along the coast , often on the leeward side of an island , but also found on the windward side wherever tidal creeks provided some protected shoreline . keegan:166–167 sauer:62 . diet . the lucayans grew root crops and hunted , fished and gathered wild foods . the staple crop of the lucayans was manioc ( cassava ) . the spanish reported that the tainos also grew sweet potatoes , cocoyams , arrowroot , leren , yampee , peanuts , beans and cucurbits , and the lucayans probably took most , if not all , of those crops with them to the bahamas . maize was a recent introduction to the greater antilles when the spanish arrived , and was only a minor component of the taino and , presumably , lucayan diets . the lucayans may have grown papayas , pineapples , guava , mammee apple , guinep and tamarind fruit . craton:20 keegan:124–126 there were few land animals available in the bahamas for hunting : hutias ( taino utia ) , cyclura , small lizards , land crabs and birds . while tainos kept dogs and muscovy ducks , only dogs were reported by early observers , or found at lucayan sites . less than twelve percent of the meat eaten by lucayans came from land animals , of which three-quarters came from iguanas and land crabs . more than 80 percent of the meat in the lucayan diet came from marine fishes , almost all of which grazed on seagrass and/or coral . sea turtles and marine mammals ( west indian monk seal and porpoise ) provided a very small portion of the meat in the lucayan diet . the balance of dietary meat came from marine mollusks . craton:25 keegan:126–127 . other plant products . the lucayans grew cotton ( gossypium barbadense ) and tobacco , and used other plants including agave , furcraea and hibiscus for fiber in fishing nets . one of columbus 's sailors received of cotton in trade from a single lucayan on guanahani . although columbus did not see tobacco in use by the lucayans , he did note that they traded a type of leaf that they regarded as valuable . bixa was used to produce a reddish body paint and jagua ( genipa or mamoncillo ) for black body paint . keegan:225 sauer:56 , 61 . artifacts . the lucayans carved canoes , spears , bowls and ceremonial stools from wood . stone chopping , cutting and scraping tools were imported from cuba or haiti . most pottery was of the type called '' palmetto ware '' , including '' abaco redware '' and '' crooked island ware '' . this was produced in the islands using local red clay soils tempered with burnt conch shells . palmetto ware pottery was usually undecorated . there are no known differences that can be used to date or sequence palmetto ware pottery . some ( usually less than one percent of collected shards in most of the bahamas , about ten percent in the caicos islands ) sand-tempered pottery was imported from cuba and/or haiti . the lucayans made fish hooks from bone or shell and harpoon points from bone . the lucayans probably did not use bows and arrows . the first mention by the spanish of encountering indians using bows and arrows was at samaná bay in northeastern hispaniola . albury:17–18 craton:20 , 25 granberry and vescellus:43 keegan:52–53 , 77 sauer:31 . one of the few artifacts of lucayan life that has been found in a variety of areas in the bahama archipelago is the duho . are carved seats found in the houses of taino caciques or chiefs throughout the caribbean region . duhos '' figured prominently in the maintenance of taino political and ideological systems . and were . literally seats of power , prestige , and ritual . '' conrad , geoffrey w . , john w . foster , and charles d . beeker , '' organic artifacts from the manantial de la aleta , dominican republic : preliminary observations and interpretations '' , journal of caribbean archaeology . 2:6 , 2001 . made of wood and stone have both been found , though those made of wood tend not to last as well as the stone chairs and are , therefore , much rarer . there are intact wooden in the collections of the musée de l'homme in paris and british museum in london ( the latter found on the island of eleuthera ) . british museum collection . the lucayan–spanish encounter . in 1492 christopher columbus sailed from spain with three ships , seeking a direct route to asia . on october 12 , 1492 columbus reached an island in the bahamas , an event long regarded as the 'discovery ' of america . this first island to be visited by columbus was called guanahani by the lucayans , and san salvador by the spanish . the identity of the first american landfall by columbus remains contested , but many authors accept samuel e . morison 's identification of what was later called watling ( or watling 's ) island as columbus ' san salvador . the former watling island was officially renamed san salvador in 1925 . luis marden 's identification of samaná key as guanahani is the strongest contender with the former watling island theory . columbus visited several other islands in the bahamas hunting for gold before sailing on to cuba . albury:21–33 craton:28–37 keegan:175–187 sauer:24–25 columbus spent a few days visiting other islands in the vicinity : santa maría de la concepción , fernandina , and saomete . lucayans on san salvador had told columbus that he could find a '' king '' who had a lot of gold at the village of samaot ( also spelled samoet , saomete or saometo ) . ( taino chiefs and villages often shared a name . keegan suggests that the confusion of spellings was due to grammatically differing forms of the name for the chief and for the village or island , or was simply due to columbus 's difficulty with the lucayan language . ) columbus spent three days sailing back and forth along the shore of an island seeking samaot . at one point he sought to reach samaot by sailing eastward , but the water was too shallow , and he felt that sailing around the island was '' a very long way '' . keegan interprets this description to fit the acklins/crooked islands group , with a ship in the west side being able to see the western shore of acklins island across the very shallow waters of the bight of acklins , where there was a village that stretched about along the shore . keegan:187–201 amerigo vespucci spent almost four months in the bahamas in 1499 to 1500 . his log of that time is vague , perhaps because he was trespassing on columbus 's discoveries ( which at the time remained under columbus ) . there may have been other unrecorded spanish landfalls in the bahamas , shipwrecks and slaving expeditions . maps published between 1500 and 1508 appear to show details of the bahamas , cuba and the north american mainland that were not officially reported until later . european artifacts of the period have been found on san salvador , the caicos islands , long island , little exuma , acklins island , conception island and samaná cay . such finds , however , do not prove that spaniards visited those islands , as trade among lucayans could have distributed the artifacts . keegan:202–203 , 207 , 212–213 . slavery and genocide . columbus kidnapped several lucayans on san salvador and santa maría de la concepción . two fled , but columbus took some lucayans back to spain at the end of his first voyage . vespucci took 232 lucayans to spain as slaves in 1500 . spanish exploitation of the labor of the natives of hispaniola rapidly reduced that population , leading the governor of hispaniola to complain to the spanish crown . after columbus 's death , ferdinand ii of aragon ordered in 1509 that indians be imported from nearby islands to make up the population losses in hispaniola , and the spanish began capturing lucayans in the bahamas for use as laborers in hispaniola . at first the lucayans sold for no more than four doubloon in hispaniola , but when it was realized that the lucayans were practiced at diving for conches , the price rose to 100 to 150 gold pesos and the lucayans were sent to the isle of cubagua as pearl diving . within two years the southern bahamas were largely depopulated . the spanish may have carried away as many as 40,000 lucayans by 1513 . carl o . sauer described ponce de león 's 1513 expedition in which he '' discovered '' florida as simply '' an extension of slave hunting beyond the empty islands . '' sauer:160 when the spanish decided to traffic the remaining lucayans to hispaniola in 1520 , they could find only eleven in all of the bahamas . thereafter the bahamas remained uninhabited for 130 years . albury:34–37 craton . pp . 37–39 keegan:212–213 , 220–223 sauer:159–160 , 191