Marinus van der Lubbe

early life . marinus van der lubbe was born in leiden in the province of south holland . his parents were divorced , and after his mother died when he was twelve years old , he went to live with his half-sister 's family . in his youth , van der lubbe worked as a bricklayer . he was nicknamed dempsey after boxer jack dempsey because of his great strength . while working , van der lubbe came in contact with the labour movement ; in 1925 , at age 16 , he joined the communist party of the netherlands ( cpn ) and its youth wing , the communist youth bund ( cjb ) . in 1926 , he was injured at work , getting lime in his eyes , which hospitalized him for a few months and almost left him blind . since the injury forced him to quit his job , he was unemployed with a pension of only 7.44 guilders a week . after a few conflicts with his sister , van der lubbe moved to leiden in 1927 . there , he learned to speak some german and founded the lenin house , where he organised political meetings . while working for the tielmann factory , a strike broke out . van der lubbe claimed to the management to be one of the ringleaders and offered to accept any punishment if no one else was victimised , even though he was clearly too inexperienced to have been seriously involved . during the trial , he tried to claim sole responsibility and was purportedly hostile to the idea of getting off free . afterwards , van der lubbe planned to emigrate to the soviet union , but he lacked the funds to do so . he was politically active among the unemployed workers ' movement until 1931 , when he fell into disagreement with the cpn and instead approached the group of international communists . in 1933 , van der lubbe fled to germany to take action in the local communist underground . he had a criminal record for several attempted arsons . reichstag fire . van der lubbe claimed to have reichstag fire in an attempt to rally german workers against fascist rule . he was brought to trial along with the head of the german communist party and three bulgarian members of the comintern . at his trial , van der lubbe was convicted and sentenced to death for the reichstag fire . the four other defendants ( ernst torgler , georgi dimitrov , blagoi popov , and vasil tanev ) were acquitted . van der lubbe was guillotined in a leipzig prison yard on 10 january 1934 , three days before his 25th birthday . he was buried in an unmarked grave on the südfriedhof ( south cemetery ) in leipzig . after world war ii , moves were made by his brother , jan van der lubbe , in an attempt to overturn the original verdict . in 1967 , his sentence was changed by a judge from death to eight years in prison . in 1980 , after more lengthy complaints , a west german court overturned the verdict entirely , but that was criticised by the prosecutor . the case was re-examined by the federal court of justice of germany for three years . in 1983 , the court made a final decision on the matter and overturned the result of the 1980 trial on grounds that there was no basis for it and so it was illegal . however , on december 6 , 2007 , the attorney general of germany monika harms nullified the entire verdict and posthumously pardoned van der lubbe , based on a 1998 german law that makes it possible to overturn certain cases of nazi injustice . the court 's determination was based on the premise that the national socialist regime was , by definition , unjust , and since the case 's death sentence had been politically motivated , it was likely to have contained an extension of that injustice . the conclusion was independent of the factual question of whether or not van der lubbe had actually set the fire . announcement of the attorney general of germany ( in german ) . claimed responsibility . historians disagree as to whether van der lubbe acted alone , as he said , to protest the condition of the german working class , or was involved in a larger conspiracy . the nazis blamed a communist conspiracy . responsibility for the reichstag fire remains an ongoing topic of debate and research in modern historical scholarship . anson rabinbach , '' staging antifascism : the brown book of the reichstag fire and hitler terror , '' in new german critique , vol . 35 , no . 1 , ( spring 2008 ) , pp . 97–126 william shirer , writing in the rise and fall of the third reich , surmised that van der lubbe was goaded into setting a fire at the reichstag but that the nazis had set their own more elaborate fire at the same time . according to ian kershaw , writing in 1998 , the consensus of nearly all historians is that van der lubbe had in fact set the reichstag on fire . kershaw , ian hitler hubris pp . 456–458 , 731–732 . in popular culture . the einstürzende neubauten song '' feurio ! '' contains a reference to van der lubbe : '' marinus du warst es nicht '' ( marinus , it was n't you ) . dutch folk-rock band refers to van der lubbe in their song '' kommer en kwel '' . a the fabulous furry freak brothers story has one of the characters ( freewheelin ' franklin ) referring to a fictitious '' marinus van der lubbe international firebombing society '' . w . h . auden refers to van der lubbe in his poem beginning '' easily , my dear , you move , easily your head '' , dated november 1934 . stephen spender wrote a poem entitled van der lubbe . belgian author willem elsschot wrote a poem entitled van der lubbe . notes . references . biography marinus van der lubbe on libcom.org history . martin schouten : rinus van der lubbe 1909–1934 – een biografie . de bezige bij , amsterdam 1986 . ( in dutch ) alexander bahar and wilfried kugel : der reichstagbrand , edition q ( 2001 ) german language only . hersch fischler : zum zeitablauf der reichstagsbrandstiftung . korrekturen der untersuchung alfred berndts , in : vierteljahrshefte für zeitgeschichte 55 ( 2005 ) , s . 617–632 . ( with english summary ) anson rabinbach , '' staging antifascism : the brown book of the reichstag fire and hitler terror , '' in new german critique , vol . 35 , no . 1 , ( spring 2008 ) , pp . 97–126 . external links . english translation of the reichstag fire ( 1963 ) by fritz tobias , with introduction by a . j . p . taylor dutch council communism and van der lubbe burning the reichstag – the question of '' exemplary acts '' – the political repercussions of his act on his comrades . zuidenwind filmproductions at www.zuidenwind.nl documentary about marinus van der lubbe marinus van der lubbe rehabilitated ( english )