Assam

music , dance , and drama . file : sattriya by dancer meenakshi medhi.jpg sattriya file : bodo dance.jpg bodo dance bagurumba file : tea tribe dance of assam.jpg '' adivasi '' -jhumair dance file : lukobadya nagara.jpg nagara file : dr . bhupen hazarika , assam , india.jpg bhupen hazarika file : bihu dance of assam.jpg assamese youth performing bihu dance file : statue of kalaguru , rupkonwar and natasurjya at guwahati ( side view ) . jpg statute of bishnu prasad rabha , jyoti prasad agarwala and phani sarma at district library , guwahati . performing arts include : ankia naat ( onkeeya naat ) , a traditional vaishnav dance-drama ( bhaona ) popular since the 15th century ce . it makes use of large masks of gods , goddesses , demons and animals and in between the plays a sutradhar ( xutrodhar ) continues to narrate the story . besides bihu dance and huchory performed during the bohag bihu , dance forms of tribal minorities such as ; kushan nritra of rajbongshi 's , bagurumba and bordoicikhla dance of bodos , mishing bihu , banjar kekan performed during chomangkan by karbis , jhumair of tea-garden community are some of the major folk dances . sattriya ( sotriya ) dance related to vaishnav tradition is a classical form of dance . moreover , there are several other age-old dance-forms such as barpeta 's bhortal nritya , deodhani dance , ojapali , beula dance , ka shad inglong kardom , nimso kerung , etc . the tradition of modern moving theatres is typical of assam with immense popularity of many mobile theatre groups such as kohinoor , sankardev , abahan , bhagyadevi , hengul , brindabon , itihas etc . the indigenous folk music has influenced the growth of a modern idiom , that finds expression in the music of artists like jyoti prasad agarwala , bishnuprasad rabha , parvati prasad baruwa , bhupen hazarika , pratima barua pandey , anima choudhury , rudra baruah , jayanta hazarika , khagen mahanta , dipali barthakur , ganashilpi dilip sarma , sudakshina sarma among many others . among the new generation , zubeen garg , jitul sonowal , angaraag mahanta and joi barua . there is an award given in the honour of bishnu prasad rabha for achievements in the cultural/music world of assam by the state government . cuisine . typically , an assamese meal consists of many things such as bhat ( rice ) with dayl/ daly ( lentils ) , masor jool ( fish stew ) , mangxô ( meat stew ) and stir fried greens or herbs and vegetables . the two main characteristics of a traditional meal in assam are khar ( an alkali , named after its main ingredient ) and tenga ( preparations bearing a characteristically rich and tangy flavour ) . khorika is the smoked or fire grilled meat eaten with meals . commonly consumed varieties of meat include mutton , fowl , duck/goose , fish , pigeon , pork and beef ( among muslim and christian indigenous assamese ethnic groups ) . grasshoppers , locusts , silkworms , snails , eels , wild fowl , squab and other birds , venison are also eaten , albeit in moderation . khorisa ( fermented bamboo shoots ) are used at times to flavour curries while they can also be preserved and made into pickles . koldil ( banana flower ) and squash are also used in popular culinary preparations . a variety of different rice cultivars are grown and consumed in different ways , viz . , roasted , ground , boiled or just soaked . fish curries made of free range wild fish as well as bôralí , rôu , illish , or sitôl are the most popular . another favourite combination is luchi ( fried flatbread ) , a curry which can be vegetarian or non-vegetarian . many indigenous assamese communities households still continue to brew their traditional alcoholic beverages ; examples include : laupani , xaaj , paniyo , jou , joumai , hor , apang , etc . such beverages are served during traditional festivities . declining them is considered socially offensive . the food is often served in bell metal dishes and platters like kanhi , maihang and so on . literature . assamese literature dates back to the composition of charyapada , and later on works like saptakanda ramayana by madhava kandali , which is the first translation of the ramayana into an indo-aryan language , contributed to assamese literature . sankardeva 's borgeet , ankia naat , bhaona and satra tradition backed the 15th-16th century assamese literature . written during the reign of ahoms , the buranjis are notable literary works which are prominently historical manuscripts . most literary works are written in assamese although other local language such as bodo and dimasa are also represented . in the 19th and 20th century , assamese and other literature was modernised by authors including lakshminath bezbaroa , birinchi kumar barua , hem barua , mamoni raisom goswami , bhabendra nath saikia , birendra kumar bhattacharya , hiren bhattacharyya , homen borgohain , bhabananda deka , rebati mohan dutta choudhury , mahim bora , lil bahadur chettri , syed abdul malik , surendranath medhi , hiren gohain etc . fine arts . the archaic mauryan stupas discovered in and around goalpara district are the earliest examples ( c . 300 & nbsp ; bce to c . 100 & nbsp ; ce ) of ancient art and architectural works . the remains discovered in daparvatiya ( doporboteeya ) archaeological site with a beautiful doorframe in tezpur are identified as the best examples of artwork in ancient assam with influence of sarnath school of art of the late gupta period . painting is an ancient tradition of assam . xuanzang ( 7th century & nbsp ; ce ) mentions that among the kamarupa king bhaskaravarma 's gifts to harshavardhana there were paintings and painted objects , some of which were on assamese silk . many of the manuscripts such as hastividyarnava ( a treatise on elephants ) , the chitra bhagawata and in the gita govinda from the middle ages bear excellent examples of traditional paintings . traditional crafts . assam has a rich tradition of crafts , cane and bamboo craft , bell metal and brass craft , silk and cotton weaving , toy and mask making , pottery and terracotta work , wood craft , jewellery making , and musical instruments making have remained as major traditions . cane and bamboo craft provide the most commonly used utilities in daily life , ranging from household utilities , weaving accessories , fishing accessories , furniture , musical instruments , construction materials , etc . utilities and symbolic articles such as sorai and bota made from bell metal and brass are found in every assamese household . hajo and sarthebari ( sorthebaary ) are the most important centres of traditional bell-metal and brass crafts . assam is the home of several types of silks , the most prestigious are : muga – the natural golden silk , pat – a creamy-bright-silver coloured silk and eri – a variety used for manufacturing warm clothes for winter . apart from sualkuchi ( xualkuchi ) , the centre for the traditional silk industry , in almost every parts of the brahmaputra valley , rural households produce silk and silk garments with excellent embroidery designs . moreover , various ethno-cultural groups in assam make different types of cotton garments with unique embroidery designs and wonderful colour combinations . moreover , assam possesses unique crafts of toy and mask making mostly concentrated in the vaishnav monasteries , pottery and terracotta work in western assam districts and wood craft , iron craft , jewellery , etc . in many places across the region . file : lil bahadur chettri.jpg lil bahadur chettri file : citra bhagavata illustration 1.jpg citra bhagavata illustration file : art hastividyarnava 2.jpg a folio from the hastividyarnava manuscript file : citra bhagavata illustration 2.jpg a page of manuscript painting from assam ; the medieval painters used locally manufactured painting materials such as the colours of hangool and haital and papers manufactured from aloewood bark file : assam xorai.png bell metal made sorai and sophura are important parts of culture file : assam knahor knahi.jpg assam kahor ( bell metal ) kahi . media . print media include assamese dailies amar asom , asomiya khobor , asomiya pratidin , dainik agradoot , dainik janambhumi , dainik asam , gana adhikar , janasadharan and niyomiya barta . asom bani , sadin and bhal khabar are assamese weekly newspapers . english dailies of assam include the assam tribune , the sentinel , the telegraph , the times of india , the north east times , eastern chronicle and the hills times . thekar , in the karbi language has the largest circulation of any daily from karbi anglong district . bodosa has the highest circulation of any bodo daily from btc . dainik jugasankha is a bengali daily with editions from dibrugarh , guwahati , silchar and kolkata . dainik samayik prasanga , dainik prantojyoti , dainik janakantha and nababarta prasanga are other prominent bengali dailies published in the barak valley towns of karimganj and silchar . hindi dailies include purvanchal prahari , pratah khabar and dainik purvoday . broadcasting stations of all india radio have been established in five big cities : dibrugarh , guwahati , kokrajhar , silchar and tezpur . local news and music are the main priority for that station . assam has three dd north-east at dibrugarh , guwahati and silchar . guwahati is the headquarters of a number of electronic medias like assam talks , dy 365 , news live , news 18 assam/north-east , prag news and pratidin time . notable people . jyoti prasad agarwala , playwright , songwriter , poet and film maker fakhruddin ali ahmed , 5th president of india talimeren ao , india football captain and physician , first captain after independence jahnu barua , film maker kanaklata barua , independence activist bhogeswar baruah , athlete and coach , asian games gold medallist , arjuna awardee uddhab bharali , inventor , innovator jatin bora , actor gopinath bordoloi , independence activist , first chief minister of assam homen borgohain , writer and journalist anwara taimur , first women chief minister of assam lachit borphukan , commander of ahom kingdom parineeta borthakur , singer , actress atan burhagohain , one of the most influential burhagohains of ahom kingdom moinul hoque choudhury , politician and former central minister of industrial development hima das , athlete and asian games gold medallist rima das , film director and producer zubeen garg , musician , actor , director , producer and singer akhil gogoi , social activist ranjan gogoi , former chief justice of india , bjp government nominated mp to rajyasabha tarun gogoi , former chief minister of assam hiren gohain , social scientist arnab goswami , journalist and editor-in-chief of republic bharat tv jitendra nath goswami , chief scientist of isro 's chandrayaan-1 mamoni raisom goswami , professor , writer , activist nipon goswami , actor aideu handique , first actress in assamese cinema , one of the first actresses in india to play a leading role bhupen hazarika , musician , lyricist , singer and poet adil hussain , actor joymoti konwari , tai-ahom princess madhavdev , disciple of sankardev , preceptor of ekasarana dharma monalisa baruah mehta , table tennis player , arjuna awardee halicharan narzary , footballer , plays in india national team papon , singer and musician riyan parag , cricketer jadav payeng , environmentalist and naturalist bishnu prasad rabha , musician , songwriter , lyricist vinit rai footballer , plays in indian national team sankardev , saint-scholar , poet , playwright , social-religious reformer and founder of ekasarana dharma sukaphaa , founder of the ahom dynasty jayanta talukdar , archer , asian games medallist , arjuna awardee shiva thapa , boxer , asian games gold medallist , arjuna awardee chabilal upadhyaya , freedom fighter , first president ( selected ) of apcc