IBM Series/1

models . initiall , model 3 ( ibm 4953 ) and model 5 ( ibm 4955 ) processors were provided . later processors were the model 4 ( ibm 4954 ) and model 6 ( ibm 4956 ) . don estridge had been the lead manager on the ibm series/1 minicomputer . he reportedly had fallen out of grace when that project was ill-received . . software support . the series/1 could be ordered with or without operating system . available were either of two mutually exclusive operating systems : event driven executive or realtime programming system ( rps ) . systems using edx were primarily programmed using event driven executive , though high level languages such as fortran iv , pl/i , pascal and cobol were also available . edl delivered output in ibm machine code for system/3 or system/7 and for the series/1 by an emulator . although the series/1 is underpowered by today 's standards , a robust multi-user operating environment ( rps ) was available along with several additional high level languages for the rps os . the edx operating system was originally ported from the system/7 . series/1 was also the first computer that ibm supported for unix . systems without an operating system were intended for users needing dedicated applications that did not require the full capabilities of either os . applications were built using a set of standalone programs , called the base program preparation facilities , consisting of a macro assembler , a link editor and some basic utilities . a set of modules , called control program support ( cps ) , was linked with the application to provide task management , data processing input/output support and initial program loading for both disks and diskettes . . applications of the series/1 . the series/1 was also widely used in manufacturing environments , including general motors assembly plants . example systems and applications included manufacturing information database ( midb ) , vehicle component verification system ( vcvs ) and aldl ( aldl ) . these systems were connected to plant floor devices and used in the realtime manufacture of vehicles . there was also a time and attendance ( t & a ) system connected to badge readers and employee turnstiles . series/1 computers were also utilized in the early development of gm 's manufacturing automation protocol ( map ) commercial applications of customized series/1 computers included an application by state farm as an intelligent remote terminal in agents ' offices . the processing unit was built into a desk . the kmart also used the series/1 computer initially for its kmart information network ( kin ) which handled the store 's ordering , invoicing , payroll , inventory , cash , and headquarters to store communications . a separate series /1 computer was later added in the early phases of its pos roll-out networked with ibm 3683 registers . the series/1 used for pos systems was short lived as it was quickly replaced by two ibm pc at computers running either ibm 3683 or ibm 4683 registers . the deluxe corporation also used a bank of series/1 ibm 4956 computers for each check printing facility which handled the plant 's business and personal check sales orders and printing operations . various serial peripherals were attached : printronix bar-coding printers , micr readers , ibm ascii terminals . parallel devices were also used for phototypesetting machines , plate makers and teletype brpe punch creating punched tape ; all connecting to the ibm integrated di/do digital in/out card . the series/1 was a good work horse for its day and was operational around the clock in an industrial environment . severn trent used a number of series/1 computers running the rps operating system to collect and process river telemetry outstation data . it polled each outstation every 6 hours and fed data to applications running on their icl 2900 mainframe . unusually , the communications link between the ibm series/1 machines and the icl 2900 machine used the icl co3 protocol rather than one of the ( de facto standard ) ibm communication protocols . shared medical systems ( sms corp . ) in the 1980s used the series/1 ( running edx ) as a channel-attached front-end communications processor for its ibm mainframe-based mvs/cics hospital information system . in this environment the series/1 provided customized interfaces to diverse ( and generally non-ibm ) minicomputer-based hospital systems using asynchronous or binary synchronous communications then commonly found in the laboratory , pharmacy , and other departments . where necessary , the series/1 also provided batch connectivity to a centralized tcam host at sms headquarters in malvern , pa . finally , the series/1 provided a cost-effective method for remote support of the distributed mainframes using inexpensive ascii terminals and modems , or ibm pcs equipped with light pens ( emulating the 3278/9 terminals ) . the series/1 was selected for this application due to challenges with mvs/vtam and the 37x5 supporting straightforward non-sna/sdlc communications . these series/1 systems were connected to the mainframe using the series/1 to system/370 channel attach module , and connected to non-ibm systems using the feature-programmable multi-line controller and adapter . internally , ibm used banks of series/1 computers as communications front end systems on their ibm information systems commercial network although back end processing was done with system/370 architecture computers . also in some ibm locations , the series/1 was employed for building access security using id card readers . series/1 in the marine corps . the united states marine corps was a major series/1 customer in the late 1970s and into the early 1980s . ibm created a ruggedized , portable version with a green plastic and metal housing for field and shipboard use known as the ibm series i model 4110 . the central processor unit boasted twin 1 megabyte 8 & nbsp ; inch floppy disk drives , an 8-inch green monitor with 25 & nbsp ; × & nbsp ; 80 character resolution ( and seldom-used graphics capability ) and 16 kilobytes of ram which was upgraded to 32 kilobytes in 1984 . each standard 'suite ' included the cpu unit , a keyboard , and a 132 column dot-matrix printer with a separate cooling-fan base . this suite was transported in two green , foam-lined , waterproof , locking plastic cases ; each weighing over 100 pounds loaded . among the optional pieces of equipment was a punched tape and a magnetic tape reader . each of these also came with its own case . the official nomenclature for this equipment was the 'automated data processing equipment for the fleet marine force ' ( adpe-fmf ) , but it was universally known as the 'green machine ' . the initial rollout of the equipment was on the west coast at camp pendleton in 1981 , where the 1st fssg information systems management office ( ismo ) was formed to develop software and support the new equipment . ismos were also formed at 2nd fssg at camp lejeune , 2nd maw cherry point and 3rd fssg and 1st maw on okinawa and were staffed with computer programmers ( mos 4063/4066 ) whose responsibilities included training of end users , hardware and software troubleshooting and development of local computer applications . systems development offices were also established at marine corps central design and programming activity ( mccdpa ) at the marine corps finance center , kansas city , missouri , at marine corps base quantico , and at marine corps logistic base albany , georgia . these offices specialized in ( respectively ) financial , personnel and logistical applications . the 'class i ' systems were classified as mainframe systems – and the series/1 systems that provided field input to them – that were maintained at and distributed from the three cdpas . the chief among these were jumps/mms ( joint uniform military pay system/manpower management system ) , sassy ( supported activities supply system ) , and mimms ( marine corps integrated maintenance management system ) . designed primarily as a source data automation ( sda ) device for the enhancement of input into 'class i ' logistics and personnel computer systems , the adpe-fmf series/1 provided the power of a minicomputer to the battalion/squadron commander . however , left in the hands of young marine corps programmers eager to explore the capabilities of their new equipment , the series/1 soon proved to be a valuable and flexible workhorse for all manner of tasks at all organizational levels . dozens of 'class ii ' systems were locally developed and maintained at the gsus ( general support units ) , later known as ismos ( information systems management offices ) , providing undreamed-of functionality even as far as the company and deployed unit level . systems developed included the waggishly named 'standardized wing overseas operation passenger system ' ( swoops – developed to generate air force passenger manifests from personnel databases ) and 'universal random integrity news extract ' ( urine – developed to provide names picked randomly from personnel databases for urinalysis screening ) , fleas ( flight evaluation administration system ) . although a cobol compiler was available as part of the software package sold to the marine corps with the series/1 , most class i and class ii systems development was in edl . in the middle 1980s , the adpe-fmf equipment was gradually phased out in favor of ibm-pc class microcomputers running off-the-shelf software and marine corps developed applications written in ada . as part of u.s . nuclear weapon command and control systems . in may 2016 the united states government accountability office released a document that covered the need to upgrade or replace legacy computer systems within federal agencies . according to this document , there is still a series/1 that '' coordinates the operational functions of the united states ' nuclear forces , such as intercontinental ballistic missiles , nuclear bombers , and tanker support aircraft . '' this system still uses floppy disk 8.0s , however the agency plans to update some of the technology by the end of the 2017 fiscal year . . references . external links . ibm archive of series/1 with picture ibm 7565 manufacturing system incorporating a series/1 ( see middle of photo ) ibm series/1 equipment modules brochure ibm series/1 documentation on bitsavers