Nonnus

life . there is almost no evidence for the life of nonnus . it is known that he was a native of panopolis ( akhmim ) in upper egypt from his naming in manuscripts and the reference in epigram 9.198 of the palatine anthology . scholars have generally dated him from the end of the 4th to the central years of the 5th century . he must have lived after the composition of claudian 's greek gigantomachy ( i.e . , after ce & nbsp ; 394–397 ) as he appears to be familiar with that work . agathias seems to have followed him , with a mid-6th-century reference to him as a '' recent author '' . agathias scholasticus , hist . 4.23 . ( 530 & nbsp ; 580 ) fornaro , s . s.v . nonnus in brill 's new pauly vol . 9 ( ed . canick & schneider ) ( leiden , 2006 ) col.812–815 he is sometimes conflated with st nonnus from the hagiographies of st pelagia and with nonnus , the bishop of edessa who attended the council of chalcedon , both of whom seem to have been roughly contemporary , but these associations are probably mistaken . the dionysiaca . image : dionysos mosaic.jpg thumb right 300px a mosaic of dionysus from antioch . nonnus ' principal work is the 48-book epic dionysiaca , the longest surviving poem from antiquity . hopkinson , n . studies in the dionysiaca of nonnus ( cambridge , 1994 ) pp.1–4 . it has 20,426 lines composed in homeric dialect and dactylic hexameters , the main subject of which is the life of dionysus , his expedition to india , and his triumphant return to the west . the poem is to be dated to the 5th century . it used to be considered of poor literary quality , but a mass of recent writing ( most notably in the budé edition and commentary on the poem in 18 volumes ) has demonstrated that it shows consummate literary skill , even if its distinctly baroque extravagance is for a modern reader a taste that has to be acquired . the paraphrase of john . his paraphrase of john ( metabolḕ toû katà iōánnēn euaggelíou ) also survives . its timing is a debated point : textual analysis seems to suggest that it preceded the dionysiaca while some scholars feel it unlikely that a converted christian would have gone on to devote so much work to the dionysiaca ’ s pagan themes . vian , francis . ' '' mârtus '' chez nonnos de panopolis . étude de sémantique et de chronologie . ' reg 110 , 1997 , 143-60 . reprinted in : l'épopée posthomérique . recueil d'études . ed . domenico accorinti . alessandria : edizioni dell'orso , 2005 ( hellenica 17 ) , 565-84 a team of italian scholars is currently producing a full commentary of the poem , book by book , of which several parts have already been published . they have shown that nonnus was as learned in christian theology ( in particular he seems to have consulted the commentary on the gospel of john that cyril of alexandria had recently penned ) as in pagan myth . works . a complete and updated bibliography of nonnus scholarship may be found at hellenistic bibliography 's page at google sites . . editions and translations of the dionysiaca include : bilingual greek-english edition ( initial introduction , some explanatory notes ) : w . h . d . rouse ( 1940 ) , nonnos , dionysiaca , with an english translation by w . h . d . rouse , mythological introduction and notes by h . j . rose , notes on text criticism by l . r . lind , 3 vols . , loeb classical library , cambridge ( ma . ) bilingual greek-french edition ( with introduction to the individual books and notes ) : f . vian ( general ed . ) ( 1976-2006 ) , nonnos de panopolis , les dionysiaques , 19 volumes , paris bilingual greek-italian edition ( with introductions and notes ) : d . gigli piccardi ( general ed . ) ( 2003-4 ) , nonno di panopoli , le dionisiache , bur , milano nonno di panopoli , le dionisiache , a cura di d . del corno , traduzione di m . maletta , note de f . tissoni , 2 vols , milano 1997 . f . tissoni , nonno di panopoli , i canti di penteo ( dionisiache 44-46 ) . commento , firenze 1998 editions and translations of the paraphrase include : translation into english : sherry , l.f . , the hexameter paraphrase of st . john attributed to nonnus of panopolis : prolegomenon and translation ( ph.d . dissertation ; columbia university , 1991 ) . translation in english : prost , mark anthony . nonnos of panopolis , the paraphrase of the gospel of john . translated from the greek by m.a.p . ventura , ca : the writing shop press , 2006 the last complete edition of the greek text : nonni panopolitani paraphrasis s . evangelii joannei edidit augustinus scheindler , accedit s . evangelii textus et index verborum , lipsiae in aedibus teubneri 1881 a team of ( mainly italian ) scholars are now re-editing the text , book by book , with ample introductions and notes . published so far : c . de stefani ( 2002 ) , nonno di panopoli : parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni , canto i , bologna e . livrea ( 2000 ) , nonno di panopoli , parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni , canto b , bologna m . caprara ( 2006 ) , nonno di panopoli , parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni , canto iv , pisa g . agosti ( 2003 ) , nonno di panopoli , parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni , canto v , firenze r . franchi ( 2013 ) , nonno di panopoli . parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni : canto sesto , bologna k . spanoudakis ( 2015 ) , nonnus of panopolis . paraphrase of the gospel of john xi , oxford c . greco ( 2004 ) , nonno di panopoli , parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni , canto xiii , alessandria e . livrea ( 1989 ) , nonno di panopoli , parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni , canto xviii , napoli d . accorinti ( 1996 ) , nonno di panopoli , parafrasi del vangelo di s . giovanni , canto xx , pisa . see also . kalamos and karpos . notes . references . bibliography . . further reading . accorinti , domenico . ed . 2016 . brill ’ s companion to nonnus of panopolis . leiden , the netherlands , and boston : brill . geisz , camille . 2018 . a study of the narrator in nonnus of panopolis ’ dionysiaca . storytelling in late antique epic . leiden , the netherlands , and boston : brill . hollis , adrian s . 1994 . '' nonnus and hellenistic poetry . '' in studies in the dionysiaca of nonnus . edited by neil hopkinson , 43–62 . cambridge , uk : cambridge philological society . matzner , sebastian . 2008 . '' christianizing the epic—epicizing christianity . nonnus . paraphrasis and the old-saxon heliand in a comparative perspective : a study in the poetics of acculturation . '' millennium 5:111–145 . miguélez cavero , laura . 2008 . poems in context : poetry in the egyptian thebaid 200–600 ad . berlin : de gruyter . shorrock , robert . 2005 . '' nonnus . '' in a companion to ancient epic . edited by john miles fowley , 374–385 . oxford : blackwell . shorrock , robert . 2001 . the challenge of epic . allusive engagement in the dionysiaca of nonnus . leiden : brill . spanoudakis , konstantinos . 2007 . '' icarius jesus christ ? dionysiac passion and biblical narrative in nonnus ’ icarius episode ( dion . 47 , 1–264 ) . '' wiener studien 120:35–92 . spanoudakis , konstantinos , ed . 2014 . nonnus of panopolis in context : poetry and cultural milieu in late antiquity with a section on nonnus and the modern world . berlin and boston : de gruyter . vian , francis . 2005 . l ’ épopée posthomérique : recueil d ’ études . edited by domenico accorinti . alessandria , italy : edizioni dell ’ orso . van opstall , emilie . 2014 . '' the golden flower of youth : baroque metaphors in nonnus and marino . '' classical receptions journal 6:446–470 . whitby , mary . 2007 . '' the bible hellenised : nonnus ’ paraphrase of st john 's gospel and ‘ eudocia ’ s ’ homeric centos . '' in texts and culture in late antiquity : inheritance , authority , and change . edited by j . h . d . scourfield , 195–231 . swansea , uk : the classical press of wales . external links . nonnus bibliography online text : nonnus , dionysiaca bks 1-14 translated by w . h . d . rouse online english translation of dionysiaca , bks 1-48 , by w.h.d . rouse , with place mentions mapped , in topostext r.f . newbold summarizes his work on dionysiaca greek opera omnia by migne patrologia graeca with analytical indexes studia nonniana interretica : news from the world of nonnian scholarship and an up-to-date bibliography of polish studies on nonnus nonnus ' paraphrase of the gospel of john - metaphrasis evangelii ioannei