Sheikh

etymology and meaning . the word in arabic stems from a semitic root connected with age and aging : , shīn-yā'-khā . the title carries the meaning leader , elder , or noble , especially in the arabian peninsula within the tribes of arabia , where shaikh became a traditional title of a bedouin tribal leader in recent centuries . due to the cultural impact of arab civilization , and especially through the spread of islam , the word has gained currency as a religious term or general honorific in many other parts of the world as well , notably in islamic culture in africa and asia . sufi term . in sufism , the word sheikh is used to represent a wali who initiates a particular tariqa which leads to prophet muhammad , although many saints have this title added before their names out of respect from their followers . a couple of prominent examples are shaikh abdul qadir jilani , who initiated the qadiriyya order , and shaikh ahmad al-tijani , who initiated the tijaniyyah sufi order . abun-nasr , jamil m . ( 2007 ) . muslim communities of grace : the sufi brotherhoods in islamic religious life . columbia university press . p . 94 . . regional usage . arabian peninsula . in the arabian peninsula , the title is used for tribal chief . this also includes royalty in most of the arab states of the persian gulf , where the royal families were traditionally considered tribal chiefs . for example , it is used by the uae al nahyan family and al maktoum , who are considered the chiefs of the bani yas tribe , and by kuwait 's al sabah dynasty and bahrain 's house of khalifa of the bani utbah tribal confederation . the term is used by almost every male and female ( sheikha ) member of the royal houses of the uae , bahrain , qatar , and kuwait . the title is not used by members of al saud of saudi arabia , where the title '' prince '' is used instead . the title is also used to refer to ulama for both sunni and shia muslims . for example , the saudi arabian family al ash-sheikh ( literally house of the sheikh ) is named after the religious leader and eponymous founder of wahhabism , muhammad ibn abd al-wahhab . lebanon . in mount lebanon , the title had the same princely and royal connotation as in the arabian peninsula until the ottoman invasion in 1516 , since it represented an indigenous autonomous '' sui iuris '' ruler or tribal chief . a house of many mansions : the history of lebanon reconsidered , 2001 , kamal salibi examples of some ancient families that hold the title of '' sui iuris '' sheikh is the al-chemor family , ruling since 1211 ce in koura and zgharta until 1747 ce national news agency - ministry of information lebanese republic , 2014 al-sheikh al-chemor al-hakum al-akoura al-hakum al-zawyia , ignatios tannous al-khoury , beirut , 1948 , pg.123 '' tārīkh al-ṭāʼifah al-mārūnīyah ( microform , 1890 ) '' . worldcat.org . and the boudib family ( descendants of the hashemite family ) who were ehdenian rulers of jebbeh since 1471 ce until 1759 ce . descendants of this royal family now live in miziara , mexico and nigeria . even the abu harmoush family , which ruled the chouf region until the battle of ain dara in 1711 ce . after the ottoman rule and the implementation of the iltizam system , the title gained a noble instead of royal connotation , since it was bestowed by a higher authority ; in this case the ottoman appointed emir , who was nothing more than a mültezim or tax collector for the empire . lebanon 's predicament , 1987 , samir khalaf some very influential maronite families , who had the title bestowed upon them , are ( in chronological order ) : el hachem of akoura ( descendants of the hashemite family , since 1523 ) , el-khazen ( since 1545 ) , hubaysh of kisrawan and douaihy of zgharta . other families who are nowadays addressed or known as '' sheikhs '' were not traditionally rulers of provinces , but instead they were high-ranking officials at the service of the emir at that time . maghreb . in the maghreb , during the almohad dynasty , the caliph was also counseled by a body of shaykhs . they represented all the different tribes under their rules , including arabs , ( bedouins ) , al-andalus and berbers and were also responsible for mobilizing their kinsmen in the event of war . . horn of africa . in the muslim parts of the horn of africa , '' sheikh '' is often used as a noble title . in somali society , it is reserved as an honorific for senior muslim leaders and clerics ( wadaad ) , and is often abbreviated to '' sh '' . famous local sheikhs include abdirahman bin isma'il al-jabarti , an early muslim leader in northern somalia ; abadir umar ar-rida , the patron saint of harar ; abd al-rahman al-jabarti , sheikh of the riwaq in cairo who recorded the napoleonic invasion of egypt ; abd al-rahman bin ahmad al-zayla ' i , scholar who played a crucial role in the spread of the qadiriyyah movement in somalia and east africa ; shaykh sufi , 19th century scholar , poet , reformist and astrologist ; abdallah al-qutbi , polemicist , theologian and philosopher best known for his five-part al-majmu'at al-mubaraka ( '' the blessed collection '' ) ; and muhammad al-sumaalee , teacher in the masjid al-haram in mecca who influenced many of the prominent islamic scholars of today . . south asia . in south asia it is not an ethnic title but an occupational title attributed to muslim trading families with arab lineage . after the advent of islam in south asia , ( brahmins , rajputs , khatris , kayasthas and vaishya ) tribes also converted to islam and adopted the title . in punjab , pakistan the hindu brahmins , kshatriya , rathores , bhattis , chauhans , manihar and other rajput converted by different ismaili pirs to islam . ismaili pirs gave the new converts of punjab the hereditary title of shaikh as well as the muslims who immigrated from central asia and settled in punjab adopted this title . distinguished sindhi shaikhs include imtiaz shaikh , mpa shikarpur and special advisor to pm and former provincial minister and bureaucrat , sindh ; shaikh ayaz , sindhi poet of pakistan ; najmudddin shaikh , former foreign secretary , pakistan ; ghulam shabir shaikh , former igp sindh , pakistan ; dr . abdul hafeez shaikh , federal finance minister , pakistan ; muhammad ayub shaikh , chairman employees ' old age benefits institution ] , pakistan ; maqbool shaikh , former provincial minister for food and health , sindh ; faraz shaikh , chairman sindh naujawan shaikh ittehad , sindh ; faryaz nisar shaikh , vice chairman sindh naujawan shaikh ittehad , sindh ; arsalan nafees shaikh bagri , president shaikh ittehad district thattha wing ; imam bux shaikh , former general secretary peoples students federation karachi , former general secretary peoples engineers forum sindh , famous student leader of pakistan . southeast asia . in indonesia and other parts of southeast asia , sheikhs are respected by local muslims . in indonesia , the term is usually spelled '' syech '' , and this is usually attributed to elderly ulama . higher knowledgeable people of islamic studies in indonesia are usually referred to as '' ustad '' or '' kyai '' . iran . from the perspective of iran , the word or title of sheikh possesses diverse meanings , among individuals who are aged and wise , it has been a honorific title used for elders and learned scholars , such as : sheikh al-rayees avicenna , sheikh mufid , sheikh morteza ansari . in the past , islamic scholars who were the islamic prophet muhammad 's descendants , were called sayyid/sayyid instead of sheikh . who/what is sheikh ? porseshkadeh.com retrieved 28 oct 2018 . for women . historically , ulema in islam were referred to as shaykhah ( arabic : ( alt . shaykhat ) . notable shaykha include the 10th-century fakhr-un-nisa and 18th-century scholar fatima al-fudayliya . a daughter or wife or mother of a sheikh is also called a shaykhah . currently , the term shaykhah is commonly used for women of ruling families in the arab states of the persian gulf , with the exception of oman . see also . allamah al ash-sheikh – saudi arabia 's leading religious family ayatollah kashmiri shaikh khawaja shaikh list of marjas - the supreme legal authority for twelver shia muslims list of ayatollahs manihar punjabi shaikh qallu qanungoh shaikh shaykhism shaikhs in south asia sindhi shaikh . notes . external links .