Artie Shaw

early life . arthur jacob arshawsky was born on may 23 , 1910 , in new york city , he was the son of sarah ( née strauss ) and harold '' harry '' arshawsky , a dressmaker and photographer . the family was jewish ; his father was from russia , his mother from austria . shaw grew up in new haven , connecticut , where his natural introversion was deepened by local antisemitism . shaw bought a saxophone by working in a grocery store and began learning the saxophone at 13 . at 16 , he switched to the clarinet and left home to tour with a band . career . returning to new york , he became a session musician through the early 1930s . from 1925–36 , shaw performed with many bands and orchestras ; from 1926 to 1929 , he worked in cleveland and established a lasting reputation as music director and arranger for an orchestra led by the violinist austin wylie . in 1929 and 1930 , he played with irving aaronson 's commanders , where he was exposed to symphonic music , which he would later incorporate in his arrangements . in 1932 , shaw joined the roger wolfe kahn orchestra and made several recordings with the outfit including '' it do n't mean a thing ( if it ai n't got that swing ) '' and '' fit as a fiddle '' . leader of bands . in 1935 , he first gained attention with his '' interlude in b-flat '' at a swing concert at the imperial theater in new york . white , john . artie shaw . continuum international publishing group , 2004 ; during the swing era , his big bands were popular with hits like '' begin the beguine '' ( 1938 ) , '' stardust '' ( with a trumpet solo by billy butterfield ) , '' back bay shuffle '' , '' moonglow '' , '' rosalie '' and '' frenesi '' . the show was well received , but was forced to dissolve in 1937 because his band 's sound was not commercial . shaw valued experimental and innovative music rather over dancing and love songs . he was an innovator in the big band idiom , using unusual instrumentation ; '' interlude in b-flat '' , where he was backed with only a rhythm section and a string quartet , was one of the earliest examples of what would be later dubbed third stream . his incorporation of stringed instruments could be attributed to the influence of the classical composer igor stravinsky . in addition to hiring buddy rich , he signed billie holiday as his band 's vocalist in 1938 , becoming the first white band leader to hire a full-time black female singer to tour the segregated southern u.s . however , after recording '' any old time '' , holiday left the band due to hostility from audiences in the south , as well as from music company executives who wanted a more '' mainstream '' singer . like his main rival , benny goodman , and other leaders of big bands , shaw fashioned a smaller '' band within the band '' in 1940 . he named it artie shaw and the gramercy five after his home telephone exchange . band pianist johnny guarnieri played harpsichord on the quintet recordings , and al hendrickson played electric guitar . trumpeter roy eldridge became part of the group , succeeding billy butterfield . in 1940 , the original gramercy five pressed eight records , then shaw dissolved the band in early 1941 . the gramercy five 's biggest hit was '' summit ridge drive '' , one of shaw 's million-selling singles . his last prewar band , organized in september 1941 , included oran '' hot lips '' page , max kaminsky , georgie auld , dave tough , jack jenney , ray conniff and guarnieri . the long series of musical groups shaw formed included billie holiday , lena horne , helen forrest , mel tormé , buddy rich , dave tough , barney kessel , jimmy raney , tal farlow , dodo marmarosa , and ray conniff . he used the morose '' nightmare '' , with its hasidic nuances , as his theme rather than choosing a more accessible song . in a televised interview in the 1970s , shaw derided the '' asinine '' songs of tin pan alley that were the lifeblood of popular music and which bands , especially the most popular ( such as his own ) were compelled to play night after night . in 1994 , he told frank prial of the new york times , '' i thought that because i was artie shaw i could do what i wanted , but all they wanted was 'begin the beguine ' '' . prial , frank j . '' at home with : artie shaw ; literary life , after ending the beguine '' , the new york times , august 18 , 1994 . throughout his career , shaw had a habit of forming bands , developing them according to his immediate aspirations , making a quick series of records , and then disbanding . he generally did not stick around long enough to reap his bands ' successes through live performances of their recorded hits . following the breakup of what was already his second band in 1939 , he rarely toured at all and , if he did , his personal appearances were usually limited to long-term engagements in a single venue or bookings that did not require much traveling , unlike many bands of the era that traveled great distances doing seemingly endless strings of one-night engagements . radio days . shaw did many big band remote broadcasts . throughout the autumn and winter of 1938 , he was often heard from the blue room of the hotel lincoln in new york . after touring in 1939 , he led the house band at the cafe rouge of the hotel pennsylvania in new york . he was the headliner of a radio series with comedian robert benchley as emcee . shaw broadcast on cbs from november 20 , 1938 until november 14 , 1939 . at the cafe rouge he quit his band that week and went to mexico . the band continued without him into january but eventually broke up . after shaw returned from mexico in 1940 , and still under contract to rca victor , he experimented with a group of session musicians in hollywood , trying to combine strings and woodwinds with a jazz band . the result was the hit '' frenesi '' . he was hired as bandleader for the burns and allen show broadcast from hollywood . he organized a band that was modeled after his swing band concept of the late 1930s with the addition of six violins , two violas , and one cello . the addition of a string section to a popular big band was not novel , as it had been done by paul whiteman and others since the 1920s . shaw updated the idea with the music trends of the 1940s . strings gave him a wider tonal palette and allowed him to concentrate on ballads rather than the fast dance songs of the swing era . shaw was at or near the top of the list of virtuoso jazz bandleaders . the band was showcased on the burns and allen program every week . in 1940 , at the height of his popularity , the 30-year-old shaw earned up to 60,000 per week . in contrast , george burns and gracie allen were each making 5,000 per week during the year that shaw and his orchestra provided the music for their radio show . '' business & finance : nat & googie '' . time . january 30 , 1933 . he acted on the show as a love interest for gracie allen , although he disliked having to be a part of the celebrity culture of the period . shaw 's contract was renewed for another 13 weeks when the program was moved to new york . shaw broke up the hollywood band , keeping a nucleus of seven musicians in addition to himself , and filled out the ensemble with new york musicians until march 1941 . while taking a few months vacation in the spring of 1941 to reassess what to do next , shaw recorded in another small group format with three horns and a four-man rhythm section with the addition of a dozen strings and . by september , he formed a big band with seven brass , five saxes , four rhythm , and fifteen strings . remote broadcasts noted the band performing in good form and shaw dazzling the crowd with his clarinet . on december 7 , three months into the tour , the 31-piece band was in the midst of a matinee performance in providence , rhode island , when he was given a note about the japanese bombing of pearl harbor . the note instructed him to tell military personnel to return to their bases . as the audience left , he knew the band was coming to an end . war and after . during world war ii , shaw enlisted in the united states navy and shortly after formed a band , which served in the pacific theater ( just as glenn miller 's wartime band served in the uk and europe ) . after 18 months playing for navy personnel , ( sometimes as many as four concerts a day in battle zones , including guadalcanal ) , shaw returned to the u.s . in a state of physical exhaustion and received a medical discharge . susman , gary . '' goodbye '' , entertainment weekly . january 3 , 2005 . after the war , the popularity of big bands declined , as crooners and bebop began to dominate the charts . shaw credited his time in the navy from 1942 to 1944 as a period of renewed introspection . after his discharge , he entered psychoanalysis and began to withdraw from music in favor of a writing career . his autobiography , the trouble with cinderella : an outline of identity , was published in 1952 ( with later reprint editions in 1992 and 2001 ) . revealing downbeat elements of the music business , shaw explained that '' the trouble with cinderella '' is '' nobody ever lives happily ever after . '' he turned to semi-autobiographical fiction with the three short novels in i love you , i hate you , drop dead ! ( 1965 , reprinted in 1997 ) , which prompted terry southern 's comment : '' here is a deeply probing examination of the american marital scene . i flipped over it ! '' shaw 's short stories , including '' snow white in harlem '' , were collected in the best of intentions and other stories ( 1989 ) . he worked for years on his 1000-page autobiographical novel , the education of albie snow , but the three-volume work remained unpublished . after his discharge in 1944 , he formed another band , this time what could be considered a modern big band in that it contained what is now considered the standard eight brass and five saxes . it did not include any strings and was based in hollywood , california , where shaw was living . he continued to record for rca victor , as he had before the war , and limited the band 's personal appearances to military bases in california . in august 1945 his contract with rca ended and he signed with an independent label , musicraft . he made a few records for musicraft before the band broke up , and all of the recordings for musicraft from 1946 were staffed by top-notch session musicians . the big band was back in the studio , this time including strings . on these musicraft recordings in 1946 shaw featured the young singer mel tormé . on some of the sides , tormé was also featured with his vocal group the meltones . in july 1954 , shaw undertook a brief but historic australian tour for promoter lee gordon on which he shared the bill with drummer buddy rich and vocalist ella fitzgerald . after completing that tour shaw stopped playing the clarinet , citing his own perfectionism , which , he later said , would have killed him . he explained to a reporter , '' in the world we live in , compulsive perfectionists finish last . you have to be lawrence welk or , on another level , irving berlin , and write the same kind of music over and over again . i 'm not able to do that , and i have taken the clarinet as far as anyone can possibly go . to continue playing would be a disservice . '' freedland , michael . '' 'jazz is like jumping off a cliff ' '' , the telegraph , march 15 , 2001 . he spent the rest of the 1950s living in europe . in 1983 , after years of prodding by williard alexander , the 73-year-old shaw organized a band and selected clarinetist dick johnson as bandleader and soloist . the 58-year-old johnson , an accomplished woodwind and saxophonist and native of brockton , massachusetts , was no stranger to jazz having recorded numerous albums of his own and had idolized shaw 's playing throughout his life . shaw 's music library , which was the product of his almost 20 years of activity in the music business , contained numerous arrangements of monumental status of popular music in addition to many original big band jazz compositions of the era . it was a collection of music arranged by some of the foremost composer/arrangers of the period , much of which was sketched out by shaw himself and filled in and completed by his orchestrator/arranger collaborators , among them jerry gray , william grant still , lennie hayton , ray conniff , eddie sauter , and jimmy mundy , to name a few . shaw rehearsed his new band , ( based out of boston , massachusetts ) , and the band made its official debut on new year 's eve 1984 at the glen island casino in new rochelle , new york , the same launching pad for many bands of the swing era decades earlier , when shaw and his bands were in their prime . shaw appeared with the band throughout its first few years , limiting his role to being its conductor and front man , while leaving the clarinet playing duties to johnson . in 1985 , another week-long series of strenuous rehearsals followed during which shaw added more repertoire , including many arrangements and compositions that were from the later years of his career shaw had never recorded . by 1987 though , shaw was no longer touring with the band , quietly content that johnson and the band kept true to shaw 's band spirit and vision . he would , however , show up on occasion '' just to hear how things sounded '' . films and television . shaw made several musical shorts in 1939 for vitaphone and paramount pictures . he portrayed himself in the fred astaire film , second chorus ( 1940 ) , which featured shaw and his orchestra playing concerto for clarinet , and his 1940–41 hollywood period star dust band can be heard throughout the soundtrack . the film garnered him two oscar nominations for best score and best song ( '' love of my life '' ) . wilson , jeff . '' artie shaw , 94 : top bandleader of swing era '' . toronto star . december 30 , 2004 . he collaborated on the love song '' if it 's you '' , sung by tony martin in the marx brothers ' film the big store ( 1941 ) . in 1950 , he was a mystery guest on what 's my line ? and on august 31 , 1952 , was part of the panel . during the 1970s he made appearances on the mike douglas show and the tonight show with johnny carson . many of his recordings have been used in motion pictures . his 1940 recording of '' stardust '' was used in its entirety in the closing credits of the film the man who fell to earth . martin scorsese also used the shaw theme song , '' nightmare '' , in his academy award-winning howard hughes biopic , the aviator . canadian filmmaker brigitte berman interviewed hoagy carmichael , doc cheatham , and others including shaw for her documentary film , bix : ai n't none of them play like him yet ( 1981 ) about bix beiderbecke , and afterward she went on to create an academy award-winning documentary , artie shaw : time is all you 've got ( 1985 ) , featuring extensive interviews with shaw , buddy rich , mel tormé , helen forrest , and other musicians , in addition to shaw 's eighth wife , actress evelyn keyes . the documentary ends with shaw rehearsing his new band with co-leader johnson present and rolls to credits perhaps quite fittingly with the band taking a final segue to shaw 's theme song nightmare . in 2000 , filmmaker ken burns interviewed shaw at his home for his pbs documentary/miniseries jazz where shaw appears in multiple segments . his last major interview was in 2003 , when he was interviewed by russell davies for the bbc television documentary , artie shaw – quest for perfection . the documentary includes interviews with surviving members of his original bands , johnson , and other music industry professionals . personal life . a self-proclaimed '' very difficult man '' , wadler , joyce . '' artie shaw , without music '' . the new york times . january 5 , 2005 . shaw was married eight times . two marriages were annulled ; the others ended in divorce : jane cairns ( 1932–33 ; annulled ) ; margaret allen ( 1934–37 ) ; actress lana turner ( 1940 ) ; betty kern , the daughter of songwriter jerome kern ( 1942–43 ) ; actress ava gardner ( 1945–46 ) ; forever amber author kathleen winsor ( 1946–48 ; annulled ) ; actress doris dowling ( 1952–56 ) , and actress evelyn keyes ( 1957–85 ) . '' artie shaw '' , the telegraph , january 1 , 2005 . he had two sons , steven kern ( with betty kern ) and jonathan shaw ( with doris dowling ) . both lana turner and ava gardner later described shaw as being extremely emotionally abusive . his controlling nature and incessant verbal abuse drove turner to have a nervous breakdown , soon after which she divorced him . in 1940 , before eloping with lana turner , shaw briefly dated actresses betty grable and judy garland and , according to tom nolan 's biography , had an affair with lena horne . apart from his interest in music , shaw had a tremendous intellect and almost insatiable thirst for intellectual knowledge and literature . during his self-imposed '' sabbaticals '' from the music business , his interests included studying advanced mathematics , as cited in karl sabbagh 's the riemann hypothesis . sabbagh , karl . the riemann hypothesis : the greatest unsolved problem in mathematics , farrar , straus , and giroux , 2004 ; in 1946 , shaw was present at a meeting of the independent citizens ' committee of the arts , sciences and professions . olivia de havilland and ronald reagan , part of a core group of actors and artists who were trying to sway the organization away from communism , presented an anti-communist declaration which , if signed , was set to run in newspapers . there was bedlam as many rose to champion the communist cause , and shaw began praising the democratic standards of the soviet constitution . in 1953 , shaw was forced to testify before the house un-american activities committee for his leftist activities . the committee was investigating a peace activist organization , the world peace council . shaw was also a precision marksman , ranking fourth in the united states in 1962 , and an expert fly fisherman . in his later years , shaw lived and wrote in the newbury park section of thousand oaks , california . he died on december 30 , 2004 , aged 94 . according to his publicist , he had been '' in ill health for some time , but i do n't know the specific cause of death . '' in fact , shaw had long been suffering from diabetes . '' jazz giant artie shaw dies at age 94 '' . associated press . december 31 , 2004 . in 2005 , shaw 's eighth wife , evelyn keyes , filed suit , claiming she was entitled to one-half of shaw 's estate , pursuant to a contract to make a will between them . in july 2006 , a ventura , california , jury unanimously held that keyes was entitled to almost one-half of shaw 's estate or 1,420,000 . she died less than two years later from cancer . '' artie shaw 's ex-wife gets half of estate '' , usa today . july 25 , 2006 . . awards and honors . in 1980 , shaw donated his papers , most of which amounted to his music library of over 700 scores and parts and approximately 1,000 pieces of sheet music , to boston university . in 1991 , the collection was transferred to the school of music of the university of arizona in tucson . in 2004 , he received a grammy lifetime achievement award . in 1938 , down beat magazine readers voted artie shaw 's the best swing band . in response to benny goodman 's nickname , the '' king of swing '' , shaw 's fans dubbed him the '' king of the clarinet '' . he felt the titles should be reversed . '' benny goodman played clarinet . i played music , '' he said . longtime duke ellington clarinetist barney bigard cited shaw as his favorite clarinet player . zwerin , mike . '' remembering artie shaw '' , culturekiosque.com , january 23 , 2005 ; accessed june 30 , 2009 . . references . bibliography . tom nolan , artie shaw , king of the clarinet : his life and times ( w . w . norton , new york , 2011 ) . john white , artie shaw : his life and music ( bloomsbury academic , london , 2004 ) . vladimir simosko , artie shaw : a musical biography and discography ( scarecrow press , lanham , md , 2000 ) . external links . artie shaw interview namm oral history library ( 1994 ) biography at swingmusic.net rare film blog : artie shaw 1985 '' swing bandleader , clarinetist artie shaw dies '' , the washington post , december 31 , 2004 university of arizona : artie shaw collection artie shaw recordings at the discography of american historical recordings .