Leatherhead

sport . leisure centre . the leisure centre was opened in 1975 by the leatherhead urban district council ( ludc ) and was extended in the 1980s with the addition of the mole barn . plans to build a new centre on the site were drawn up by mole valley district council prior to 2006 , but instead the facility was given a 20-month , £12.6m refit and a further extension , which was opened by the duke of kent in march 2011 . the upgraded centre includes a redesigned reception and entrance area , a new gym , aerobics studio , sauna and play areas . . leatherhead football club . there is a local football team leatherhead f.c . ( '' the tanners '' ) who play at fetcham park grove . in the 1974–75 season the tanners were drawn against first division leicester city at home in the fa cup fourth round proper . with the game switched to filbert street , the bbc 's match of the day cameras and over 32,000 people saw a dramatic match : leicester won 3 & ndash ; 2 . leicester city went on to play arsenal in the next round . in the 2017–18 fa cup they reached the second round proper where they were tied away to wycombe wanderers . tourist attractions . bocketts farm . bocketts farm covers an area of to the south west of the town . formerly part of the manor of thorncroft , it was subinfeudated in around 1170 . both the farmhouse and the timber-framed granary date from around 1800 and are grade ii listed . the farm was purchased by the gowing family in 1990 and was opened to the public two years later . . leatherhead museum . leatherhead museum was opened in 1980 by the leatherhead & district local history society . it houses a wide range of historical artefacts and permanent displays explain the history of the town from its origins to the present day . hampton cottage , the building in church street in which the museum is based , dates from before 1682 . . river mole local nature reserve . the river mole lnr is a protected corridor that stretches along the banks for the river from young street ( in the south ) to waterway road in the north . it was designated in 2005 for its diversity of plant and animal species . . notable buildings and landmarks . cherkley court . cherkley court was constructed in around 1870 for abraham dixon , a wealthy industrialist from the midlands . it was substantially rebuilt after a fire in 1893 and was sold in 1910 to max aitken , 1st baron beaverbrook , the candian-born owner of the daily express . following the death of beaverbrook 's son in 1984 , the estate was owned by the beaverbrook foundation until 2011 , when it was sold to a consortium of private investors . despite considerable local opposition , the house was converted to a luxury hotel , spa and golf course , which opened in 2017 . . leatherhead institute . the leatherhead institute was built in 1892 and given to the town by abraham dixon . dixon 's intention was to provide educational , social and recreational opportunities to local residents . during ww2 , it housed the local food and fuel offices . a major restoration project was completed in 1987 . . running horse . the running horse pub dates back to 1403 and is one of the oldest buildings in leatherhead . it is on the bank of the river mole , at the southern approach to the town centre . legend has it that elizabeth i once spent a night at the inn when floods made the river mole impossible to cross . the mansion . the mansion , in church street , houses the public library , register office and council offices . the present building dates from 1739 , but was partially remodelled around 1810 . a map of the town from 1600 show a house on the site , which may formerly have been the manor house for the manor of michin . during the elizabethan and stuart periods , the town was associated with several notable people . edmund tylney , master of the revels , who was in effect the official censor of the time to queen elizabeth i and who may have lived in leatherhead mansion . a wetherspoons pub in high street is now named after him . . war memorial . the war memorial in north street was designed by stock , page and stock , a london firm of architects and was dedicated in april 1921 . it consists of a long , storey building with 11 open arches , constructed of brick and flint . the arches face a terraced garden , in which there is a free-standing cross made of portland stone . the land on which the memorial stands was given to the town by cf leach , who funded much of the building work and whose son had been a second lieutenant in the scots guards . in total , 186 names inscribed on stone tablets inside the cloister-like structure , of whom 117 died in ww1 . the memorial is protected by a grade ii listing . . wesley house . the art deco wesley house , on bull hill , was built in 1935 as the offices of the leatherhead urban district council ( ludc ) . it was designed by the architects ch rose and hr gardner and was constructed of red brick . the original debate chamber is preserved at the rear of the property . wesley house was vacated by the ludc in 1983 , when it became part of mole valley district council . . the town . symbol . the symbol of leatherhead is a swan holding a sword in its beak . this can be seen on the old leatherhead coat of arms , and on the mole valley coat of arms . the insignia of leatherhead f.c . includes a swan , as do the logos of the swan shopping centre , therfield school and the leisure centre . town centre . the town is above the river , and set away from the parks . until the 1970s , it had many shops . however accidents occurred from increased traffic close to winding bends and narrow pavements . since then the central streets have been pedestrianised or partly blocked off , leading to a decline in the number of pedestrians and shop closures in favour of out-of-town supermarkets . the construction of the swan centre and its supermarket , brought some revitalisation . in 2002 , the high street was voted one of the worst in the united kingdom in a bbc poll . the theatre ( see below ) is also a cinema and has art exhibitions . in the late 1990s the town centre 's only hotel , the bull hotel , closed down and was subsequently demolished . a lidl store was built on the site and opened in february 2007 . early in the 21st century , travelodge opened a new hotel on the site of the old swan hotel . givons grove . the givons grove estate , to the south of the town , was developed in the late 1920s and early 1930s . originally a constituent of thorncroft manor , it was an area of arable land , known as 'gibbons farm ' , named after a prominent local family . in the late 1780s , henry boulton , the then leaseholder of thorncroft manor and the owner of the pachesham estate , built 'givons grove house ' , which was occupied for a short time by sir william altum . the house remained in the ownership of the boulton family until 1859 and in 1865 , it was bought by thomas grissell , the owner of norbury park . in 1919 , the givons grove estate was bought by the aircraft manufacturer , humphrey verdon roe , whose wife , marie stopes , would live at norbury park for 20 years from 1938 . . north leatherhead or leatherhead common . north leatherhead or leatherhead common is the area north of the kingston road bridge , bordered to the north by leatherhead golf course , ashtead common and the m25 motorway and to the south by the railway which forks by the town centre . it includes the town 's main secondary school , therfield school , and part of the trinity school , as well as the bulk of the town 's social housing . here is the royal oak pub and the north leatherhead community association ( nlca ) or social club in a former school building next to the kingston road playing fields and playground . local area . the village of fetcham may be considered part of leatherhead , especially as a postal area . the border with fetcham blends into leatherhead . ashtead is separated from leatherhead by the m25 . also close by are headley heath , oxshott woods , box hill and bookham common . in the village of headley , a military hospital , headley court ( formerly raf headley court ) , provides long-term rehabilitation to injured members of the british armed forces . its playing fields can be used by helicopters . notable people . harold auten vc dsc ( 1891–1964 ) , recipient of the victoria cross during the first world war , was born in leatherhead . john drinkwater bethune ( 1762–1844 ) lived at thorncroft manor just outside the town from about 1838 until his death and is buried in the churchyard of the parish church . sir thomas bloodworth ( 1620–1682 ) , lord mayor of london during the great fire of 1666 , lived at thorncroft manor . ted bowley ( 1890–1974 ) , english test cricketer . michael caine ( born 1933 ) , lives in leatherhead and is patron to the leatherhead drama festival . donald campbell ( 1921–1967 ) , bluebird pilot and fastest man on land and water , lived in leatherhead . john campbell-jones ( born 1930 ) , former formula one racing driver . leonard dawe ( 1889–1963 ) , footballer , teacher and crossword compiler for the daily telegraph ; while living in leatherhead in 1944 he was wrongly suspected of espionage by inserting codewords for operation overlord into his puzzles . admiral sir john thomas duckworth ( 1747–1817 ) , accomplished royal navy officer who served under nelson . andy ellison ( born 1946 ) and chris townson ( 1947–2008 ) , founding members of the band john 's children , and former pupils at box hill school . badri patarkatsishvili collapsed and died in his mansion in leatherhead . richard patterson ( b . 1963 ) and his brother simon patterson ( b . 1967 ) , both artists , were born in the town . jean ross ( 1911–1973 ) , an english writer was educated in leatherhead and briefly confined in a nearby sanatorium as a young woman . madron seligman ( 1918–2002 ) , member of the european parliament and friend of edward heath . marie stopes ( 1880–1958 ) , family planning pioneer , lived in the town . edward wilkins waite ( 1854–1924 ) was a noted local landscape painter . . notes . references . bibliography . . see also . list of leisure and entertainment in leatherhead . external links . mole valley district council leatherhead residents association leatherhead & district local history society