Lake Pontchartrain

toponymy . lake pontchartrain is named for , . he was the france minister of the marine , chancellor , and controller-general of finances during the reign of france 's '' sun king '' , louis xiv , for whom the colony of was named . the name itself comes from the place in france where 's is situated . it is thought that this name originates from it being where a bridge crossed the river on the ancient route from to . lake maurepas , directly west of lake pontchartrain , was named for the son of , , , who was also a french statesman . description . lake pontchartrain is an estuary connected to the gulf of mexico via the rigolets strait ( known locally as '' the rigolets '' ) and chef menteur pass into lake borgne , another large lagoon , and therefore experiences small tide changes . it receives fresh water from the tangipahoa , tchefuncte , tickfaw , amite , and bogue falaya rivers , and from bayou lacombe and bayou chinchuba . it is one of the largest wetlands along the gulf coast of north america . keddy , p.a . , d . campbell , t . mcfalls , g . shaffer , r . moreau , c . dranguet , and r . heleniak . 2007 . the wetlands of lakes pontchartrain and maurepas : past , present and future . environmental reviews 15 : 1- 35 . it comprises more than 125,000 acres of wetland , including bottomland hardwoods and cypress swamps ( although these have been severely degraded by past logging ) , along with a complex mixture of herbaceous wetlands including fresh , intermediate and brackish marsh . keddy , p.a . , d . campbell , t . mcfalls , g . shaffer , r . moreau , c . dranguet , and r . heleniak . 2007 . the wetlands of lakes pontchartrain and maurepas : past , present and future . environmental reviews 15 : 1- 35 . table 2 . salinity varies from negligible at the northern cusp west of mandeville up to nearly half the salinity of seawater at its eastern bulge near interstate 10 . lake maurepas , a true freshwater lake , connects with lake pontchartrain on the west via pass manchac . the industrial canal connects the mississippi river with the lake at new orleans . bonnet carré spillway diverts water from the mississippi into the lake during times of river flooding . history . the lake was created 2,600 to 4,000 years ago as the evolving mississippi river delta formed its southern and eastern shorelines with alluvial deposits . one recorded indigenous name for the lake is ( 'wide water ' ) . in 1699 , france explorer renamed it after . human habitation of the region began at least 3,500 years ago , but increased rapidly with the arrival of europeans about 300 years ago . the great american naturalist , william bartram , explored the north shore during a trip west in 1777 . keddy , p.a . , d . campbell , t . mcfalls , g . shaffer , r . moreau , c . dranguet , and r . heleniak . 2007 . the wetlands of lakes pontchartrain and maurepas : past , present and future . environmental reviews 15 : 1-35 . in 1852 a railroad was constructed to link new orleans to the north . engines turned at pass manchac . however , the pilings were burned to the water line in the civil war . perrin , j.m . 2000 . home town ponchatoula . a community history of ponchatoula , louisiana . self-published . ponchatoula , louisiana . the great cypress swamps of the area were heavily logged in the early 20th century ; many have not regrown . norgress , r . e . ( 1947 ) . the history of the cypress lumber industry in louisiana . louisiana historical quarterly 30 : 979–1059 . keddy , p.a . 2008 . water , earth , fire : louisiana ’ s natural heritage . xlibris , philadelphia . 229 p . . conservation and restoration . owing to past exploitation , the ecosystems of the lake have been placed under stress . marshes , for example , are turning to open water , and cypress swamps are being killed by salt water intrusion . however , brown pelicans and bald eagles , once scarce , are now a common sight along the shores . a team of experts assembled by the nature conservancy assessed the situation in 2004 . maygarden , d . and others . 2004 . conservation area plan for the lake pontchartrain estuary . the nature conservancy , la . they identified seven target habitat types that were in particular need of conservation management : bottomland hardwood forest , cypress swamp , relict ridge woodland , fresh/intermediate marsh , brackish/salt marsh , lake open water , and littoral submersed aquatic vegetation . the bottomland hardwood forest and cypress swamp are suffering from lack of fresh water input and sediment deposition owing to the levees upstream from the lake . in addition , bottomland hardwoods are being invaded by exotic species such as chinese tallow , while freshwater marshes are being invaded by exotic species such as elephant's-ear . the team also identified four key animal species that could indicate the degree to which the system declines or improves . these were the rangia clam ( representing lake bottom habitat ) , gulf sturgeon and paddlefish ( representing fish communities ) , and the alligator snapping turtle ( one of the largest freshwater turtles in the world , but in decline owing to over-harvesting ) . the future of the lake depends , in part , on restoring annual spring floods to the wetlands of the lake basin , and controlling urban sprawl on the north shore . selected species , like the paddlefish and alligator snapping turtle , would benefit from reduced harvesting . the lake could change considerably without such conservation planning . a few examples of future change might include more cypress swamps converting to anthropogenic marsh or open water , chinese tallow displacing native forests , and , with a warming climate , mangrove trees replacing brackish marsh . keddy , p.a . , d . campbell , t . mcfalls , g . shaffer , r . moreau , c . dranguet , and r . heleniak . 2007 . the wetlands of lakes pontchartrain and maurepas : past , present and future . environmental reviews 15 : 1- 35 . fig . 21 hence , the ecosystems of the lake now , and in the future , depend very much upon some basic decisions about human activities in the vicinity of the lake , and , even more so , human activity upstream along the mississippi river . the current population in the region is over 1.5 million . there have been many problems with conservation management of the forests and wetlands . houck , o . 2006 . can we save new orleans ? tulane environmental law journal 19 : 1–68 . keddy , p.a . 2010 . wetland ecology : principles and conservation ( 2nd edition ) . cambridge university press , cambridge , uk . 497 p . the united states geological survey is currently monitoring the environmental effects of shoreline erosion , loss of wetlands , pollution from urban areas and agriculture , saltwater intrusion from artificial waterways , dredging , basin subsidence and faulting , storms and sea level rise , and freshwater diversion from the mississippi and other rivers . with with proper management of this lake and its wetlands , there is great potential to enhance the productivity of wetlands , and to maintain biological diversity to support an ecotourism industry that will diversify the economy . . northshore . north of lake pontchartrain is the north shore , northshore , or northlake region . it includes the cities of mandeville , covington , abita springs , madisonville , lacombe , and slidell in st . tammany parish ; ponchatoula , hammond , and amite in tangipahoa parish ; and franklinton in washington parish . these three northshore parishes are the eastern florida parishes . the landscape here is mostly uplands that were once dominated by long leaf pine savannas and interrupted by occasional large rivers . the savannas were maintained by regular fires caused by lightning ; they produced the distinctive fauna and flora of this region . lake pontchartrain 's south shore areas ( dominated by new orleans ) , instead of being designated by that name , are more likely to be referred to as either '' east bank '' or '' west bank , '' depending upon their position with respect to the general north–south course of the mississippi river . lake pontchartrain forms the northern boundary of the city of new orleans , which is coterminous with orleans parish , and the northern boundary of its two largest suburbs , metairie and kenner ; as well as forming the northern boundaries of jefferson parish and saint charles parish , and much of the northern and eastern boundaries of saint john the baptist parish . new orleans . new orleans was established at a native american portage between the mississippi river and lake pontchartrain . the lake provides numerous recreational activities for people in new orleans and is also home to the southern yacht club . in the 1920s , the industrial canal in the eastern part of the city opened , providing a direct navigable water connection , with locks , between the mississippi river and the lake . in the same decade , a project dredging new land from the lake shore behind a new concrete floodwall began ; this would result in an expansion of the city into the former swamp between metairie/gentilly ridges and the lakefront . the lake pontchartrain causeway was constructed in the 1950s and 1960s , connecting new orleans ( by way of metairie ) with mandeville , and bisecting the lake in a north-northeast line . hurricanes . image : lake pontchartrain georges.jpg thumb upright 1.25 lake pontchartrain at new orleans during hurricane georges in 1998 ; lakefront fishing camps outside of the protection levee suffered severe damage . during hurricanes , a storm surge can build up in lake pontchartrain . wind pushes water into the lake from the gulf of mexico as a hurricane approaches from the south , and from there it can spill into new orleans . a hurricane in 1947 flooded much of metairie , much of which is slightly below sea level due to land subsidence after marshland was drained . after the storm , hurricane-protection levees were built along lake pontchartrain 's south shore to protect new orleans and nearby communities . a storm surge of from hurricane betsy overwhelmed some levees in eastern new orleans in 1965 , while storm surge funneled in by the mississippi river–gulf outlet canal and a levee failure flooded most of the lower 9th ward . after this the levees encircling the city and outlying parishes were raised to heights of . due to cost concerns , the levees were built to protect against only a category 3 hurricane ; however , some of the levees initially withstood the category 5 storm surge of hurricane katrina ( august 2005 ) , which only slowed to category 3 winds within hours of landfall ( due to a last-minute eyewall replacement cycle ) . experts using computer modeling at louisiana state university after hurricane katrina have concluded that the levees were never topped but rather faulty design , inadequate construction , or some combination of the two were responsible for the flooding of most of new orleans . some canal walls leaked underneath , because the wall foundations were not deep enough in peat-subsoil to withstand the pressure of higher water . . funding . congress failed to fully fund an upgrade requested during the 1990s by the army corps of engineers , and funding was cut in 2003–04 despite a 2001 study by the federal emergency management agency warning that a hurricane in new orleans was one of the country 's three most likely disasters . raising and reinforcing the levees to resist a category 5 hurricane might take 25 years to complete . some estimates place the cost at 25 billion . hurricane katrina . image : hurricane katrina winds 1200utc29aug05 landfall la 1hr.gif upright 1.3 thumb windspeed of hurricane katrina 7 a.m . , showing hurricane-force winds ( yellow/brown/red : 75-92 mph ) hitting the northeast–south shores of lake pontchartrain ( 1 hour after landfall ) on august 29 , 2005 . thumb when hurricane katrina reached category 5 in 2005 , some experts predicted that the levee system might fail completely if the storm passed close to the city . although katrina weakened to a category 3 before making landfall on august 29 ( with only category 1-2 strength winds in new orleans on the weaker side of the eye of the hurricane ) , the outlying new orleans east area along south lake pontchartrain was in the eyewall with winds , preceding the eye , nearly as strong as those experienced in bay st . louis , mississippi . canals near chalmette began leaking at 8 am , and some levees/canals , designed to withstand category 3 storms , suffered multiple breaks the following day ( see effects of hurricane katrina in new orleans ) , flooding 80 % of the city . the walls of the industrial canal were breached by storm surge via the mississippi river gulf outlet , while the 17th street canal and london avenue canal experienced catastrophic breaches , even though water levels never topped their flood walls . louisiana state university experts presented evidence that some of these structures might have had design flaws or faulty construction . there are indications that the soft earth and peat underlying canal walls may have given way . in the weeks before katrina , tests of salinity in seepage pools near canals showed them to be lake water , not fresh water from broken mains . the i-10 twin span bridge heading northeast between new orleans and slidell was destroyed . the shorter fort pike bridge crossing the outlet to lake borgne remained intact . much of the northern sector of the suburban areas of metairie and kenner was flooded with up to of water . in this area , flooding was not the result of levee overtopping , but was due to a decision by the governmental administration of jefferson parish to abandon the levee-aligned drainage pumping stations . broussard says he did n't send pump operators away - kenner bulletin - nola.com . this resulted in the reverse flow of lake water through the pumping stations into drainage canals which subsequently overflowed , causing extensive flooding of the area between i-10 and the lakefront . when the pump operators were returned to their stations , water was drained out of metairie and kenner in less than a day . on september 5 , 2005 , the army corps of engineers started to fix levee breaches by dropping huge sandbags from chinook helicopters . the london avenue canal and industrial canal were blocked at the lake as permanent repairs started . on september 6 , the corps began pumping flood water back into the lake after seven days in the streets of new orleans . because it was fouled with dead animals , sewage , heavy metals , petrochemicals , and other dangerous substances , the army corps worked with the u.s . environmental protection agency and louisiana department of environmental quality ( ldeq ) to avoid major contamination and eutrophication of the lake . aerial photography suggests that of water covered new orleans as of september 2 , which equals about 2 % of lake pontchartrain 's volume . due to a lack of electric power , the city was unable to treat the water before pumping it into the lake . it is unclear how long the pollution will persist and what its environmental damage to the lake will be , or what the long-term health effects will be in the city from mold and other contamination . on september 24 , 2005 , hurricane rita did not breach the temporary repairs in the main part of the city , but the repair on the industrial canal wall in the lower 9th ward was breached , allowing about of water back into that neighborhood . notable deaths . eastern air lines flight 304 crashed into the lake on february 25 , 1964 , resulting in the deaths of 51 passengers and 7 crew . on june 16 , 1964 , a trailways bus plunged off the lake pontchartrain causeway into lake pontchartrain , killing 6 . on december 31 , 1967 , a chartered plane crashed into lake pontchartrain , killing 5 servicemen and the pilot . on september 15 , 1978 , six-year-old benjamin daly , along with the pilot , died when a private plane his parents had chartered crashed into the lake . his parents survived . on february 23 , 1980 , a twin engine plane crashed into lake pontchartrain , killing 7 . on january 15 , 1981 , a piper pa-23 flying in heavy fog crashed into lake pontchartrain while on final approach to new orleans lakefront airport , killing the plane 's owner and pilot joyce w . hornady , the 73-year-old ceo of hornady manufacturing company , and two other company employees edward a . heers , a 34-year-old engineer , and james w . garber , a 29-year-old customer service manager . all three men were due to attend and represent their company in the 1981 shot show in new orleans . in 1986 , a decomposing woman 's body was found by two fishermen . the cause of death was homicide by asphyxia . she was not identified and no leads were ever identified in the case . new england patriots defensive end , new orleans native and former lsu star marquise hill was found dead in lake pontchartrain on may 28 , 2007 . a u.s . navy t-34 mentor crashed into the lake on january 23 , 2010 , after a routine training mission . the instructor , lt . clinton wermers , was found dead at 0100 on january 27 , 2010 . the student pilot was rescued about two hours after the crash . navy pilot 's body found in lake pontchartrain , the times-picayune , january 27 , 2010