Fear Factory

transgression ( 2005–2006 ) . fear factory announced plans to record and release its next full-length album over a very short period of time with mainstream rock producer toby wright , who had worked with korn and alice in chains . this was allegedly due to pressure from fear factory 's new label calvin records , which preponed the album 's release date from four months away to just a month and a half so the band would have a new album to support on the inaugural gigantour , which they had been invited to participate on by dave mustaine . the resulting album , transgression , was released on august 22 , 2005 , in the united kingdom , and on the following day in north america , almost a year after archetype . the album garnered highly polarized reviews ; some critics hailed the album as diverse and progressive , and other reviewers did not receive the record very well . although the album starts off as a fear factory record , subsequent songs include mellow/alt-rock numbers '' echo of my scream '' ( featuring faith no more 's billy gould on bass ) and '' new promise '' , a pop-rock song '' supernova '' , and a faithful cover of u2 's rock song '' i will follow '' . in 2013 , wolbers posted more details about writing and recording of transgression and archetype on his facebook page . he said he was disappointed with transgression , calling it half-finished , and blamed the label for the severe time constraints imposed during the recording sessions and for the inclusion of the u2 cover . however , burton c . bell said he is proud of the album and sees it as the band '' stepping over boundaries '' . during 2005 and 2006 , fear factory promoted the album on the '' fifteen years of fear '' world tour in celebration of their fifteenth anniversary . the members invited bands including darkane , strapping young lad and soilwork to join them on the u.s . leg , and misery index to join them on the european leg . late in 2005 , fear factory toured the u.s . again on the '' machines at war '' tour , with an all-star , death metal lineup of guests in suffocation , hypocrisy , and decapitated ; they played old classics from soul of a new machine , such as '' crash test '' , which they had not performed live in many years . hiatus and other projects ( 2006–2008 ) . an online statement from wolbers in december 2006 said the band would return to the studio to record a new album , produced by the band , immediately after the completion of the transgression touring cycle . that month , bell confirmed in an interview that the band would leave liquid 8 records . rather than begin work on a new studio album , the band members briefly parted and began working with other projects . bell contributed vocals to the songs '' end of days , pt.1 '' , '' end of days , pt . 2 '' , and '' die in a crash '' on ministry 's 2007 album the last sucker , and later toured with ministry in support of the album . in an interview for the website metalsucks , bell called this a '' dream come true '' , describing ministry frontman al jourgensen as '' one of his heroes '' . in the same interview , bell talked at length about his new band ascension of the watchers , providing insight into the inspiration behind the project 's formation . on march 21 , 2008 , while fear factory was on hiatus , bell spoke in a video interview about the band 's future , saying he no longer wanted to contribute to the violence and aggression he saw in the world with the aggressive type of music fear factory produced . wolbers and herrera started a new band called arkaea , with vocalist jon howard and bassist pat kavanagh of threat signal . wolbers said , '' ironically , half of the arkaea album consists of songs that were intended to be the next fear factory record '' . arkaea 's debut album years in the darkness was released on july 14 , 2009 . . second return , internal disputes , and mechanize ( 2009–2011 ) . on april 8 , 2009 , bell and cazares announced the reconciliation of their friendship , and the formation of a new project with byron stroud on bass and drummer gene hoglan of testament , death , strapping young lad , dark angel , and dethklok . on april 28 , this project was announced to be a new version of fear factory without herrera and wolbers . when asked about their exclusion , bell said , '' fear factory is like a business and i 'm just reorganizing & nbsp ; . & nbsp ; we wo n't talk about their exclusion '' . in june 2009 , wolbers and herrera spoke about the issue on the radio program speed freaks . herrera said he and wolbers were still in the band . '' christian and i are actually still in fear factory & nbsp ; . & nbsp ; burton and dino decided to start a new band , and furthermore , they decided to call it fear factory . they never communicated with us about it '' , said herrera . herrera also said the four original members—bell , cazares , wolbers , and herrera—were contractually regarded as fear factory incorporated , and , '' it 's almost like them two against us two , so it 's kind of a stalemate '' . the drummer also said he and wolbers had written eight songs for the next fear factory record , but that a '' personal disagreement '' had arisen between them and bell , which left bell not wanting to continue work with the band . bell and cazares later spoke about their reasons for excluding herrera and wolbers . cazares said bell wanted to reunite the classic fear factory lineup of himself , cazares , herrera , and wolbers , but that herrera and wolbers refused to be part of any reunion with cazares . bell also said he wanted to fire the band 's manager christy priske , who was also wolbers ' wife , and herrera and wolbers refused . herrera and wolbers threatened to sign a new record deal without bell , prompting him to form a new version of fear factory without them . in some interviews , wolbers said bell had made '' growing unacceptable demands '' , which were declined . he said , '' ray and i wanted what was best for the business and what he burton was trying to change was n't really good for the business . it was only bad for the business , so that 's why he went into that whole phase of hijacking the name and trying to run with it . '' fear factory featuring bell and cazares was due to make its live debut on june 21 at the metalway festival in zaragoza , spain . however , the show was canceled '' at the last minute '' , apparently because of the legal complications referenced by herrera . the rest of that lineup 's planned performances in mid-2009 , which included a tour of the united kingdom , germany , australia , and new zealand that august , had also been canceled . the group said they canceled the tour to finish writing and recording the next fear factory album . despite the canceled performances in europe , they performed some shows in december in south american countries including argentina , chile , and brazil . during an interview on june 23 , 2009 , cazares said he could never have a working relationship with raymond and wolbers again , saying they were too money-driven and criticized the music they recorded on archetype for being too similar to the band 's earlier output . despite ongoing issues between the two parties , the new fear factory went ahead with the recording process . in late july 2009 , a short video shot with a cell telephone showed cazares recording drum tracks with longtime contributor rhys fulber . on november 6 , 2009 , blabbermouth.net said a new album , mechanize , would be released on february 9 , 2010 , on candlelight records . on november 8 , 2009 , fear factory released a track titled '' powershifter '' on youtube . on november 10 , 2009 , bell announced the track list for mechanize , along with an explanation of each song . in january 2010 , fear factory played in australia and new zealand tour on the big day out tour , playing their first australian dates since 2005 on january 17 at parklands showgrounds on queensland 's gold coast . fear factory released mechanize on february 5 , 2010 , and began a u.s . tour titled '' fear campaign tour 2010 '' , in late march . in august 2010 , the band headlined the brutal assault open air festival in czech republic . in september 2010 , fear factory toured australia , new zealand , and tokyo as the opening act for metallica . the new zealand concerts were in christchurch , two shows that were brought about by a petition sent to metallica asking them to visit new zealand 's second-largest city . after the 2010 canterbury earthquake , the south island concerts were in doubt , but on september 15 , 2010 , an official announced the cbs arena had escaped harm and both shows went ahead . the industrialist ( 2011–2013 ) . in an interview during the 70000 tons of metal cruise , bell said fear factory was planning to write and record a '' full-on concept '' album , which was due for release in 2012 . he said , '' we 're gon na kind of take a break a little bit , but we 're definitely going into the studio at some point and start writing . we wan na take our time doing it . personally & nbsp ; . & nbsp ; mechanize , do n't get me wrong , is a good record—i 'm very proud of it—but it 's got ta be better than that . i 've got plans where i 'd like to do a full-on concept again—story , artwork . just make it real cerebral . but there 'll definitely be another fear factory record , maybe in 2012 . '' on august 3 , 2011 , dino cazares said on his twitter feed that he was working and demoing new material for the next fear factory album . on january 25 , 2012 , the band announced the new album will be titled the industrialist . the album was again co-produced by the band with rhys fulber and mixed by greg reely . byron stroud left the band early in 2012 , saying , '' life 's too short to spend it with people who do n't respect you '' . in one interview , cazares said he did not know why stroud decided to leave and that he could not play the bass parts on mechanize , prompting cazares to do it himself . in february 2012 , former chimaira guitar player matt devries replaced stroud . on april 19 , 2012 , mike heller of malignancy and system divide was announced as the band 's new drummer , replacing gene hoglan . at the same time , cazares confirmed on his facebook page that john sankey of devolved had programmed the drums on the industrialist . burton described the industrialist as another concept album '' sonically , conceptually , and lyrically '' . cazares also said he and burton were the two in control of the record 's outcome , and that the songwriting on the album was much more '' definitive '' in regards to fear factory 's platform sound . on june 4 , 2012 , the industrialist was available to stream through aol music . the album was released through candlelight records on june 5 , 2012 . on may 2 , 2013 , cazares commented regarding the status of fear factory albums archetype and transgression , which were recorded without his participation , and the band 's decision not to play songs from them live , saying '' they do n't count '' as fear factory albums . contradicting this , fear factory played the track archetype on its 2013 australian tour in early july , with minor changes to the song 's lyrics . on august 2 , 2013 , ex-drummer hoglan said he left fear factory because he was prevented from participating on the album , and only found out about its completion online . . genexus ( 2013–2015 ) . on may 1 , 2013 , dino cazares told songfacts.com fear factory would begin work on their ninth studio album after the end of the industrialist tour . the album was expected to be released in early 2014 . on may 13 , 2013 , burton c . bell told metal-rules.com , '' fear factory will continue to tour north america and europe 2013 . we 've got some more tours scheduled , some summer festivals next year . during that time our plan is to start writing a new record and we would like to have a new record out by spring 2014 '' . on march 19 , 2014 , bell told brave words & bloody knuckles he would like to have the new album released by august , followed by a tour in september . on september 12 , 2014 , the band announced it had signed to record label nuclear blast and would enter the studio in october . the band also confirmed that the album would be mixed by andy sneap , and that rhys fulber would again produce it . the band played their first shows in india , in november 2014 , as part of the weekender tour , and on february/march 2015 , they participated at the soundwave festival in australia and new zealand . on may 1 , 2015 , it was announced that former static-x and soulfly bassist tony campos joined the band . later that month , fear factory announced that they would release their ninth studio album , titled genexus , on august 7 , 2015 . they toured in european festivals in july 2015 , and then onto north america , as an opening act for coal chamber . from late august until mid-september 2015 , the band toured the midwestern , southern and southwestern united states with support from once human ( starring logan mader ) , los angeles melodic metal band before the mourning and chicago rock band the bloodline . they also announced that they would play the entire demanufacture album in europe between november and december 2015 , a tour which again included once human with the addition of irish band dead label as openers . . hiatus , lawsuits , new music , and departure of burton c . bell ( 2016–present ) . in a november 2016 interview with loudwire , guitarist dino cazares revealed that fear factory had planned to release their tenth studio album in mid-to-late 2017 . he stated , '' right now we 're going to be home and doing a new record . we 're writing already and in the process of doing a new record , but it probably wo n't be out until late summer of next year or maybe even october . i 'm not exactly sure . '' in a december 2016 interview with the ex-man , despite an ongoing '' huge legal battle '' with bell and cazares , former bassist-guitarist christian olde wolbers stated that he was '' trying to reach out and try to get this reunion thing happening . '' he added , '' there would be nothing better for this band than to reconcile our differences , fucking write a killer record , which i know we can , and fucking we would be doing really big tours . my passion for playing and what we have invested in this band is very big , and i know it 's really big for dino as well , 'cause he started it with raymond back in the day . '' more fuel to the possibility of a reunion with the '' classic '' lineup of bell , cazares , herrera and wolbers was added later that month , when wolbers posted an image on his instagram account , suggesting fear factory 's official website was '' under construction . '' on may 7 , 2017 , wolbers posted a blank picture on his instagram ( which was later deleted ) , claiming that fear factory had broken up . later that day , cazares was asked via twitter if they were still together , and his response was , '' not sure why your asking that and rant by who ? '' . in an interview with kilpop in may 2017 , burton c . bell said that the new songs were '' even stronger than genexus , 'cause it just seems even more tight . we 're on a groove , and it 's kicking ass . '' in an interview with siriusxm 's jose mangin at november 2018 's inaugural headbangers con in portland , oregon , bell revealed monolith as the title of fear factory 's tenth studio album and its tentative artwork via his smartphone . in october 2019 , this was refuted by guitarist dino cazares who stated via his twitter account that there was no new fear factory album . shortly thereafter , cazares expressed uncertainty towards the band 's future , indicating that a lawsuit filed by former members raymond herrera and christian olde wolbers had prevented him and bell from using the fear factory name . on september 2 , 2020 , dino cazares announced he would be releasing new fear factory music in 2021 . less than a month later , burton c . bell announced he quit fear factory citing '' consistent series of dishonest representations and unfounded accusations from past and present band members '' , leaving no original members left in the band besides cazares . however , bell 's contributions to their upcoming album will remain , as he recorded his vocals in 2017 . in an interview with robb flynn on september 28 , 2020 , which took place within hours after bell announced his departure from fear factory , cazares claimed that he was not aware of the split until he '' found out about it via social media . '' he also claimed that one of the reasons behind bell 's departure was not only due to the lawsuit that prevented the release of the band 's new album , but because the latter 's portion of the fear factory '' trademark ownership became available '' , which left cazares as the sole owner of the band name . cazares reiterated that bell 's vocals will appear on the new album , which is being mixed by andy sneap for a march 2021 release , and hoped the pair would continue to work together in order to support it . . musical style , influences , and legacy . fear factory has been classified under several metal genres , but usually are described as industrial metal . the band also has been described as groove metal , nu metal , grindcore , thrash metal , and death metal . the band began as a death metal band with their debut album soul of a new machine , but quickly moved to industrial metal after that album . fear factory 's influences include slayer , exodus , napalm death , ministry , nine inch nails , and godflesh . in terms of influences on the group 's work , dino cazares has cited the band members ' interests in fantasy and science fiction alternative universes such as the terminator mythos as well as the dune mythos . as a specific example , their debut album , soul of a new machine , picked up its name directly from a line in a movie critic review of the terminator 2 : judgment day film ( discussing the t-1000 villain ) . cazares has also cited recurring influences on fear factory coming from conventional popular music , outside of the genres of hard rock and heavy metal , for instance looking to singer-songwriter paul mccartney 's sounds in both the beatles and wings . over the years the film blade runner has become a recurring theme as the band often makes lyrical reference to the plot , as well as directly quote and sample lines from the film . fear factory 's innovative approach towards and hybridization of the genres industrial metal , death metal , and alternative metal has had a lasting impact on other artists coming later , the band putting a stamp on metal music ever since the release of their first album in 1992 . fear factory is noteworthy among contemporaries for its lyrical focus on science fiction , with much of the band 's music telling a single story spanning several concept albums . the band has been called a '' stepping stone '' , leading mainstream listeners to venture into less-known , more extreme bands , and are consistently appreciated . in the liner notes of the re-released version of soul of a new machine , machine head vocalist robb flynn , chimaira vocalist mark hunter , and spineshank guitarist mike sarkisyan cited fear factory as an influence . robb flynn said his vocal style was influenced by burton c . bell 's vocals and machine head have been wrongly credited for the vocal style . mark hunter said chimaira 's drumming was heavily influenced by raymond herrera . slipknot , killswitch engage , as i lay dying , static-x , and coal chamber have also mentioned fear factory in their liner notes . modern bands including mnemic , scarve , stiff valentine , and threat signal contain significant influences from fear factory 's technique and have also credited a substantial debt of gratitude to the band . peter tägtgren of hypocrisy said , '' fear factory are close to our hearts '' and , '' soul of a new machine was the influence for me to start my other project , 'pain ' '' . devin townsend of strapping young lad said his main influences for heavy as a really heavy thing were fear factory and napalm death . in an interview on that metal show , black sabbath drummer bill ward said fear factory is one of the bands he wishes he could play with , and picked mechanize as one of his favourite albums . . band members . current members . dino cazares – guitars , backing vocals ( 1989–2002 , 2009–present ) , bass ( 1992 , 1995 , 2009–present ) , keyboards ( 1995 ) mike heller – drums ( 2012–present ) tony campos – bass , backing vocals ( 2015–present ) . former members . . miscellaneous . burton c . bell – lead vocals ( 1989–2002 , 2002–2006 , 2009–2020 ) , keyboards ( 1995 ) christian olde wolbers – bass ( 1993–2002 , 2002–2006 ) , keyboards ( 1995 ) , guitars ( 2002–2006 ) , backing vocals ( 1993–2002 , 2002–2006 ) . bassists . david gibney – bass ( 1989–1991 ) andy romero – bass ( 1991–1992 ) andrew shives – bass ( 1992–1993 ) byron stroud – bass ( 2002–2006 , 2009–2012 ) matt devries – bass , backing vocals ( 2012–2015 ) . drummers . raymond herrera – drums ( 1989–2002 , 2002–2006 ) gene hoglan – drums ( 2009–2012 ) . session/touring musicians . . keyboardists . reynor diego – keyboards , samples ( 1992–1995 ) rhys fulber – keyboards , samples ( 1993–2002 , 2003–2004 , 2009–present ) steve tushar – keyboards , synthesizers , samples ( 1995–1997 , 2003–2005 ) john morgan – keyboards , samples ( 1997 ) john bechdel – keyboards , synthesizers , samples ( 1998–2002 , 2002–2004 ) timeline . discography . soul of a new machine ( 1992 ) demanufacture ( 1995 ) obsolete ( 1998 ) digimortal ( 2001 ) archetype ( 2004 ) transgression ( 2005 ) mechanize ( 2010 ) the industrialist ( 2012 ) genexus ( 2015 ) . references . external links .