Charles Wesley

biography . early life . charles wesley was the eighteenth child of susanna wesley and samuel wesley . he was born in epworth , lincolnshire , england , where his father was rector . in 1716 , at the age of 8 , he entered westminster school , where his brother samuel was usher . he was selected as king 's scholar in 1721 and head boy in 1725–26 , before matriculating at christ church , oxford . at oxford , charles formed a prayer group among his fellow students in 1727 ; his elder brother , john , joined in 1729 , soon becoming its leader and moulding it in line with his own convictions . they focused on studying the bible and living a holy life . other students mocked them , saying they were the '' holy club '' , '' sacramentarians '' , and '' the methodism '' , being methodical and exceptionally detailed in their bible study , opinions and disciplined lifestyle . the wesleys ' future colleague , george whitefield joined the group . charles graduated in 1732 with a master 's degree in classical languages and literature . he was also a tutor . charles followed his father and brothers into anglican orders , being ordained as a priest in september 1735 . that same year his father died . voyage to america . on 14 october 1735 , charles and his brother john sailed on the simmonds from gravesend , kent for savannah in georgia colony in british america at the request of the governor , james oglethorpe . charles was appointed secretary of indian affairs and while john remained in savannah , charles went as chaplain to the garrison and colony at nearby fort frederica , st . simon 's island , arriving there tuesday , 9 march 1736 according to his journal entry . matters did not turn out well , and he was largely rejected by the settlers . in july 1736 , charles was commissioned to england as the bearer of dispatches to the trustees of the colony . on 16 august 1736 , he sailed from charleston , south carolina , never to return to the georgia colony . . ministry . in 1738 the wesley brothers had religious experiences : charles experienced a conversion on 21 may , and john had a similar experience in aldersgate street just three days later . a city of london blue plaque at 13 little britain , near the church of st botolph 's , aldersgate , off st . martin 's le grand , marks the site of the former house of john bray , reputed to be the scene of charles ' evangelical conversion . it reads , '' adjoining this site stood the house of john bray . scene of charles wesley 's conversion by faith in christ on may 21st 1738 '' . charles felt renewed strength to spread the gospel to ordinary people and it was around then that he began to write the poetic hymns for which he would become known . in january 1739 , he was appointed as curate to serve at st mary 's church , islington , but was forced to resign when the churchwardens opposed his evangelical preaching . later that same year , finding that they were unwelcome inside parish churches , the wesley brothers took to preaching to crowds in open fields . they were influenced by george whitefield , whose open-air preaching was already reaching great numbers of bristol colliers . from 1740 , the wesleys evangelism across britain and ireland . in newcastle he established its first methodist society in september 1742 , and faced mob violence at wednesbury and sheffield in 1743 and at devizes in 1747 . following a period of illness , after 1756 charles made no more journeys to distant parts of the country , mainly just moving between bristol and london . increasingly in his later years charles became the mouthpiece of the so-called 'church methodists'—he was strongly opposed to a separation of methodism from its anglican roots . in the 1780s , he was especially dismayed by his brother 's ordination of priests to serve in america ( see , which he criticised in a published poem . . marriage and children . in april 1749 , he married the much younger sarah wesley ( 1726–1822 ) , also known as sally . she was the daughter of marmaduke gwynne , a wealthy wales magistrate who had been converted to methodism by howell harris . they moved into a charles wesley 's house in september 1749 . sarah accompanied the brothers on their journeys throughout britain , until at least 1753 . in 1771 , charles obtained another house , in london , and moved into it that year with his elder son . by 1778 the whole family had transferred from bristol to the london house , at 1 great chesterfield street ( now wheatley street ) , marylebone , where they remained until charles ' death and on into the 19th & nbsp ; century . the house in bristol still stands and has been restored , however the london house was demolished in the mid 19th & nbsp ; century . only three of the couple 's children survived infancy : charles wesley junior ( 1757–1834 ) , sarah wesley ( 1759–1828 ) , who like her mother was also known as sally , and samuel wesley ( 1766–1837 ) . their other children , john , martha maria , susannah , selina and john james are all buried in bristol , having died between 1753 and 1768 . ( see monument in garden on north side of junction of lewis mead and the haymarket , bristol . ) both samuel and charles junior were musical child prodigies and , like their father , became organists and composers . charles junior spent most of his career as the personal organist of the royal family , and samuel became one of the most accomplished musicians in the world and is often called '' the english mozart '' . samuel wesley 's son , samuel sebastian wesley , was one of the foremost british composers of the 19th & nbsp ; century . . death and burial . on his deathbed he sent for the rector of st marylebone parish church , john harley , and purportedly told him '' sir , whatever the world may say of me , i have lived , and i die , a member of the church of england . i pray you to bury me in your churchyard . '' at the age of 80 , he died on 29 march 1788 , in london . his body was carried to the church by six clergymen of the church of england . a memorial stone to him stands in the gardens in marylebone high street , close to his place of burial . one of his sons , samuel , became the organist at the church . . hymns and other works . charles wesley was a prolific hymnwriter . among the collections ( hymnals ) of wesley 's hymns published in his lifetime were hymns on god 's everlasting love ( 1741 , 1742 ) , hymns on the lord 's supper ( 1745 ) , and short hymns on select passages of the holy scriptures ( 1762 ) , together with others celebrating the major festivals of the christian year . his hymns are marked by their strong doctrinal content ( notably the arminian insistence on the unlimited atonement ) , a richness of scriptural and literary allusion , and the variety of his metrical and stanza forms . they are considered to have had a significant influence not only on methodism , but on christian worship and modern theology as a whole . wesley 's poetry included epistles , elegies and political and satirical verse . a collected edition of the poetical works of john and charles wesley , edited by george osborn , was published in thirteen volumes in 1868–1872 . osborn 's collection has now been supplemented by the three volumes of the unpublished poetry of charles wesley . see volume 2 jason e . vickers states that wesley 's 'conversion experience ' in 1738 had a clear impact on his doctrine , especially doctrine concerning the power of the holy spirit . the change was most prominent in his hymns written after the same year . from his published work hymns and prayers to the trinity and in hymn number 62 he writes '' the holy ghost in part we know , for with us he resides , our whole of good to him we owe , whom by his grace he guides , he doth our virtuous thoughts inspire , the evil he averts , and every seed of good desire , he planted in our hearts . '' charles communicates several doctrines : the personal indwelling of the holy spirit , the sanctification of the spirit , the depravity of mankind , and humanity 's personal accountability to god . . hymnody . in the course of his career , wesley published the words of between 6,500 to 10,000 hymns , many of which are still popular . these include : '' arise , my soul , arise '' ( words ) '' and can it be that i should gain ? '' ( words ) '' christ the lord is risen today '' ( words ) '' christ , whose glory fills the skies '' ( words ) '' come , o thou traveler unknown '' ( words ) '' come , thou long expected jesus '' ( words ) '' depth of mercy , can it be '' ( words ) '' father , i stretch my hands to thee '' ( words ) '' hail the day that sees him rise '' ( words ) '' hark ! the herald angels sing '' ( words ) '' jesus , lover of my soul '' ( words ) '' jesus , the name high over all '' ( words ) '' lo ! he comes with clouds descending '' ( words ) '' love divine , all loves excelling '' ( words ) '' o for a heart to praise my god '' ( words ) '' o for a thousand tongues to sing '' ( words ) '' rejoice , the lord is king '' ( words ) '' soldiers of christ , arise '' ( words ) '' sun of unclouded righteousness '' ( words ) '' thou hidden source of calm repose '' ( words ) '' ye servants of god '' ( words ) the words to many more of charles wesley 's hymns can be found on wikisource and in his many publications . complete texts of charles wesley 's published verse at duke divinity school some 150 of his hymns are in the methodist hymn book hymns and psalms , including '' hark ! the herald angels sing '' , and the church hymn book ( in new york and chicago , us , 1872 ) where '' jesus , lover of my soul '' is published . many of his hymns are translated into other languages , and form the foundation for methodist hymnals , as well as the swedish metodist-episkopal-kyrkans psalmbok printed in stockholm in 1892 . psalms . wesley 's hymns are notable as interpretations of scripture . he also produced paraphrases of the psalms , contributing to the long tradition of english metrical psalter . a notable feature of his psalms is the introduction of jesus into the psalms , continuing a tradition of christological readings of the psalms evident in the translations of john patrick and isaac watts . the introduction of jesus into the psalms was often the source of controversy , even within wesley 's own family . charles ' brother samuel wesley wrote a poem against such practice . of particular importance is wesley 's manuscript psalms , held in the archives of the pitts theology library at emory university . . legacy . wesley is still remembered for his ministry while in st . simon 's island , georgia , by the south georgia conference of the united methodist church ; in 1950 , the conference opened a christian retreat center on the island by the banks of the frederica river , designating it epworth by the sea in honour of his and john 's birthplace . he is commemorated in the calendar of saints of the evangelical lutheran church in america on 2 march with his brother john . the wesley brothers are also commemorated on 3 march in the calendar of saints of the episcopal church and on 24 may in the anglican calendar . charles is commemorated on 29 march in the calendar of commemorations by order of st . luke ; john is commemorated on 2 march ; their parents are also commemorated . as a result of his enduring hymnody , the gospel music association recognised his musical contributions to the art of gospel music in 1995 by listing his name in the gospel music hall of fame . wesley wrote two of the so-called great four anglican hymns : '' hark ! the herald angels sing '' and '' lo ! he comes with clouds descending '' . ; memorials file : wesley plaque , postman 's park.jpg plaque at postman 's park , london , commemorating john and charles wesley file : charles wesley 2.jpg wesley at st . matthew 's church in bristol , by arnold wathen robinson file : church musicians window , king 's heath , birmingham.jpg bach , wesley and handel , at cambridge road methodist church , birmingham file:17 22 169 window.jpg stained glass of charles wesley , john wesley , and francis asbury at lake junaluska file : charles wesley , john wesley 's chapel , the horsefair , bristol - geograph.org.uk - 1167364.jpg charles wesley statue in the courtyard at the new room , bristol ( 2009 ) . tercentenary . 24 may 2007 was celebrated as the tercentenary of wesley 's birth , with many celebratory events held throughout england , even though wesley was in fact born in december 1707 . the date of 24 may is known to methodists as aldersgate day and commemorates the spiritual awakening of first charles and then john wesley in 1738 . in november 2007 , an post , the irish post office , issued a 78-cent stamp to commemorate the 300th anniversary of wesley 's birth . . in film . a heart set free – t . n . mohan , 2007 , a feature-length documentary on charles wesley 's life and hymns wesley – foundery pictures , 2009 , starring burgess jenkins as john wesley , r . keith harris as charles wesley , and featuring june lockhart as susanna wesley and kevin mccarthy as bishop ryder . references . external links . charles wesley at the eighteenth-century poetry archive ( ecpa ) biography and works at the cyber hymnal biography and articles about charles wesley the journal of charles wesley papers of charles wesley charles wesley family papers , 1740–1864 at pitts theology library , candler school of theology charles wesley conference 2007 held at liverpool hope university 'charles wesley in historical perspective : poet , priest and theologian ' , lecture delivered by revd professor kenneth newport , at gresham college , 13 december 2007 . ( available for download as mp3 and mp4 ) . charles wesley 's journal 1736–56 on a vision of britain through time , with links to the places visited . a man named wesley passed this way historical marker at st . simons island , georgia reverends john & charles wesley historical marker stuart a . rose manuscript , archives , and rare book library , emory university : charles wesley family papers , 1740–1864