Joaquin Phoenix

early life . phoenix was born joaquin rafael bottom in the río piedras district of san juan , puerto rico on october 28 , 1974 , the son of american parents from the u.s . mainland . he is the third of five children , following river ( 1970–1993 ) and rain ( born 1972 ) , and preceding liberty ( born 1976 ) and summer ( born 1978 ) , all of whom have been involved in acting . he also has a half-sister named jodean ( born 1964 ) from his father 's previous relationship . he was born with a mark on his lip , which he claims is not a cleft lip . his father , john lee bottom , is originally from california and is of mostly english descent with some german and french ancestry . his mother , arlyn ( née dunetz ) , was born in new york city to ashkenazi jews parents , whose families were from hungary and russia . arlyn moved to california , meeting phoenix 's father while hitchhiking . they married in 1969 ; years later , they joined a religious cult called the children of god and began traveling throughout south america and puerto rico in the caribbean , where phoenix was born . they eventually became disenchanted with the cult and decided to leave the group , returning to the u.s . in 1977 when phoenix was three years old . they changed their last name to phoenix , after the mythical bird that rises from its own ashes , symbolizing a new beginning . phoenix began calling himself '' leaf '' around this time , having been inspired by spending time outdoors raking leaves and desiring to have a nature-related name like his siblings . this became the name he used as a child actor , until he changed it back to joaquin at age 15 . . acting career . early career . in order to provide food and financial support for the family , the phoenix children performed at various talent contests , singing and playing instruments . in los angeles , his mother started working as an executive secretary for nbc , and his father worked as a landscape architect . phoenix and his siblings were eventually discovered by one of hollywood 's leading children 's agents , iris burton , who got the five children acting work , mainly doing commercials and television show appearances . at the age of eight , joaquin made his acting debut alongside his brother river in the television series seven brides for seven brothers in the 1982 episode '' christmas song '' . in his first major role , phoenix co-starred opposite river in the abc afterschool special entitled backwards : the riddle of dyslexia ( 1984 ) . also in 1984 , phoenix made guest appearances in the murder , she wrote episode '' we 're off to kill the wizard '' with his sister summer , and individual episodes of the fall guy and hill street blues . after appearing in the cbs television film kids do n't tell ( 1985 ) , phoenix made his theatrical film debut in spacecamp ( 1986 ) as max , a 12-year-old who goes to kennedy space center to learn about the nasa space program and undergoes amateur astronaut training . he guest starred in the anthology series alfred hitchcock presents episode '' a very happy ending '' in the same year , playing a child who blackmails a hitman ( played by robert loggia ) into killing his father ( john aprea ) . phoenix 's first starring role was in russkies ( 1987 ) , about a group of friends who unknowingly befriend a russian soldier during the cold war . phoenix then appeared in ron howard 's comedy-drama parenthood ( 1989 ) , in which he played the withdrawn teenage nephew of steve martin 's character . the film was well received by critics and grossed 126 & nbsp ; million worldwide . phoenix was nominated for the young artist award for best leading young actor in a feature film for his performance in the film . after establishing himself as a child actor , joaquin decided to retire from acting for a while and traveled to mexico and south america with his father . on october 31 , 1993 , three days after joaquin 's 19th birthday , his older brother river died of an overdose outside the viper room in west hollywood . phoenix , who had accompanied his brother and older sister rain to the club , called 911 to seek help for his dying brother . after river 's death , the phone call was repeatedly broadcast on tv and radio shows . as a result of the media glare , his family retreated from the public . . 1995–1999 : return to acting . following the comeback of his acting career , phoenix was often cast in supporting roles as conflicted , insecure characters with a dark side . in 1995 , he co-starred in to die for , as a disturbed young man who is seduced by a woman ( nicole kidman ) to commit murder . directed by gus van sant , the film was screened out of competition at the 1995 cannes film festival and became a financial and critical success , resulting in a domestic box office total of 21 & nbsp ; million . new york times critic janet maslin praised phoenix 's performance , writing '' so pity poor jimmy . rivetingly played by mr phoenix with a raw , anguished expressiveness that makes him an actor to watch for , jimmy is both tempted and terrified by suzanne 's slick amorality . in that , he speaks for us all . '' in 1997 , phoenix played a small-town troublemaker in oliver stone 's u turn , and a poor man in love with a rich woman in inventing the abbotts . the films were received with mostly mixed and negative reviews , respectively , and neither performed well at the box office . the following year , phoenix starred in clay pigeons ( 1998 ) as a young man in a small town who befriends a serial killer . budgeted at 8 & nbsp ; million , the film became a box office flop , grossing only 1 & nbsp ; million and was , like phoenix 's previous projects , not well received by critics . in his next film , 8mm ( 1999 ) , phoenix co-starred as an adult video store employee who helps tom welles ( nicolas cage ) investigate the underworld of illegal pornography . the film turned out to be a box office success , grossing 96 & nbsp ; million worldwide , but found few admirers among critics . . 2000–2005 : critical acclaim and commercial success . in 2000 , phoenix co-starred in three films . he made his first collaboration with director james gray in the yards . the film follows the corruption in the rail yards of queens . although failing to perform at the box office , the yards received positive reviews from critics . that same year , phoenix played a fictionalized version of roman empire commodus in the historical epic film gladiator , directed by ridley scott . the film was a massive financial and critical success , becoming one of the highest earning films of 2000 , with a worldwide box office gross of 457 & nbsp ; million and received universal critical praise . the film won the academy award for best picture . for his performance , which the critic lisa schwarzbaum described as '' deliciously creepy perversity '' , phoenix was nominated for the golden globe award for best supporting actor – motion picture , the bafta award for best supporting actor , the screen actors guild award for outstanding performance by a male actor in a supporting role and received his first nomination for the academy award in the category of best supporting actor . he and late brother river phoenix became the first brothers to be nominated for acting academy awards . to date they are the only brothers to hold this distinction . joaquin phoenix later portrayed the conflicted priest abbé de coulmier in quills . inspired by the life and work of the marquis de sade , the film premiered in the united states at the telluride film festival on september 2 , 2000 , and was a modest art house success grossing a total of 17 & nbsp ; million at the box office . it was received with critical praise , eventually receiving three academy award nominations at the 73rd academy awards and the national board of review selected the film as its best film of 2000 . for his combined roles , phoenix won the broadcast film critics association award for best supporting actor and the national board of review award for best supporting actor . the following year , phoenix starred in the satirical film buffalo soldiers ( 2001 ) as a u.s . army soldier . the world premiere was held at the 2001 toronto international film festival in early september . however , because the film was a satire of the us military , its wider theatrical run was delayed by approximately two years because of the september 11 attacks ; it was finally released on july 25 , 2003 . although the film was a box office flop , it was received with mostly positive reviews . film critic roger ebert praised phoenix for his '' spot-on performance '' . phoenix was nominated for the british independent film award for best actor . phoenix also starred in m . night shyamalan 's science fiction thriller signs ( 2002 ) . phoenix plays merrill hess , a former minor league baseball player who , along with his older brother graham ( mel gibson ) , discovers that earth has been invaded by extraterrestrials . the film was a massive financial success , grossing 408 & nbsp ; million on its 72 & nbsp ; million budget , and was received with positive reviews . rolling stone critic peter travers praised phoenix 's performance , writing '' phoenix registers impressively , finding the humor and the pain in this lost boy '' . in 2003 , phoenix played the irresolute husband of a superstar-skater in it 's all about love , and voiced kenai in the disney animated film , brother bear . the film grossed 250 & nbsp ; million worldwide and was nominated for the academy award for best animated feature . he was replaced by patrick dempsey in the sequel brother bear 2 . in 2004 , phoenix paired with shyamalan again , playing a lovestruck farmer in the village . it received mixed reviews but was a financial success , grossing 256 & nbsp ; million worldwide on its 60 & nbsp ; million budget . for his second film that year , phoenix starred in the drama film ladder 49 as a baltimore firefighter . the film earned 102 & nbsp ; million at the box office despite receiving generally mixed reviews . roger ebert gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars , praising the performances in the film . phoenix 's final film of 2004 was terry george 's hotel rwanda , playing photographer jack daglish . the film was a moderate financial success but was a critical success , receiving almost exclusively positive reviews from critics . hotel rwanda . metacritic . cnet networks . retrieved june 6 , 2010 . for his performance in the film , phoenix was nominated for the screen actors guild award for outstanding performance by a cast in a motion picture along with the cast . in 2005 , phoenix starred in the james mangold directed film walk the line , a johnny cash biopic , after cash himself approved of phoenix . all of cash 's vocal tracks in the film and on the accompanying soundtrack are played and sung by phoenix . roger love was his vocal coach on this film . the film was released on november 18 , 2005 , eventually grossing 186 & nbsp ; million . phoenix 's performance received rave reviews from critics and it inspired film critic roger ebert to write , '' knowing johnny cash 's albums more or less by heart , i closed my eyes to focus on the soundtrack and decided that , yes , that was the voice of johnny cash i was listening to . the closing credits make it clear it 's joaquin phoenix doing the singing , and i was gob-smacked '' . for his portrayal of johnny cash , phoenix was nominated for his second academy award , in the category of best actor as well as the bafta award for best actor , broadcast film critics association award for best actor and the screen actors guild award for outstanding performance by a male actor in a leading role . he won the golden globe award for best actor – motion picture musical or comedy and the grammy award for best compilation soundtrack for visual media for the film 's soundtrack . earlier that year , he narrated earthlings ( 2005 ) , a documentary about the investigation of animal abuse in factory farms , and pet mills , and for scientific research . he was awarded the humanitarian award at the san diego film festival in 2005 , for his work and contribution to earthlings . . 2006–2010 : producing and self-imposed break . in 2006 , phoenix was invited to join the academy of motion picture arts and sciences . in 2007 , phoenix reunited with director james gray for the film we own the night , which he also produced . in the film , phoenix played a new york nightclub manager who tries to save his brother and father from russian mafia hit men . the film premiered at the 2007 cannes film festival , receiving mixed reviews from critics and grossed a total of 54.5 & nbsp ; million worldwide . critic peter travers described phoenix as '' electrifying and then some '' , and he was awarded the people 's choice award for favorite leading man for the performance . for his second film of 2007 , phoenix also reunited with director terry george for the film reservation road . in it , phoenix played a father obsessed with finding out who killed his son in a hit-and-run accident . the film failed at the box office and received negative reviews from critics , with film critic peter travers writing '' even the best actors – and i 'd rank joaquin phoenix and mark ruffalo among their generation 's finest – ca n't save a movie that aims for tragedy but stalls at soap opera . '' phoenix made his third collaboration with director james gray in the film two lovers ( 2008 ) , where he played a bachelor torn between the family friend his parents wish he would marry and his beautiful but volatile new neighbor . two lovers premiered in competition at the 2008 cannes film festival in may , receiving largely positive reviews , especially phoenix who was praised by film critics david edelstein who wrote '' he phoenix is , once again , stupendous , and stupendous in a way he has never been before '' and roger ebert describing his performance as '' perfect pitch '' . two lovers grossed 16 & nbsp ; million worldwide . phoenix 's mockumentary film i 'm still here ( 2010 ) premiered at the 67th venice international film festival on september 6 , 2010 . the film was directed by phoenix 's then brother-in-law casey affleck and was also written by affleck and phoenix himself . the film purports to follow the life of phoenix , from the announcement of his retirement from acting , through his transition into a career as a hip hop artist . filming officially began on january 16 , 2009 at a las vegas nightclub . throughout the filming period , phoenix remained in character for public appearances , giving many the impression that he was genuinely pursuing a new career . although widely suspected to be a '' mockumentary , '' the fact that the events of the film had been deliberately staged was not disclosed until after the film had been released . the film received mixed reviews and failed at the box office . . 2012–2018 : comeback and further acclaim . in 2011 , it was announced that phoenix would star in paul thomas anderson 's drama film the master ( 2012 ) . phoenix played freddie quell , a sex-obsessed alcoholic world war ii veteran struggling to adjust to a post-war society . the film premiered at the venice film festival where phoenix won the volpi cup for best actor . the art film only grossed 28 & nbsp ; million but was received with universal critical acclaim , with the acting performances receiving high praise , especially phoenix's . peter travers of the rolling stone gave phoenix high praise stating '' joaquin phoenix in the performance of his career . phoenix wears the role like a second skin ; he 's a volcano in full eruption . you ca n't take your eyes off him . '' his performance was publicly lauded by fellow actors daniel day-lewis , jessica chastain and robert duvall . phoenix received his third academy award nomination , his second for best actor , as well as nominations for the golden globe award for best actor & nbsp ; – motion picture drama and bafta award for best actor . in 2013 , phoenix starred in romantic science-fiction drama film her directed by spike jonze . in it , phoenix plays theodore twombly , a man who develops a relationship with samantha ( scarlett johansson ) , an intelligent computer operating system personified through a female voice . it had its premiere at the new york film festival on october 12 , 2013 . her had a worldwide gross of 47 & nbsp ; million and received widespread critical acclaim , along with phoenix 's performance . film critics manohla dargis and david edelstein agreed that no other actor could have done the role but phoenix , stating '' her is even harder to imagine without mr . phoenix , an actor who excels at exquisite isolation '' and '' it 's hard to imagine someone more affecting than phoenix in the role '' respectively , and phoenix received his fourth nomination for the golden globe award . the film was nominated for five academy awards , including best picture . also in 2013 , phoenix collaborated with director james gray for the fourth time in the drama film the immigrant . he starred as bruno weiss , a pimp who prostitutes poles immigrant ewa ( marion cotillard ) and ends up falling for her . it was screened at the 2013 cannes film festival as well as at the new york film festival . the film was released in the united states on may 16 , 2014 . the immigrant was not successful at the box office but received positive reviews from critics . in 2014 , phoenix reunited with paul thomas anderson for the crime comedy-drama film inherent vice , the first adaptation of a thomas pynchon book . phoenix played doc sportello , a private investigator and hippie/dope head trying to help his ex-girlfriend solve a crime . inherent vice premiered as the centerpiece at the new york film festival on october 4 , 2014 and went nationwide on january 9 , 2015 . it was met with mostly positive reviews with many critics praising the film for its acting performances , while some were frustrated by its complicated plot , however it only grossed 11.1 & nbsp ; million at the box office . phoenix was nominated for his fifth golden globe award for his performance . phoenix starred in the 2015 mystery comedy-drama irrational man . directed by woody allen , the film was screened out of competition at the 2015 cannes film festival , received mixed to positive reviews , and began a theatrical release on july 17 , 2015 . phoenix narrated his second documentary for nation earth about animal rights called unity ( 2015 ) . it was released on august 12 , 2015 . phoenix starred in four movies released in 2018 : in the first , phoenix portrayed jesus in mary magdalene , written by helen edmundson and directed by garth davis , opposite rooney mara . it was released in the united kingdom on march 16 , 2018 to mixed reviews . the film 's original distributor has been the cause of the film 's delayed u.s . release . later , phoenix starred as joe , a former fbi agent and gulf war veteran suffering from ptsd , in the amazon studios thriller you were never really here ( 2017 ) , written and directed by lynne ramsay . the film premiered in competition at the cannes film festival , where it received wide critical acclaim , and won phoenix the cannes film festival award for best actor . the film began its us release on april 6 , 2018 . many critics agreed the performance is one of phoenix ' best to date , with justin chang of the los angeles times describing it as '' the most rivetingly contained '' work of his career . in his third feature of the year , phoenix portrayed quadriplegic cartoonist john callahan in his second feature with director gus van sant , the biopic do n't worry , he wo n't get far on foot . the film was released on july 13 , 2018 and phoenix 's lead performance received critical acclaim . his last film role of 2018 was as charlie sisters in jacques audiard 's english-language debut , an adaptation of patrick dewitt 's historical novel , the sisters brothers . the film was released on september 21 , 2018 . this same year , he also collaborated with rooney mara , sia , sadie sink and kat von d to narrate chris delforce 's animal rights documentary dominion . for his contribution to the documentary , he was granted the 2018 award of excellence for narration by hollywood international independent documentary awards . . 2019–present : joker and beyond . in 2019 , phoenix starred as the iconic dc comics character the joker in todd phillips 's neo-noir psychological thriller joker . the film premiered at the 76th venice international film festival , where it won the golden lion , with phoenix 's performance garnering widespread acclaim . owen gleiberman of variety wrote , '' phoenix is astonishing as a mentally ill geek who becomes the killer-clown joker in todd phillips ' neo-taxi driver knockout : the rare comic-book movie that expresses what 's happening in the real world . '' the film was theatrically released in the united states on october 4 , 2019 , and became a box office success , grossing over 1 & nbsp ; billion with a mere budget of 55 million , making it the first r-rated film to pass the billion-dollar mark at the worldwide box office . his performance was lauded by fellow actors kathy bates and jessica chastain , among others . phoenix received his first academy award , his fourth academy award nomination , his third in the best actor category and won his first bafta in the category best actor in a leading role , won his second golden globe in the category best actor – motion picture drama , his second critics choice award in the category best actor and the screen actors guild award for outstanding performance by a male actor in a leading role . in 2020 , phoenix served as an executive producer on gunda directed by viktor kossakovsky , which premiered at the berlin international film festival . that same year , phoenix was named on the list of the 25 greatest actors of the 21st century by the new york times . the list was written by famed critics manohla dargis and a.o . scott and phoenix 's paragraph was written by his frequent collaborator , director james gray . phoenix is set to star in mike mills ' next film c'mon c'mon , which will be produced and distributed by a24 . the film was shot in the fall of 2019 and early 2020 . in january 2021 , deadline hollywood reported that phoenix will star in kitbag , directed by ridley scott , in their second collaboration . in february 2021 , it was announced that phoenix will star in ari aster 's new film disappointment blvd for a24 . . other work . he has directed music videos for ringside , she wants revenge , people in planes , arckid , albert hammond jr . , and silversun pickups . phoenix served as one of the executive producers of a television show called 4real , a half-hour series which showcase celebrity guests on global adventures '' in order to connect with young leaders who are creating social and economic change '' . he is also listed as a producer on the movie we own the night . in music , he was said to have produced the opening track for pusha t 's my name is my name album alongside kanye west . the track is called '' king push '' . phoenix then denied in a statement to xxl having produced the record , saying , '' while it was widely reported that pusha t used my beat and that i produced his song , i ca n't take any credit . a friend 's son played me his music , and all i did was make an introduction to kanye west 's camp . '' he is set to produce a documentary about lgbt teenagers on summer camp . . personal life . phoenix dated his inventing the abbotts co-star liv tyler from 1995 to 1998 and model topaz page-green from 2001 to 2005 . since late 2016 , he has been in a relationship with actress rooney mara . in july 2019 , it was confirmed that they are engaged . in may 2020 , it was reported that mara was expecting her first child with phoenix . in late september 2020 , the couple announced that they had a son , named river after phoenix 's late brother . in early april 2005 , phoenix checked himself into rehab to be treated for alcoholism . since 2006 , he has lived in the hollywood hills . on his religious background , he has said , '' my parents believed in god . i 'm jewish , my mom 's jewish , but she believes in jesus , she felt a connection to that . but they were never religious . i do n't remember going to church , maybe a couple of times . '' on january 26 , 2006 , while driving down a winding canyon road in hollywood , phoenix veered off the road and flipped his car . the crash was reportedly caused by brake failure . shaken and confused , he heard someone tapping on his window and telling him to '' just relax '' . unable to see the man , phoenix replied , '' i 'm fine . i am relaxed . '' the man replied , '' no , you 're not . '' the man then stopped phoenix from lighting a cigarette while gasoline was leaking into the car cabin . phoenix realized that the man was german filmmaker werner herzog . while herzog helped phoenix out of the wreckage by breaking the back window of the car , bystanders called an ambulance . phoenix approached herzog to express his gratitude . ( herzog tells the story about the car crash while promoting his collaboration with david lynch . video unavailable in some countries . ) phoenix unexpectedly announced in late 2008 that he had retired from acting to pursue a career in rap music , and that the forthcoming two lovers would be his last film . on february 11 , 2009 , he appeared on late show to promote two lovers . he seemed incoherent and was mostly unresponsive to host david letterman 's questions about the film and his career plans . thomson , katherine . ( february 11 , 2009 ) . '' phoenix 's bizarre letterman appearance : ( video ) '' . huff post . retrieved february 11 , 2009 . as the show ended , letterman said , '' okay , ah , i want to thank most of our guests tonight , '' to audience chuckles . phoenix appeared on late show again on september 22 , 2010 , revealing that his '' retirement '' and eccentric behavior were for his role in a mockumentary called i 'm still here . in october 2012 , phoenix labeled the academy awards '' bullshit '' . he later gave an interview apologizing for his comments , and acknowledged that the awards provide an important platform for many deserving filmmakers . he elaborated on the topic while on jimmy kimmel live ! in 2015 , explaining that he is uncomfortable receiving accolades for his work in films when he considers the filmmaking process to be a collaborative one . phoenix is famous for his anxiety when acting and receiving awards . during a 2012 interview with interview magazine , he said , '' i still get nauseous the day before and have weeks of incredible anxiety . they have to put fucking pads in my armpits because i sweat so much that it just drips down my wardrobe . for the first three weeks of shooting , i 'm just sweating . it 's pure anxiety , and i love it . '' . activism . phoenix has long been a activism , lending his support to a number of charities and humanitarian organizations , such as amnesty international , the art of elysium , heart , and the peace alliance ( which campaigns for a united states department of peace ) . phoenix is also on the board of directors for the lunchbox fund , a non-profit organization which provides daily meals to students of township schools in soweto , south africa , which was founded by his ex-girlfriend , south african model topaz page-green . phoenix is a vegan , an animal rights movement and a member of in defense of animals and peta . he does not wear any clothes made out of animal skin . in his films , he requests that leather costumes be made from synthetic materials . for his lifelong dedication to animal rights , he was named peta 's person of the year in 2019 . for nation earth he narrated earthlings ( 2005 ) , a documentary about humanity 's economic dependence on animals . he was awarded the humanitarian award at the san diego film festival in 2005 , for his work and contribution to earthlings . he narrated his second documentary for nation earth called unity ( 2015 ) , along with other celebrity vegans such as actress jessica chastain and comedian ellen degeneres . in 2017 , he executive-produced the documentary what the health , which premiered on june 16 , 2017 , on netflix . on january 10 , 2020 , phoenix was arrested with actress jane fonda at a climate change protest outside the united states capitol at washington , d.c . at the protest , phoenix spoke about the link between animal agriculture and climate change . on february 2 , 2020 , after being awarded the bafta award for best actor in a leading role for his performance in joker , phoenix criticized the lack of diversity in the 2020 bafta nominations , as all of the nominees in the four main acting categories were white . in february 2020 , phoenix starred in guardians of life , the first of twelve short films by the environmental organization mobilize earth that highlight the most pressing issues facing humanity and the natural world . funds raised by the project will go to amazon watch and extinction rebellion . during his 2020 oscar acceptance speech , he passionately promoted societal equality and animal rights , ending with a tribute to his brother river phoenix . this speech received both praise and backlash from the dairy industry . following the death of animal rights campaigner regan russell , who was killed by an animal transport lorry outside of a slaughterhouse in june 2020 , phoenix expressed his support by attending a vigil in montréal , and writing a statement for people magazine . . filmography . awards and nominations . phoenix is the recipient of an academy award , a british academy film award , a grammy award , two golden globe awards , a screen actors guild award , the volpi cup for best actor at the venice film festival and the award for best actor at the cannes film festival , among numerous other accolades from industry groups , critics ' associations , and film festivals . joaquin and river hold the distinction of being the only brothers nominated for acting academy awards . both joaquin phoenix and heath ledger won an academy award for their performances as the joker , becoming the second pair of actors to win academy awards for playing the same character – the other pair being marlon brando and robert de niro , who won best actor and academy award for best supporting actor respectively , for their portrayals of vito corleone . . see also . list of puerto ricans list of animal rights advocates list of vegans . notes .