WWKB

history . early years . wkbw was founded in 1926 as a religious station , operating at the frequency of 1380 & nbsp ; khz . as the story goes , founder clinton churchill applied to the department of commerce for a license to operate under the call sign way . that call sign , however , was being used for a ship at sea , so instead , churchill chose the letters '' wkbw , '' which were next in the random assignment pool . churchill proclaimed the call letters stood for well known bible witness . later usage referred to the middle letters '' kb '' standing for king of buffalo ( alluding to its 50,000-watt broadcast power ) . wkbw changed frequencies from 1380 to 1480 & nbsp ; khz in the late 1920s as a result of general order 40 ( bumping the station already at that frequency , wufo , down the dial to 1040 & nbsp ; khz ) , and raised its power to 5,000 watts—the first buffalo station to raise its power to that level . in march 1941 wkbw inaugurated a new transmitter plant south of buffalo in the town of hamburg , increased power to 50,000 watts around the clock and shifted to its current dial position at 1520 & nbsp ; khz as a result of narba . during the 1930s , wkbw shared a cbs affiliation with then-sister station wgr , and in the 1940s , was affiliated with the nbc blue network and its corporate successor abc , running as a conventional full service network affiliated station also offering local news and music programming . the station later broadcast a wide variety of ethnic , country music and religious programming when not carrying network offerings , including pioneer rock and roll and rhythm and blues shows launched in the 1950s by disk jockey george '' hounddog '' lorenz , later founder of pioneer fm urban station wblk . stan barron served as the station 's sports director in this era . top 40 era . on july 4 , 1958 , a few months before companion station wkbw-tv ( channel 7 ) was launched , wkbw radio abandoned its adult approach and was converted into a personality-driven full service top 40 music radio station , featuring foreground personalities , a tight playlist of current hits and an aggressive local news department , which it continued to program with great success for over 20 years . buffalo broadcasters ' history of wkbw it was one of the first stations to present traffic reports in cooperation with police and state and local authorities . churchill sold wkbw-am-tv to capital cities broadcasting in 1961 , earning a handsome return on his original investment of 35 years earlier . on halloween night 1968 , writer dan kriegler and then-program director jefferson kaye ( later the voice of wpvi-tv in philadelphia , co-owned with wkbw-tv in 1971 ) commemorated the 30th anniversary of orson welles ' 1938 war of the worlds by re-making the infamous broadcast , updating the storyline and changing locations to make it significant to buffalo listeners . kaye ( the voice of nfl films ) did another equally well-received remake of '' war of the worlds '' in 1972 using a revised script and some new cast members including jackson armstrong and newsmen jim mclaughlin and joe downey . both versions have been recorded and collected by aficionados of classic radio programming . during the late 1950s , 1960s and 1970s , wkbw became a major force in pop radio over the east coast . kb had a 50,000 watt transmitter ( the maximum power allowed ) at their transmitter site in hamburg . this high power blanketed the entire eastern u.s . with top 40 music every night , and the station actually had a better signal at night in the western boston suburbs than boston 's own top 40 station , wmex , located at 1510 , right next door to wkbw . disk jockeys included future price is right announcer rod roddy , dick biondi , danny neaverth , jack armstrong , joey reynolds , steve mitchell , bud ballou , norm marshall , tom shannon , and the amazin ' jim quinn . art wander served as news director from 1956 to 1958 , followed by irv weinstein from 1958 to 1964 ; stan barron , a holdover from the pre-rock and roll era , handled sports until his departure in 1965 . mike joseph , later creator of the hot hits format , was a major off-air contributor to the station 's approach to the '' futuresonic '' top-40 format . in 1969 , wkbw became the first radio station to air cuts from the beatles ' unreleased get back album . the recordings had been compiled from material the beatles recorded in london in january 1969 , the same sessions that would be used in the beatles ' let it be album , released in may 1970 . although wkbw was the first station to air the '' get back '' tapes , wbcn in boston would be better known for playing them , as its broadcast of the tapes was preserved on a high-quality reel , which spawned several widely circulated bootlegs of the beatles . a recreated example of wkbw as an early 1960s-era pop radio station can be found on ron jacobs ' '' cruisin ' 1960 '' ( watermark inc . incr 5-2005 ) . this recreation features dick biondi and includes several classic rock and pop songs of that era , contemporary commercials , and dj patter . a tribute site for wkbw 's top 40 years is found at . the 1980s and 1990s . the station continued with the top 40 format until 1981 , when , facing the emergence of fm competition , the station evolved to more of an adult contemporary format . by 1983 , they leaned toward rock and roll oldies while still playing ac songs . they also added talk radio shows in the evenings by 1984 . in 1986 , the wkbw stations were broken up as a result of capital cities ' purchase of the american broadcasting company . wkbw radio was sold to price communications , who subsequently changed the station 's call letters to the current wwkb on january 3 , mainly in order to keep the long-standing '' kb '' slogan ( which was necessitated due to an fcc regulation in effect then that forbade tv and radio stations in the same city , but with different owners from sharing the same call letters ; the former calls remained on now-former sister station wkbw-tv , which capital cities/abc would sell to queen city broadcasting ) . in 1987 , the station moved to a full service oldies format and on june 18 , 1988 , the station dropped live programming and switched to satellite-fed oldies . on march 6 , 1989 , wwkb flipped to business talk as part of the '' business radio network '' . it flipped to hot talk in 1993 . wwkb aired j . r . gach from wgr as the afternoon drive show and established syndicated hot talkers the howard stern show ( by this time now almost exclusively on the fm dial ) , g . gordon liddy , laura schlessinger , the fabulous sports babe , tom leykis and ( briefly , before gach 's arrival ) don and mike . john otto hosted a late night program in this era . stern 's and gach 's presence was not enough to revive kb 's ratings in what was then a three way news-talk battle also involving market-leading wben and contender wgr , which would itself later switch to its current format of sports talk and play by play . by 1996 , the format was flipped again to country music as '' real country 1520 kb '' ( this despite there being three other country stations in buffalo , wyrk , wlkk and wxrl ) . following that in 1998 was an all sports format utilizing the now-defunct one on one sports network , which would move to 107.7 after two years . on january 29 , 2000 , wwkb flipped to a simulcast of sister station wkse . this lasted until june of that year , when it returned to business talk , a low-cost , albeit unpopular format . price communications presided over the collapse of its entire radio portfolio including wwkb and filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in 1992 . after reorganization , wwkb was sold to keymarket communications in 1994 . around the same time , keymarket acquired one of wwkb 's longtime rivals , wben , from locally based owners at a premium price . keymarket then sold both wwkb and wben to st . louis-based river city broadcasting in 1995 . sinclair broadcast group acquired wwkb and wben in 1996 through its purchase of river city . a year later , sinclair bought wgr , bringing three of buffalo 's heritage am stations under its portfolio . in 1999 , sinclair decided to divest its radio stations , selling most of them , including wwkb , wben and wgr , to entercom . the legend returns . on january 27 , 2003 , wwkb returned to music , playing oldies from the station 's heyday in the 1950s and 1960s , featuring artists such as elvis presley , the beatles , the beach boys , frankie lymon , the four seasons , the who , the four tops , the everly brothers , fats domino , ricky nelson , lovin spoonful , and many others . the oldies format was an attempt to recreate the station 's history as a popular music station ( and was part of a nationwide fad of '' real oldies '' formats on am radio stations in the early 2000s ) . while it maintained the official wwkb calls for station identification , it also played the original '' wkbw buffalo '' jingles and featured many of the classic wkbw jocks including armstrong and neaverth , who is currently on air at weck buffalo . while not performing as well in arbitron ratings as it had in its golden past , the revived '' wkbw '' earned the best ratings for the station since the 1990s , with approximately a 2 share , and was beginning to grow . progressive talk era . personality oldies has been a successful format in many markets . nevertheless , entercom found the personality oldies format too expensive to maintain in buffalo for only a 2 share , and so on february 6 , 2006 , wwkb ended a three-year run as an oldies station with a format change to predominantly syndicated progressive talk . ( entercom 's buffalo sales manager buddy shula later revived the concept when he purchased weck and reformatted it to a personality oldies format . ) a syndicated overnight show hosted by former wkbw personality joey reynolds survived the format change . the move was a hasty attempt to block brokered station whld from succeeding with a liberal talk format , sap its listeners , and protect right leaning talk format sister station wben . despite an increase in transmission power , whld found air america with local morning talk to be unsustainable and dropped the format for the '' totally gospel radio network '' programming in december 2006 . wwkb maintained their liberal talk format for another seven years . on april 16 , 2008 the station started airing randi rhodes of the nova-m radio network , who had been fired from air america . the classic '' wkbw '' was honored by xm satellite radio on november 30 , 2007 in a five-hour '' sonic sound salute '' on the 60s on 6 . on july 3 , 2008 , forgottenbuffalo.com celebrated the 50th anniversary of kb 's format switch to top 40 with a sidewalk sock hop . the event was held in front of the original studios located at 1430 main street in buffalo . kb alumni danny neaverth , stan roberts and tom donahue attended . a limited edition poster commemorating the anniversary was produced . espn 1520 . on september 5 , 2013 , wwkb flipped to sports radio under the brand espn 1520am . the espn radio affiliation had previously been on wgr from the network 's launch in 1992 until 2013 ; wgr 's increased emphasis on local programming ( and , since the phil hendrie show moved to an earlier time slot , a lack of progressive talk programs to air in the overnight hours ) prompted entercom to move the espn affiliation to a full-time signal . the local sports broadcasts and brokered programming that wwkb carried under its previous format continue under the espn affiliation ; the station launched with a broadcast of the buffalo sabres ' participation in the traverse city prospects tournament . pergament , alan ( september 6 , 2013 ) . sabres games in nhl prospect tourney on new espn buffalo . the buffalo news . retrieved september 5 , 2013 . the station is primarily a straight simulcast of the espn radio feed , with the exception of the jim rome show which is part of cbs sports radio . rome had previously aired on wgr for over a decade prior before the station opted to rearrange its local programming and move the somewhat lower-rated ( and less locally relevant ) rome to wwkb . broadcast range . wwkb 's transmitter is located in hamburg , new york , with a three-tower array designed for maximum nighttime range . it is one of two 50,000-watt '' flamethrowers '' in western new york , the other being wham in rochester . transcontinental range has been reported . during the exclusive monkees '' sleepy jean '' / '' daydream believer '' broadcast in 1967 , a recording was made in sidi yahia , morocco . i heard it on the am radio-wkbw heard in morocco-1967 audio file of wkbw playing '' sleepy jean '' / '' daydream believer '' -1967 wwkb 's daytime signal decently covers all of western new york , including rochester , as well as the southern tier . it also provides secondary coverage to much of southern ontario , including toronto , and can be heard as far east as kingston . at night , it must direct its signal eastward due to sharing a frequency with kokc in oklahoma city , oklahoma ( the former koma , another flame-throwing 50,000-watt top 40 powerhouse in the 1960s and 1970s ) . thus , while the station can be heard across most of the eastern half of north america at night , its signal is spotty at best only 20 miles southwest of buffalo . its directional quality is due to the configuration of its transmitter tower array , which has resulted the station being commonly heard very well in parts of sweden at night during the winter months . a group of scandinavian dxing actually traveled to the united states to have a conference at a camp road motel , with the purpose of viewing the array for themselves , apparently to photograph and measure it . residents of the neighborhood remain largely unaware that the antenna array is internationally famous for sending the 1520 signal all the way to the outskirts of stockholm on a regular basis . there have been ongoing reports for the past several years that allege entercom has cut back wwkb 's signal power to 10,000 watt in an effort to save power . entercom has not filed with the fcc to do so and such a signal reduction has yet to be confirmed ; indications are that the station 's signal strength and range has remained normal . fybush , scott ( 2010-03-22 ) . goodbye , luv - ron lundy remembered . northeast radio watch . retrieved 2010-03-22 . . sports coverage . buffalo bills home games buffalo bandits lacrosse ( in season ) buffalo bisons baseball ( in season ) buffalo bulls football and basketball ( beginning 2014 ) nfl on westwood one ( in season , overflow from wgr when wgr does bills games ) select buffalo sabres preseason and prospect tournament games wwkb 's 50,000-watt signal has made the station desirable as an outlet for the buffalo 's second-tier sports teams : the buffalo bandits have aired on the station since the 2006 season ( moving from wgr where it took the place of the locked-out sabres in 2005 ) , buffalo bulls football and basketball , and , on and off , the buffalo bisons , who moved back to the frequency in april 2008 . entercom uses wwkb as an overflow station for wgr 's sports coverage . when two teams to which wgr owns the rights are playing at the same time , the more important event usually airs on wgr and the lesser event airs on wwkb . wwkb 's bills home game coverage is broadcast live without a broadcast delay primarily for the benefit of listeners inside bills stadium . the official buffalo bills radio network broadcast airs on wgr . the use of wwkb as a de facto co-flagship would also allow , if the situation arose , the bills ' home team broadcast to be heard across the east coast if they were to ever reach the super bowl . references . external links . wwkb website fcc history cards for wwkb