Imagery intelligence

history . origins . although aerial photography was first used extensively in the first world war , it was only in the second world war that specialized imagery intelligence operations were initiated . high quality images were made possible with a series of innovations in the decade leading up to the war . in 1928 , the raf developed an electric heating system for the aerial camera . this allowed reconnaissance aircraft to take pictures from very high altitudes without the camera parts freezing . in 1939 , sidney cotton and flying officer maurice longbottom of the raf suggested that airborne reconnaissance may be a task better suited to fast , small aircraft which would use their speed and high service ceiling to avoid detection and interception . they proposed the use of spitfires with their armament and radios removed and replaced with extra fuel and cameras . this led to the development of the spitfire pr variants . these planes had a maximum speed of 396 & nbsp ; mph at 30,000 feet with their armaments removed , and were used for photo-reconnaissance missions . the aircraft were fitted with five cameras which were heated to ensure good results . the systematic collection and interpretation of the huge amounts of aerial reconnaissance intelligence data soon became imperative . beginning in 1941 , raf medmenham was the main interpretation centre for photographic reconnaissance operations in the european and mediterranean theatres . unlocking buckinghamshire 's past the central interpretation unit ( ciu ) was later amalgamated with the bomber command damage assessment section and the night photographic interpretation section of no 3 photographic reconnaissance unit , raf oakington , in 1942 . allied central interpretation unit ( aciu ) during 1942 and 1943 , the ciu gradually expanded and was involved in the planning stages of practically every operation of the war , and in every aspect of intelligence . in 1945 , daily intake of material averaged 25,000 negatives and 60,000 prints . thirty-six million prints were made during the war . by ve-day , the print library , which documented and stored worldwide cover , held 5,000,000 prints from which 40,000 reports had been produced . american personnel had for some time formed an increasing part of the ciu and on 1 may 1944 this was finally recognised by changing the title of the unit to the allied central interpretation unit ( aciu ) . there were then over 1,700 personnel on the unit 's strength . a large number of photographic interpreters were recruited from the hollywood film studios including xavier atencio . two renowned archaeologists also worked there as interpreters : dorothy garrod , the first woman to hold an oxbridge chair , and glyn daniel , who went on to gain popular acclaim as the host of the television game show animal , vegetable or mineral ? . sidney cotton 's aerial photographs were far ahead of their time . together with other members of his reconnaissance squadron , he pioneered the technique of high-altitude , high-speed photography that was instrumental in revealing the locations of many crucial military and intelligence targets . cotton also worked on ideas such as a prototype specialist reconnaissance aircraft and further refinements of photographic equipment . at its peak , british reconnaissance flights yielded 50,000 images per day to interpret . of particular significance in the success of the work of medmenham was the use of stereoscopic images , using a between plate overlap of exactly 60 % . despite initial scepticism about the possibility of the german rocket technology , major operations , including the 1943 offensives against the v-2 rocket development plant at peenemünde , were made possible by painstaking work carried out at medmenham . later offensives were also made against potential launch sites at wizernes and 96 other launch sites in northern france . it is claimed that medmanham 's greatest operational success was '' operation crossbow '' which , from 23 december 1943 , destroyed the v-1 infrastructure in northern france . '' operation crossbow '' , bbc2 , broadcast 15 may 2011 according to r.v . jones , photographs were used to establish the size and the characteristic launching mechanisms for both the v-1 flying bomb and the v-2 rocket . post war spyplanes . immediately after world war ii , long range aerial reconnaissance was taken up by adapted jet bombers – such as the english electric canberra , and its american development , the martin b-57 – capable of flying higher or faster than the enemy . highly specialized and secretive strategic reconnaissance aircraft , or spy planes , such as the lockheed u-2 and its successor , the sr-71 blackbird were developed by the united states . flying these aircraft became an exceptionally demanding task , as much because of the aircraft 's extreme speed and altitude as it was because of the risk of being captured as spy . as a result , the crews of these aircraft were invariably specially selected and trained . there are claims that the us constructed a hypersonic reconnaissance aircraft , dubbed the aurora , in the late 1980s to replace the blackbird . since the early 1960s , in the united states aerial and satellite reconnaissance has been coordinated by the national reconnaissance office . early use of satellites . early photographic reconnaissance satellites used photographic film , which was exposed on-orbit and returned to earth for developing . these satellites remained in orbit for days , weeks , or months before ejecting their film-return vehicles , called '' buckets . '' between 1959 and 1984 the u.s . launched around 200 such satellites under the codenames corona and gambit , with ultimate photographic resolution ( ground-resolution distance ) better than . the first successful mission concluded on 1960-08-19 with the mid-air recovery by a c-119 of film from the corona mission code-named discoverer 14 . this was the first successful recovery of film from an orbiting satellite and the first aerial recovery of an object returning from earth orbit . because of a tradeoff between area covered and ground resolution , not all reconnaissance satellites have been designed for high resolution ; the kh-5-argon program had a ground resolution of 140 meters and was intended for mapmaking . between 1961 and 1994 the ussr launched perhaps 500 zenit film-return satellites , which returned both the film and the camera to earth in a pressurized capsule . the u.s . kh-11 series of satellites , first launched in 1976 , was made by lockheed , the same contractor who built the hubble space telescope . hst has a 2.4 metre telescope mirror and is believed to have had a similar appearance to the kh-11 satellites . these satellites used charge-coupled devices , predecessors to modern digital cameras , rather than film . russian reconnaissance satellites with comparable capabilities are named resurs dk and persona . aircraft . low- and high-flying planes have been used all through the last century to gather intelligence about the enemy . u.s . high-flying reconnaissance planes include the lockheed u-2 , and the much faster sr-71 blackbird , ( retired in 1998 ) . one advantage planes have over satellites is that planes can usually produce more detailed photographs and can be placed over the target more quickly , more often , and more cheaply , but planes also have the disadvantage of possibly being intercepted by aircraft or missiles such as in the 1960 u-2 incident . unmanned aerial vehicles have been developed for imagery and signals intelligence . these drones are a force multiplier by giving the battlefield commander an '' eye in the sky '' without risking a pilot . satellite . though the resolution of satellite photographs , which must be taken from distances of hundreds of kilometers , is usually poorer than photographs taken by air , satellites offer the possibility of coverage for much of the earth , including hostile territory , without exposing human pilots to the risk of being shot down . there have been hundreds of reconnaissance satellites launched by dozens of nations since the first years of space exploration . satellites for imaging intelligence were usually placed in high-inclination low earth orbits , sometimes in sun-synchronous orbits . since the film-return missions were usually short , they could indulge in orbits with low perigees , in the range of 100–200 & nbsp ; km , but the more recent ccd-based satellites have been launched into higher orbits , 250–300 & nbsp ; km perigee , allowing each to remain in orbit for several years . while the exact resolution and other details of modern spy satellites are classified , some idea of the trade-offs available can be made using simple physics . the formula for the highest possible resolution of an optical system with a circular aperture is given by the rayleigh criterion : : \sin \theta 1.22 \frac , where θ is the angular resolution , λ is the wavelength of light , and d is the diameter of the lens or mirror . were the hubble space telescope , with a 2.4 m telescope , designed for photographing earth , it would be diffraction-limited to resolutions greater than 16 & nbsp ; cm ( 6 & nbsp ; inches ) for green light ( \lambda \approx 550 nm ) at its orbital altitude of 590 & nbsp ; km . this means that it would be impossible to take photographs showing objects smaller than 16 & nbsp ; cm with such a telescope at such an altitude . modern u.s . imint satellites are believed to have around 10 & nbsp ; cm resolution ; contrary to references in popular culture , this is sufficient to detect any type of vehicle , but not to read the headlines of a newspaper . the primary purpose of most spy satellites is to monitor visible ground activity . while resolution and clarity of images has improved greatly over the years , this role has remained essentially the same . some other uses of satellite imaging have been to produce detailed 3d maps for use in operations and missile guidance systems , and to monitor normally invisible information such as the growth levels of a country 's crops or the heat given off by certain facilities . some of the multi-spectral sensors , such as thermal measurement , are more electro-optical masint than true imint platforms . to counter the threat posed by these '' eyes in the sky , '' the united states , ussr/russia , china and india have developed anti-satellite weapon ( either with the use of another 'killer satellite ' , or with some sort of earth- or air-launched missile ) . since 1985 , commercial vendors of satellite imagery have entered the market , beginning with the french spot satellites , which had resolutions between 5 and 20 metres . recent high-resolution ( 4–0.5 metre ) private imaging satellites include terrasar-x , ikonos , orbview , quickbird and worldview-1 , allowing any country ( or any business for that matter ) to buy access to satellite images . analytical methodology . the value of imint reports are determined on a balance between the timeliness and robustness of the intelligence product . as such , the fidelity of intelligence that may be gleaned from imagery analysis is a traditionally perceived by intelligence professionals as a function of the amount of time an imagery analyst ( ia ) has to exploit a given image or set of imagery . as such , the united states army field manual breaks imint analysis into three distinct phases , based upon the amount of time expended in exploiting any given image . . first phase . first phase imagery analysis is deemed '' time-dominant . '' this means that given imagery must be rapidly exploited in order to satisfy an immediate requirement for imagery-sourced intelligence from which a leader may make an educated political and/or military decision . due to the need to produce near-real time intelligence assessments based upon collected imagery , first phase imagery analysis is rarely compared to collateral intelligence . second phase . second phase imagery analysis is centered on the further exploitation of recently-collected imagery to support short- to mid-term decision-making . like first phase imagery analysis , second phase imagery analysis is generally catalyzed by a local commander 's priority intelligence requirements , at least in the context of a military operational setting . whereas first phase imagery analysis may depend on the exploitation of a relatively small repository of imagery , or even a single image , second phase imagery analysis generally mandates a review of a chronological set of imagery over time , so as to establish a temporal understanding of objects and/or activities of interest . third phase . third phase imagery analysis is generally conducted in order to satisfy strategic intelligence questions or to otherwise explore existing data in the search of '' discovery intelligence . '' third phase imagery analysis hinges on the use of a large repository of historical imagery as well as access to a variety of sources of information . third phase imagery analysis incorporates supporting information and intelligence from other intelligence gathering disciplines and is , therefore , generally conducted in support of a multi-source intelligence team . the exploitation of imagery at this level of analysis is typically conducted with the intention of producing geoint ( geoint ) . see also . arthur c . lundahl canadian forces intelligence command ( canadian geoint organization ) defence imagery and geospatial organisation ( digo ) ( australian geoint organization ) defence intelligence fusion centre ( british geoint organization ) dino brugioni first images of earth from space gis in geoint geospatial intelligence ( geoint ) national geospatial-intelligence agency ( american geoint organization ) raf intelligence : royal air force intelligence branch remote sensing . notes . . further reading . maya quiñones , william gould , and carlos d . rodríguez-pedraza . united states department of agriculture geospatial data availability for haiti ( february 2007 ) ( study on availability of commercial imagery in 2007 which summarizes collection systems and data products . ) covert imagery , peter jenkins , , intel publishing uk . external links . introduction to imagery intelligence via globalsecurity australian defence satellite communications station , geraldton joint australian-us intelligence facility - pine gap