1980 in music

specific locations . 1980 in british music 1980 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1980 in country music 1980 in heavy metal music 1980 in hip hop music 1980 in jazz . events . january–march . january 1 cliff richard is appointed an mbe by queen elizabeth ii of the united kingdom . the zorros audition drummer greg pedley . january 5 – donna summer brings her 3 double album in a 14-month period , to the top of the billboard albums charts ; when greatest hits : on the radio ; vol 1 & 2 ; reaches the top spot . january 7 – at the age of 44 , songwriter larry williams is found dead in his los angeles , california , home of a gunshot wound to the head . investigators are never able to determine whether his death was a murder or suicide . january 13 – the beach boys , grateful dead , and jefferson starship perform at a benefit concert at oakland coliseum for the people of kampuchea . january 14 – rush release permanent waves , which eventually becomes the band 's fifth platinum album . january 16 – paul mccartney is arrested in tokyo for possession of a half pound of marijuana . the remaining part of mccartney 's and wings ' tour was then canceled . january 19 – the first uk indie chart is published in record week , with spizzenergi 's '' where 's captain kirk '' topping the singles chart , and adam and the ants ' dirk wears white sox topping the album chart . january 25 – paul mccartney is released from a japanese jail and ejected from the country by japanese authorities . february 7 – pink floyd 's the wall tour opens at the los angeles memorial sports arena . february 8 – david bowie and his wife of nearly 10 years , angie , file for divorce . bowie gets custody of their 9-year-old son , zowie . february 14 – lou reed marries sylvia morales in new york city 's greenwich village . february 19 – bon scott , lead singer of ac/dc , dies in london . although common folklore cites pulmonary aspiration of vomit as the cause of his death , the official cause is listed as '' acute alcohol poisoning '' and '' death by misadventure '' . february 23 – ron wood of the rolling stones and his wife are arrested for cocaine possession on the caribbean island of saint martin . they are set free after spending five days in custody due to the inability of authorities to prove the cocaine in the apartment belonged to either of them . february 27 – the 22nd annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by kenny rogers . billy joel 's 52nd street wins album of the year , while the doobie brothers ' '' what a fool believes '' wins both record of the year and song of the year . rickie lee jones wins best new artist . february 29 – buddy holly 's trademark glasses and the big bopper 's watch are '' rediscovered '' in old police files by the mason city , iowa , sheriff ( both were killed in a plane crash on february 3 , 1959 , along with singer ritchie valens ) . march 1 – patti smith marries former mc5 member fred '' sonic '' smith . march 3 – sotheby 's auction house in london auctions off a rivera hotel , las vegas , napkin signed by elvis presley for £500 . other items auctioned included four american dollar bills autographed by the beatles , for £220 and a collection of personal letters belonging to the rolling stones , also for £220 . march 8–16 – tbilisi rock festival ( 1980 ) : the first state-sanctioned rock music festival in the soviet union . march 14 – record producer quincy jones receives a star on the hollywood walk of fame . march 19 – elvis presley 's autopsy was subpoenaed during the trial of dr . george nichopoulous , who would later be found guilty of over-prescribing drugs to presley , jerry lee lewis and other clients . march 20 – radio caroline shuts down in the uk after radio ship mi amigo sinks in a storm . april–june . april 1 – brian johnson is made the new lead singer of ac/dc replacing the late bon scott . april 13 – the broadway musical grease closes its run of 3,388 performances , making it the longest running show on broadway up until that time . april 14 a member of the new jersey state assembly introduces a resolution to make bruce springsteen 's '' born to run '' the official state song . iron maiden release their self-titled debut album . april 17 – as the '' official guests of state '' , bob marley and the wailers perform at zimbabwe 's independence festival . marley calls the event the '' greatest honor of my life . '' april 19 – johnny logan wins the 25th eurovision song contest for ireland , with the song '' what 's another year '' . april 25 – black sabbath release heaven and hell , their first album to feature ronnie james dio on vocals . april 30 – the roger daltrey film , mcvicar , opens in london . may 4 – america 's top 10 , the television version of radio 's american top 40 and hosted by casey kasem , debuts this week in syndication . may 18 – ian curtis , vocalist of pioneering post-punk group joy division , hangs himself in his macclesfield home , just one day before joy division are scheduled to begin their first u.s . tour . june 25 rock and roll pioneer bill haley performs for the last time during a tour of south africa . after this tour , his health deteriorates and he dies in february 1981 . july 1980 marks the 25th anniversary of haley 's '' rock around the clock '' reaching no . 1 on the american singles charts . the sony walkman goes on sale in the united states . kiss plays its first show with new drummer eric carr at the new york palladium . june 27 – john lydon and keith levene of public image ltd make an appearance on the tomorrow show with host tom snyder . in a famously uncomfortable interview , lydon gives curt and vague responses to most of snyder 's questions . july–september . july 11 – ultravox release their fourth studio album , vienna . their first album with new lead singer midge ure following the departures of frontman john foxx and guitarist robin simon , vienna marks a radical shift in ultravox 's direction and image , transforming the former post-punk band into a more sophisticatedly-oriented new wave/synthpop group . despite this stylistic shift alienating fans and critics who were more favorable towards the foxx-led incarnation of the band , vienna would go on to become ultravox 's most successful studio album to date . july 18 – the documentary and concert film no nukes opens in new york . july 25 – over five months after the death of lead singer bon scott , ac/dc release back in black , their first album with replacement singer brian johnson , who would remain with the band until 2016 . the album 's success would lead it to become the second-highest-selling album of all time and the highest-selling studio album by any band to date . july 29 – over two months after the suicide of lead singer ian curtis , the surviving members of joy division regroup as a new band and debut anonymously live at manchester 's beach club ; the group would adopt the moniker '' new order '' the following year . july 31 – the eagles end their tour with a contentious show in long beach , california . they would not play together again until 1994 . august 4 – john lennon and yoko ono begin the recording of the double fantasy album . august 16 the first monsters of rock heavy metal festival is held at donington park in england . rainbow headlines , and judas priest , scorpions , april wine , saxon , riot and touch also perform . several bands lose members in one day ; bass player jah wobble leaves public image , ltd . ; drummer cozy powell leaves rainbow ; keyboard player jools holland leaves squeeze ; and drummer bill ward leaves black sabbath . august 19 – fans at exhibition stadium in toronto stage a riot after alice cooper cancels because of illness . august 23 – the heatwave festival near toronto features the b-52 's , talking heads , the pretenders , elvis costello and many others . august 26 – pete comita replaces tom petersson in cheap trick . august 31 – karen carpenter marries thomas burris . '' because we are in love '' is played at their wedding . september 13 solid gold , a new music television series , premieres in syndication . elton john plays a free concert for 400,000 people in new york 's central park . he performs the encore in a donald duck costume . september 25 – john bonham , drummer of led zeppelin , is found dead by bandmate john paul jones . october–december . october 9 – a riot breaks out at a black sabbath concert in milwaukee after bassist geezer butler is hit in the head by a bottle and the band quits the stage . october 26 – paul kantner of jefferson starship is rushed to hospital following a cerebral hemorrhage . he soon recovers without surgery , defying medical odds . october – iron maiden replaces guitarist dennis stratton with urchin guitarist adrian smith . november 21 the eagles ' don henley is arrested when cocaine , quaaludes , and marijuana are found in his hotel room after a 16-year-old prostitute has drug-related seizures . henley is also subsequently charged with contributing to the delinquency of a minor . after pleading no contest , he was fined 2,500 and put on two years ' probation . iron maiden play their first gig with new guitarist adrian smith in uxbridge , london , england . december 4 duran duran signs with emi after finalizing its lineup and touring as a support act for hazel o'connor . led zeppelin disbands following the death of drummer john bonham . december 7 – darby crash , leader of seminal l.a . punk band the germs , dies of a heroin overdose in a suicide pact . december 8 – john lennon is shot to death outside his apartment building in new york city at 10:50 pm . lennon 's single , '' ( just like ) starting over '' , subsequently becomes a number one hit in many countries , including the united states , united kingdom and australia . december 14 – over 100,000 mourners attend a public vigil for john lennon in central park , new york . 10 minutes of silence are observed at 2pm . december 31 – the ninth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by charlie daniels , billy preston , syreeta , chuck berry and barry manilow . also in 1980 . the roland corporation releases the roland tr-808 drum machine , which became a cornerstone of the emerging electronic , dance , and hip hop genres . the machine went on to become one of the most influential instruments in popular music , comparable to the fender stratocaster 's influence on rock . record labels established in 1980 record labels disestablished in 1980 the single '' groovy ghost show '' by casper is one of the first recorded hip hop songs from chicago . british comedy group the hee bee gee bees release '' meaningless songs ( in very high voices ) '' , a parody of a bee gees ' disco-style single . though not a hit in the uk , it is a huge success elsewhere , especially in south africa , and helps to encourage the gibb brothers to diversify stylistically . phil collins signs a contract with atlantic records to distribute his solo records in the us and in europe outside the uk ( on wea label ) . bands formed . see : category : musical groups established in 1980 . bands disbanded . see : category : musical groups disestablished in 1980 . albums released . january . . classical music . george crumb – a little suite for christmas , a.d . 1979 , for piano mario davidovsky consorts , for symphonic band string quartet no . 4 peter maxwell davies farewell to stromness ( interlude from the yellow cake review ) , for piano , op . 89 , no . 1 symphony no . 2 , op . 91 a welcome to orkney , for ensemble , op . 90 the yellow cake revue , for singer or reciter and piano , op . 88 yesnaby ground ( interlude from the yellow cake review ) , for piano , op . 89 , no . 2 sofia gubaidulina – offertorium ( « жертвоприношение » ) , concerto for violin and orchestra helmut lachenmann – ein kinderspiel , seven little pieces for piano trygve madsen – sonata for tuba and piano arvo pärt – de profundis , for accompanied chorus ; first performance 1981 krzysztof penderecki – symphony no . 2 : '' christmas '' ' simeon ten holt natalon in e for piano bi-ba-bo for vocal quartet . opera . peter maxwell davies – cinderella ( children 's opera ) lorenzo ferrero – marilyn philip glass – satyagraha kirke mechem – tartuffe william mathias – the servants ( libretto by iris murdoch ) karlheinz stockhausen – donnerstag aus licht mieczysław weinberg – the portrait ( opera ) . jazz . musical theater . barnum – broadway production opened at the st . james theatre on april 30 and ran for 854 performances brigadoon ( lerner & loewe ) – broadway revival opened at the majestic theatre on october 16 and ran for 133 performances camelot ( lerner & loewe ) – broadway revival opened at the new york state theater on july 8 and ran for 56 performances colette – london production opened at the comedy theatre on september 24 and ran for 47 performances a day in hollywood/a night in the ukraine – broadway production opened at the john golden theatre on april 2 and transferred to the royale theatre on june 17 for a total run of 588 performances forty-second street – broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on august 25 , transferred to the majestic theatre on march 30 , 1981 , and transferred to the st . james theatre on april 7 , 1987 , for a total run of 3486 performances the life and adventures of nicholas nickleby – london production opened at the aldwych theatre on june 5 on the twentieth century – london production opened at her majesty 's theatre on march 19 and ran for 165 performances sweeney todd ( stephen sondheim ) – london production opened at the drury lane theatre on july 2 and ran for 157 performances the umbrellas of cherbourg london production opened at the phoenix theatre on april 10 west side story ( leonard bernstein ) – broadway revival opened at the minskoff theatre on february 14 and ran for 333 performances . musical films . the blues brothers ca n't stop the music fame the idolmaker the jazz singer kallukkul eeram la boum one trick pony popeye qurbani ram balram times square xanadu . births . january 14 – hiroshi tamaki , japanese actor , model , and singer january 16 – lin-manuel miranda , american playwright , singer , songwriter , rapper and composer january 17 – zooey deschanel , american actress and singer-songwriter . january 18 – estelle ( musician ) , british singer , songwriter , rapper , record producer , and actress january 21 – nana mizuki , japanese voice actress and singer january 28 nick carter ( backstreet boys ) brian fallon , american singer-songwriter and guitarist january 30 wilmer valderrama , american actor , singer , producer and television personality ( demi lovato , mandy moore ) josh kelley , american musician february 3 – sarah lewitinn , american record producer and journalist february 7 – william tell ( musician ) , rhythm guitarist and backing vocalist for the piano rock band something corporate . february 15 – conor oberst ( bright eyes ) february 18 – regina spektor , russian-born american singer-songwriter and pianist february 22 – shamari fears , american singer-songwriter and actress ( blaque ) february 27 – cyrus bolooki , ( new found glory ) february 26 – alex fong lik-sun , hong kong singer and actor march 2 vince walker , american rock singer ( suburban legends ) rebel wilson , australian actress , writer , comedienne , singer and producer march 8 – charli robinson , australian actress , singer and dancer march 13 – flavia cacace , italian dancer march 19 – agnes pihlava , finnish pop singer march 20 – mikk murdvee , violinist and conductor march 21 – deryck whibley , canadian musician and producer ( sum 41 ) ( avril lavigne ) march 22 – shannon bex , american singer , reality show personality , professional dancer ( danity kane . dumblonde ) march 27 – tai orathai , luk thung singer march 28 – rasmus seebach , danish singer-songwriter and record producer march 30 – yalin , turkish pop singer and songwriter march 31 – maaya sakamoto , japanese singer april 10 – bryce soderberg , canadian musician ( lifehouse ) april 12 – brian mcfadden , ( westlife ) april 14 – win butler , american/canadian musician april 15 – patrick carney , american musician and producer ( the black keys ) ( michelle branch ) april 16 – jake andrews , american singer-songwriter and guitarist april 24 – danny gokey , american idol season 8 finalist april 26 – channing tatum , american dancer , performer and actor ( jessie j , jenna dewan ) april 29 – kian egan ( westlife ) may 3 – souleye ( hip hop artist ) , american rapper and hip hop artist ( bassnectar , blvd , alanis morissette ) may 5 – maia hirasawa , swedish pop singer may 6 – taebin , korean hip-hop artist ( 1tym ) may 12 – romina arena , italian-american singer-songwriter may 16 – harmony samuels , english record producer , composer and songwriter . may 17 – ariën van weesenbeek , dutch drummer , screamer , keyboardist , percussion ( epica , mayan ) may 21 gotye , australian multi-instrumental musician and singer-songwriter ( kimbra ) anika moa , new zealand recording artist and television presenter may 28 mark feehily ( westlife ) lindi ortega , canadian country singer-songwriter may 31 – andy hurley , american drummer ( fall out boy and the damned things ) june 2 – orish grinstead , american r & b singer ( d . 2008 ) june 5 – brandi shearer , american singer-songwriter june 6 – peter mosely , american bass player ( yellowcard and inspection 12 ) june 7 – henkka seppälä , finnish bassist ( children of bodom ) june 13 – sarah connor , german singer june 16 – joey yung , hong kong singer june 17 – kimeru , japanese singer june 18 – colin munroe , canadian singer-songwriter and producer june 20 – tony lovato ( mest ) june 23 – jessica taylor , english singer , television personality , and dancer ( liberty x ) june 26 – jason schwartzman ( phantom planet ) june 27 – jennifer goodridge , american keyboard player ( your enemies friends ) june 29 – katherine jenkins , welsh soprano july 2 – ciara sotto , filipina singer and actress july 3 – kid sister , american rapper july 5 pauly d , american dj ( britney spears ) mads tolling , danish-american violinist and composer ( turtle island quartet ) july 10 – jessica simpson , american singer-songwriter , designer and actress july 11 – jenny hval , norwegian singer-songwriter , record producer and musician . july 13 corey clark , american singer emile haynie , american record producer ( lana del rey , bruno mars , dua lipa , florence welch ) july 15 – jw-jones , canadian blues artist july 17 – kaya ( japanese musician ) , japanese visual kei musician , edm artist july 18 – kristen bell , american actress , vocal actress and singer july 19 – michelle heaton , english pop singer , actress , television personality and personal trainer . ( liberty x ) july 20 – mike kennerty ( the all-american rejects ) july 21 – really doe , american rapper july 22 – kate ryan , belgian singer-songwriter july 23 – michelle williams , gospel singer-songwriter ( destiny 's child ) july 26 – dave baksh ( sum 41 ) july 28 stephen christian , american christian rock singer ( anberlin ) noel sullivan , welsh singer ( hear'say ) and actor july 30 – diam 's , french rapper august 12 matt thiessen , canadian singer/guitarist jade villalon , american singer-songwriter , pianist , and actress ( sweetbox ) august 16 vanessa carlton , american singer-songwriter , musician øystein moen , norwegian pianist and composer ( puma and jaga jazzist ) august 19 houcine camara , french singer darius danesh , scottish singer-songwriter & actor august 26 – macaulay culkin , american actor , author , painter , podcaster , musician and president of bunnyears august 29 – richa sharma , playback singer august 30 – alicia warrington , american drummer ( lillix ) september 5 – kevin simm , english singer ( liberty x ) september 6 – kerry katona , english singer , author , model ( atomic kitten ) september 11 – mikey way , bassist of my chemical romance september 13 – teppei teranishi ( thrice ) september 14 – ayọ , nigerian-german singer-songwriter and actress september 19 – tegan and sara quin ( tegan and sara ) , canadian singer-songwriters , musicians , multi-instrumentalists september 24 – homeboy sandman , american rapper september 25 – t.i . , american rapper september 29 – dallas green ( musician ) , canadian singer/songwriter october 5 – paul thomas ( good charlotte ) october 8 – nick cannon , american actor and rapper october 10 – sherine , egyptian singer october 12 – soledad pastorutti , argentine folklore singer and the voice coach october 13 – ashanti , american singer-songwriter , actress , dancer october 24 kaushiki chakraborty , indian classical vocalist monica , american singer , songwriter , producer and actress october 27 – tanel padar , estonian singer-songwriter and guitarist october 31 – isabella summers , english musician , songwriter , producer , remixer , dj ( florence and the machine ) . november 3 – dan marsala , american musician november 7 – karthik , playback singer november 10 – calvin chen , taiwanese pop singer november 12 – shaun cooper , american bass player november 14 – matt brann , canadian drummer november 15 – ace young , american singer and reality show finalist november 17 – isaac hanson ( hanson ) november 18 – dustin kensrue ( thrice ) november 26 – satoshi ohno , japanese singer november 28 – lisa middelhauve , german singer ( xandria ) november 29 – janina gavankar , american musician and actress december 3 – jenna dewan , american dancer , performer , business woman , choreographer , producer , actor and television host december 5 – ibrahim maalouf , trumpeter december 6 – kei yasuda , japanese singer december 8 – kate voegele , american singer-songwriter and actress december 9 – simon helberg , american actor , comedian , singer and pianist december 10 sarah chang , american classical violinist chris gaynor ( the all-american rejects ) december 14 – tata young , thai-american singer and actress december 16 – axle whitehead , australian singer , musician , tv host and actor december 18 – christina aguilera , american r & b-soul singer-songwriter december 19 – verbal jint , south korean musician , rapper and record producer december 24 – tomas kalnoky , american musician ( streetlight manifesto ) unknown : madeleine sami , new zealand actress , comedian , movie producer and musician . deaths . january 1 – adolph deutsch ( 82 ) , american composer january 2 – j . mayo williams ( 85 ) , african american blues music producer january 3 – amos milburn ( 52 ) , african american r & b singer and pianist january 6 poley mcclintock , jazz musician georgeanna tillman ( 36 ) , pop and r & b singer january 7 – larry williams ( 44 ) , singer , songwriter and pianist january 13 – andre kostelanetz ( 78 ) , russian-born conductor and arranger january 21 – elvira de hidalgo ( 88 ) , coloratura soprano and singing teacher january 29 jimmy durante ( 86 ) , pianist & entertainer edward lewis ( 79 ) , founder of decca records january 30 – professor longhair ( 61 ) , pianist february 17 – jerry fielding ( 57 ) , american conductor and music director ( heart failure ) february 18 muriel brunskill ( 80 ) , british contralto gale robbins ( 58 ) , american singer and actress ( lung cancer ) february 19 – bon scott ( 33 ) , lead singer of ac/dc ( acute alcohol poisoning ) february 28 – dinorá de carvalho ( 75 ) , brazilian pianist , conductor and composer march 5 – winifred wagner ( 82 ) , daughter-in-law of richard wagner , close friend of adolf hitler ( b . 1897 ) march 14 – anna jantar ( 29 ) , polish singer ( air crash ) march 18 – jessica dragonette ( 80 ) , american singer march 23 – jacob miller ( 27 ) , reggae artist march 25 – walter susskind ( 76 ) , czech conductor march 26 jon paulus ( 32 ) , the buckinghams , drug overdose ted shapiro ( 80 ) , songwriter & pianist march 28 – dick haymes , ( 63 ) , argentinian-born us singer and actor march 29 – mantovani ( 74 ) , italian-born british orchestra leader and composer april 4 – red sovine ( 62 ) , american country & folk singer & songwriter april 20 – katherine kennicott davis ( 87 ) , american composer april 28 – tommy caldwell ( 30 ) , bassist of marshall tucker band ( car accident ) may 4 – joe '' mr piano '' henderson ( 60 ) , pianist ( heart attack ) thedeadrockstarsclub.com & nbsp ; — accessed august 2010 may 18 – ian curtis ( 23 ) , lead singer of joy division ( suicide ) may 30 – carl radle ( 37 ) , rock bassist june 11 – bolesław woytowicz ( 80 ) , polish pianist and composer june 16 – bob nolan ( 72 ) , country singer and songwriter june 20 – allan pettersson ( 68 ) , sweden composer june 21 – bert kaempfert ( 56 ) , german composer , bandleader and arranger ( stroke ) june 27 – barney bigard ( 74 ) , jazz clarinetist june 28 – josé iturbi ( 84 ) , pianist july 5 – a . j . potter ( 72 ) , irish composer july 9 – vinicius de moraes ( 66 ) , brazilian lyricist and composer july 14 – malcolm owen ( 26 ) , lead singer the ruts ( overdose ) july 15 – ben selvin ( 82 ) , '' the dean of recorded music '' july 23 – keith godchaux ( 32 ) , keyboardist with grateful dead ( car accident ) july 25 – vladimir vysotsky ( 42 ) , russian singer-songwriter , poet , actor ( heart failure ) july 31 – mohammed rafi ( 55 ) , indian singer ( heart attack ) august 11 – jacques singer ( 70 ) , conductor august 17 – harold adamson ( 73 ) , lyricist august 18 – john sebastian ( 66 ) , harmonica virtuoso august 20 – joe dassin ( 41 ) , singer ( heart attack ) august 22 – cosmé mcmoon ( 79 ) , pianist and composer august 26 – miliza korjus ( 71 ) , estonian-polish opera singer september 2 – marcel ciampi ( 89 ) , french pianist and teacher september 7 – arvella gray ( 74 ) , blues and folk singer and guitarist september 12 – lillian randolph ( 81 ) , actress and singer september 15 – bill evans ( 51 ) , jazz pianist september 16 – ludmila červinková ( 72 ) , operatic soprano september 17 – waldemar seidel ( 87 ) , australian pianist september 18 – walter midgley ( 67 ) , english operatic tenor september 25 – john bonham ( 32 ) , drummer ( led zeppelin ) ( pulmonary aspiration ) september 30 – horace finch ( 74 ) , pianist and organist october 3 – jerzy żurawlew ( 93 ) , pianist , conductor , teacher , and founder of the international chopin piano competition . october 25 – virgil fox ( 68 ) , organist ( cancer ) october 27 – steve peregrin took ( 31 ) , bongo player for t . rex ( band ) later a solo artist/frontman ( asphyxiation ) november 15 – bill lee ( 64 ) , american actor and playback singer december 7 – darby crash ( 22 ) , singer of the ( germs ) ( suicide ) december 8 – john lennon ( 40 ) , singer , guitarist and songwriter ( the beatles ) ( murdered ) december 24 – siggie nordstrom ( 87 ) , american model , actress , entertainer , socialite and lead singer ( the nordstrom sisters ) december 29 – tim hardin ( 39 ) , singer-songwriter ( heroin overdose ) december 31 – robert pete williams ( 66 ) , blues singer and guitarist . notes . references .