Toga

varieties . the toga was an approximately semi-circular woolen cloth , usually white , worn draped over the left shoulder and around the body : the word '' toga '' probably derives from tegere , to cover . it was considered formal wear and was generally reserved for citizens . the romans considered it unique to themselves , thus their poetic description by virgil and martial as the gens togata ( 'toga-wearing race ' ) . virgil . aeneid , i.282 ; martial , xiv.124 . there were many kinds of toga , each reserved by custom to a particular usage or social class . ( '' toga of manhood '' ) also known as toga alba or toga pura : a plain white toga , worn on formal occasions by adult male commoners , and by senators not having a imperium . it represented adult male citizenship and its attendant rights , freedoms and responsibilities . ; . toga praetexta : a white toga with a broad purple stripe on its border , worn over a tunic with two broad , vertical purple stripes . it was formal costume for : imperium in their official functions , and traditionally , the kings of rome . . freeborn boys , and some freeborn girls , before they came of age . it marked their protection by law from sexual predation and immoral or immodest influence . a praetexta was thought effective against malignant magic , as were a boy 's bulla , and a girl 's lunula . . not all modern scholarship agrees that girls wore the toga praetexta ; see . . some priesthoods , including the pontifices , epulones , the augurs , and the arval brethren . livy , xxvii.8,8 and xxxiii.42 ( as cited by the dictionary of greek and roman antiquities ) . toga candida : '' bright toga '' ; a toga rubbed with chalk to a dazzling white , worn by candidates ( from latin candida , '' pure white '' ) for public office . . thus persius speaks of a cretata ambitio , '' chalked ambition '' . toga candida is the etymological source of the word candidate . toga pulla : a '' dark toga '' was supposed to be worn by mourning at elite funerals . a toga praetexta was also acceptable as mourning wear , if turned inside out to conceal its stripe ; so was a plain toga pura . . wearing a toga pulla at the feast that ended mourning was irreligious , ignorant , or plain bad manners . cicero makes a distinction between the toga pulla and an ordinary toga deliberately '' dirtied '' by its wearer as a legitimate mark of protest or supplication . . toga picta ( '' painted toga '' ) : dyed solid purple , decorated with imagery in gold thread , and worn over a similarly-decorated tunica palmata ; used by generals in their triumphs . during the empire , it was worn by consuls and emperors . over time , it became increasingly elaborate , and was combined with elements of the consular trabea . ; ; . trabea , associated with citizens of equites ; thus their description as trabeati in some contemporary roman literature . it may have been a shorter form of toga , or a cloak , wrap or sash worn over a toga . it was white with some form of decoration . in the later imperial era , trabea refers to elaborate forms of consular dress . some later roman and post-roman sources describe it as solid purple or red , either identifying or confusing it with the dress worn by the ancient roman kings ( also used to clothe images of the gods ) or reflecting changes in the trabea itself . more certainly , equites wore an angusticlavia , a tunic with narrow , vertical purple stripes , at least one of which would have been visible when worn with a toga or trabea , whatever its form . ; . laena , a long , heavy cloak worn by flamen priesthoods , fastened at the shoulder with a brooch . a lost work by suetonius describes it as a toga made '' duplex '' ( doubled by folding over upon itself ) . . . . as '' national dress '' . the toga 's most distinguishing feature was its semi-circular shape , which sets it apart from other cloaks of antiquity like the greek himation or pallium . the rounded form suggests it evolved out of the semi-circular etruscan tebenna . roman historians believed that rome 's legendary founder and first king , the erstwhile shepherd romulus , had worn a toga as his clothing of choice ; the purple-bordered toga praetexta was supposedly used by etruscan magistrates , and introduced to rome by her third king , tullus hostilius . . . in civil life . roman society was strongly hierarchical , stratified and competitive . landowning aristocrats occupied most seats in the senate and held the most senior magistracies . magistrates were elected by their peers and '' the people '' ; in roman constitutional theory , they ruled by consent . in practice , they were a mutually competitive oligarchy , reserving the greatest power , wealth and prestige for their class . the plebeian who made up the vast majority of the roman electorate had limited influence on politics , unless barracking or voting en masse , or through representation by their tribunes . the equites ( sometimes loosely translated as '' knights '' ) occupied a broadly mobile , mid-position between the lower senatorial and upper commoner class . despite often extreme disparities of wealth and rank between the citizen classes , the toga identified them as a singular and exclusive civic body . conversely , and just as usefully , it underlined their differences . togas were relatively uniform in pattern and style but varied significantly in the quality and quantity of their fabric , and the marks of higher rank or office . the highest-status toga , the solidly purple , gold-embroidered toga picta could be worn only at particular ceremonies by the highest-ranking magistrates . tyrian purple was supposedly reserved for the toga picta , the border of the toga praetexta , and elements of the priestly dress worn by the inviolate vestal virgins . it was colour-fast , extremely expensive and the '' most talked-about colour in greco-roman antiquity '' . romans categorised it as a blood-red hue , which sanctified its wearer . the purple-bordered praetexta worn by freeborn youths acknowledged their vulnerability and sanctity in law . once a boy came of age ( usually at puberty ) he adopted the plain white toga virilis ; this meant that he was free to set up his own household , marry , and vote . on coming of age , he also gave his protective bulla into the care of the family lares . ; ; . young girls who wore the praetexta on formal occasions put it aside at menarche or marriage , and adopted the stola . : a minority of young girls seem to have used the praetexta , perhaps because their parents embraced the self-conscious revivalism typified in augustan legislation and mores . even the whiteness of the toga virilis was subject to class distinction . senatorial versions were expensively laundered to an exceptional , snowy white ; those of lower ranking citizens were a duller shade , more cheaply laundered . citizenship carried specific privileges , rights and responsibilities . respectable women , the sons of freeborn men , and provincials during the early empire could hold lesser forms of citizenship ; they were protected by law but could not vote , or stand for public office . citizenship could be inherited , granted , up or down-graded , and removed for specific offences . the formula togatorum ( '' list of toga-wearers '' ) listed the various military obligations that rome 's socii were required to supply to rome in times of war . togati , '' those who wear the toga , '' is not precisely equivalent to '' roman citizens , '' and may mean more broadly '' romanized '' . . in roman territories , the toga was explicitly forbidden to non-citizens ; to foreigners , freedmen , and slaves ; to roman exiles ; exiles were deprived of citizenship and the protection of roman law . and to men of infamia or shameful reputation ; an individual 's status should be discernable at a glance . . a freedman or foreigner might pose as a togate citizen , or a common citizen as an equestrian ; such pretenders were sometimes ferreted out in the census . formal seating arrangements in public theatres and circuses reflected the dominance of rome 's togate elect . senators sat at the very front , equites behind them , common citizens behind equites ; and so on , through the non-togate mass of freedmen , foreigners , and slaves . women probably sat or stood at the very back – apart from the sacred vestals , who had their own box at the front . imposters were sometimes detected and evicted from the equestrian seats . . various anecdotes reflect the toga 's symbolic value . in livy 's history of rome , the patrician hero lucius quinctius cincinnatus , retired from public life and clad ( presumably ) in tunic or loincloth , is ploughing his field when emissaries of the senate arrive , and ask him to put on his toga . his wife fetches it and he puts it on . then he is told that he has been appointed dictator . he promptly heads for rome . . donning the toga transforms cincinnatus from rustic , sweaty ploughman – though a gentleman nevertheless , of impeccable stock and reputation – into rome 's leading politician , eager to serve his country ; a top-quality roman . . rome 's abundant public and private statuary reinforced the notion that all rome 's great men wore togas , and must always have done so . . . work and leisure . traditionalists idealised rome 's urban and rustic citizenry as descendants of a hardy , virtuous , toga-clad peasantry , but the toga 's bulk and complex drapery made it entirely impractical for manual work or physically active leisure . the toga was heavy , '' unwieldy , excessively hot , easily stained , and hard to launder '' . . it was best suited to stately processions , public debate and oratory , sitting in the theatre or circus , and displaying oneself before one 's peers and inferiors while '' ostentatiously doing nothing '' . every male roman citizen was entitled to wear some kind of toga – martial refers to a lesser citizen 's '' small toga '' and a poor man 's '' little toga '' ( both togula ) , . but the poorest probably had to make do with a shabby , patched-up toga , if he bothered at all . ; throughout the empire , there is evidence that old clothing was recycled , repaired and handed down the social scale , from one owner to the next , until it fell to rags . centonarii ( '' patch workers '' ) made a living by sewing clothing and other items from recycled fabric patches . the cost of a new , simple hooded cloak , using far less material than a toga , might represent three fifths of an individual 's annual minimum subsistence cost : see . conversely , the costly , full-length toga seems to have been a rather awkward mark of distinction when worn by '' the wrong sort '' . the poet horace writes '' of a rich ex-slave 'parading from end to end of the via sacra in a toga three yards long ' to show off his new status and wealth . '' croom , p . 53 , citing horace , epodes , 4.8 in the early second century ad , the satirist juvenal claimed that '' in a great part of italy , no-one wears the toga , except in death '' ; in martial 's rural idyll there is '' never a lawsuit , the toga is scarce , the mind at ease '' . . . most citizens who owned a toga would have cherished it as a costly material object , and worn it when they must for special occasions . family , friendships and alliances , and the gainful pursuit of wealth through business and trade would have been their major preoccupations , not the otium ( cultured leisure ) claimed as a right by the elite . : contra goldman 's description of roman clothing , including the toga , as '' simple and elegant , practical and comfortable '' in . . rank , reputation and romanitas were paramount , even in death , so almost invariably , a male citizen 's memorial image showed him clad in his toga . he wore it at his funeral , and it probably served as his shroud . . despite the overwhelming quantity of roman togate portraits at every social level , and in every imaginable circumstance , at most times rome 's thoroughfares would have been with crowded with citizens and non-citizens in a variety of colourful garments , with few togas in evidence . only a higher-class roman , a magistrate , would have had lictors to clear his way , and even then , wearing a toga was a challenge . the toga 's apparent natural simplicity and '' elegant , flowing lines '' were the result of diligent practice and cultivation ; to avoid an embarrassing disarrangement of its folds , its wearer had to walk with measured , stately gait , . yet with virile purpose and energy . if he moved too slowly , he might seem aimless , '' sluggish of mind '' - or , worst of all , '' womanly '' . . vout ( 1996 ) suggests that the toga 's most challenging qualities as garment fitted the romans ' view of themselves and their civilization . like the empire itself , the peace that the toga came to represent had been earned through the extraordinary and unremitting collective efforts of its citizens , who could therefore claim '' the time and dignity to dress in such a way '' . . . patronage and salutationes . patronage was a cornerstone of roman politics , business and social relationships . a good patron offered advancement , security , honour , wealth , government contracts and other business opportunities to his client , who might be further down in the social or economic scale , or more rarely , his equal or superior . cash-strapped or debtor citizens with a respectable lineage might have to seek patronage from rich freedmen , who ranked as inferiors and non-citizens . a good client canvassed political support for his patron , or his patron 's nominee ; he advanced his patron 's interests using his own business , family and personal connections . freedmen with an aptitude for business could become extremely wealthy ; but to negotiate citizenship for themselves , or more likely their sons , they had to find a patron prepared to commend them . clients seeking patronage had to attend the patron 's early-morning formal salutatio ( '' greeting session '' ) , held in the semi-public , grand reception room ( atrium ) of his family house ( domus ) . . citizen-clients were expected to wear the toga appropriate to their status , and to wear it correctly and smartly or risk affront to their host . . martial and his friend juvenal suffered the system as clients for years , and found the whole business demeaning . a client had to be at his patron 's beck and call , to perform whatever '' togate works '' were required ; and the patron might even expect to be addressed as '' domine '' ( lord , or master ) ; a citizen-client of the equites , superior to all lesser mortals by virtue of rank and costume , might thus approach the shameful condition of dependent servitude . for a client whose patron was another 's client , the potential for shame was still worse . even as a satirical analogy , the equation of togate client and slave would have shocked those who cherished the toga as a symbol of personal dignity and auctoritas – a meaning underlined during the saturnalia festival , when the toga was '' very consciously put aside '' , in a ritualised , strictly limited inversion of the master-slave relationship . patrons were few , and most had to compete with their peers to attract the best , most useful clients . clients were many , and those of least interest to the patron had to scrabble for notice among the '' togate horde '' ( turbae togatae ) . one in a dirty or patched toga would likely be subject to ridicule ; or he might , if sufficiently dogged and persistent , secure a pittance of cash , or perhaps a dinner . when the patron left his house to conduct his business of the day at the law courts , forum or wherever else , escorted ( if a magistrate ) by his togate lictors , his clients must form his retinue . each togate client represented a potential vote : a citizen 's voting power was directly proportionate to his rank , status and wealth . to impress his peers and inferiors , and stay ahead in the game , a patron should have as many high-quality clients as possible ; or at least , he should seem to . martial has one patron hire a herd ( grex ) of fake clients in togas , then pawn his ring to pay for his evening meal . ; . : at salutationes and during any other '' business times '' , equites were expected to wear a gold ring . along with their toga , striped tunic and formal shoes ( or calcei ) , this signified their status . } } the emperor marcus aurelius , rather than wear the '' dress to which his rank entitled him '' at his own salutationes , chose to wear a plain white citizen 's toga instead ; an act of modesty for any patron , unlike caligula , who wore a triumphal toga picta or any other garment he chose , according to whim ; or nero , who caused considerable offence when he received visiting senators while dressed in a tunic embroidered with flowers , topped off with a muslin neckerchief . . . oratory . in oratory , the toga came into its own . quintilian 's institutio oratoria ( circa 95 ad ) offers advice on how best to plead cases at rome 's law-courts , before the watching multitude 's informed and critical eye . effective pleading was a calculated artistic performance , but must seem utterly natural . first impressions counted ; the lawyer must present himself as a roman should : '' virile and splendid '' in his toga , with statuesque posture and '' natural good looks '' . he should be well groomed – but not too well ; no primping of the hair , jewellery or any other '' feminine '' perversions of a roman man 's proper appearance . quintilian gives precise instructions on the correct use of the toga – its cut , style , and the arrangements of its folds . its fabric could be old-style rough wool , or new and smoother if preferred – but definitely not silk . the orator 's movements should be dignified , and to the point ; he should move only as he must , to address a particular person , a particular section of the audience . he should employ to good effect that subtle '' language of the hands '' for which roman oratory was famed ; no extravagant gestures , no wiggling of the shoulders , no moving '' like a dancer '' . . to a great extent , the toga itself determined the orator 's style of delivery : '' we should not cover the shoulder and the whole of the throat , otherwise our dress will be unduly narrowed and will lose the impressive effect produced by breadth at the chest . the left arm should only be raised so far as to form a right angle at the elbow , while the edge of the toga should fall in equal lengths on either side . '' if , on the other hand , the '' toga falls down at the beginning of our speech , or when we have only proceeded but a little way , the failure to replace it is a sign of indifference , or sloth , or sheer ignorance of the way in which clothes should be worn '' . by the time he had presented his case , the orator was likely to be hot and sweaty ; but even this could be employed to good effect . quintilian . institutio oratoria , 11.3.131‒149 . . in public morals . roman moralists '' placed an ideological premium on the simple and the frugal '' . . aulus gellius claimed that the earliest romans , famously tough , virile and dignified , had worn togas with no undergarment ; not even a skimpy tunic . . towards the end of the republic , the arch-conservative cato the younger favoured the shorter , ancient republican type of toga ; it was dark and '' scanty '' ( exigua ) , and cato wore it without tunic or shoes ; all this would have been recognised as an expression of his moral probity . : some modern sources consider exigua as a republican type , others interpret it as poetic . die-hard roman traditionalists deplored an ever-increasing roman appetite for ostentation , '' un-roman '' comfort and luxuries , and sartorial offences such as celtic trousers , brightly coloured syrian robes and cloaks . the manly toga itself could signify corruption , if worn too loosely , or worn over a long-sleeved , '' effeminate '' tunic , or woven too fine and thin , near transparent . appian 's history of rome finds its strife-torn late republic tottering at the edge of chaos ; most seem to dress as they like , not as they ought : '' for now the roman people are much mixed with foreigners , there is equal citizenship for freedmen , and slaves dress like their masters . with the exception of the senators , free citizens and slaves wear the same costume . '' . the augustan principate brought peace , and declared its intent as the restoration of true republican order , morality and tradition . augustus was determined to bring back '' the traditional style '' ( the toga ) . he ordered that any theatre-goer in dark ( or coloured or dirty ) clothing be sent to the back seats , traditionally reserved for those who had no toga ; ordinary or common women , freedmen , low-class foreigners and slaves . he reserved the most honourable seats , front of house , for senators and equites ; this was how it had always been , before the chaos of the civil wars ; or rather , how it was supposed to have been . infuriated by the sight of a darkly clad throng of men at a public meeting , he sarcastically quoted virgil at them , '' romanos , rerum dominos , gentemque togatam '' ( '' romans , lords of the world and the toga-wearing people '' ) , then ordered that in future , the aediles ban anyone not wearing the toga from the forum and its environs – rome 's '' civic heart '' . . augustus ' reign saw the introduction of the toga rasa , an ordinary toga whose rough fibres were teased from the woven nap , then shaved back to a smoother , more comfortable finish . by pliny 's day ( circa 70 ad ) this was probably standard among the elite . . pliny also describes a glossy , smooth , lightweight but dense fabric woven from poppy-stem fibres and flax , in use from at least the time of the punic wars . though probably appropriate for a '' summer toga '' , it was criticised for its improper luxuriance . . . women . some romans believed that in earlier times , both genders and all classes had worn the toga . women could also be citizens but by the mid-to-late republican era , respectable women were stolatae ( stola-wearing ) , expected to embody and display an appropriate set of female virtues : vout cites pudicitia and fides as examples . women 's adoption of the stola may have paralleled the increasing identification of the toga with citizen men , but this seems to have been a far from straightforward process . an equestrian statue , described by pliny the elder as '' ancient '' , showed the early republican heroine cloelia on horseback , wearing a toga . the unmarried daughters of respectable , reasonably well-off citizens sometimes wore the toga praetexta until puberty or marriage , when they adopted the stola , which they wore over a full-length , usually long-sleeved tunic . higher-class female prostitutes ( meretrix ) and women divorced for adultery were denied the stola . meretrices might have been expected or perhaps compelled , at least in public , to wear the '' female toga '' ( toga muliebris ) . . this use of the toga appears unique ; all others categorised as infamia were explicitly forbidden to wear it . in this context , modern sources understand the toga – or perhaps merely the description of particular women as togata – as an instrument of inversion and realignment ; a respectable ( thus stola-clad ) woman should be demure , sexually passive , modest and obedient , morally impeccable . the archetypical meretrix of roman literature dresses gaudily and provocatively . edwards ( 1997 ) describes her as '' antithetical to the roman male citizen '' . an adulterous matron betrayed her family and reputation ; and if found guilty , and divorced , the law forbade her remarriage to a roman citizen . in the public gaze , she was aligned with the meretrix . , citing servius , in aenidem , 1.281 and nonius , 14.867l ; for the former wearing of togas by women other than prostitutes and adulteresses . some modern scholars doubt the '' togate adulteress '' as more than literary and social invective : cf . ; . when worn by a woman in this later era , the toga would have been a '' blatant display '' of her '' exclusion from the respectable roman hierarchy '' . . roman military . until the marian reforms of 107 bc , the lower ranks of rome 's military forces were '' farmer-soldiers '' , a militia of citizen smallholders conscripted for the duration of hostilities , . expected to provide their own arms and armour . citizens of higher status served in senior military posts as a foundation for their progress to high civil office ( see cursus honorum ) . the romans believed that in rome 's earliest days , its military had gone to war in togas , hitching them up and back for action by using what became known as the '' gabine cinch '' . . as part of a peace settlement of 205 bc , two formerly rebellious spanish tribes provided roman troops with togas and heavy cloaks ; in 206 bc , scipio africanus was sent 1,200 togas and 12,000 tunics for his operations in north africa . in the macedonian campaign of 169 bc , the army was sent 6,000 togas and 30,000 tunics . . from at least the mid-republic on , the military reserved their togas for formal leisure and religious festivals ; the tunic and sagum ( heavy rectangular cloak held on the shoulder with a brooch ) were used or preferred for active duty . late republican practice and legal reform allowed the creation of standing armies , and opened a military career to any roman citizen or freedman of good reputation . . a soldier who showed the requisite '' disciplined ferocity '' in battle and was held in esteem by his peers and superiors could be promoted to higher rank : a plebeian could rise to equestrian status . . non-citizens and foreign-born auxiliaries given honesta missio were usually granted citizenship , land or stipend , the right to wear the toga , and an obligation to the patron who had granted these honours ; usually their senior officer . a dishonourable discharge meant infamia . . colonies of retired veterans were scattered throughout the empire . in literary stereotype , civilians are routinely bullied by burly soldiers , inclined to throw their weight around . . though soldiers were citizens , cicero typifies the former as '' sagum wearing '' and the latter as '' togati '' . he employs the phrase cedant arma togae ( '' let arms yield to the toga '' ) , meaning '' may peace replace war '' , or '' may military power yield to civilian power '' , in the context of his own uneasy alliance with pompey . he intended it as metonym , linking his own '' power to command '' as consul ( imperium togatus ) with pompey 's as general ( imperator armatus ) ; but it was interpreted as a request to step down . cicero , having lost pompey 's ever-wavering support , was driven to exile . . in reality , arms rarely yielded to civilian power . during the early roman imperial era , members of the praetorian guard ( the emperor 's personal guard as '' first citizen '' , and a military force under his personal command ) , concealed their weapons under white , civilian-style togas when on duty in the city , offering the reassuring illusion that they represented a traditional republican , civilian authority , rather than the military arm of an imperial autocracy . . . in religion . citizens attending rome 's frequent roman festivals and associated ludi were expected to wear the toga . the toga praetexta was the normal garb for most roman priesthoods , which tended to be the preserve of high status citizens . when offering sacrifice , libation and prayer , and when performing augury , the officiant priest covered his head with a fold of his toga , drawn up from the back : the ritual was thus performed capite velato ( with covered head ) . this was believed a distinctively roman form , . in contrast to etruscan , greek and other foreign practices . the etruscans seem to have sacrificed bareheaded ( capite aperto ) . . in rome , the so-called ritus graecus ( greek rite ) was used for deities believed greek in origin or character ; the officiant , even if citizen , wore greek-style robes with wreathed or bare head , not the toga . . it has been argued that the roman expression of piety capite velato influenced paul 's prohibition against christians praying with covered heads : '' any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head . '' ; ; citing as the standard source ; an officiant capite velato who needed free use of both hands to perform ritual could employ the '' gabinian cincture '' ( cinctus gabinus ) , which tied the toga back . . it was thought to derive from the priestly practice of ancient , warlike gabii . etruscan priests also employed the gabine cinch . in rome , it was one of the elements in making a declaration of war . servius , note to aeneid 7.612 ; see also and . . materials . the traditional toga was made of wool , which was thought to possess apotropaic magic and the evil eye ; the toga praetexta ( used by magistrates , priests and freeborn youths ) was always woolen . . wool-working was thought a highly respectable occupation for roman women . a traditional , high-status mater familias demonstrated her industry and frugality by placing wool-baskets , spindles and looms in the household 's semi-public reception area , the atrium . in reality , she was the female equivalent of the romanticised citizen-farmer : see and . augustus was particularly proud that his wife and daughter had set the best possible example to other roman women by , allegedly , spinning and weaving his clothing . . hand-woven cloth was slow and costly to produce , and compared to simpler forms of clothing , the toga used an extravagant amount of it . to minimise waste , the smaller , old-style forms of toga may have been woven as a single , seamless , selvedged piece ; the later , larger versions may have been made from several pieces sewn together ; size seems to have counted for a lot . . more cloth signified greater wealth and usually , though not invariably , higher rank . the purple-red border of the toga praetexta was woven onto the toga using a process known as '' tablet weaving '' ; such applied borders are a feature of etruscan dress . . modern sources broadly agree that if made from a single piece of fabric , the toga of a high status roman in the late republic would have required a piece approximately 12 & nbsp ; ft in length ; in the imperial era , around 18 & nbsp ; ft , a third more than its predecessor , and in the late imperial era around 8 feet wide and up to 18 or 20 feet in length for the most complex , pleated forms . . . features and styles . the toga was draped , rather than fastened , around the body , and was held in position by the weight and friction of its fabric . supposedly , no pins or brooches were employed . the more volumious and complex the style , the more assistance would have been required to achieve the desired effect . in classical statuary , draped togas consistently show certain features and folds , identified and named in contemporary literature . the sinus ( literally , a bay or inlet ) appears in the imperial era as a loose over-fold , slung from beneath the left arm , downwards across the chest , then upwards to the right shoulder . early examples were slender , but later forms were much fuller ; the loop hangs at knee-length , suspended there by draping over the crook of the right arm . . the umbo ( literally '' knob '' ) was a pouch of the toga 's fabric pulled out over the balteus ( the diagonal section of the toga across the chest ) in imperial-era forms of the toga . its added weight and friction would have helped ( though not very effectively ) secure the toga 's fabric onto the left shoulder . as the toga developed , the umbo grew in size . . the most complex togas appear on high-quality portrait busts and imperial reliefs of the mid-to-late empire , probably reserved for emperors and the highest civil officials . the so-called '' banded '' or '' stacked '' toga ( latinised as toga contabulata ) appeared in the late second century ad and was distinguished by its broad , smooth , slab-like panels of pleated material , more or less correspondent with umbo , sinus and balteus , or applied over the same . one rises from low between the legs , and is laid over the left shoulder ; another more or less follows the upper edge of the sinus ; yet another follows the lower edge of a more-or-less vestigial balteus then descends to the upper shin . as in other forms , the sinus itself is hung over the crook of the right arm . modern reconstructions have employed applied panels of fabric , pins , and hidden stitches to achieve the effect ; the underlying structure of the original remains unknown . if its full-length representations are accurate , it would have severely constrained its wearer 's movements . dressing in a toga contabulata would have taken some time , and specialist assistance . when not in use , it required careful storage in some form of press or hanger to keep it in shape . such inconvenient features of the later toga are confirmed by tertullian , who preferred the pallium . . high-status ( consular or senatorial ) images from the late 4th century show a further ornate variation , known as the '' broad eastern toga '' ; it hung to the mid-calf , was heavily embroidered , and was worn over two pallium-style undergarments , one of which had full length sleeves . its sinus was draped over the left arm . . . decline . in the long term , the toga saw both a gradual transformation and decline , punctuated by attempts to retain it as an essential feature of true romanitas . it was never a popular garment ; in the late 1st century , tacitus could disparage the urban plebs as a vulgus tunicatus ( '' tunic-wearing crowd '' ) . . hadrian issued an edict compelling equites and senators to wear the toga in public ; the edict did not mention commoners . the extension of citizenship , from around 6 million citizens under augustus to between 40 and 60 million under the '' universal citizenship '' of caracalla 's constitutio antoniniana ( 212 ad ) , probably further reduced whatever distinctive value the toga still held for commoners , and accelerated its abandonment among their class . . meanwhile , the office-holding aristocracy adopted ever more elaborate , complex , costly and impractical forms of toga . the toga nevertheless remained the formal costume of the roman senatorial elite . a law issued by co-emperors gratian , valentinian ii and theodosius i in 382 ad ( codex theodosianus 14.10.1 ) states that while senators in the city of rome may wear the paenula in daily life , they must wear the toga when attending their official duties . . failure to do so would result in the senator being stripped of rank and authority , and of the right to enter the curia julia . . byzantine art show the highest functionaries of court , church and state in magnificently wrought , extravagantly exclusive court dress and priestly robes ; some at least are thought to be versions of the imperial toga . . in the early european kingdoms that replaced roman government in the west , kings and aristocrats alike dressed like the late roman generals they sought to emulate , rather than the toga-clad senators of ancient tradition . .