Tralee

climate . the climate of tralee is , like the rest of ireland , classified as a maritime climate ( cfb ) according to the köppen climate classification system . met éireann maintains a climatological weather station at valentia island , 50 & nbsp ; km south-west of the town . it is mild and changeable with abundant rainfall and a lack of temperature extremes . the hottest months of the year are july , august and september with temperatures of around 17 – 18 degrees celsius . tralee gets rainfall all year round and the wettest months are october , november , december and january . local government . tralee had a town council with twelve members until the 2014 local elections were held on 23 may 2014 . these elections were held following the changes effected by the local government reform act 2014 . the act abolished town councils and introduced municipal districts . county kerry was divided into six municipal districts , which are identical with the local electoral areas ( lea ) used for election of councillors . the municipal district of tralee has seven seats on kerry county council with the following councillors returned after the local elections in 2019 . places of interest . tralee is a tourism destination , and there are a number of visitor attractions in the area : kerry county museum : incorporating the theme park 'kerry : the kingdom ' and an exhibit which depicts life in medieval geraldine tralee . siamsa tíre : ireland 's national folk theatre , offering traditional music and plays in irish . blennerville windmill : located about 2 & nbsp ; km outside the town , ireland 's largest functioning windmill . tralee aquadome : a large indoor water leisure facility with a mini-golf course . ballyseedy wood : is located 2 & nbsp ; km outside tralee off the n21 . it consists of of woodland dating back from the 16th century where kerry county council have developed public entrances at the north and south of the wood with car parks and 4 & nbsp ; km of gravelled looped pathways . ash , oak and beech trees are part of the wood as are a number of ruins and folllies , dating back to the 17th century , with the river lee ( from which tralee takes its name ) forming the woodlands northern boundary . tralee town park : tralee has a town park located in the town centre ( opposite the kerry county museum ) with a rose garden comprising over 5,000 roses of different varieties . the park is the location for the annual féile na mbláth / tralee garden festival – a free midsummer weekend festival of gardening demonstrations , flower arranging , garden tours , musical and choral events . tralee bay wetlands and nature reserve : tralee bay nature reserve covers approximately 2,500 ha ( 8,000 acres ) and stretches from tralee town westwards to fenit harbour and cloghane , encompassing tralee bay , brandon bay and the magharees peninsula . it includes extensive mudflats at the eastern end , the beaches of derrymore island , the sand dunes and lagoons of the magharees peninsula . both the river lee and brandon ( owenmore ) estuaries feature wide expanses of sheltered intertidal flats , often fringed with saltmarsh vegetation . the wetlands centre which opened in 2012 is designed as a microcosm of the wild nature reserve where visitors are introduced to the fresh and saltwater habitats . visitors can travel on a safari boat ride through the recreated reed and freshwater channels in the centre . tralee ship canal : opened in 1846 , this 2 mile long canal connects tralee to tralee bay where it passes by blennerville windmill . the dingle way runs along the towpath of the canal . dingle way : ( irish : slí chorca dhuibhne ) a 162-kilometre ( 101-mile ) long national waymarked trail that begins and ends in tralee and is typically completed in eight days . ratass church : a 10th-century medieval church , with a 6th-century ogham stone . located in the eastern suburbs of tralee . rose of tralee . the rose of tralee festival is an international competition which is celebrated among irish communities all over the world . the festival , held annually in august since 1959 , takes its inspiration from a nineteenth-century ballad of the same name about a woman called mary , who because of her beauty was called the rose of tralee . the contest , which is broadcast over two nights by rté is one of the highest viewed shows on irish television with over a million people watching . to commemorate the rose of tralee tradition , the rose garden in the tralee town park is a home to a life size bronze statue depicting the original rose of tralee mary o'connor and the author of the rose of tralee ballad william pembroke mulchinock sculpted by an irish sculptor jeanne rynhart ( unveiled in 2009 ) , as well as the rose wall of honour – a series of glass panels that will contain the name of every rose who has participated in the festival since 1959 ( unveiled in 2013 on the 55th anniversary of the rose of tralee international festival ) . both statues were commissioned by tralee town council . archaeological sites . archaeological sites around tralee and throughout the county of kerry , including a number of ring-forts , are listed for preservation in the kerry county development plan 2009–15 . these include casement 's fort , an ancient ring fort where roger casement had been hiding before his arrest . there is also an iron age fort at caherconree , overlooking tralee bay . an example of a sheela na gig is now located in the christian round tower at rattoo , ballyduff , a few kilometres north of tralee . there is also a monument to brendan at fenit , with reproductions of ancient irish structures . media . the town has two local weekly newspapers , the kerryman and kerry 's eye while the tralee outlook and tralee advertiser are also published weekly . the town has a commercial radio station , radio kerry , which commenced operations in 1990 . spin south west also had a studio on castle street , which opened in 2016 but is now vacant . transport . road . tralee is served by national primary and secondary roads as well as local routes . a 13.5 & nbsp ; km bypass of tralee consisting of dual and single carriageway sections was opened on 16 august 2013 . the bypass connects four of the five national routes — the n21 , n22 , n69 and n70 — which terminate in tralee . national primary routes : national secondary routes : and limerick regional roads : ) harbour . bus . the bus station in tralee is a regional hub for bus éireann , providing services to dublin , limerick , galway , cork , killarney and dingle . the current bus station opened on 26 february 2007 . several local routes radiate from tralee and a number of these have had their frequency increased in recent years . local routes include : 13 ( limerick via listowel ) , 40 ( cork via killarney ) , 272 ( tarbert via ballybunion ) , 274 ballyheigue via banna ) , 275 ( dingle ) , 279 ( killorglin ) and 285 ( kerry airport via castleisland ) . rail . a train service to killarney , and via mallow to cork and dublin is provided by the national railway operator iarnród éireann . from the dublin-cork line , there are connecting trains at limerick junction for limerick , clonmel and waterford . further links are available at limerick to ennis , athenry , oranmore and galway . the current tralee railway station , casement station named after roger casement , was opened on 18 july 1859 . there were also two other adjacent stations , now closed and demolished , in the north circular road area . one was the terminus of the '' north kerry '' line which ran to limerick via listowel and newcastle west , and the other was the terminus of the narrow gauge tralee and dingle light railway . the tralee and dingle light railway was once one of europe 's most western railways . it opened on 31 march 1891 , connecting tralee and dingle by rail along the dingle peninsula , and was closed in june 1953 . in 1993 a 3 & nbsp ; km section was reopened as a preserved line between the aquadome in tralee and blennerville windmill . currently this railway is no longer in operation . a standard gauge railway used to operate to fenit harbour from tralee , diverging from the north kerry line to the north west of the town , before closing in june 1978 . currently a section of this railway has been restored as a walk/cycle way in the tralee urban area and it is hoped in the future that this will be extended to fenit , similar along the lines of the great southern trail which has been created on the closed north kerry line route in western county limerick . air . kerry airport , located 20 & nbsp ; km from tralee in farranfore , provides air services to dublin , london luton , london stansted , frankfurt-hahn and seasonally , alicante and faro . ryanair now operates seasonal services to berlin international airport . connecting trains run from farranfore railway station to tralee and killarney railway station in killarney . sea . the local port for tralee is fenit , about 10 & nbsp ; km west of the town on the north side of the estuary . catering for ships of up to 17,000 tonnes , the port is a picturesque mixed-use harbour with fishing boats and a thriving marina ( 136 berths ) . the 2 mile long tralee ship canal provides a navigable connection between tralee itself and the sea . healthcare . university hospital kerry opened in 1984 , and is the third largest acute hospital in the health service executive south region . it serves as the main hospital for county kerry and also serves the people in parts of north cork and west limerick . the bon secours hospital , founded in 1921 , is a private hospital owned by the roman catholic bon secours sisters and offers healthcare to privately insured patients . it forms part of the bon secours health system , the largest private healthcare network in ireland . education . in common with all parts of ireland , most schools at all levels in tralee are managed and owned by the churches . these include the roman catholic schools of cbs ( scoil na mbráithre ) , gaelscoil mhic easmainn , holy family , presentation primary school ( sacred heart ) , st ita 's and st joseph 's , st john 's , and st mary 's . st john 's on ashe street is a church of ireland school . tralee educate together school is multidenominational , and is neither owned nor managed by any church . at secondary level , most schools are explicitly roman catholic in ethos . these include mercy secondary school , mounthawk , presentation secondary school , st ita 's and st joseph 's , st mary 's cbs ( the green ) and coláiste gleann lí post primary school ( formally tralee community college ) . brookfield college and gaelcholáiste chiarraí are non-denominational . at third level , the institute of technology , tralee ( itt or it tralee ) , to be merged into munster technological university ( mtu ) , is the main third level institution in county kerry . it was established in 1977 as the regional technical college , tralee but acquired its present name in 1997 . it has an enrolment of about 3,500 students studying in areas such as business , computing , science , engineering and health . the institute has two campuses- the north campus ( opened in dromtacker in 2001 ) and the south campus ( opened in clash in 1977 ) which are approximately 2.4 & nbsp ; km ( 1.5 & nbsp ; mi ) apart . kerry college of further education ( kcfe ) is a provider of further education programmes in kerry . the college offers a range of level 5 and level 6 programmes on the nfq . sport . gaelic athletic association . austin stack park is the main gaelic athletic association ( gaa ) stadium in tralee . the ground is named after austin stack , an irish revolutionary and captain of the all-ireland winning kerry gaelic football team of 1904 . it is located in the centre of tralee . it hosts many kerry gaa home games , mostly football league games and both league and championship hurling . the county championship football and hurling finals are normally held here . austin stacks gaa club is based at the top of rock street and its former players include mikey sheehy , ger power , john o'keeffe and kieran donaghy . other gaa clubs in the area include john mitchels gaa club ( based in the boherbee and camp area ) , kerins o'rahilly 's gaa ( strand road area of the town ) , na gaeil gaa club ( oakpark area ) , st . patricks , blennerville ( about 1 & nbsp ; km outside tralee ) , tralee parnells ( promoting hurling ) , tralee it gaa ( at the institute of technology , tralee ) . tralee mitchels and tralee celtic are former gaa clubs . fitzgerald-jones handball club is based at the sports complex in tralee . soccer . the kerry district league is based in mounthawk park , tralee . tralee dynamos is tralee 's most senior soccer club , playing in the kerry district league . st . brendan 's park f.c . also play in the kerry district league . racket sports . tralee tennis club is based on the dan spring road . county badminton club meet in the presentation secondary school gym . cricket . county kerry cricket club play at the oyster oval based at the nearby village of spa on the shores of tralee bay . the club is a member of the munster cricket union . cycling . the chain gang cycling club is a tralee-based cycling club founded in 2008 . other cycling clubs include tralee bicycle club ( founded 1992 ) , tralee cycling club ( founded 1953 ) , kingdom cycling club , and na gaeil cycling cycling club . basketball . basketball clubs include st . brendan 's basketball club , tralee imperials basketball club , tralee tigers ( defunct ) , and tralee warriors . golf and pitch & putt . tralee pitch and putt club is located at collis sandes house in killeen . triathlon . tralee triathlon club was founded in 2009 and is one of the largest clubs in ireland with around 300 adult members . they run the annual tri kingdom come sprint distance triathlon in fenit during the august weekend . watersports . kingdom swimming club are based at the sports complex in tralee . tralee bay sailing club and tralee bay swimming club are both based in fenit . tralee rowing club was founded in 2004 and is located at the basin . rugby . tralee rugby football club ground is in ballyard . athletics . tralee harriers is a local athletics club . greyhound racing . tralee greyhound racing has a stadium on brewery road . notable people . notable tralee people include : brendan , monastic saint and navigator danny barnes , rugby player joe barrett , footballer denis behan , soccer player daniel bohan , footballer leonard boyle , priest and scholar bryan cooper , jockey billy dennehy , soccer player darren dennehy , soccer player kieran donaghy , footballer ultan dillane , rugby player for connacht and ireland michael dwyer , journalist mike finn , former gaelic and australian rules footballer robert d . fitzgerald , surveyor , botanist rea garvey , singer of reamonn shane guthrie , footballer christie hennessy , singer/songwriter richard johnson , president of irish high court tracey k , musician úna-minh caomhánach , journalist and author barry john keane , footballer eddie kelliher , olympic sailor and businessman richard kelliher , recipient of the victoria cross joan kennelly , photographer and founder of kerry 's eye pádraig kennelly , founder and editor of kerry 's eye joe keohane , footballer william kirby , footballer john joseph lee , an irish historian and former senator gareth mannix , sound engineer/producer savannah mccarthy , footballer for the republic of ireland women 's national football team david moran , footballer maurice moynihan , governor of central bank ailbhe ní ghearbhuigh , poet david o'callaghan , footballer sean o'callaghan , provisional ira member graham o'connell , footballer denis o'donnell , businessman patrick denis o'donnell , military/historian ( and known locally as paddy , or p.d . ) dan o'keeffe , footballer john o'keeffe , footballer arthur o'leary , composer and pianist aisling o'sullivan , actor john o'sullivan , rugby player ger power , footballer declan quill , footballer micheál quirke , footballer boyle roche , politician elise sandes , humanitarian billy sheehan , footballer mikey sheehy , footballer dan spring , politician , footballer and rugby player dick spring , politician , footballer and rugby player austin stack , revolutionary and footballer barry john walsh , footballer tommy walsh , footballer timothy v . murphy , actor . twinning . tralee is twinned with westlake , ohio and holyoke , massachusetts , both in the united states . tralee also has a twinning arrangement with beit sahur in palestine . '' beit sahour twins with tralee , ireland '' , imemc ( international middle east media center ) , 28 march 2019 . gallery . file : dominick street , tralee.jpg dominick street , tralee file : ashe memorial hall.jpg ashe memorial hall file : tralee courthouse.jpg tralee courthouse file : traleepriory.jpg dominican church of holy cross file : tralee from the international space station 2013-03-17.jpg tralee from the international space station . see also . list of abbeys and priories in ireland county kerry list of towns and villages in ireland market houses in ireland banna strand wild atlantic way tralee ( uk parliament constituency ) . references . external links .