Shape

classification of simple shapes . some simple shapes can be put into broad categories . for instance , polygons are classified according to their number of edges as triangles , quadrilaterals , pentagons , etc . each of these is divided into smaller categories ; triangles can be equilateral , isosceles , obtuse , acute , scalene , etc . while quadrilaterals can be rectangles , rhombi , trapezoids , squares , etc . other common shapes are points , lines , planes , and conic sections such as ellipses , circles , and parabolas . among the most common 3-dimensional shapes are polyhedra , which are shapes with flat faces ; ellipsoids , which are egg-shaped or sphere-shaped objects ; cylinders ; and cones . if an object falls into one of these categories exactly or even approximately , we can use it to describe the shape of the object . thus , we say that the shape of a manhole cover is a disk , because it is approximately the same geometric object as an actual geometric disk . in geometry . a geometric shape is the geometry information which remains when location , scale , orientation and reflection are removed from the description of a geometric object . that is , the result of moving a shape around , enlarging it , rotating it , or reflecting it in a mirror is the same shape as the original , and not a distinct shape . many two-dimensional geometric shapes can be defined by a set of points or vertices and lines connecting the points in a closed chain , as well as the resulting interior points . such shapes are called polygons and include triangles , squares , and pentagons . other shapes may be bounded by curves such as the circle or the ellipse . many three-dimensional geometric shapes can be defined by a set of vertices , lines connecting the vertices , and two-dimensional faces enclosed by those lines , as well as the resulting interior points . such shapes are called polyhedrons and include cubes as well as pyramids such as tetrahedrons . other three-dimensional shapes may be bounded by curved surfaces , such as the ellipsoid and the sphere . a shape is said to be convex if all of the points on a line segment between any two of its points are also part of the shape . properties . left there are several ways to compare the shapes of two objects : congruence : two objects are congruent if one can be transformed into the other by a sequence of rotations , translations , and/or reflections . similarity : two objects are similar if one can be transformed into the other by a uniform scaling , together with a sequence of rotations , translations , and/or reflections . isotopy : two objects are isotopic if one can be transformed into the other by a sequence of deformations that do not tear the object or put holes in it . sometimes , two similar or congruent objects may be regarded as having a different shape if a reflection is required to transform one into the other . for instance , the letters '' b '' and '' d '' are a reflection of each other , and hence they are congruent and similar , but in some contexts they are not regarded as having the same shape . sometimes , only the outline or external boundary of the object is considered to determine its shape . for instance , a hollow sphere may be considered to have the same shape as a solid sphere . procrustes analysis is used in many sciences to determine whether or not two objects have the same shape , or to measure the difference between two shapes . in advanced mathematics , quasi-isometry can be used as a criterion to state that two shapes are approximately the same . simple shapes can often be classified into basic geometry objects such as a point , a line , a curve , a plane , a plane figure ( e.g . square or circle ) , or a solid figure ( e.g . cube or sphere ) . however , most shapes occurring in the physical world are complex . some , such as plant structures and coastlines , may be so complicated as to defy traditional mathematical description & nbsp ; – in which case they may be analyzed by differential geometry , or as fractals . equivalence of shapes . in geometry , two subsets of a euclidean space have the same shape if one can be transformed to the other by a combination of translations , rotations ( together also called rigid transformations ) , and uniform scalings . in other words , the shape of a set of points is all the geometrical information that is invariant to translations , rotations , and size changes . having the same shape is an equivalence relation , and accordingly a precise mathematical definition of the notion of shape can be given as being an equivalence class of subsets of a euclidean space having the same shape . mathematician and statistician david george kendall writes : in this paper ‘ shape ’ is used in the vulgar sense , and means what one would normally expect it to mean . we here define ‘ shape ’ informally as ‘ all the geometrical information that remains when location , scale here , scale means only uniform scaling , as non-uniform scaling would change the shape of the object ( e.g . , it would turn a square into a rectangle ) . and rotational effects are filtered out from an object . ’ shapes of physical objects are equal if the subsets of space these objects occupy satisfy the definition above . in particular , the shape does not depend on the size and placement in space of the object . for instance , a '' d '' and a '' p '' have the same shape , as they can be perfectly superimposed if the '' d '' is translated to the right by a given distance , rotated upside down and magnified by a given factor ( see procrustes superimposition for details ) . however , a mirror image could be called a different shape . for instance , a '' b '' and a '' p '' have a different shape , at least when they are constrained to move within a two-dimensional space like the page on which they are written . even though they have the same size , there 's no way to perfectly superimpose them by translating and rotating them along the page . similarly , within a three-dimensional space , a right hand and a left hand have a different shape , even if they are the mirror images of each other . shapes may change if the object is scaled non-uniformly . for example , a sphere becomes an ellipsoid when scaled differently in the vertical and horizontal directions . in other words , preserving axes of symmetry ( if they exist ) is important for preserving shapes . also , shape is determined by only the outer boundary of an object . congruence and similarity . objects that can be transformed into each other by rigid transformations and mirroring ( but not scaling ) are congruent . an object is therefore congruent to its mirror image ( even if it is not symmetric ) , but not to a scaled version . two congruent objects always have either the same shape or mirror image shapes , and have the same size . objects that have the same shape or mirror image shapes are called similarity ( geometry ) , whether or not they have the same size . thus , objects that can be transformed into each other by rigid transformations , mirroring , and uniform scaling are similar . similarity is preserved when one of the objects is uniformly scaled , while congruence is not . thus , congruent objects are always geometrically similar , but similar objects may not be congruent , as they may have different size . homeomorphism . a more flexible definition of shape takes into consideration the fact that realistic shapes are often deformable , e.g . a person in different postures , a tree bending in the wind or a hand with different finger positions . one way of modeling non-rigid movements is by homeomorphisms . roughly speaking , a homeomorphism is a continuous stretching and bending of an object into a new shape . thus , a square and a circle are homeomorphic to each other , but a sphere and a torus are not . an often-repeated mathematical joke is that topologists can not tell their coffee cup from their donut , since a sufficiently pliable donut could be reshaped to the form of a coffee cup by creating a dimple and progressively enlarging it , while preserving the donut hole in a cup 's handle . a described shape has external lines that you can see and make up the shape . if you were putting you coordinates on and coordinate graph you could draw lines to show where you can see a shape , however not every time you put coordinates in a graph as such you can make a shape . this shape has a outline and boundary so you can see it and is not just regular dots on a regular paper . shape analysis . the above-mentioned mathematical definitions of rigid and non-rigid shape have arisen in the field of statistical shape analysis . in particular , procrustes analysis is a technique used for comparing shapes of similar objects ( e.g . bones of different animals ) , or measuring the deformation of a deformable object . other methods are designed to work with non-rigid ( bendable ) objects , e.g . for posture independent shape retrieval ( see for example spectral shape analysis ) . similarity classes . all similar triangles have the same shape . these shapes can be classified using complex numbers u , v , w for the vertices , in a method advanced by j.a . lester j.a . lester ( 1996 ) '' triangles i : shapes '' , aequationes mathematicae 52:30–54 and rafael artzy . for example , an equilateral triangle can be expressed by the complex numbers 0 , 1 , ( 1 + i √3 ) /2 representing its vertices . lester and artzy call the ratio : s ( u , v , w ) \frac ) , \ j 1 , . , n-2 . the polygon bounds a convex set when all these shape components have imaginary components of the same sign . rafael artzy ( 1994 ) '' shapes of polygons '' , journal of geometry 50 ( 1–2 ) :11–15 . human perception of shapes . psychologists have theorized that humans mentally break down images into simple geometric shapes called geons . marr , d . , & nishihara , h . ( 1978 ) . representation and recognition of the spatial organization of three-dimensional shapes . proceedings of the royal society of london , 200 , 269-294 . examples of geons include cones and spheres . a wide range of other shape representations have also been investigated . shape features seem to boil down to three basic dimensions : segmentability , compactness , and spikiness . there is also clear evidence that shapes guide human attention .