Mandy Rice-Davies

early life . marilyn davies was born near llanelli , wales , and , during her childhood , moved to solihull , warwickshire . her father was a policeman before becoming a technologist for dunlop rubber , and her mother was a former actress . she attended sharmans cross secondary modern school . as a teenager she worked at woods farm in shirley assisting with the horse yard there . she appeared older than her age and at 15 she gained a saturday job as a clothes model at the marshall & snelgrove department store in birmingham . at 16 she went to london as 'miss austin ' at the earls court motor show , shirley green ( 1979 ) rachman . london , michael joseph : 157 and then worked as a dancer at murray 's cabaret club in soho . profumo scandal . at murray 's cabaret club she met christine keeler , who introduced her to her friend , the well-connected osteopath stephen ward , and to an ex-lover , the slum landlord peter rachman . shirley green ( 1979 ) rachman . london , michael joseph : 159 rice-davies became rachman 's mistress and was set up in the house in which he had previously kept keeler , 1 bryanston mews west , marylebone . rice-davies often visited keeler at the house she shared with ward at wimpole mews , marylebone , and , after keeler had moved elsewhere , lived there herself , between september and december 1962 . on 14 december 1962 , while keeler was visiting rice-davies at wimpole mews , one of keeler 's boyfriends , john edgecombe , attempted to enter and fired a gun several times at the door . ludovic kennedy ( 1964 ) the trial of stephen ward : 10 his trial brought attention to the girls ' involvement with ward 's social set , and intimacy with many powerful people , including viscount astor at whose stately home of cliveden keeler met the war minister john profumo . profumo 's brief relationship with keeler was the centre of the affair that caused him to resign from the government in june 1963 , though rice-davies herself never met him . david profumo ( 2006 ) bringing the house down . '' well he would , would n't he ? '' . stephen ward was found guilty of living off immoral earnings ( money obtained from rice-davies and keeler among others ) – the trial having been instigated after the embarrassment caused to the government . whilst being cross-examined at ward 's trial , rice-davies made a riposte which has since become famous . when james burge , the defence counsel , pointed out that lord astor denied an affair or even having met her , she dismissed this , giggling '' well he would , would n't he ? '' ( often misquoted '' well he would say that , would n't he ? '' ) . this has become a popular phrase among politicians in britain . examples of this phrase : scottish parliament committee news release 22 february 2001 '' so perhaps there is a slight mandy rice davies feel to this backing with a hint of 'well he would , would n't he ? ' . '' lords hansard text for 6 feb 2002 '' i pause to anticipate the interjection—'he would say that , would n't he ? ' '' spoken by lord mcintosh of haringey . well he would say that , would n't he ? by bronwen maddox in the times 11 january 2006 by 1979 , this phrase had entered the third edition of the oxford dictionary of quotations , and is occasionally referred to with the abbreviation mrda ( '' mandy rice-davies applies '' ) . ; also . later celebrity . a private eye cover at the time of profumo had a photograph of '' the lovely '' rice-davies with the caption ( without any headline or other identification ) , '' do you mind ? if it was n't for me – you could n't have cared less about rachman '' . private eye , 26 july 1963 ; the life and times of private eye ( ed . richard ingrams , 1971 ) , page 85 . rice-davies released a 45 ep on the ember label ( emb ep 4537 ) in may 1964 entitled introducing mandy , which included cover versions of songs such as '' all i do is dream of you '' and '' you got what it takes '' . rice-davies traded on the notoriety the trial brought her , comparing herself to nelson 's mistress , lady hamilton . the penguin dictionary of modern quotations ( j . m . & m . j . cohen , 1971 ) 190:69 in 1966 she married an israeli businessman , rafi shauli and moved to israel . the couple had one daughter together and rice-davies converted to judaism . she also opened nightclubs and restaurants in tel aviv . they were called mandy 's , mandy 's candies and mandy 's singing bamboo . in 1980 , with shirley flack , rice-davies wrote her autobiography , mandy . a year later she appeared in the tom stoppard play , dirty linen and new-found-land . in 1989 , she wrote a novel entitled the scarlet thread . the ottoman empire provided the backdrop and the novel was described as a stirring wartime saga in the spirit of gone with the wind . jani allan . mandy rice-davies - high-life scandal to low-profile success sunday times ( south africa ) . 10 september 1989 subsequently , journalist libby purves , who had met rice-davies when mandy was published , invited her to join a female re-creation on the river thames of jerome k . jerome 's comic novel three men in a boat . this expedition was commissioned by alan coren for the magazine punch , the other members of the party being cartoonist merrily harpur and a toy alsatian to represent montmorency , the dog in the original story . purves recounted how she '' immediately spotted that this rice-davies was a woman to go up the amazon with '' and , among other things , that '' only mandy 's foxy charm saved us from being evicted from a lock for being drunk on pink champagne . '' libby purves in country life , 17 november 2010 rice-davies appeared in a number of television and film productions , including absolutely fabulous and episode 6 of the first series of chance in a million . her film career included roles in nana , the true key of pleasure ( 1982 ) , black venus ( 1983 ) , and absolute beginners ( 1986 ) as colin 's mother . in the 1989 film scandal , about the profumo affair , bridget fonda portrayed rice-davies alongside joanne whalley as keeler . she was closely involved in the development of andrew lloyd webber 's musical stephen ward about ward 's involvement in the profumo affair , in which she was portrayed by charlotte blackledge . the musical opened on 19 december 2013 at the aldwych theatre . on radio 4 's midweek on 5 february 2014 , rice-davies said of stephen ward , '' i did n't fall for him , but i did have an affair with him . '' she once described her life as '' one slow descent into respectability '' . rice-davies is portrayed by ellie bamber in the trial of christine keeler , a 2019–2020 six-part bbc one television series . . death . rice-davies died , aged 70 , from cancer on 18 december 2014 in london . she is survived by her third husband , millionaire waste collection businessman ken foreman , and her daughter dana . . references . external links . 1963 denning report - parliament & the 1960s - uk parliament living heritage bbc radio 4 play about the profumo affair , narrated by mandy rice-davies