Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix

plot . during the summer , harry potter and his cousin dudley are attacked by dementors . forced to use magic to fend them off , harry is expelled from hogwarts , but his expulsion is postponed pending a hearing at the ministry of magic . harry is whisked off to number 12 , grimmauld place , the childhood home of sirius black , by a group of wizards belonging to the order of the phoenix . ron weasley and hermione granger explain that the order is a secret organisation led by hogwarts headmaster albus dumbledore , dedicated to fighting lord voldemort and the death eaters . harry , ron , hermione , ginny weasley and fred and george weasley learn that voldemort is seeking something he lacked prior to his defeat . the ministry , led by cornelius fudge , refuses to accept voldemort 's return , and are running a smear campaign against harry and dumbledore . at the hearing , dumbledore defends harry , who is cleared of all charges . at hogwarts , dolores umbridge , a senior ministry employee who was present in harry 's hearing , becomes the new defence against the dark arts teacher . she refuses to believe in voldemort 's return , and clashes with harry , punishing him by having him magically carve '' i must not tell lies '' into the back of his hand . she also refuses to teach her students how to perform defensive magic , prompting harry , ron , and hermione to form their own defence group with other students . umbridge , empowered by the ministry to interfere in hogwarts as the new high inquisitor , bans unapproved clubs , forcing the group , now called dumbledore 's army , to meet in secret in the room of requirement to practice under harry 's instruction . one night , harry has a vision of voldemort 's snake nagini seriously injuring arthur weasley . harry tells professor mcgonagall and dumbledore , and arthur is rescued . dumbledore arranges for harry to take occlumency lessons with professor snape , another member of the order , to protect his mind against invasions by voldemort . umbridge is eventually given a tip-off about dumbledore 's army , and to prevent harry 's expulsion , dumbledore takes responsibility for the group , and goes into hiding . umbridge becomes headmistress , but dumbledore 's office seals itself against her . harry 's occlumency lessons go poorly . during one , snape is called away , leaving behind dumbledore 's pensieve . harry uses the pensieve , and sees a memory of snape being bullied by his father , james potter , and sirius . snape catches harry and ends his lessons in a fit of rage . harry makes no further effort to protect his mind , and during exams , harry has a vision of sirius being tortured by voldemort in the department of mysteries . harry uses umbridge 's fireplace to contact grimmauld place , and kreacher , sirius ' house elf , claims he is gone . umbridge catches harry and asks snape for veritaserum to question harry , which he claims not to have . harry covertly warns snape of sirius , which snape claims to not understand . umbridge reveals she had ordered the dementor attack on harry , and decides to interrogate him with the cruciatus curse . hermione intervenes , convincing umbridge that they are hiding a weapon of dumbledore 's in the forbidden forest . harry and hermione lead her there , into an area inhabited by centaurs . umbridge provokes them , and they take her captive . harry and hermione escape the centaurs . luna , ron , ginny , and neville join them , and they fly to the ministry on thestrals , to rescue sirius . once in the department of mysteries , they fail to find him , instead finding a glass sphere bearing harry 's and voldemort 's names . death eaters led by lucius malfoy attack them , revealing that harry was lured here with a fake vision to secure the sphere , which is what voldemort seeks – a recording of a prophecy concerning harry and voldemort . harry and his friends , soon joined by members of the order , battle the death eaters . during the fight , neville accidentally destroys the prophecy , and bellatrix lestrange kills sirius . harry chases after her , but is no match . voldemort arrives to kill harry , but dumbledore arrives as well , dueling voldemort to a stalemate . voldemort possesses harry , in an attempt to get dumbledore to kill harry , but harry fights off the possession , and voldemort escapes just as fudge arrives . having seen voldemort , fudge accepts the truth . in his office , dumbledore explains that snape had understood harry 's warning , and had alerted the order . dumbledore also reveals that kreacher had informed lucius ' wife of harry and sirius 's closeness , which voldemort had then exploited . dumbledore also reveals that harry is safe from voldemort with the dursleys , as by taking harry in , petunia , lily 's sister , seals the protection harry 's mother gave him . furthermore , dumbledore reveals the contents of the prophecy , which foretold the birth of someone with the power to defeat voldemort . one of voldemort 's followers had overheard part of the prophecy , and informed voldemort , who then tried to kill the baby harry . the rest of the prophecy , which voldemort did not hear , hinted that voldemort would mark his opponent as an equal , and that eventually , one would kill the other . overwhelmed by the prophecy and mourning the loss of sirius , harry grows sullen , although the wizarding community now affords him great respect . motivated by his friends , harry returns to the dursleys . publication and release . potter fans waited three years between the releases of the fourth and fifth books . before the release of the fifth book , 200 & nbsp ; million copies of the first four books had already been sold and translated into 55 & nbsp ; languages in 200 & nbsp ; countries . as the series was already a global phenomenon , the book forged new pre-order records , with thousands of people queuing outside book stores on 20 june 2003 & nbsp ; to secure copies at midnight . despite the security , thousands of copies were stolen from an earlestown , merseyside warehouse on 15 june 2003 . . critical response . harry potter and the order of the phoenix was met with mostly positive reviews and received several awards . in 2004 , the book was cited as an american library association best book for young adults and as an american library association notable book . it also received the oppenheim toy portfolio 2004 gold medal , along with several other awards . rowling was praised for her imagination by usa today writer deirdre donahue . the new york times writer john leonard praised the novel , saying '' the order of the phoenix starts slow , gathers speed and then skateboards , with somersaults , to its furious conclusion.as harry gets older , rowling gets better . '' however , he also criticised '' the one-note draco malfoy '' and the predictable lord voldemort . most negative reviewers were concerned with the violence contained in the novel and with morality issues occurring throughout the book . . predecessors and sequels . harry potter and the order of the phoenix is the fifth book in the harry potter series . the first book in the series , harry potter and the philosopher 's stone , was first published by bloomsbury in 1997 with an initial print-run of 500 & nbsp ; copies in hardback , 300 of which were distributed to libraries . by the end of 1997 , the uk edition won a national book award and a gold medal in the 9-to-11-year-olds category of the nestlé smarties book prize . the second novel , harry potter and the chamber of secrets , was published in the uk on 2 july 1998 . harry potter and the prisoner of azkaban was published a year later in the uk on 8 july 1999 and in the us on 8 september 1999 . harry potter and the goblet of fire was published 8 july 2000 , simultaneously by bloomsbury and scholastic . harry potter and the order of the phoenix is the longest book in the series , yet it is the second shortest film at 2 hours and 18 minutes . after the publishing of order of the phoenix , the sixth book of the series , harry potter and the half-blood prince , was published on 16 july 2005 and sold 9 & nbsp ; million copies in the first 24 & nbsp ; hours of its worldwide release . the seventh and final novel , harry potter and the deathly hallows , was published 21 july 2007 . the book sold 11 million copies within 24 & nbsp ; hours of its release : 2.7 & nbsp ; million copies in the uk and 8.3 & nbsp ; million in the us . . adaptations . film . in 2007 , harry potter and the order of the phoenix was released in a film version directed by david yates and written by michael goldenberg . the film was produced by david heyman 's company , heyday films , alongside david barron . the budget was reportedly between £75 & nbsp ; and 100 & nbsp ; million ( us 150–200 & nbsp ; million ) , and it became the unadjusted list of highest-grossing films and a critical and commercial success . the film opened to a worldwide 5-day opening of 333 & nbsp ; million , the third best of all time , and grossed 940 & nbsp ; million total , second to pirates of the caribbean : at world 's end for the greatest total of 2007 . . video games . a video game adaptation of the book and film versions of harry potter and the order of the phoenix was made for microsoft windows , ps2 , ps3 , xbox 360 , psp , nintendo ds , wii , game boy advance , and mac os x . it was released on 25 june 2007 & nbsp ; in the u.s . , 28 june 2007 & nbsp ; in australia , and 29 june 2007 & nbsp ; in the uk and europe for playstation 3 , psp , playstation 2 , windows , and 3 july 2007 & nbsp ; for most other platforms . the games were published by electronic arts . the book is also depicted in the 2011 video game lego harry potter : years 5–7 . translations . the first official foreign translation of the book appeared in vietnamese on 21 july 2003 , when the first of twenty-two installments was released . the first official european translation appeared in serbia and montenegro in serbian by the official publisher narodna knjiga in early september 2003 . other translations appeared later ( e.g . in november 2003 in dutch and german ) . the english-language version has topped the bestseller list in france , whereas in germany and the netherlands , an unofficial distributed translation process was started on the internet . . see also . religious debates over the harry potter series . references . external links . common sense media age rating