Leopold Stokowski

biography . early life . the son of an english-born cabinet-maker of poland heritage , kopernik joseph boleslaw stokowski , and his northampton-born wife annie-marion ( née moore ) , stokowski was born leopold anthony stokowski , although on occasion in later life he altered his middle name to antoni , per the polish spelling . there is some mystery surrounding his early life . for example , he spoke with an unusual , non-british accent , though he was born and raised in london . on occasion , stokowski gave his year of birth as 1887 instead of 1882 , as in a letter to the hugo riemann musiklexicon in 1950 , which also incorrectly gave his birthplace as kraków . nicolas slonimsky , editor of baker 's biographical dictionary of musicians , received a letter from a finnish encyclopaedia editor that said , '' the maestro himself told me that he was born in pomerania , germany , in 1889 . '' in germany there was a corresponding rumour that his original name was simply '' stock '' ( german for stick ) . however , stokowski 's birth certificate ( signed by j . claxton , the registrar at the general office , somerset house , london , in the parish of all souls , county of middlesex ) gives his birth on 18 april 1882 , at 13 upper marylebone street ( now new cavendish street ) , in the marylebone district of london . stokowski was named after his polish-born grandfather leopold , who died in the english county of surrey on 13 january 1879 , at the age of 49 . abram chasins , leopold stokowski , a profile , pp . 1-3 ( new york : da capo press , 1979 ) the '' mystery '' surrounding his origins and accent is clarified in oliver daniel 's 1000-page biography stokowski – a counterpoint of view ( 1982 ) , in which ( in chapter 12 ) daniel reveals stokowski came under the influence of his first wife , american pianist olga samaroff . samaroff , born lucy mary agnes hickenlooper , was from galveston , texas , and adopted a more exotic-sounding name to further her career . for professional and career reasons , she '' urged him to emphasize only the polish part of his background '' once he became a resident of the united states . he studied at the royal college of music , where he first enrolled in 1896 at the age of thirteen , making him one of the youngest students to do so . in his later life in the united states , stokowski would perform six of the nine symphonies composed by his fellow organ student ralph vaughan williams . stokowski sang in the choir of the st marylebone parish church , and later he became the assistant organist to sir walford davies at temple church . by age 16 , stokowski was elected to a membership in the royal college of organists . in 1900 , he formed the choir of st . mary 's church , charing cross road , where he trained the choirboys and played the organ . in 1902 , he was appointed the organist and choir director of st . james 's church , piccadilly . he also attended the queen 's college , oxford , where he earned a bachelor of music degree in 1903 . . new york , paris , and cincinnati . in 1905 , stokowski began work in new york city as the organist and choir director of st . bartholomew 's church . he was very popular among the parishioners , who included members of the vanderbilt family , but in the course of time , he resigned this position in order to pursue a career as an orchestra conductor . stokowski moved to paris for additional study in conducting . there he heard that the cincinnati symphony orchestra would be needing a new conductor when it returned from a long sabbatical . in 1908 , stokowski began a campaign to win this position , writing letters to mrs . christian r . holmes , the orchestra 's president , and travelling all the way to cincinnati , ohio , for a personal interview . stokowski was selected over the other applicants , and took up his conducting duties in late 1909 . that was also the year of his official conducting debut in paris with the colonne orchestra on 12 may 1909 , when stokowski accompanied his bride to be , the pianist olga samaroff , in tchaikovsky 's piano concerto no . 1 . stokowski 's conducting debut in london took place the following week on 18 may with the new symphony orchestra at queen 's hall . his engagement as new permanent conductor in cincinnati was a great success . he introduced the concept of '' pops concerts '' and , starting with his first season , he began championing the work of living composers . his concerts included performances of music by richard strauss , sibelius , rachmaninoff , debussy , glazunov , saint-saëns and many others . he conducted the american premieres of new works by such composers as elgar , whose 2nd symphony was first presented there on 24 november 1911 . he was to maintain his advocacy of contemporary music to the end of his career . however , in early 1912 , stokowski became frustrated with the politics of the orchestra 's board of directors , and submitted his resignation . there was some dispute over whether to accept this or not , but , on 12 april 1912 , the board decided to do so . philadelphia orchestra . two months later , stokowski was appointed the director of the philadelphia orchestra , and he made his conducting debut in philadelphia on 11 october 1912 . this position would bring him some of his greatest accomplishments and recognition . it has been suggested that stokowski resigned abruptly at cincinnati with the hidden knowledge that the conducting position in philadelphia was his when he wanted it , or as oscar levant suggested in his book a smattering of ignorance , '' he had the contract in his back pocket . '' before stokowski moved into his conducting position in philadelphia , however , he sailed back to england to conduct two concerts at the queen 's hall in london . on 22 may 1912 , stokowski conducted the london symphony orchestra in a concert which he was to repeat in its entirety 60 years later at the age of 90 , and on 14 june 1912 he conducted an all-wagner concert that featured the noted soprano lillian nordica . while he was director of the philadelphia orchestra , he was largely responsible for convincing mary louise curtis bok to set up the curtis institute of music ( 13 october 1924 ) in philadelphia . he helped with recruiting faculty and hired many of their graduates . stokowski rapidly gained a reputation as a musical showman . his flair for the theatrical included grand gestures , such as throwing the sheet music on the floor to show he did not need to conduct from a score . he also experimented with new lighting arrangements in the concert hall , at one point conducting in a dark hall with only his head and hands lighted , at other times arranging the lights so they would cast theatrical shadows of his head and hands . late in the 1929-1930 symphony season , stokowski started conducting without a baton . his free-hand manner of conducting soon became one of his trademarks . on the musical side , stokowski nurtured the orchestra and shaped the '' stokowski '' sound , or what became known as the '' philadelphia sound '' . he encouraged '' free bowing '' from the string section , '' free breathing '' from the brass section , and continually altered the seating arrangements of the orchestra 's sections , as well as the acoustics of the hall , in response to his urge to create a better sound . stokowski is credited as the first conductor to adopt the seating plan that is used by most orchestras today , with first and second violins together on the conductor 's left , and the violas and cellos to the right . preben opperby , leopold stokowski , great performers , tunbridge wells , kent : midas / new york : hippocrene , 1982 , , p . & nbsp ; 127 , reproduces four of stokowski 's seating plans , of which illustration no . 2 shows the string sections as here described . stokowski also became known for modifying the orchestrations of some of the works that he conducted , as was a standard practice for conductors prior to the second half of the 20th century . among others , he amended the orchestrations of beethoven , tchaikovsky , sibelius , johann sebastian bach , and brahms . for example , stokowski revised the ending of the romeo and juliet ( tchaikovsky ) , by tchaikovsky , so it would close quietly , taking his notion from modest tchaikovsky 's life and letters of peter ilych tchaikovsky ( translated by rosa newmarch : 1906 ) that the composer had provided a quiet ending of his own at balakirev 's suggestion . stokowski made his own orchestration of mussorgsky 's night on bald mountain by adapting rimsky-korsakov 's orchestration and making it sound , in some places , similar to mussorgsky 's original . in the film fantasia , to conform to the disney artists ' story-line , depicting the battle between good and evil , the ending of night on bald mountain segued into the beginning of schubert 's ave maria . many music critics have taken exception to the liberties stokowski took—liberties which were common in the nineteenth century , but had mostly died out in the twentieth , when faithful adherence to the composer 's scores became more common . stokowski 's repertoire was broad and included many contemporary works . he was the only conductor to perform all of arnold schoenberg 's orchestral works during the composer 's own lifetime , several of which were world premieres . stokowski gave the first american performance of schoenberg 's gurre-lieder in 1932 . it was recorded '' live '' on 78 & nbsp ; rpm records and remained the only recording of this work in the catalogue until the advent of the lp record . stokowski also presented the american premieres of four of dmitri shostakovich 's symphonies , numbers 1 , 3 , 6 , and 11 . in 1916 , stokowski conducted the american premiere of mahler 's symphony no . 8 ( mahler ) . he added works by rachmaninoff to his repertoire , giving the world premieres of his fourth piano concerto , the three russian songs , the third symphony , and the rhapsody on a theme of paganini ; sibelius , whose last three symphonies were given their american premieres in philadelphia in the 1920s ; and igor stravinsky , many of whose works were also given their first american performances by stokowski . in 1922 , he introduced stravinsky 's score for the ballet the rite of spring to america , gave its first staged performance there in 1930 with martha graham dancing the part of the chosen one , and at the same time made the first american recording of the work . seldom an opera conductor , stokowski did give the american premieres in philadelphia of the original version of mussorgky 's boris godunov ( 1929 ) and alban berg 's wozzeck ( 1931 ) . works by such composers as arthur bliss , max bruch , ferruccio busoni , carlos chávez , aaron copland , george enescu , manuel de falla , paul hindemith , gustav holst , gian francesco malipiero , nikolai myaskovsky , walter piston , francis poulenc , sergei prokofiev , maurice ravel , ottorino respighi , albert roussel , alexander scriabin , elie siegmeister , karol szymanowski , edgard varèse , heitor villa-lobos , anton webern , and kurt weill , received their american premieres under stokowski 's direction in philadelphia . in 1933 , he started '' youth concerts '' for younger audiences , which are still a tradition in philadelphia and many other american cities , and fostered youth music programs . after disputes with the board , stokowski began to withdraw from involvement in the philadelphia orchestra from 1936 onwards , allowing his co-conductor eugene ormandy to gradually take over . stokowski shared principal conducting duties with ormandy from 1936 to 1941 ; stokowski did not appear with the philadelphia orchestra from the closing concert of the 1940-41 season ( a semi-disastrous performance of bach 's st . matthew passion ) until 12 february 1960 , when he guest-conducted the philadelphia in works of mozart , de falla , respighi , and in a legendary performance of the shostakovich fifth symphony , arguably the greatest by stokowski . the recording of this concert 's broadcast had been circulated privately among collectors over the years , though never issued commercially , but with the copyright expiring at the start of 2011 , it was released in its entirety on the pristine audio label . stokowski appeared as himself in the motion picture the big broadcast of 1937 , conducting two of his bach transcriptions . that same year he also conducted and acted in one hundred men and a girl , with deanna durbin and adolphe menjou . in 1939 , stokowski collaborated with walt disney to create the motion picture for which he is best known : fantasia . he conducted all the music ( with the exception of a '' jam session '' in the middle of the film ) and included his own orchestrations for the toccata and fugue in d minor and night on bald mountain/ave maria segments . stokowski even got to talk to ( and shake hands with ) mickey mouse on screen , although he would later say with a smile that mickey mouse got to shake hands with him . this footage of stokowski was incorporated into fantasia 2000 . a lifelong and ardent fan of the newest and most experimental techniques in recording , stokowski saw to it that most of the music for fantasia was recorded over class a telephone lines laid down between the academy of music in philadelphia and bell laboratories in camden nj , using an early , highly complex version of multi-track stereophonic sound , dubbed fantasound , which shared many attributes with the later perspecta stereophonic sound system . recorded on photographic film , the only suitable medium then available , the results were considered astounding for the latter half of the 1930s . upon his return in 1960 , stokowski appeared with the philadelphia orchestra as a guest conductor . he also made two lp recordings with them for columbia records , one including a performance of manuel de falla 's el amor brujo , which he had introduced to america in 1922 and had previously recorded for rca victor with the hollywood bowl symphony orchestra in 1946 , and a bach album which featured the 5th brandenburg concerto and three of his own bach transcriptions . he continued to appear as a guest conductor on several more occasions , his final philadelphia orchestra concert taking place in 1969 . in honour of stokowski 's vast influence on music and the philadelphia performing arts community , on 24 february 1969 , he was awarded the prestigious university of pennsylvania glee club award of merit . beginning in 1964 , this award was '' established to bring a declaration of appreciation to an individual each year that has made a significant contribution to the world of music and helped to create a climate in which our talents may find valid expression . '' . all-american youth orchestra . with his philadelphia orchestra contract having expired in 1940 , stokowski immediately formed the all-american youth orchestra , its players ' ages ranging from 18 to 25 . it toured south america in 1940 and north america in 1941 and was met with rave reviews . although stokowski made a number of recordings with the aayo for columbia , the technical standard was not as high as had been achieved with the philadelphia orchestra for rca victor . in any event , the aayo was disbanded when america entered the second world war , and plans for another extensive tour in 1942 were abandoned . nbc symphony orchestra . during this time , stokowski also became chief conductor of the nbc symphony orchestra on a three-year contract ( 1941–1944 ) . the nbc 's regular conductor , arturo toscanini , did not wish to undertake the 1941-42 nbc season because of friction with nbc management , though he did accept guest engagements with the philadelphia orchestra . stokowski conducted a great deal of contemporary music with the nbc symphony , including the us premiere of prokofiev 's alexander nevsky in 1943 , the world premieres of schoenberg 's piano concerto ( with eduard steuermann ) and george antheil 's 4th symphony , both in 1944 , and new works by alan hovhaness , stravinsky , hindemith , milhaud , howard hanson , william schuman , morton gould and many others . he also conducted several british works with this orchestra , including vaughan williams ' 4th symphony , holst 's the planets , and george butterworth 's a shropshire lad . stokowski also made a number of recordings with the nbc symphony for rca victor in 1941-42 , including tchaikovsky 's 4th symphony , a work which was never in toscanini 's repertoire , and stravinsky 's firebird suite . toscanini returned as co-conductor of the nbc symphony with stokowski for the remaining two years of the latter 's contract . new york city symphony orchestra . in 1944 , on the recommendation of mayor fiorello la guardia , stokowski helped form the new york city symphony orchestra , which they intended would make music accessible for middle-class workers . ticket prices were set low , and performances took place at convenient , after-work hours . many early concerts were standing room only ; however , a year later in 1945 , stokowski was at odds with the board ( who wanted to trim expenses even further ) and he resigned . stokowski made three 78pm sets with the new york city symphony for rca victor : beethoven 's 6th symphony , richard strauss 's death and transfiguration , and a selection of orchestral music from georges bizet 's carmen . hollywood bowl symphony orchestra . in 1945 , he founded the hollywood bowl symphony orchestra . the orchestra lasted for two years before it was disbanded for live concerts , but not for recordings , which continued well into the 1960s . stokowski 's own recordings ( made in 1945-46 ) included brahms 's 1st symphony , tchaikovsky 's pathetique symphony and a number of short popular pieces . some of stokowski 's open-air hbso concerts were broadcast and recorded , and have been issued on cd , including a collaboration with percy grainger on edvard grieg 's piano concerto ( grieg ) in the summer of 1945 . ( it began giving live concerts again as the '' hollywood bowl orchestra '' in 1991 , under john mauceri ) . there was a 1949 cartoon spoof of stokowski at the bowl with bugs bunny playing the conductor in '' long-haired hare '' by chuck jones . . new york philharmonic . he continued to appear frequently with the los angeles philharmonic , both at the hollywood bowl and other venues . then in 1946 stokowski became a chief guest conductor of the new york philharmonic . his many '' first performances '' with them included the us premiere of prokofiev 's 6th symphony in 1949 . he also made many splendid recordings with the nypo for columbia , including the world premiere recordings of vaughan williams 's 6th symphony and olivier messiaen 's l'ascension , also in 1949 . international career . however , when in 1950 dimitri mitropoulos was appointed chief conductor of the nypo , stokowski began a new international career which commenced in 1951 with a nationwide tour of england : during the festival of britain celebrations he conducted the royal philharmonic orchestra at the invitation of sir thomas beecham . it was during this first visit that he made his debut recording with a british orchestra , the philharmonia , of rimsky-korsakov 's scheherazade . during that same summer he also toured and conducted in germany , holland , switzerland , austria , and portugal , establishing a pattern of guest-conducting abroad during the summer months while spending the winter seasons conducting in the united states . this scheme was to hold good for the next 20 years during which stokowski conducted many of the world 's greatest orchestras , simultaneously making recordings with them for various labels . thus he conducted and recorded with the main london orchestras as well as the berlin philharmonic , the suisse romande orchestra , the orchestre national de france , the czech philharmonic , the radio filharmonisch orkest , et al . symphony of the air , houston symphony orchestra . stokowski returned to the nbc symphony orchestra in 1954 for a series of recording sessions for rca victor . the repertoire included beethoven 's 'pastoral ' symphony , sibelius 's 2nd symphony , acts 2 and 3 of tchaikovsky 's swan lake and highlights from saint-saëns 's samson and delilah with risë stevens and jan peerce . after the nbc symphony orchestra was disbanded as the official ensemble of the nbc radio network , it was re-formed as the symphony of the air with stokowski as notional music director , and as such performed many concerts and made recordings from 1954 until 1963 . the us premiere in 1958 of turkish composer adnan saygun 's yunus emre oratorio is among them . he made a series of symphony of the air recordings for the united artists label in 1958 which included beethoven 's 7th symphony , shostakovich 's 1st symphony , khatchaturian 's 2nd symphony and respighi 's the pines of rome . from 1955 to 1961 , stokowski was also the music director of the houston symphony orchestra . for his debut appearance with the orchestra he gave the first performance of mysterious mountain by alan hovhaness – one of many living american composers whose music he championed over the years . he also gave the us premiere in houston of shostakovich 's 11th symphony ( 7 april 1958 ) and made its first american recording on the capitol label . american symphony orchestra , chicago symphony orchestra , and london . in 1960 , stokowski made one of his infrequent appearances in the opera house , when he conducted giacomo puccini 's turandot at the new york metropolitan , in memorable performances with a cast that included birgit nilsson , franco corelli and anna moffo . at the new york city opera , he had led double-bills of œdipus rex ( with richard cassilly ) and carmina burana ( 1959 ) , as well as l'orfeo ( with gérard souzay ) and il prigioniero ( with norman treigle , 1960 ) . in 1962 , at the age of 80 , stokowski founded the american symphony orchestra . his championship of the 20th-century composer remained undiminished , and perhaps his most celebrated premiere with the american symphony orchestra was of charles ives 's 4th symphony in 1965 , which cbs also recorded . stokowski served as music director for the aso until may 1972 when , at the age of 90 , he returned to live in england . on 3 january 1962 , still showing his interest in using technological innovation , he was featured in a telecast for wgn-tv conducting the chicago symphony orchestra , which has since been recorded on dvd . video artists international one of his notable british guest conducting engagements in the 1960s was the first proms performance of gustav mahler 's symphony no . 2 ( mahler ) , since issued on cd . he continued to conduct in public for a few more years , but failing health forced him to only make recordings . an eyewitness said that stokowski often conducted sitting down in his later years ; sometimes , as he became involved in the performance , he would stand up and conduct with remarkable energy . his last public appearance in the uk took place at the royal albert hall , london , on 14 may 1974 . stokowski conducted the new philharmonia in the 'merry waltz ' of otto klemperer ( in tribute to the orchestra 's former music director who had died the previous year ) , vaughan williams 's fantasia on a theme of thomas tallis , ravel 's rapsodie espagnole and brahms 's 4th symphony . his final public appearance took place during the 1975 vence music festival in the south of france , when , on 22 july 1975 , he conducted the rouen chamber orchestra in several of his bach transcriptions . last years . stokowski gave his last world premiere in 1973 when , at the age of 91 , he conducted havergal brian 's 28th symphony in a bbc radio broadcast with the new philharmonia orchestra . in august 1973 , stokowski conducted the international festival youth orchestra at royal albert hall in london , performing tchaikovsky 's fifth symphony . edward greenfield of the guardian wrote : '' stokowski rallied them as though it was a vintage philadelphia concert of the 1920s '' . stokowski continued to make recordings even after he had retired from the concert platform , mainly with the national philharmonic , another 'ad hoc ' orchestra made up of first-desk players chosen from the main london orchestras . in 1976 , he signed a recording contract with columbia records that would have kept him active until he was 100 years old . stokowski died of a heart attack in 1977 in nether wallop , hampshire , at the age of 95 . allen hughes , '' leopold stokowski is dead of a heart attack at 95 '' , the new york times , 14 september 1977 . his very last recordings , made shortly before his death , for columbia , included performances of the youthful symphony in c by georges bizet and felix mendelssohn 's 4th symphony , '' italian '' , with the national philharmonic orchestra in london . he is interred at east finchley cemetery . east finchley cemetery infosite , westminster.gov.uk ; accessed 21 july 2014 . . recording . stokowski made his very first recordings , with the philadelphia orchestra , for the victor talking machine company in october 1917 , beginning with two of brahms ' hungarian dances . other works recorded in the early sessions were the scherzo from mendelssohn 's a midsummer night 's dream incidental music and '' dance of the blessed spirits '' from gluck 's orfeo ed euridice . abram chasins , p . 93 he found ways to make the best use of the acoustical process , until electrical recording was introduced by victor in the spring of 1925 . he conducted the first orchestral electrical recording to be made in america ( saint-saëns 's danse macabre ) in april 1925 . the following month stokowski recorded marche slave by tchaikovsky , in which he increased the double basses to best utilise the lower frequencies of early electrical recording . stokowski was also the first conductor in america to record all four of brahms ' symphonies ( between 1927 and 1933 ) . stokowski made the first us recordings of the beethoven 7th and 9th symphonies , antonín dvořák 's new world symphony , pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky 's 4th symphony and the nutcracker , césar franck 's symphony in d minor , nikolai rimsky-korsakov 's scheherazade , sergei rachmaninoff 's 2nd piano concerto ( with the composer as soloist ) , jean sibelius 's 4th symphony ( its first recording ) , dmitri shostakovich 's 5th and 6th symphonies , and many shorter works . his early recordings were made at victor 's trinity church studio in camden , new jersey until 1926 , when victor began recording the orchestra in the academy of music in philadelphia . stokowski and the philadelphia orchestra later participated in long playing , high fidelity , and stereophonic experiments , during the early 1930s , mostly for bell laboratories fox , barry ( 24–31 december 1981 ) '' a hundred years of stereo : fifty of hi-fi '' , scientific american , pp 910–911 ; retrieved 1 march 2012 . ( victor even released some early long playing records around this time , which were not commercially successful for several reasons ) . stokowski and the philadelphia orchestra continued to make records for victor through december 1940 . one of his last 1940 sessions was the world premiere recording of shostakovich 's sixth symphony . in addition to rca victor , stokowski recorded prodigiously for several other labels until shortly before his death , including columbia , capitol , everest , united artists , and decca/london . his first commercial stereo recordings were made in 1954 for rca victor with the nbc symphony orchestra , devoted to excerpts from prokofiev 's ballet romeo and juliet and the complete one-act ballet sebastian by gian carlo menotti . from 1947 to 1953 , stokowski recorded for rca victor with a specially assembled 'ad hoc ' band of players drawn principally from the new york philharmonic and nbc symphony . the lps were labelled as being played by 'leopold stokowski and his symphony orchestra ' and the repertoire ranged from haydn ( his imperial symphony ) to schoenberg ( verklärte nacht ) by way of schumann , liszt , bizet , wagner , tchaikovsky , debussy , ralph vaughan williams , sibelius and percy grainger . his capitol recordings in the 1950s were distinguished by the use of three-track stereophonic tape recorders . stokowski was very careful in the placement of musicians during the recording sessions and consulted with the recording staff to achieve the best possible results . some of the sessions took place in the ballroom of the riverside plaza hotel in new york city in january and february 1957 ; these were produced by richard c . jones and engineered by frank abbey with stokowski 's own orchestra , which was typically drawn from new york musicians ( primarily members of the symphony of the air ) . the cd reissue by emi included selections originally released on two lps -- the orchestra and landmarks of a distinguished career—and featured music of paul dukas , samuel barber , richard strauss , harold farberman , vincent persichetti , tchaikovsky , mussorgsky , debussy , bach ( as arranged by stokowski ) , and sibelius . emi classics liner notes although he officially used the ravel orchestration of the finale to mussorgsky 's pictures at an exhibition in his 1957 capitol recording , he did add a few additional percussion instruments to the score . his capitol recording of holst 's the planets was made with the los angeles philharmonic orchestra . emi , which acquired capitol and angel records in the 1950s , has reissued many of stokowski 's capitol recordings on cd . all of the music that stokowski conducted in fantasia was released on a 3-lp set by disneyland records , in the 1957 soundtrack album made from the film . after stereo became possible on phonograph records , the album was released in stereo on buena vista records . with the advent of compact discs , it appeared on a 2-cd walt disney records set , in conjunction with the film 's 50th anniversary . other labels for which stokowski recorded in the late 1950s included everest , noted for its use of 35 & nbsp ; mm film instead of tape and the resulting highly vivid sound . the most notable of which was a coupling of tchaikovsky 's francesca da rimini and hamlet with stokowski conducting the new york stadium symphony orchestra ( the summer name for the new york philharmonic ) . other remarkable everest recordings of stokowski conducting the new york stadium symphony orchestra are villa-lobos ' tone poem uirapuru , shostakovich 's symphony no . 5 and prokofiev 's ballet suite cinderella . several of stokowski 's televised concerts have appeared on both video and dvd , including beethoven 's 5th symphony and schubert 's unfinished symphony with the london philharmonic on emi classics 'classic archive ' label ; the nielsen 2nd symphony with the danish radio orchestra on vai ( video artists international ) ; and charles ives ' 4th symphony with the american symphony orchestra on classical video rarities . in 1973 , aged 91 , he was invited by the international festival of youth orchestras to conduct the 1973 international festival orchestra , numbering 140 of the world 's finest young musicians , in a performance of tchaikovsky 's fifth symphony at the royal albert hall , london . the cameo classics lp label recorded the concert , and also , by special permission of the maestro , the final rehearsals , which would make up a 2-lp set . edward greenfield in the guardian reported '' stokowski rallied them as though it was a vintage philadelphia concert of the 1920s '' . robert m . stumpff ll ( leopold stokowski club of america ) called the performance '' the finest ever performance of this symphony '' . this unique dolby recording was restored in 2014 by klassik haus and is available from cameo classics on cd ( nimbus records distribution ) . personal life . marriages . stokowski married three times . his first wife was american concert pianist olga samaroff ( born lucy hickenlooper ) , to whom he was married from 1911 until 1923 . they had one daughter : sonya maria noel stokowski ( born 24 december 1921 ) , an actress , who married willem thorbecke and settled in the us with their four children , noel , johan , leif and christine . his second wife was johnson & johnson heiress evangeline love brewster johnson ( 1897–1990 ) , an artist and aviator , to whom he was married from 1926 until 1937 . they had two daughters : gloria luba stokowski and andrea sadja stokowski . in march 1938 stokowski vacationed with greta garbo on the island of capri in italy . new york times 2 march 1938 this followed other reports of friendship or romance between stokowski and garbo . stokowski and evangeline subsequently divorced . evangeline later married prince zalstem-zalessky , a descendant of a russian noble family , who died in 1965 . in 1945 stokowski married heiress and actress gloria vanderbilt ( 1924–2019 ) . they had two sons , leopold stanislaus stokowski ( born 1950 ) and christopher stokowski ( born 1952 ) . they divorced in 1955 . margery lewis ( photographer ) ‘ life visits the stokowski family ’ life 7 sep 1953 , vol . 35 , no . 10 . issn 0024-3019 . pps . 122-124 . name myth . after he had achieved international fame with the philadelphia orchestra , unsubstantiated rumours circulated that he was born '' leonard '' or '' lionel stokes '' or that he had '' anglicised '' it to '' stokes '' ; this canard is readily disproved by reference not only to his birth certificate and those of his father , younger brother , and sister ( which show stokowski to have been the genuine polonised lithuanian family name , originally stokauskas , where stoka means '' lack '' or '' shortage '' ) , but also by the student entry registers of the royal college of music , royal college of organists , and the queen 's college , oxford , along with other surviving documentation from his days at st . marylebone church , st . james 's church , and st . bartholomew 's in new york city . . legacy . after stokowski 's death , tom burnam writes , the '' concatenization of canards '' that had arisen around him was revived & nbsp ; — that his name and accent were phony ; that his musical education was deficient ; that his musicians did not respect him ; that he cared about nobody but himself . burnam suggests that there was a dark , hidden reason for these rumours . stokowski deplored the segregation of symphony orchestras in which women and minorities were excluded , and , burnam claims , his detractors got revenge by slandering him . nevertheless , and notwithstanding burnam ’ s claims , attitudes towards stokowski have changed dramatically since his death . in 1999 , for gramophone magazine , the noted music commentator david mellor wrote : '' one of the great joys of recent years for me has been the reassessment of leopold stokowski . when i was growing up there was a tendency to disparage the old man as a charlatan . today it is all very different . stokowski is now recognised as the father of modern orchestral standards . he possessed a truly magical gift of extracting a burnished sound from both great and second-rank ensembles . he also loved the process of recording and his gramophone career was a constant quest for better recorded sound . but the greatest pleasure of all for me is his acceptance now as an outstanding conductor of nineteenth- and twentieth-century music , including a lot that was at the cutting edge of contemporary achievement . '' the looney tunes episode '' long-haired hare '' has a satirical homage to stokowski : bugs bunny impersonates him at the hollywood bowl . a statue of the maestro shaking hands with mickey mouse , a recreation of a memorable moment in fantasia , stands in the lobby of disney 's contemporary resort in walt disney world in orlando , florida . notable concert premieres . edgard varèse , ameriques , philadelphia orchestra , philadelphia , 9 april 1926 sergei rachmaninoff , fourth piano concerto , composer as soloist , philadelphia orchestra , 1927 sergei rachmaninoff , rhapsody on a theme of paganini , composer as soloist , philadelphia orchestra , baltimore , 7 november 1934 sergei rachmaninoff , third symphony , philadelphia orchestra , 1936 arnold schoenberg , violin concerto , louis krasner as soloist , philadelphia orchestra , 6 december 1940 arnold schoenberg , piano concerto , eduard steuermann as soloist , nbc symphony orchestra , new york , 16 february 1944 nathaniel shilkret , concerto for trombone , tommy dorsey as soloist , new york city symphony orchestra , 15 february 1945 elie siegmeister , symphony no . 1 , new york philharmonic , new york city , 30 october 1947 alan hovhaness , symphony no . 2 ( hovhaness ) , houston symphony orchestra , houston , texas , 1955 charles ives , fourth symphony , american symphony orchestra , carnegie hall , new york , 26 april 1965 . notable recording premieres . arnold schoenberg , gurre-lieder , philadelphia orchestra , 9 and 11 april 1932 , rca victor jean sibelius , fourth symphony , philadelphia orchestra , 23 april 1932 , rca victor sergei rachmaninoff , rhapsody on a theme of paganini , composer as soloist , philadelphia orchestra , 24 december 1934 , rca victor dmitri shostakovich , sixth symphony , philadelphia orchestra , august 1940 , rca victor ralph vaughan williams , sixth symphony , philharmonic symphony orchestra of new york , 21 february 1949 , columbia . see also . fantasia ( 1940 walt disney animated movie ) , which stars stokowski leading the philadelphia orchestra and performing , among other pieces of music , his transcription of bach 's toccata and fugue in d minor , bwv 565 , as the opening piece of the program list of poles music long-haired hare ( 1949 bugs bunny cartoon ) , which pokes gentle fun at stokowski 's conducting style , including his habit of leading the orchestra without a baton . references . further reading . abram chasins ( 1979 ) leopold stokowski : a profile oliver daniel ( 1982 ) . stokowski : a counterpoint of view herbert kupferberg ( 1969 ) those fabulous philadelphians preben opperby ( 1982 ) leopold stokowski paul robinson ( 1977 ) stokowski : the art of the conductor rollin smith ( 2005 ) stokowski and the organ william ander smith ( 1990 ) the mystery of leopold stokowski leopold stokowski ( 1943 ) music for all of us . external links . leopold stokowski papers , 1916-1994 , kislak center for special collections , rare books and manuscripts , university of pennsylvania leopold stokowski papers - special collections in performing arts at the university of maryland leopold stokowski discography leopold stokowski recordings at the discography of american historical recordings . leopold stokowski cd discography františek sláma ( musician ) archive . more on the history of the czech philharmonic between the 1940s and the 1980s : conductors stokowski/philadelphia orchestra discography and selected ( rca ) victor recordings , 1917–1940