Ehlers–Danlos syndromes

signs and symptoms . this group of disorders affects connective tissues across the body , with symptoms most typically present in the joints , skin , and blood vessels . however , as connective tissue is found throughout the body , eds may result in an array of unexpected impacts with any degree of severity , and the condition is not limited to joints , skin , and blood vessels . effects may range from mildly loose joints to life-threatening cardiovascular complications . due to the diversity of subtypes within the eds family , symptoms may vary widely between individuals diagnosed with eds . musculoskeletal . musculoskeletal symptoms include hyperflexible joints that are unstable and prone to sprain , dislocation , subluxation , and hyperextension . there can be an early onset of advanced osteoarthritis , chronic degenerative joint disease , swan neck deformity of the fingers , and boutonniere deformity of the fingers . tearing of tendons or muscles may occur . deformities of the spine , such as scoliosis ( curvature of the spine ) , kyphosis ( a thoracic hump ) , tethered spinal cord syndrome , craniocervical instability , and occipitoatlantoaxial hypermobility may also be present . there can also be myalgia ( muscle pain ) and arthralgia ( joint pain ) , which may be severe and disabling . trendelenburg 's sign is often seen , which means that when standing on one leg , the pelvis drops on the other side . osgood–schlatter disease , a painful lump on the knee , is common as well . in infants , walking can be delayed ( beyond 18 months of age ) , and bottom-shuffling instead of crawling occurs . file : ehlers-danlos syndrome3.jpg individual with eds showing hypermobile fingers , including the '' swan-neck '' malformation on the 2nd–5th digits , and a hypermobile thumb file : ehlers-danlos thumb.jpg individual with eds displaying hypermobile thumb file : ehlers-danlos syndrome2.jpg individual with eds displaying hypermobile metacarpophalangeal joints file : kyphoscoliosis of the back of person with kyphoscoliosis eds.png kyphoscoliosis of the back of someone with kyphoscoliosis eds file : arthrochalasia eds.png severe joint hypermobility in a girl with eds arthrochalasia type . skin . the weak connective tissue causes abnormal skin . this may present as stretchy or in other types simply be velvet soft . in all types , some increased fragility occurs , but the degree varies depending on the underlying subtype . skin may tear and bruise easily , and may heal with abnormal atrophic scars , and atrophic scars that look like cigarette paper are a sign seen including in those whose skin might appear otherwise normal . in some subtypes , although not in the hypermobile subtype , redundant skin folds occur , especially on the eyelids . redundant skin folds are areas of excess skin lying in folds . other skin symptoms include molluscoid pseudotumors , especially on pressure points , petechiae , subcutaneous spheroids , livedo reticularis , and piezogenic papules are less common . in vascular eds , skin can also be thin and translucent . in dermatosparaxis eds , the skin is extremely fragile and saggy . file : atrophic scar of ehlers danlos syndrome.jpg atrophic scar in a case of eds file : pmc3567970 1752-1947-7-35-1 ( cropped ) . png translucent skin in vascular eds file : ehlers-danlos syndrome4.jpg individual with eds displaying skin hyperelasticity file : piezogenic papules.jpg piezogenic papules on the heel of an individual with hypermobile eds . cardiovascular . thoracic outlet syndrome arterial rupture valvular heart disease , such as mitral valve prolapse , creates an increased risk for infective endocarditis during surgery . this may progress to a life-threatening degree . heart conduction abnormalities have been found in those with hypermobility form of eds . dilation and/or rupture ( aneurysm ) of ascending aorta cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction such as postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome raynaud 's phenomenon varicose veins heart murmur heart conduction abnormalities . other manifestations . hiatus hernia gastroesophageal reflux gastroparesis dysautonomia gorlin sign ( touch tongue to nose ) anal prolapse flat feet tracheobronchomalacia collapsed lung ( spontaneous pneumothorax ) nerve disorders ( carpal tunnel syndrome , acroparesthesia , neuropathy , including small fiber neuropathy ) insensitivity to local anesthetics arnold–chiari malformation platelet aggregation failure ( platelets do not clump together properly ) mast cell disorders ( including mast cell activation syndrome and mastocytosis ) pregnancy complications : increased pain , mild to moderate peripartum bleeding , cervical insufficiency , uterine tearing , or premature rupture of membranes hearing loss may occur in some types eye : nearsightedness , retinal tearing and retinal detachment , keratoconus , blue sclera , dry eye , sjögren syndrome , lens subluxation , angioid streaks , epicanthic fold , strabismus , corneal scarring , brittle cornea syndrome , cataracts , carotid-cavernous fistula , macular degeneration craniocervical instability : caused by trauma ( s ) to the head and neck areas such as concussion and whiplash . ligaments in neck are unable to heal properly , therefore , the neck structure does not have the ability to support the skull , which can then sink into the brain stem blocking the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid , leading to issues related to the autonomic nervous system failing to work properly . celiac disease may be associated with eds . also , it can be misdiagnosed as eds due to common symptoms , including fatigue , pain , gastrointestinal complaints , or cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction . osteoporosis and osteopenia are associated with eds and symptomatic joint hypermobility psychiatric disorders almost half of eds patients have psychiatric disorders citation needed . adhd is common in hypermobility spectrum disorder but not in eds patients . file : pmc2856381 ijd-55-86-g002.png gorlin 's sign in a case of eds file : a case of keratoglobus in a case of brittle cornea syndrome.png a case of keratoglobus in a case of brittle-cornea syndrome because it is often undiagnosed or misdiagnosed in childhood , some instances of eds have been mischaracterized as child abuse . the pain may also be misdiagnosed as a behavior disorder or munchausen biproxy . the pain associated with eds ranges from mild to debilitating . . genetics . every type of eds , except the hypermobile type ( which affects the vast majority of people with eds ) , can be positively tied to specific genetic variation . mutations in these genes can cause eds : collagen primary structure and collagen processing : adamts2 , col1a1 , col1a2 , col3a1 , col5a1 , col5a2 collagen folding and collagen cross-linking : plod1 , fkbp14 structure and function of myomatrix : tnxb , col12a1 glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis : b4galt7 , b3galt6 , chst14 , dse complement pathway : c1r , c1s intracellular processes : slc39a13 , znf469 , prdm5 variations in these genes usually alter the structure , production , or processing of collagen or proteins that interact with collagen . collagen provides structure and strength to connective tissue . a defect in collagen can weaken connective tissue in the skin , bones , blood vessels , and organs , resulting in the features of the disorder . inheritance patterns depend on the specific syndrome . most forms of eds are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern , which means only one of the two copies of the gene in question must be altered to cause a disorder . a few are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern , which means both copies of the gene must be altered for a person to be affected by a disorder . it can also be an individual ( de novo or '' sporadic '' ) mutation . sporadic variations occur without any inheritance . cannabinoids and medical marijuana have shown some efficacy in reducing pain levels . in general , medical intervention is limited to symptomatic therapy . before pregnancy , people with eds should have genetic counseling and familiarize themselves with the risks to their own bodies that pregnancy poses . children with eds should be provided with information about their disorder so they can understand why they should avoid contact sports and other physically stressful activities . children should be taught that demonstrating the unusual positions that they can maintain due to loose joints should not be done , as this may cause early degeneration of the joints . emotional support along with behavioral and psychological therapy can be useful . support groups can be immensely helpful for people dealing with major lifestyle changes and poor health . family members , teachers , and friends should be informed about eds so they can accept and assist the child . . pain management . successfully treating chronic pain in eds needs a multidisciplinary team . the ways to manage pain can be to modify pain management techniques used in the normal population . chronic pain has two types . the first type is the nociceptive type , which is caused by injury sustained to tissues . the second type is neuropathic pain , caused by abnormal signals by the nervous system . in most cases , the pain is an unequal mix of the two . physiotherapy ( exercise rehabilitation ) has evidence of positive effect . it is primarily stabilizing the core of the body and the joints . stretching exercises must be reduced to slow and gentle stretching to reduce the risks of dislocations or subluxations . usable methods may include posture re-education , muscle release , joint mobilization , trunk stabilization , and manual therapy for overworked muscles . cognitive behavioural therapy is used in all chronic pain patients , especially those who have severe , chronic , life-controlling pain that is unresponsive to treatment . it had not been checked for efficiency in clinical trials as to date . the current state of pain management with eds is considered insufficient . . medications . nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( nsaids ) may help if the pain is caused by inflammation . however , long-term use is nsaids is often a risk factor of gastrointestinal , renal , and blood-related side effects . it can worsen symptoms of mast cell activation syndrome , a disease that may be associated with eds . acetaminophen can be used to avoid the bleeding-related side effects of nsaids . opioids have shown efficiency in some eds cases for management of both acute and chronic pain . 112 lidocaine can be applied topically after subluxations and painful gums . it can also be injected into painful areas in the case of musculoskeletal pain . if the pain is neuropathic in origin , tricyclic antidepressants in low doses , anticonvulsants , and selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors can be used . . surgery . the instability of joints , leading to subluxations and joint pain , often requires surgical intervention in people with eds . instability of almost all joints can happen , but appears most often in the lower and upper extremities , with the wrist , fingers , shoulder , knee , hip , and ankle being most common . common surgical procedures are joint debridement , tendon replacements , capsulorrhaphy , and arthroplasty . after surgery , the degree of stabilization , pain reduction , and people 's satisfaction can improve , but surgery does not guarantee an optimal result ; affected peoples and surgeons report being dissatisfied with the results . consensus is that conservative treatment is more effective than surgery , particularly since people have extra risks of surgical complications due to the disease . three basic surgical problems arise due to eds - the strength of the tissues is decreased , which makes the tissue less suitable for surgery ; the fragility of the blood vessels can cause problems during surgery ; and wound healing is often delayed or incomplete . if considering surgical intervention , seeking care from a surgeon with extensive knowledge and experience in treating people with eds and joint hypermobility issues would be prudent . local anesthetics , arterial catheters , and central venous catheters cause a higher risk of haematoma in people with eds . some people with eds also show a resistance to local anaesthetics . resistance to lidocaine and bupivacaine is not uncommon , and mepivacaine tends to work better in people with eds . special recommendations for anesthesia are given for people with eds . detailed recommendations for anesthesia and perioperative care of people with eds should be used to improve safety . surgery in people with eds requires careful tissue handling and a longer immobilization afterward . . prognosis . the outcome for individuals with eds depends on the specific type of eds they have . symptoms vary in severity , even in the same disorder , and the frequency of complications varies . some people have negligible symptoms , while others are severely restricted in daily life . extreme joint instability , chronic musculoskeletal pain , degenerative joint disease , frequent injuries , and spinal deformities may limit mobility . severe spinal deformities may affect breathing . in the case of extreme joint instability , dislocations may result from simple tasks such as rolling over in bed or turning a doorknob . secondary conditions such as autonomic dysfunction or cardiovascular problems , occurring in any type , can affect prognosis and quality of life . severe mobility-related disability is seen more often in heds than in classical eds or vascular eds . although all types of eds are potentially life-threatening , most people have a normal lifespan . those with blood-vessel fragility , though , have a high risk of fatal complications , including spontaneous arterial rupture , which is the most common cause of sudden death . the median life expectancy in the population with vascular eds is 48 years . . complications . . vascular . pseudoaneurysm vascular lesions ( nature is disputed ) due to tears in the lining of the arteries or deterioration of congenitally thin and fragile tissue enlarged arteries . gastrointestinal . a 50 % risk of colonic perforation exists . . obstetric . pregnancy increases the likelihood of uterine rupture . maternal mortality is around 12 % . uterine hemorrhage can occur during the postpartum recovery . . epidemiology . ehlers–danlos syndromes are estimated to occur in about one in 5,000 births worldwide . initially , prevalence estimates ranged from one in 250,000 to 500,000 people , but these estimates were soon found to be too low , as more was studied about the disorders , and medical professionals became more adept at diagnosis . eds may be far more common than the currently accepted estimate due to the wide range of severities with which the disorder presents . the prevalence of the disorders differs dramatically . the most commonly occurring is hypermobile eds , followed by classical eds . the others are very rare . for example , fewer than 10 infants and children with dermatosparaxis eds have been described worldwide . some types of eds are more common in ashkenazi jews . for example , the chance of being a carrier for dermatosparaxis eds is one in 248 in ashkenazi jews , whereas the prevalence of this variation in the general population is one in 2,000 . . society and culture . eds may have contributed to the virtuoso violinist niccolò paganini 's skill , as he was able to play wider fingerings than a typical violinist . many sideshow performers have eds . several of them were billed as the elastic skin man , the india rubber man , and frog boy . they included such well-known individuals ( in their time ) as felix wehrle , james morris , and avery childs . two performers with eds currently hold world records . contortionist daniel browning smith has hypermobile eds and holds the current guinness world record for the most flexible man as of 2018 , while gary '' stretch '' turner ( shown right ) , sideshow performer in the circus of horrors , has held the current guinness world record for the most elastic skin since 1999 , for his ability to stretch the skin on his stomach 6.25 inches . . notable cases . actress cherylee houston has hypermobile eds . she uses a wheelchair and was the first full-time disabled actress on coronation street . drag queen and winner of the 11th season of rupaul 's drag race yvie oddly drag race 's yvie oddly on living with ehlers danos syndrome eric the actor , a regular caller to the howard stern show actress and activist jameela jamil has heds . writer and actress lena dunham '' lena dunham goes on instagram to reveal she has ehlers-danlos syndrome '' australian singer sia youtuber and disability rights activist annie segarra miss america 2020 camille schrier . other species . ehlers–danlos-like syndromes have been shown to be hereditary in himalayan cats , some domestic shorthair cats , and certain breeds of cattle . it is seen as a sporadic condition in domestic dogs . it has a similar treatment and prognosis . animals with the condition should not be bred , as the condition can be inherited . file : ehlers-danlos syndrome 2.jpg eds in a dog file : ehlers-danlos syndrome 1.jpg same dog with eds file : ehlers-danlos syndrome 3.jpg eds in same dog showing an atrophic scar degenerative suspensory ligament desmitis is a similar condition seen in many breeds of horses . it was originally notated in the peruvian paso and thought to be a condition of overwork and older age , but it is being recognized in all age groups and all activity levels . it has been noted in newborn foals . see also . ehlers-danlos society hypermobility spectrum disorder