Agudath Israel of America

functions . agudah serves as a leadership and policy umbrella organization for haredi jews in the united states representing the vast majority of members of the yeshiva world , sometimes known by the old label of misnagdim , as well as a number of hasidic groups . however , not all hasidic groups are affiliated with agudath israel . for example , the hasidic group satmar , which is vehemently anti-zionism , dislikes agudah 's relatively moderate stance towards the state of israel . jonathan rosenblum , '' reb elimelech gavriel ( mike ) tress '' , in nora roberts , daring to dream , feldheim publishers , 2006 . '' even the satmar rebbe , a fierce ideological opponent of agudath israel , once told mike 's son mendel 'if there were nine more people in the world like your father , moshiach would come . ' '' agudah has ideological connections with both the agudat israel and with degel hatorah , two israeli haredi political parties that have representation in the knesset ( israel 's parliament ) . in israel , degel and agudah are in a political coalition called united torah judaism ( utj ) . '' list made up of the ultra-orthodox parties agudat israel and degel hatorah . united torah judaism ( utj ) promotes the interests of the haredi community . '' . history . the original agudath israel movement was established '' four might pillars '' - '' german orthodoxy . the great yeshivoth of lithuania . the vibrant , predominantly hasidic polish jewry ; and a branch in the land of israel . '' in europe in 1912 by some of the most famous orthodox rabbis of the time , including rabbi yisrael meir kagan ( the chafetz chaim ) , rabbi chaim ozer grodzinski of vilna , the izhbitza – radzin ( hasidic dynasty ) , the avraham mordechai alter , and the chortkover rebbe . it grew during the 1920s and 1930s to be the political , '' agudath israel . in time it became a political party represented in the sejm ( polish parliament ) . '' '' . between the wars , none was more effective than the agudath israel . in the polish government and was represented in the sejm ( polish parliament ) . '' '' agudas yisroel succeeded in electing deputies to the polish sejm . '' communal , and cultural voice of those orthodox jews who were not part of zionism 's orthodox jewish mizrachi party . for more information , see world agudath israel rabbi eliezer silver , an eastern european-trained rabbi , established the first office of agudath israel in america during the 1930s , organizing its first conference in 1939 . some of the early rabbinic leaders of the organization included mordechai shlomo friedman , shlomo heiman , rabbi leo jung , rabbi herbert goldstein , rabbi joshua baumel and joseph b . soloveitchik . after the holocaust , some prominent rabbis who made their home in america established a moetzes ( '' supreme council '' ) known as the moetzes gedolei hatorah , and the movement began to grow rapidly with the rise of the yeshiva-based and hasidic orthodox communities . mike tress led the expansion of the movement during the early 1940s as its chief lay leader until his death in 1967 . his cousin rabbi moshe sherer then took the reins as president '' aided the right wing of orthodox judaism by helping build the agudath israel of america organization from a small group into an influential force . '' and the organization flourished further in size and accomplishments . after his passing in may 1998 , he was succeeded by rabbi shmuel bloom , as executive vice president . in 2008 rabbi chaim dovid zwiebel , having served agudah as general counsel and director of government affairs , took over as executive vice-president . '' rabbi chaim david zwiebel has been the executive vice president of agudath israel since 2008 . prior to that , he worked for 30 years at a law firm . '' in 2016 , his salary was 220,000 . in april 2020 agudath israel of america head rabbi yaakov perlow , the novominsker rebbe , 89 years old , died after contracting covid-19 , one month after he urged american orthodox jews to follow social distancing and other precautionary guidelines in response to the coronavirus outbreak , saying : '' we can not behave the way we did last week or two weeks ago . we 're told that the halakha ( jewish law ) is that we must listen to doctors , whether it 's about a sick person or yom kippur '' . . structure . agudah 's policies and leadership are directed by its moetzes gedolei hatorah ( council of torah sages ) , composed primarily of rosh yeshivas ( the chief spiritual and scholarly authority in a yeshiva ) and hasidic rebbes ( who head hasidic dynasties and organizations ) . the moetzes sets all major policies and guides the organization according to its precepts of daas torah , generally translated as torah knowledge/direction . avi shafran , '' what da'at torah really means '' , new york jewish week . reprinted at rabbi yaakov perlow ( recently deceased ) , who was the novominsker rebbe and a member of the moetzes , was appointed as the rosh agudat yisrael ( '' head of agudath israel '' ) . the executive staff includes reb shia markowitz as ceo , rabbi chaim dovid zwiebel as the executive vice president , and rabbi labish becker as the executive director . there are several agudah-affiliated synagogues across the united states and canada . . positions . the agudah takes positions on many political , religious , and social issues , primarily guided by its moetzes gedolei hatorah . it uses these stances to advise its members , advocate for its constituency in the halls of government , and to file amicus curiae on behalf of the haredi orthodox jewish community in the united states . conservative , reform , and modern orthodox judaism . in 1956 , for example , the moetzes issued a written ruling forbidding orthodox rabbis to join with any reform or conservative rabbis in rabbinical communal professional organizations that then united the various branches of america 's jews , such as the synagogue council of america . this position was not endorsed by the modern orthodox . rabbi joseph soloveitchik of yeshiva university had initially aligned himself with agudah , but later established his independent views on these matters and a host of other issues , such as attitudes towards college education and attitudes towards the secular-led israeli governments . rabbi soloveitchik believed it important to nurture the more modern orthodox rabbinical council of america ( rca ) . however , at times , some of the more traditionalist rabbis at yeshiva university aligned themselves with agudah 's positions . women . in 2015 and 2017 , agudah denounced moves to ordain women . it went even further , declaring yeshivat maharat , open orthodoxy , yeshivat chovevei torah , and other affiliated entities to be similar to other dissident movements throughout jewish history in having rejected basic tenets of judaism . avi shafran , director of public affairs , wrote '' . women . assuming positions of public leadership is . antithetical to the concept of tzniut ( modesty ) . '' agudah forbade ordained orthodox female clergy from being hired to lead congregations . dr . noam stadlan , a board member of the jewish orthodox feminist alliance , wrote : '' on this issue , the agudah is irrelevant to modern orthodoxy in the same way satmar or neturei karta views are irrelevant on issues of zionism . '' . abortion . in 2019 , commenting on abortion , agudath israel said '' jewish tradition teaches that a human fetus has status and dignity , and that abortion is prohibited in the vast majority of pregnancies , '' with certain exceptions in which it is permitted and in others where it is required . other orthodox new york rabbis offered opposing positions . . vaccination . also in 2019 , agudath vaccine hesitancy that would have ended a policy allowing new jersey parents to not immunize their children—because of religious beliefs , but to still enroll them in school . the bill included an exemption for private schools . in the 2018-19 school year religious exemptions in new jersey had grown to 2.6 % . doctors and public health experts had said the bill was urgently needed to prevent the level of measles outbreak that spread across the region in 2018 ( the largest outbreak in three decades in the area ) , with most cases of measles being orthodox jews , and emphasized that there is overwhelming scientific consensus that vaccination safety . . zionism . while agudath does not consider itself zionist , it is generally supportive of the state of israel insofar as agudath supports participation in its politics and the development of religious life , as well as the security of its population . it became more involved after the israeli state was established in 1948 . agudah takes stances on issues affecting the haredi sector in israel ; in contradistinction to the more stridently anti-zionist haredi communal organizations . . activities . political activity . agudah also has active branches in 27 states , including illinois , michigan , ohio , maryland , minnesota , texas , florida , california , and new jersey , where they lobby the judicial and legislative branches of these state and local governments on any issue it deems important morally or religiously or important to its constituency ( for example , abortion , physician-assisted suicide , same-sex marriage , school vouchers/school choice ) . agudath israel 's federal activities are coordinated by rabbi abba cohen , the director and counsel of the organization 's washington office . agudah was the first orthodox jewish group to open a washington office , in 1988 , and maintains ongoing relations with the white house and executive agencies , as well as with the u.s . congress , on various domestic and foreign issues . '' rabbi abba cohen , agudath israel 's washington director '' - '' after 28 years in washington , abba cohen of agudath israel of america . '' agudath israel world organization also has a representative at the united nations . agudah files amicus curiae in cases at all levels of the judiciary , often signing on as one of the organization signatories to a brief authored by nat lewin or the national jewish commission on law and public affairs . with its head office in manhattan , and the bulk of its members living in the new york-new jersey area , the agudah monitors and intercedes on behalf of causes important to it in the politics of new york city , its five boroughs , and in the state government of new york state . fingerprinting controversy . official spokesman '' rabbi avi shafran . currently serves as the organization 's spokesperson and media liaison . '' '' comments by avi shafran , a spokesman for the orthodox group agudath israel of america . '' rabbi avi shafran denied claims by the jewish week that aguda '' is opposed to both the mandated reporting and finger printing , and background check legislation '' then under consideration , and cited a memorandum from 2 years prior dated june 20 , 2006 expressing strong support for the legislation . the difference is aguda 's 2006 support was for legislation that passed in 2007 permitting but not mandating fingerprinting/background checking . , . youth services . agudah maintains a network of summer youth camps ( including camp agudah , machane ephraim , camp bnos , camp chayl miriam , and camp bnoseinu in the catskills in new york , as well as camps in the midwest , california , and toronto , canada ) . sometimes referred to as '' pirchei / zeirei '' , this was part of the work by mike tress . '' jep '' ( jewish education program ) is known for its release hour work , and was identified by harav yaakov perlow as '' the jep operation of zeirei agudath israel '' in a 1977 interview , in which he spoke about '' to take off a seder from yeshiva and go out and speak at a release hour at a public school . '' . social services . agudah has a number of social service branches that cater to the elderly , poor , or disabled . it has a job training program called cope , a job placement division , and a housing program . the agudah is responsible for the founding of other national institutions and projects , including the beis yaakov girls ' school system , and the national daf yomi commission . communications . agudah advocates its positions in several ways : publication of an e-newsletter , weekly window publication of a general-interest monthly magazine , the jewish observer , from 1963 ( no longer published ) maintains full-time offices in washington , dc , and the us west coast , midwest , and south activism by lobbying and submitting amicus curiae organizes prominent lay-person missions to government agencies rabbi avi shafran , the official spokesman of agudah , responds to media articles and statements which concern the haredi orthodox community ; shafran also organizes members to do the same conveys its positions in the jewish media , particularly through privately owned weekly jewish newspapers in english called '' hamodia '' and '' yated neeman '' ( distinct from the israeli english-language newspaper carrying the same name ) , which convey news and views from the haredi orthodox point of view publication of articles and press releases on its website . see also . agudat israel ( of israel ) degel hatorah orthodox judaism haredi judaism schisms among the jews hasidim and mitnagdim world agudath israel . references . external links . agudath israel of america official website national public policy of agudah , 1999 professional survey of agudah dei'ah vedibur , weekly web edition of yated neeman newspaper the jewish observer , agudah 's magazine , on the web the lefkowitz leadership initiative , agudah 's website for younger people