David Low (cartoonist)

biography . early life . the son of chemist david brown low and jane caroline flanagan , david low was born in dunedin on 7 april 1891 , and attended primary school there . his family later moved to christchurch , where low briefly attended christchurch boys ' high school . however following the death of his eldest brother , low was taken out of school , as his parents believed that he had been weakened by over studying . low 's first cartoon was published in 1902 , when he was 11 years old , a three-picture strip in the british comic big budget . . early career . low began his career as a professional cartoonist with the canterbury times in 1910 . in 1911 he moved to sydney , australia to join the bulletin . during his employment at the bulletin , low became well known for a 1916 cartoon satirising billy hughes , then the prime minister of australia , entitled the imperial conference . after that success , low published many cartoons depicting hughes ' forceful and eccentric personality . hughes was not impressed and apparently called low a '' bastard '' to his face . a collection of low 's cartoons of hughes entitled the billy book , which he published in 1918 , brought low to the notice of henry cadbury , part-owner of the london star . in 1919 cadbury offered low a job with the star , which low promptly accepted . move to england . in england , low worked initially at the london star from 1919 to 1927 . the london star sympathised with his own moderately left-wing views . in 1927 , he accepted an invitation from max aitken to join the conservative evening standard on the strict understanding that there would be no editorial interference with his output . low produced numerous cartoons about the austrian civil war , the second italo-ethiopian war , the 1936 summer olympics , the spanish civil war , and other events of the interwar period . he also worked with horace thorogood to produce illustrated whimsical articles on the london scene , under the byline '' low & terry '' . john gunther called low '' the greatest caricaturist in the world '' . in 1937 , nazi propaganda minister joseph goebbels told british foreign secretary lord halifax that british political cartoons , particularly those of low 's , were damaging anglo-german relations . in 1937 low had produced an occasional strip about '' hit and muss '' ( hitler and mussolini ) , but after germany made official complaints he substituted a composite dictator , '' muzzler '' . oxford dictionary of national biography after the war , low is said to have found his name in the black book , the list of those the nazis planned to arrest in the aftermath of an operation sea lion . exhibition celebrates the 20th century 's greatest cartoonist , bbc worldwide press releases . retrieved on 14 october 2008 . . world war ii . his works are featured in many british history textbooks . on 1 september , the germans invaded poland from the west and , on 17 september , the soviets invaded from the east . low depicted these events in one of his most famous cartoons , rendezvous , first published in the evening standard on 20 september 1939 . it satirises the cynicism which lay at the heart of the molotov–ribbentrop pact , showing hitler and soviet dictator joseph stalin bowing politely across the dead body of poland , but nevertheless greeting each other respectively as '' the scum of the earth , i believe ? '' and '' the bloody assassin of the workers , i presume ? '' . the words are based on those supposedly used by henry morton stanley at his meeting with david livingstone in 1871 , and the dictators are shown raising their hats to one another in greeting similarly to the two explorers in artistic reconstructions of that earlier meeting . the harmony boys of 2 may 1940 depicts hitler , stalin , italian dictator benito mussolini , and spanish dictator francisco franco '' harmonizing '' and getting along quite well . when this cartoon was published , the operation barbarossa was still more than a year in the future . his satirical works met much criticism in the british public eye . the british press called him a '' war monger , '' and many citizens felt disdain for his depictions of appeasement . remainder of career . low remained in the united kingdom for the rest of his career . he left the evening standard in 1950 . that same year , he moved to the daily herald and stayed there until 1953 . finally , low moved to the the guardian and was there from 1953 . low received a knighthood in the 1962 birthday honours and died at his home in london on 19 september 1963 . his obituary in the guardian described him as '' the dominant cartoonist of the western world '' . a blue plaque commemorates low at 33 melbury court , kensington . . personal life . low married madeline grieve kenning of auckland on 7 june 1920 in st . paul 's church , covent garden ; they lived for many years in golders green , north london . the couple had two daughters : in 1939 , time described low 's breakfast as '' a political meeting , with the cartoonist , his wife , and his two young daughters threshing out the news . '' his wife and daughters survived him . . collections . united kingdom british cartoon archive , university of kent political cartoon gallery 16 lower richmond road , london sw15 1jp collection of low 's original cartoons from the evening standard and the manchester guardian , as well as original caricatures from his new statesman series . australia national library of australia : the collection holds 57 original drawings and 22 photo-lithographs individually catalogued with a number digitised ( including drawings relating to the billy book ) ; the newspapers collection holds many thousands of low 's cartoons , although none are digitised at present . selected works . low 's annual ( 1908 ) the billy book ( 1918 ) sketches by low ( 1926 ) lions and lambs ( 1928 ) the autocracy of mr . parham by h.g . wells ( 1930 ) , illustrator ; german edition , der diktator ( p . & nbsp ; zsolnay , 1931 ) low 's russian sketchbook ( 1932 ) low & terry ( 1934 ) with horace thorogood the modern rake 's progress ( 1934 ) with rebecca west low again ( 1938 ) a cartoon history of our times ( 1939 ) europe since versailles ( 1940 ) all behind you ( 1940 ) europe at war ( 1941 ) years of wrath : a cartoon history 1932–45 ( 1949 ) low visibility : a cartoon history 1945–53 ( 1953 ) autobiography ( m . joseph , 1956 ) , 387 pp . , the fearful fifties : a history of the decade ( 1960 ) low and the dictators ( 2009 ) by timothy s . benson david low censored ( 2019 ) by timothy s . benson political cartoon society . references . external links . online biography with selected cartoons political cartoons by david low rbkc virtual museum – david low 's blue plaque the british cartoon archive david low papers . general collection , beinecke rare book and manuscript library .