Martie Maguire

early life . martha elenor erwin , nicknamed martie , was born october 12 , 1969 , in york , pennsylvania . encouraged by her parents & ndash ; educators at private schools & ndash ; erwin began playing violin at age five , and by age 12 , started to learn to play '' fiddle style '' after receiving a birthday gift of fiddle lessons . she also was active in her school orchestra . her sister emily shared her love and interest in music , and displayed early talent herself . the two sisters were provided musical instruction on several instruments , and their talent for vocal harmony continued to be nurtured . although erwin became famous for her harmony and mastery of the fiddle , she also plays a variety of strings that include the viola , guitar , mandolin , and double bass . leggett , steve all-music guide writer on msn ( retrieved march 9 , 2008 ) erwin composes songs and arranges the use of stringed instruments for concert and recording performances . early career . by 1983 , erwin was touring with her sister emily and school friends siblings troy and sharon gilchrist . the sisters showed an '' almost obsessive '' interest in busking at small venues and attending bluegrass festivals . frost , jane walnut valley festival in winfield , ks , early 1980s the all-inclusive dixie chicks page the four students formed the teenage bluegrass group '' blue night express '' , playing together for five years , from 1984–1989 , gilchrist , sharon faraway hills retrieved 12 february , 2008 while still attending private greenhill school . '' we 'd drive down to the west end of dallas and open our cases , and that was our job '' , erwin said of it in a later interview to 60 minutes ii correspondent dan rather . '' that 's how we made money in high school . '' rather , dan 60 minutes ii dixie chicks not whistling dixie the trio has sold 17 million cds september 6 , 2002 retrieved june 26 , 2008 also while in high school erwin performed at six flags over texas in arlington , tx , in a strolling duo with troy gilchrist for a summer . in 1987 , erwin was awarded second place for the fiddle in the national fiddle championships held yearly in winfield , kansas . upon graduation from high school , with emily still in high school , she spent a year attending college at southwestern university in georgetown , texas , from 1988–1989 . she performed in the school orchestra there and again competed in the national fiddle championships at the walnut valley festival , in winfield , earning third place that year . in the 90s she played occasionally with the slo-core band , bedhead . . the chicks . in 1989 , erwin and strayer joined guitarist robin lynn macy and laura lynch on double bass in the dixie chicks , playing what was at the time predominantly bluegrass music and a mix of country standards . originally listed as martha , and then martie erwin , erwin played fiddle , mandolin , viola and harmony with strayer on backing vocals . erwin had begun writing and recording songs on their debut independent album , thank heavens for dale evans , and in 2001 , one song co-written with laura lynch called '' pink toenails '' resurfaced . the song was featured in the film , do n't say a word , with skye mccole bartusiak performing the song . ( retrieved march 22 , 2008 ) yahoo movie review for do n't say a word when their second album had a more polished sound , erwin commented , '' i hope our fans wo n't be disappointed in the little ol ' cowgirl ; it 's got drums on every track ; it 's no longer bluegrass , but we have to make a living and you ca n't do that playing bluegrass . '' clark , renee can the dixie chicks make it in the big time ? local heroes ( transcribed from ) dallas life magazine , dallas morning news , march 1 , 1992 ( retrieved january 23 , 2008 ) two albums later , after natalie maines assumed the position of vocalist , the band was revitalized . erwin said of their music , '' it 's very rootsy , but then natalie comes in with a rock and blues influence . that gave emily and i a chance to branch out , because we loved those kinds of music but felt limited by our instruments . '' erwin co-wrote the song , '' cowboy take me away '' on the chicks sophomore studio album fly for her sister emily . it was a tribute to emily 's courtship with country music writer/singer charlie robison . erwin was singled out by bmi in 2000 , and awarded songwriter of the year for writing and/or co-writing '' cowboy take me away '' , '' ready to run '' and '' you were mine '' . '' you were mine '' was co-written by the sisters about their parents ' divorce . hillman , chris entertainment weekly ( retrieved april 21 , 2008 ) in 1999 , the dixie chicks performed two songs , recording a cover of the song , '' you ca n't hurry love '' as well as erwin 's '' ready to run '' for the julia roberts/ richard gere film runaway bride . in 2003 , erwin was nominated for a tony award for co-composing the film score to urban cowboy ; the musical used her '' cowboy take me away '' . after the band achieved massive commercial success with its first sony studio two albums with maines , they struggled with their record company over artistic direction on the third . erwin commented , '' i do n't think any of us ever trusted nashville . when you 're in that town you know everybody is talking about everybody else . everybody is wishing for the other guy to fail . '' martie maguire , to the los angeles times , 5/21/06 . flippo , chet ( may 25 , 2006 ) cmt news nashville skyline : dixie chicks , dixie chicks , dixie chicks although erwin and strayer often appear quiet and demure compared to their animated bandmate natalie maines , the trio have stood united on controversial subjects since they banded together to play in 1995 , even when their opinions have had the potential to serve them more harm than good . in 2006 , erwin said , '' i 'd rather have a smaller following of really cool people who get it , who will grow with us as we grow and are fans for life , than people that have us in their five-disc changer with reba mcentire and toby keith . we do n't want those kinds of fans . they limit what you can do . '' . court yard hounds . with natalie maines taking a break from music , erwin was working on a solo fiddle album ; however , it was announced in january 2010 that she and sister emily strayer have formed a side project called the court yard hounds , with strayer on lead vocals . the band made their live debut in march at south by southwest with an album released in may 2010 . . personal life . martie married pharmaceutical representative ted seidel on june 17 , 1995 , and changed her last name to seidel . she also was stepmother to his son , carter . however , her marriage did not last , and she and ted seidel were divorced in november 1999 . at bandmate natalie maines ' sister kim 's wedding , martie met gareth maguire , a roman catholic teacher and actor from carnlough , northern ireland . the couple became engaged in june 2001 and married on august 10 , 2001 , in a civil ceremony in hawaii ; as explained at one of their concerts , the dixie chicks ' song '' white trash wedding '' is based on martie 's relationship with gareth . later they had a catholic '' blessing '' ceremony in the groom 's hometown , carnlough in county antrim , northern ireland , on march 9 , 2002 , for all the guests that were not able to attend the first wedding . martie said of the ceremony that the catholic church would not permit a wedding service due to her prior divorce . erwin said that there were many '' special '' people that they had wanted to include , but that they just could not wait to marry . cmt online cmt online ( retrieved 25 september , 2005 ) another reason for the rush was gareth 's need to keep flying back and forth between the united states and ireland because of visa considerations . minchin iii , james r . and lieberman , ellen instyle magazine ; february 2003 , vol . 10 issue 2 , pg . 244 retrieved september 25 , 2005 after her second marriage , martie changed her name to that of her new husband , which is why in her musical career she has had the surnames of erwin , seidel , and maguire . they had three daughters together : fraternal twins eva ruth and kathleen 'katie ' emilie were born april 27 , 2004 . katie was named after gareth 's late sister , kathleen . martie maguire 's twin daughters and natalie maines ' sons ( retrieved june 28 , 2012 ) third daughter harper rosie maguire was born july 25 , 2008 . the couple divorced in 2013 . on tour again today , but what do they look like now ? erwin has been frank about using in vitro fertilization to conceive their daughters . in an interview in conceive , she said , '' all my paperwork said 'unspecified origin . ' we spent three years of active trying before we went to ivf . first i went on clomid . then i had some dye tests and found i had a collapsed tube , so i had laparoscopic surgery ; the tube was n't blocked , just spasming . '' after three attempts at intrauterine insemination , she said , she and her husband did n't think it was worth continuing in that manner , and switched to ivf . in august 2007 , maguire began ivf again , resulting in their third daughter harper . regarding the number of children the dixie chicks had produced in the past seven years , ( maines had two ; strayer had four in addition to erwin 's twins and newborn ) erwin told people in 2008 , '' we 'll have to move over and let the little chicks take over ! we 've got a new band ! '' people magazine ( accessed january 28 , 2008 ) dixie chick martie maguire is expecting erwin and strayer co-wrote a song , '' so hard '' , about their own personal experiences with infertility and their need to rely on other methods to conceive . they speak out about the difficulties they faced , but also their good fortune ; both having options that for many women are financially prohibitive . mentioning the stigma attached to ivf , erwin said , '' i think we feel a responsibility to break down some barriers . it 's much more of a common problem than people realize . '' frontpage publicity dixie chicks website a final concern erwin mentioned was the question of what to do with all the unused frozen embryos . now that i have children , i see those embryos as possible children . so i have to think about what my options are if there are leftovers again . i could keep them in storage , and maybe they will help my children some day . or i can try to donate them to stem cell research . i do n't think i could give them to another family . i would always worry : what if it 's an abusive family ? what if they do n't get enough love ? natalie maines has said she and erwin learned transcendental meditation in the mid-1990s . . awards . . discography . erwin played fiddle on the song , '' somewhere down the road '' on the eponymous album , deryl dodd by deryl dodd on sony . erwin also played fiddle on the flatlanders ' adaptation of woody guthrie 's '' sowing on the mountain '' on their 2009 album hills and valleys . as part of the court yard hounds , erwin played fiddle and provided harmony vocals on the song '' she sang hymns out of tune '' on the cass county album by don henley . references . external links . dixie chicks ( official site ) court yard hounds ( official site )