Suicidal Tendencies

first comeback ( 1987–1988 ) . with the line-up of muir , louiche mayorga , george , and herrera , the band released their second album , join the army , in 1987 . the album was met with a mixed reaction from long-time fans due to its considerably more metal-oriented sound ( an element brought to the table by rocky george ) , as they were expecting another punk album . nonetheless , join the army featured classic tracks such as the title track , '' war inside my head '' and '' possessed to skate '' ( which featured a video , originally intended for an unsuccessful skateboard movie , which featured timothy leary ) . shortly afterwards , the band made some major changes . rocky george 's metal influences ( reflected in his motörhead-esque songwriting contributions to join the army ) began in turn influencing muir , who replaced keven guercio as singer for mike clark 's speed metal band no mercy prior to this . muir hired no mercy 's clark as a rhythm guitarist for suicidal . clark helped handle much of the band 's songwriting , which progressed into a more thrash oriented musical direction . he fired mayorga , who had been trying to keep the band in punk territory , and was replaced briefly by no mercy bassist ric clayton , who was replaced by bob heathcote . shortly after the band was picked up by anthrax producer mark dodson and signed to the columbia subsidiary epic records . the stylistic changes and signing to a major label outraged a few long-time fans , but suicidal tendencies began to pick up more fans from the heavy metal community as well . the band 's first release with epic was how will i laugh tomorrow when i ca n't even smile today , released in 1988 . the album was mostly stripped of the band 's punk and hardcore roots , instead featuring a thrash-oriented sound with more complex song structures and a greater emphasis on instrumental skill than the band had ever shown previously . however , the album was considerably more melodic than most thrash metal albums , perhaps a lasting influence of the band 's punk past . singles and music videos were released for '' trip at the brain '' and the title track , which were successful and helped expand the bands audience . that same year the band was thanked by country musician hank williams jr . at the 1988 cma awards . williams ' son was apparently a big fan of suicidal tendencies . robert trujillo-era and second hiatus ( 1989–1996 ) . in early 1989 , bassist bob heathcote ( who at the time was a father of one child ) left the band to support his family and was replaced by robert trujillo , who joined suicidal tendencies right before their summer european tour with anthrax . later that year , suicidal tendencies released their fourth album ( also referred to as a compilation of two eps ) , controlled by hatred/feel like shit.déjà vu . although trujillo appeared in the videos that promoted the album , he was not a member of the band at the time of its recording ; bass duties were reportedly by handled by rocky george and mike clark . controlled by hatred . featured two versions of '' how will i laugh tomorrow '' : the video version ( the original song cut down for radio/video airplay ) and the '' heavy emotion '' version ( a semi-unplugged , more mellow version of the song ) . the rest of the songs on the album came from previously released eps , except '' just another love song '' and '' feel like shit.deja vu '' , with the remaining songs being no mercy and los cycos covers . the album featured the hit '' waking the dead '' , which at seven minutes was one of the most progressive tracks the band had released to date . controlled by hatred . eventually went gold , the first of three suicidal albums to do so . in 1990 suicidal tendencies released the album that many fans consider to be their masterpiece , and the album that almost broke them into the rock mainstream , lights.camera.revolution ! . this album featured the same line-up as controlled by hatred . , with trujillo on bass guitar . the songs were much more complex than on any other suicidal album , some songs bordering on progressive metal , but also showed a new influence courtesy of trujillo , funk . to accompany the album , suicidal tendencies released the home video lights.camera.suicidal . the album was a hit , and featured the singles '' you ca n't bring me down '' , '' send me your money '' , and the melodic thrash song '' alone '' . all three singles were successful and received music videos ( especially '' you ca n't bring me down '' ) , and helped lights.camera.revolution ! also reach gold status . the band gained a heavy audience in the thrash metal community despite being commonly accused of '' selling out '' in the hardcore circle . their first show in los angeles in years , as well as headlining major u.s . tours ( with a variety of acts such as pantera , exodus , armored saint , jane 's addiction , 24-7 spyz , white zombie and leeway ) , their appearance on the european clash of the titans tour ( with megadeth , slayer and testament ) and supporting queensrÿche on their empire tour , helped expand their popularity . muir eventually became interested in the funk music that trujillo had brought to the table of suicidal tendencies 's influences . as a result , the two formed a funk metal side project in the vein of early red hot chili peppers called infectious grooves . also recruiting ex-jane 's addiction drummer stephen perkins and excel guitarist adam siegel , infectious grooves released their debut , the plague that makes your booty move.it 's the infectious grooves , which featured ozzy osbourne singing the line '' therapy '' in the song '' therapy '' in 1991 . this helped expand suicidal tendencies ' fan base into a wider audience that included members of the alternative rock community ( funk-metal was a popular alternative-metal style at the time ) . herrera left suicidal tendencies in 1991 due to personal differences . the rest of the band continued as an incomplete four-piece for about a year , drafting now-famous drummer josh freese to record their new album which would become art of rebellion , released in 1992 . the album was very different from anything suicidal tendencies had done before , but it was actually their most melodic , accessible album to date . it lessened the bands thrash influences , instead focusing on a unique , almost alternative metal sound , with more emphasis on funk and progressive rock , as well as traditional metal guitars . although different , the album was greeted warmly by most fans and many critics . the album was also the band 's most commercially successful album . the first single , '' asleep at the wheel '' , did moderately well , but was followed by two smash hits . the metal ballad '' nobody hears '' and the crossover hit '' i 'll hate you better '' , both of which managed to chart on the modern rock radio billboards . the album debuted on number 52 on the billboard top 100 charts ( the band 's highest charting album ) and has gone gold . the band began performing large arena/stadium shows , sharing the stage with such mainstream rock staples as metallica , megadeth , kiss , guns n ' roses , queensrÿche , danzig , alice in chains , faith no more and white zombie , where they earned a wide reputation as an excellent live act . by the end of the year suicidal tendencies had found a permanent replacement for herrera , former white lion and y & t drummer jimmy degrasso . now at their commercial peak , suicidal tendencies released still cyco after all these years in 1993 . the album was a re-recording of suicidal tendencies 's self-titled debut album with three additional songs ( two re-recordings of join the army tracks , and the b-side to the 1990 single '' send me your money '' ) . it featured singles for the new versions of '' institutionalized '' and '' i saw your mommy '' , which managed to do well , as did the album . that same year also saw the release of another infectious grooves album , sarsippius ' ark , which included new tracks as well as demo recordings of old songs , and live tracks . however , disturbed by their recent commercial success and fame , and fear that the band was no longer relevant in the underground , suicidal tendencies released suicidal for life in 1994 . the album was intended by the band to be the least accessible album they had released , starting out by having four consecutive songs with the word '' fuck '' in the title , and switching to a more aggressive style than on their previous studio album . suicidal for life was widely considered to be a disappointing album by critics , many of which claimed muir had '' dumbed down '' his lyrical approach from previous albums . fans also had a generally mixed reaction , although their reaction was more favorable than critics ' . muir 's strategy worked , however . the album did not sell nearly as well as the past four suicidal tendencies records ( although it did sell decently on the band 's reputation alone ) and the only major single , '' love vs . loneliness '' , featured a gloomy music video that hurt the song 's airplay . it was also around this time the band , whose contract with epic records had expired , began to fall apart , and folded after a tour in 1995 . muir and trujillo continued infectious grooves , releasing groove family cyco later that year ( this album was released before suicidal tendencies split ) , but they eventually folded as well , with trujillo joining ozzy osbourne 's band ( and later black label society and metallica ) and muir performing as cyco miko , releasing lost my brain ! ( once again ) . rocky george formed the group samsara and played in 40 cycle hum and cro-mags after suicidal tendencies 's breakup , eventually joining fishbone . mike clark joined a band called creeper , while jimmy degrasso joined dave mustaine 's side project md.45 , and eventually replaced nick menza in megadeth , who recruited guitarist anthony gallo ( suicidal tendencies , los cycos ) for his solo record entitled life after deth . a greatest hits compilation , prime cuts , was released in 1997 , apparently against the band 's will . second comeback ( 1996–2001 ) . suicidal tendencies returned in 1996 . however , rocky george , robert trujillo , and jimmy degrasso were unable to rejoin as they were busy with other projects . muir and clark brought in new lead guitarist dean pleasants ( formerly of infectious grooves ) , new bassist josh paul and new drummer brooks wackerman ( formerly of bad4good , infectious grooves and bad religion , now with avenged sevenfold ) to replace them . the band released their first new material in almost half a decade , the six the hard way ep in 1998 , which also included two live tracks . released on suicidal records , this ep saw the band switching back to their original punk metal and skatepunk style ( with songs originally recorded by cyco miko covered ) . this , along with the absence of george and trujillo , upset many of the bands metal-era fans , but fans of the older punk suicidal tendencies warmly welcomed the new style . the band stuck to a similar formula for freedumb , released in 1999 . despite generally bad reviews from critics ( who claimed that the band had '' dumbed themselves down '' not only lyrically , but musically as well ) it was considered by fans of the band as their '' comeback album '' , with the title track , '' cyco vision '' and '' we are a family '' becoming fan favorites ( although no singles from the album were released ) . the following year suicidal tendencies released free your soul and save my mind . unlike its predecessor , which was more straightforward hardcore , this album saw the band covering most of the styles they had dabbled with in the past . some songs were punk , but many of them were also thrash-oriented , and this was by far suicidal tendencies 's funkiest album yet . fans and critics greeted the album warmly , and a new single , '' pop song '' , was released . infectious grooves released their fourth and comeback album mas borracho in 2000 , followed by muir 's second solo album as cyco miko , schizophrenic born again problem child , in 2001 . suicidal tendencies featured a new song on the friends & family , vol . 2 compilation in 2001 , but after then the band fell silent again . third hiatus , year of the cycos and no mercy fool ! /the suicidal family ( 2002–2012 ) . wackerman ( who had just joined bad religion ) had left suicidal tendencies by 2001 while the band was on tour . greg saenz joined the band before ron bruner took over drum duties and paul also left by the following year but was replaced by his brother steve . the band toured during 2003 but were forced take another hiatus in 2004 due to mike muir requiring surgery for a back injury . while the band failed to release an album with material , independently or otherwise , suicidal tendencies have continued to tour consistently since 2005 . on october 29 of that year their live performance at the grand olympic auditorium in los angeles was filmed . suicidal tendencies secured a spot in the metal/punk-rock soundwave festival in australia in february and march 2007 , taking in brisbane , sydney and perth . they performed at the artefact festival in france on april 29 , 2007 , and performed in istanbul , turkey on may 29 . they also headlined the tuborg stage at the download festival , held at donington park , uk on friday june 8 , 2007 , and closed select shows for the sounds of the underground tour in san jose , california on august 3 , irvine , california on august 4 , and mesa , arizona on august 5 . on august 1 , 2008 , suicidal tendencies headlined the porão do rock festival in brasília in front of 15,000 people . by this stage eric moore had replaced dave hidalgo on drums . during the fall of 2008 , the band toured with whole wheat bread , madball , terror , and death by stereo , opening select dates . during this tour year of the cycos – a compilation album featuring suicidal tendencies , infectious grooves , cyco miko and no mercy – was available for the first time for purchase at the concerts or from their official website . from the album , the original track '' come alive '' was released as a video clip , and is still their latest video clip to date . the band replaced as i lay dying on the first five shows of the no fear energy music tour with lamb of god . suicidal tendencies toured europe from june through july 2009 . the first suicidal tendencies dvd live at the olympic auditorium , featuring the full show recorded in los angeles back in 2005 , was released on january 26 , 2010 by fontana distribution via the band 's own imprint , suicidal records . on the same day , a best of compilation was released as part of the playlist music album series issued by sony bmg . in september 2010 , suicidal tendencies released the album no mercy fool ! /the suicidal family which consists of re-recordings of tracks from the join the army album and of old no mercy songs , plus the previously released '' come alive '' . in support of the album the band toured the us in october and november , including performing at tucson , arizona kfma radio station 's fall ball 2010 on october 24 at pima county fairgrounds . . 13 ( 2013–2014 ) . suicidal tendencies released 13 , their first album with new material in 13 years , on march 26 , 2013 . the band spent the next few years touring in support of the album , with such bands as d.r.i . , sick of it all , slayer , exodus , slipknot , beartooth , megadeth , children of bodom and havok . they also headlined the 2014 persistence tour , and appeared at many festivals such as riot fest in 2013 , amnesia rockfest in 2014 and motörhead 's motörboat cruise and knotfest in both 2015 . on march 11 , 2014 , thomas pridgen ( former drummer of the mars volta ) confirmed on his instagram and facebook page that he had joined suicidal tendencies . by the fall of 2014 , pridgen was no longer playing in suicidal tendencies , and eric moore rejoined the band . on august 27 , 2014 , suicidal tendencies announced that bassist tim williams had died . rawbiz was replaced by michael morgan , and two years later by ra díaz . . world gone mad ( 2014–2017 ) . in a december 2014 interview with loudwire , vocalist mike muir was asked if suicidal tendencies would release a follow-up to 13 . he replied , '' right now i have no answer to that as far as the previous one . there were a lot of things that went on and i think for us now , if everyone said they wanted to get into the studio and there was something they really wanted to do , i 'd take it into consideration . but we 're in the studio all the time , we 're always recording . '' in an april 2015 interview with metalhead blog , guitarist dean pleasants revealed that suicidal tendencies had been working on new material for a possible compilation album . in a february 2016 interview , muir hinted at a new ep , followed by a new full-length studio album , inspired by then-current political climate and upcoming election . he also stated that the album and ep could be the band 's final recordings , although he added , '' i thought the first one would probably be the last we would do , too . '' on february 20 , 2016 , suicidal tendencies announced that former slayer drummer dave lombardo , a longtime friend and supporter of the band , would be playing drums on their february–march 2016 tour with megadeth , and again on their may–june 2016 european tour . on may 6 , 2016 , guitarist nico santora announced on his facebook page that he had left suicidal tendencies to focus on his new project lillake . he was replaced by oneironaut guitarist jeff pogan . on may 15 , 2016 , suicidal tendencies posted a video of lombardo laying down tracks for the band 's follow-up to 13 , which was expected to be released in september . this video implied that lombardo had become a permanent member of suicidal tendencies . on june 17 , 2016 , suicidal tendencies announced in a newsletter that they were in the final stages of mixing the new album , which was expected to be released on september 30 , 2016 . mike muir revealed in june 2016 interviews that the album would be called the world gone mad , and that the band planned to release a new ep in january 2017 . however , the title of the album was later shortened to world gone mad . it was supported by the band 's first single in 22 years ( since 1994 's '' love vs . loneliness '' ) '' clap like ozzy '' . to promote world gone mad , suicidal tendencies supported megadeth , amon amarth and metal church on the dystopia tour in the united states in september–october 2016 , and headlined two tours in 2017 : the persistence tour with agnostic front in europe in january , and a u.s . tour in february–march with crowbar and havok . muir had stated in interviews that world gone mad may be suicidal tendencies ' final studio album , though he later retracted this statement , saying , '' you ca n't believe what anybody says nowadays — everybody 's effin ' lyin ' . '' . get your fight on ! , still cyco punk after all these years and next album ( 2018–present ) . on december 1 , 2017 , suicidal tendencies announced that they had completed work on a new ep with producer paul northfield for an early 2018 release . muir has described the ep as '' a little more specifically a statement of the time '' and an effort that '' could be interpreted as political . '' the ep , get your fight on ! , was released on march 9 , 2018 , and was the first of two releases the band had planned for release that year ; the second being a new full-length , still cyco punk after all these years , released on september 7 , 2018 . the latter is a near re-recording of mike muir 's first album lost my brain ! ( once again ) . on july 2 , 2018 , it was announced that guitarist jeff pogan had left suicidal tendencies for personal reasons . former the dillinger escape plan guitarist ben weinman filled in for him on the band 's summer and fall 2018 shows . in march 2019 , weinman announced on his twitter page that he was in the studio tracking down new material for the next suicidal tendencies album . in a july 2020 interview with ultimate guitar , however , weinman stated that '' there has n't been any music made '' , but also stated that '' maybe when all this comes back , when things go back to normal , we can think about that . '' on march 18 , 2020 , muir announced on suicidal tendencies ' facebook page that they are working on an '' old-school vinyl release '' featuring instrumental '' songs from st members and people related to st . '' . style and influence . suicidal tendencies have been influenced by a variety of genres , including punk rock , speed metal , hardcore punk , surf music , heavy metal and reggae , such as jimi hendrix , ramones , sex pistols , the beatles , led zeppelin , pink floyd , rush , black flag , the germs , dick dale , black sabbath , circle jerks , t.s.o.l . , the who , the middle class , the simpletones , china white , the hated , motörhead , the plugz , big boys , war , bob marley and frank zappa . while their early material , including their first album , is considered hardcore punk , christe , ian ( 2003 ) . sound of the beast : the complete headbanging history of heavy metal . harpercollins . chapter 11 united forces : metal and hardcore punk . the band is well known for combining elements of thrash metal with funk , punk rock and alternative rock . critics have also described suicidal tendencies as '' the godfathers '' of the genre crossover thrash , which they have been credited for creating along with texas-based band d.r.i . and new york-based band stormtroopers of death . various artists have expressed their admiration for suicidal tendencies or have cited them as an influence , including anthrax , biohazard , body count , children of bodom , death by stereo , dub war , green day , jane 's addiction , incubus , killswitch engage , korn , limp bizkit , megadeth , metallica , mxpx , nofx , the offspring , p.o.d . , pantera , papa roach , pennywise , rage against the machine , sepultura , sevendust , skrillex , slayer , slipknot , soulfly , staind , system of a down , terror and hank williams iii . . band members . ; current members mike muir & nbsp ; – lead vocals ( 1980–present ) dean pleasants & nbsp ; – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 1996–present ) dave lombardo – drums ( 2016–present ) ra díaz – bass , backing vocals ( 2016–present ) ben weinman & nbsp ; – rhythm guitar ( 2018–present ) . discography . suicidal tendencies ( 1983 ) join the army ( 1987 ) how will i laugh tomorrow when i ca n't even smile today ( 1988 ) controlled by hatred/feel like shit.déjà vu ( 1989 ) lights.camera.revolution ! ( 1990 ) the art of rebellion ( 1992 ) still cyco after all these years ( 1993 ) suicidal for life ( 1994 ) freedumb ( 1999 ) free your soul and save my mind ( 2000 ) no mercy fool ! /the suicidal family ( 2010 ) 13 ( 2013 ) world gone mad ( 2016 ) still cyco punk after all these years ( 2018 ) . references . external links . official website interview in hard times , 1984