Emanuel van Meteren

biographical notes . as a historian van meteren was special in that he was not merely a chronicler of the events of his time , but also a powerful and wealthy man who influenced those events : the van meteren family.had fled the netherlands for religious reasons . van meteren ’ s father , jacob , played a key role in the publication of the first english bible in the 1530s , and the family established itself as a pillar of the protestant refugee community in london . as an adult , emmanuel lived on lime street , became the consul for the dutch merchants in london , and occupied the all-important office of postmaster . reliable mail service was an essential component of any natural history network , since specimens ranging from tulip bulbs to rhinoceros horns needed to circulate between interested naturalists . accompanying these specimens , of course , were the letters on which the european natural history community in particular , and the republic of letters more generally , depended in order to thrive.van meteren ’ s skillful management of the post.made him indispensable . when the artist marcus gheeraerts wanted to send smoked herring to antwerp , or ortelius wanted gifts to arrive at his sister ’ s house in london , they inevitably went through emmanuel van meteren and his formidable network of middlemen , merchants , sailors , and travelers to ensure that precious messages and gifts reached their destination . in 1581 he was the consul representing dutch merchants in london . in that year , willem i of orange , prince of orange , enlisted van meteren 's help in a bit of subterfuge in a larger effort to undermine the plots of bernardino de mendoza , spain 's ambassador at the court of queen elizabeth . william enlisted a ship 's captain , willem janszoon van hoorn , to pretend to accept a bribe from de mendoza ; to avoid trickery , de mendoza held van hoorn 's son as a hostage . since trickery was indeed intended , william sent his fourth secretary , christiaen , to sneak the boy out of the spanish embassy in london , at which point van meteren concealed them and helped effect their escape . in 1599 van meteren wrote a book titled belgische ofte nederlandsche historie van onzen tijden , detailing the events of the first part of the eighty years ' war between the netherlands and spain . some of the accounts detail events that van meteren actually witnessed . for instance he was with maurice of orange during the siege of zaltbommel by the spaniards . after henry hudson returned from his second voyage he related to van meteren that there had been a mutiny in 1609 , originating in quarrels between dutch and english sailors . van meteren had access to hudson 's journals , charts and logbooks , and recorded these events in historie der nederlanden . he also chronicled the adventures and demise of the french merchant françois le fort . van meteren is also the author of historia belgica . publications worldcat van meteren . translation of francis pretty : beschryvinge van de overtreffelijcke , ende wijdtvermaerde zee-vaerdt vanden . thomas candish . den 21 julij , 1586 , ende in pleymouth , den 9 . september 1588 . beschreven door m . françois prettie . hier noch by ghevoecht de voyagie van sire françoys draeck , en sire ian haukens , near west-indien , amsterdam 1598 memorien der belgische ofte nederlantsche historie , van onsen tijden . : inhodende hoe de nederlanden aenden anderen ghehecht , ende aen spaengien ghecomen zijn : . : meest onder de regeeringhe van philippus de ii . coninc van spaengien , tot synen doot , ende den vvtgaenden iare 1598 ; verciert met een caerte van allede nederlanden , ende aller regeerders afbeeldinghe in coper ghesneden , delft 1599 a true discourse historical of the succeeding governours in the netherlands : london 1602 . belgische ofte nederlandtsche historie van onsen tijden : inhoudende hoe de nederlanden aenden anderen gehecht , ende aen spaengten ghecomen zijn : met de oorsaken der inlantsche beroerten , ende oorlogen der selver . , delft 1605 commentarien ofte memorien van-den nederlandtschen staet , handel , oorloghen ende gheschiedenissen van onsen tyden , etc . mede vervattende eenige haerder ghebueren handelinghen , 1608 commentarien ofte memorien van-den nederlandtschen staet / handel / oorloghen ende gheschiedenissen van onsen tyden / etc . : mede vervattende eenige haerder ghelbueren handelinghen . mit vestaende in twaelf boecken / beginnende vant twintichste af / tot het een en dertichste boer / ende daer in ghebrocht de gheschiedenissen tot den jare 1610 , 1610 niederlandische historien oder geschichten aller deren handel : so sich zugetragen von anfangs desz niederlandischen kriegs biss auff das jahr 1611 in niederlandischer sprach beschrieben and in 28 bucher verfast , antwerpen 1612 belgische ofte nederlantsche oorlogen ende gheschiedenissen : beginnende van t'iaer 1598 tot 1611 mede vervatende enighe haerder gebueren handelinghe , 1611 emanuels van meteren historie der neder-landscher ende haerder na-buren oorlogen ende geschiedenissen , tot den iare m . vi.c xii . : nu de laestemael bij hem voor sijne doodt merckelijck verbetert ende in , xxxii , boecken voltrocken , is mede ' hier by gevoegt des autheurs leven . gedruckt int jaer ons heeren . m . dc . xiv . , 1614 eigentlich und volkomene historische beschreibung des niderlendischen kriegs , arnhem 1614 emanvelis van meteren historie der nederlandscher geschiedenissen , van den jaere 1566 . tot den jaere 1612 . in het corte ghebracht : ende van den jaere 1612 . tot den jaer 1618 . ghecontinueert ende vermeerdert , 1618 with jean de la haye : l'histoire des pays-bas d'emanuel de meteren , ou , recueil des guerres , et choses memorables advenues tant és dits pays , qu'és pays voysins , depuis l'an 1315 iusques à l'an 1612 , 1618 niderländischer histori emanuel van meteren supplementum , darinn was sich vom jahr 1613 biss auff gegenwertiges 1620 gedenckwirdiges fast in der gantzen welt sich zugetragen begriffen , arnheim 1620 emanvels van meteren historie der neder-landscher ende haerder na-buren oorlogen ende geschiedenissen , tot den iare m.vic.xii . : nu de laestemael bij hem voor sijne doodt merckelijck verbetert en̄ in xxxii boecken voltrocken , is mede hier by gevoegt des autheurs leven . verrijckt beneffens de land-caerte met by na hondert correcte conterfeijtsels vande voor treflijcste personagien in dese historie verhaelt alle cierlijck na d'leven ghedaen ende in coperen platen gesteken gedruckt int jaer ons heeren . m.dc.xiv . , 1623 historie van de oorlogen en geschiedenissen der nederlanderen , en der zelver naburen : beginnende met den jare 1315 , en eindigende met den jare 1611 '' pictures of the english in queen elizabeth 's reign '' , in england as seen by foreigners in the days of elizabeth and james the first '' by william brenchley rye , london : j . r . smith 1865 het album van emanuel van meteren . h.c . rogge , ed . , 's gravenhage 1898 . notes . references . . external links . the life and times of henry hudson van meeteren 's translation of francis petty 's travel diaries : beschrijvinge ( 1617 edition ) ( national library of aruba )