Joan Sims

biography . early life and education . sims was born on 9 may 1930 , the only child of john henry sims ( 1888-1964 ) , station master of laindon railway station in essex , and his wife gladys marie sims , née ladbrook ( 1896-1981 ) . sims 's early interest in being an actress came from living at the railway station . she would often put on performances for waiting passengers . she decided that she wanted to pursue show business during her teens , and soon became a familiar face in a growing number of amateur productions locally . one of her first stage appearances was as miranda bute in the langdon players production of esther mccracken 's comedy quiet wedding in may 1946 . in 1946 , sims first applied to rada , but her audition was unsuccessful . her first audition included a rendition of winnie the pooh . she did succeed in being admitted to parada , the academy 's preparatory school , and finally , on her fourth attempt , she graduated and was trained at rada . she graduated from rada in 1950 at the age of 19 . one of her first stage performances was in the 1951 pantomime , the happy ha'penny , opposite stanley baxter at glasgow 's citizens theatre . . early work . sims appeared in a number of brian rix 's aldwych theatre farces including the well known i say ! nawks ! , but revue was sims 's greatest medium , especially in the works of peter myers . in 1956 she appeared at the aldwych alongside robertson hare in john dighton 's farce man alive ! . in 1958 , she got a part in peter coke 's play breath of spring , which opened at the cambridge theatre in march , transferring to the duke of york 's theatre in august 1958 , which ran until april 1959 . sims preferred film to stage work . '' it was , of course , lovely to be in a successful play , to have the excitement of performing a hit to packed houses ( and , not least , the assurance of a regular income for the foreseeable future ) . but , on the other hand , i found it extremely difficult to keep a performance fresh , and i 'd soon get bored . '' sims made her first film appearance in will any gentleman ? with george cole in 1953 , closely followed by trouble in store with norman wisdom . in 1954 , she appeared as miss dawn in the belles of st . trinian 's , and made a cameo appearance in doctor in the house , opposite dirk bogarde , as the sexually repressed nurse rigor mortis . sims became a regular in the doctors series , which was produced by betty e . box , and was hence spotted by box 's husband peter rogers . in 1956 she appeared as '' nell '' in the adventures of robin hood with richard green , victor woolfand archie duncan . she had a small part in the 1957 film carry on admiral , unrelated to the later carry on series and with no other cast members in common with the series . carry on films . in 1958 , sims received a script from peter rogers ; it was for carry on nurse . the film carry on sergeant had been a huge success at the box office and in the autumn of that year , rogers and director gerald thomas began planning a follow-up . she first starred in carry on nurse , then carry on teacher , followed by carry on constable and carry on regardless , and this sealed her future as a regular carry on performer . following a bout of ill health , dilys laye had to be brought in to take her place in carry on cruising at very short notice ; however , sims rejoined the team with carry on cleo . her role in this was to set the tone for the rest of the carry on films . '' . for once the costumes were made for me , rather than my having to resort to some old dress that had been used before and had to have a new panel sewn in the back to accommodate my girth – which by now was unvaryingly plump . '' sims 's characters evolved from objects of desire in the early films to frumpy , nagging wives in the later ones , epitomised by the emily bung role in carry on screaming . following the success of carry on cleo , she stayed with the films all the way through to the final one in the original series , carry on emmannuelle . sims appeared in 24 carry on films in all ; she did not return for the one-off revival film , carry on columbus ( 1992 ) . however , she did appear alongside kenneth williams in the radio show stop messing about in 1969–70 . prior to this she had worked on the bbc radio comedy play it cool with hugh paddick and ian carmichael . . later life and work . after the carry on series ended in 1978 , sims continued to work on television . she appeared opposite katharine hepburn and laurence olivier in the award-winning 1975 television film love among the ruins and had a recurring role as gran in the bbc comedy series till death us do part ( though she was only in her late thirties when she assumed the role ) . from 1979 until 1981 , she played the recurring character mrs bloomsbury-barton in worzel gummidge for southern television . during 1986 and 1987 , sims starred as annie begley alongside angela thorne in the yorkshire television sitcom farrington of the f.o . also in 1986 , sims appeared in the long-running bbc science fiction series doctor who in the four episodes of the trial of a time lord : the mysterious planet as katryca . she also played miss murgatroyd in the miss marple adaptation a murder is announced ( 1985 ) , betsey prig in a star-studded adaptation of dickens ' martin chuzzlewit ( 1994 ) and lady fox-custard in simon and the witch . in 1987 she joined the cast on and there 's more and was paired up with nicholas smith for a number of sketches for each episode as an old couple . in 1989 , she appeared as a medium in the video for morrissey 's '' ouija board , ouija board '' . from 1990 to 1992 , she played mrs wembley , who has a liking for sherry , in the bbc comedy series on the up , co-starring dennis waterman , jenna russell and sam kelly . from 1994 , she played madge hardcastle , drum playing wife to rocky hardcastle played by frank middlemass , and stepmother of geoffrey palmer 's character lionel in as time goes by . she appeared as harriet coverly in “ the mild bunch ” , s3 : e8 of pie in the sky ( tv series ) ( 1995 ) . sims also appeared in episodes of the hit television comedy series only fools and horses , the 1987 christmas day special the frog 's legacy , and the goodies , in the one foot in the grave special one foot in the algarve , and made a guest appearances in a sketch show with victoria wood and hetty wainthropp investigates alongside patricia routledge . in 1996 , she had a small role as mrs . umney in the television film the canterville ghost . in her later years , sims fought a long battle against depression . this was worsened by the deaths of her agent peter eade , her best friend hattie jacques and her mother , all within a two-year period , after which she fell into alcoholism . sims suffered from bell 's palsy in 1999 and fractured her hip in 2000 , but recovered well . however , her alcoholism was beginning to dominate life in her rented kensington flat , and she described herself as '' the queen of puddings . '' after assessment by a doctor , she was offered a place in a rehabilitation centre , but declined . she took a role in the bbc television film the last of the blonde bombshells ( 2000 ) , alongside her as time goes by castmate judi dench and olympia dukakis , which was her last appearance on screen . music career . during 1963 , sims made several recordings . '' hurry up gran '' / '' oh not again ken '' was issued as a single , followed by '' spring song '' / '' men '' . both were produced by george martin for the parlophone label but neither single made an impact on the uk singles chart . this did not deter her from releasing a third and final single during 1967 , '' sweet lovely whatsisname '' / '' the lass with the delicate hair '' . again it failed to chart , and as a result the singles are now quite rare . as of 2009 , both '' spring song '' and '' men '' are available for the first time through itunes and other download services , as well as on cd as part of re-issues of the comedy compilation albums oh ! what a carry on ! and laugh a minute . sims also featured on an original cast recording of the lord chamberlain regrets in 1961 , as well as the water gypsies . . personal life . sims , like her fellow carry on star kenneth williams , never married . williams , who was homosexual , did , however , propose a marriage of convenience to her , which she promptly declined . from 1958 , she lived for three years with fellow actor tony baird but , every time her parents visited , she asked baird to remove all of his belongings from their london flat . after she told her mother on a visit that she was living with baird , her father wrote her a stern letter , condemning the relationship . sims replied , telling her parents that they had to come to terms with tony being an extremely important part of her life . for the next six months she had no contact with her parents . sims was a devoted daughter and found the separation from her parents difficult . the relationship with baird began to founder , sims said , due to her success and tony baird 's failure as an actor . sims writes had house husbands been in vogue in those days we 'd have made an excellent couple , since tony was not very successful as an actor and i soon became the main breadwinner . if we had been able to accept that i would go out and earn the money and he would concentrate on running the home , things might have turned out better . for three years i was besotted with this loveable reprobate , but then the icing on the cake began to chip off and the love started to wear thin . i was virtually keeping him and the friction of the situation was getting harder to bear . of the break-up , which was finally triggered by sims returning from a tour to find baird had not done any washing or housework , she wrote '' i could tell that he was genuinely heartbroken , and so was i , but i had to do it for my own survival . '' following this came a relationship with john walters whom sims had known for a long time . he had been assistant stage manager for the play high spirits , in which she appeared . they had had an 'innocent ' romance at the time , but they embarked on a more serious relationship after sims 's break-up with baird . however , sims never felt it would be a long-term relationship : john was a much moodier character than tony . during what she described as the 'one broody phase of my life ' , they discussed marriage and children , but it came to nothing and the relationship , the last serious one of sims 's life , ended after around two years of living together . '' i never married because the right person never came along . i leave others to seek for darker explanations . for me it 's extremely simple ! '' . high spirits . the tone of sims 's autobiography high spirits is revealing ( though not sensationalist ) , frank and sometimes mordant : high spirits concluded with sims in reflective and rueful mood . having been disappointed to miss out on the part in a bbc adaptation of vanity fair , she is somewhat crestfallen to discover that there are only two entries on her 'trivia ' page on imdb.com . it ends : . death . sims was diagnosed with diverticular disease in 1997 and she was admitted to hospital in november 2000 , and complications of a routine operation caused her to slip into a coma . her lifelong friend and stand-in , norah holland '' tribute to a studio 's dream '' . bucks free press ( 29 january 2003 ) . retrieved 9 november 2014 . spoke of the doctors ' amazement at her strength and courage throughout her final illness . on 27 june 2001 , ten minutes before she died , holland spoke to her gently about kenneth williams , hattie jacques and their time on the carry on films . sims died from liver failure and diverticulitis , with diabetes and copd cited as contributory factors . gro register of deaths : 2002 , kensington and chelsea - irene joan m . sims . she was cremated at putney vale crematorium , and her ashes scattered in the grounds there . . in popular culture . sims was played by chrissie cotterill in the 2000 television film , cor , blimey ! , an adaptation of terry johnson 's play cleo , camping , emmanuelle and dick , and by beatie edney in the 2006 television film kenneth williams : fantabulosa ! . selected filmography . notes . references . high spirits by joan sims too happy a face – the authorised biography of joan sims by andrew ross , 978-1781961216 ) . external links .