Hayato Ikeda

early life . ikeda was born in present-day takehara , hiroshima , on 3 december 1899 , the youngest of seven siblings . he attended kyoto imperial university and joined the ministry of finance following graduation in 1925 . while at the ministry , he served as the head of the local tax offices in hakodate and utsunomiya . during his time in the latter role , in 1929 , he contracted pemphigus foliaceus and went on sick leave for two years , formally resigning in 1931 once his sick leave had run out . the condition was cured by 1934 . he briefly considered accepting a position at hitachi , but returned to the ministry of finance in december 1934 to head a tax office in osaka . ikeda remained within the ministry through the end of world war ii , eventually becoming vice minister of finance under prime minister shigeru yoshida in 1947 . entry into politics . ikeda resigned from the ministry of finance in 1948 and won a seat in the house of representatives , representing a portion of hiroshima prefecture , in the 1949 japanese general election . he was a part of the liberal group that established the democratic liberal party , a forerunner of the current liberal democratic party . along with eisaku satō , ikeda was an understudy of shigeru yoshida early in his career , and was called an '' honor student '' for his commitment to the ideas presented in the yoshida doctrine , although he was a strong personality himself . he was appointed minister of finance on 16 february 1949 by prime minister shigeru yoshida , and on 7 march announced the dodge line monetary policy with american occupation advisor joseph dodge . he visited the united states in 1950 to begin preparations for us-japan security cooperation following the end of the occupation . in 1951 , he oversaw the formation of the development bank of japan and japan bank for international cooperation . the security cooperation morphed into the '' yoshida doctrine '' by 1951 . it was a strategy devised by yoshida that concentrated upon reconstructing japan 's domestic economy while relying heavily on the security alliance with the united states . the yoshida doctrine said first , japan is firmly allied with the united states in the cold war against communism . second , japan relies on american military strength and limits its own defense forces to a minimum . third , japan emphasizes economic diplomacy in its world affairs . the yoshida doctrine was accepted by the united states and the economic dimension was fostered by ikeda as finance minister and later as prime minister . most historians argue the policy was wise and successful , but a minority criticize it as naïve and inappropriate . yoneyuki sugita , '' the yoshida doctrine as a myth . '' japanese journal of american studies 27 ( 2016 ) : 123-143 online . . in the 1950s , ikeda developed a reputation as a distant and haughty technocrat unsympathetic to the concerns of ordinary people following a series of verbal gaffes . in a december 1950 upper house budget committee meeting , for example , ikeda suggested that poor people should eat more barley , rather than expensive white rice . this was reported in the press as '' let the poor eat barley ! '' ikeda then became minister of international trade and industry following a cabinet reshuffle in 1952 , but was forced to resign less than one month later after he was reported to have said in the diet , in reference to efforts to curb rampant inflation , '' even if five or ten small businessmen commit suicide , it ca n't be helped . '' nevertheless , ikeda remained a senior ldp lawmaker in various party posts , and returned to the cabinet as minister of finance in december 1956 . he then became minister without portfolio in june 1958 , and minister of international trade and industry in june 1959 . prime minister of japan . ikeda was elected president of the ldp and became prime minister in july 1960 , at an extremely difficult moment in japanese domestic politics and u.s.-japan relations . ikeda 's immediate predecessor as prime minister , nobusuke kishi , had disastrously mishandled his attempt to revise the anpo ( known as anpo in japanese ) , leading to the massive anpo protests , which were the largest protests in japan 's modern history . although kishi was ultimately successful in ramming the revised treaty through the diet , the size and violence of the protests that followed forced him to cancel a planned visit by u.s . president dwight d . eisenhower and resign in disgrace . ikeda also inherited from kishi miike struggle at the miike coal mine in kyushu , where striking coal miners repeatedly clashed with right-wing thugs sent by their corporate overlords to break the strike . ikeda had been a compromise candidate to succeed kishi , and had only secured the premiership by promising to call an immediate election , just a few months later in the fall of 1960 . given ikeda 's image as an unpopular politician out of touch with the common people and prone to verbal gaffes , few expected ikeda to be anything more than a temporary placeholder prime minister . however , ikeda surprised observers by undertaking a dramatic personal makeover . he drew a sharp contrast to kishi 's '' high posture '' ( 高姿勢 , kō shisei ) and ruthless , take-no-prisoners approach by taking a '' low posture '' ( 低姿勢 , tei shisei ) and by adopting an accommodating stance toward the political opposition and making '' tolerance and patience '' ( i.e . toward the political opposition ) his slogan for the fall election campaign . ikeda also underwent a deliberate physical makeover , switching out the dark , double-breasted suits and severe , wire-rimmed glasses he had worn prior to becoming prime minister for more approachable light , single-breasted suites and thick , plastic-rimmed glasses . most dramatically of all , ikeda announced his bold income doubling plan , which promised to double the size of japan 's economy in just ten years ' time , by 1970 . eschewing the usual 5-year economic plan , ikeda set an extremely ambitious 10-year time frame , promising a package of targeted tax breaks , government investment , and an expanded social safety net to turbocharge economic growth . ikeda 's new image and income doubling plan proved popular , and he won a resounding victory at the polls in the fall , leaving no chance that one of his factional rivals in the ldp could replace him . upon taking office , ikeda acted quickly to defuse the bloody clash at the miike mine . as his labor minister , he chose hirohide ishida , who was a member of a rival political faction but was seen as more trustworthy by labor unions . he immediately dispatched ishida to negotiate a compromise between the miners and mitsui corporation , which owned the mine , and ishida succeeded in getting the two sides to agree to binding arbitration , finally bringing an end to the year-long miike struggle in december 1960 . ikeda also placed a high priority on repairing the u.s . japan relationship , which had been damaged by the anti-american character of the anti-treaty and the cancellation of eisenhower 's visit . he gave numerous reassurances to the u.s . government that he would staunchly support u.s . cold war policies , including support for taiwan and non-interaction with mainland china . he asked for , and was granted , a summit meeting with incoming u.s . president john f . kennedy in washington d.c . in the summer of 1961 . at the summit , ikeda reiterated his support for u.s . policy , and kennedy promised to treat japan more like a close ally such as great britain . ikeda hoped to make up for eisenhower 's inability to visit japan by hosting kennedy in tokyo , and kennedy agreed . plans were made for kennedy to visit japan in 1964 , but he was assassinated before he could visit , and secretary of state dean rusk went in his stead . ikeda also relentlessly pushed japanese trade abroad , in support of his goal to expand export-led economic growth under the income doubling plan . targeted government investment in strategic manufacturing industries helped japan move up the value chain and into high-tech and other higher-value-added goods . in 1962 , then french president charles de gaulle famously referred to ikeda as '' that transistor salesman , '' signalling that japan was becoming more known for exporting electronics than for the cheap toys , bicycles , and textiles it had exported in the 1950s . domestically , ikeda fulfilled his promise to expand the social safety net in support of the income doubling plan . a universal national pension scheme was established in 1961 , the japan of today , published in 1989 by the international society for educational information , inc . together with a system of universal health insurance . the physically disabled persons employment promotion law was passed in 1960 to promote the employment of people with physical disabilities through the creation of an employment quota system in japan , an on-the-job adjustment scheme , and a financial assistance system in addition to offering vocational guidance and placement services through approximately 600 public employment security offices ( peso ) and their branch offices . in addition , the 1963 welfare law for the aged provided funding for respite care , home care , homes for the aged , and other services paid by taxes collected through local and central governments . moses , stephen a . '' kaigo-jigoku ( ltc hell ) and what japan 's doing about it : valuable lessons for the u.s . and vice versa '' . in 1963 , ikeda remained extremely popular and was able to win a second term as prime minister . now he was powerful enough to take on the factional rivalries that had nearly torn the ldp apart during the security treaty crisis . ikeda took a number of steps to tame intra-party factional infighting , including appointing an '' all-faction cabinet '' with members from enemy factions , and bringing his bitter rival ichirō kōno into his government as agriculture minister , construction minister , and finally minister in charge of planning the 1964 tokyo olympics , thus allowing kōno to accrue much of the glory and credit for the successful olympic games , which were seen as japan 's '' coming out party '' after completing postwar reconstruction . by 1963 , ikeda was also powerful enough to announce , over the objection of many conservatives in his own party , that the ldp would renounce any effort to revive constitution of japan and specifically article 9 , which forbade japan from maintaining a military . he even made '' no constitutional revision on our watch '' one of the ldp 's campaign slogans for the general election . this move outraged his predecessor kishi , who had avidly pursued constitutional revision . however , it also severely damaged the electoral prospects of the opposition japan socialist party going forward , as the jsp had previously been able to win votes by pointing out that they needed at least one-third of the seats in the diet to block the ldp 's attempts at revising the constitution . . retirement and death . ikeda contracted laryngeal cancer and was admitted to the national cancer center for treatment in september 1964 , by which point the condition had progressed considerably . on 25 october , the day after the closing of the 1964 summer olympics in tokyo , ikeda announced his resignation . hoping to avoid a vicious intra-party struggle to succeed him , ikeda took the unusual step of personally designating eisaku satō as his successor . ikeda 's longstanding rival ichirō kōno , respected his dying wish and declined to run for party president , clearing the way for satō to succeed to the premiership . although ikeda was released from the hospital in december 1964 , he underwent another operation at the university of tokyo hospital in august 1965 . he died of pneumonia on 13 august , several days after the operation , at the age of 65 . ikeda 's '' ikeda faction '' was one of the most powerful factions in the ldp , and occupied the left wing of the party . as faction leader , he was succeeded in turn by shigesaburo maeo , masayoshi ōhira , kiichi miyazawa , koichi kato , and mitsuo horiuchi . . legacy . historian nick kapur credits ikeda with stabilizing the so-called 1955 system in japanese politics , after it nearly came apart amid vicious factional infighting within the ldp during the anpo protests . ikeda 's '' low posture '' and conciliatory politics helped tame factions within his own party and reduce inter-party conflict with the opposition parties in order to preclude future mass extra-parliamentary street protests . ikeda helped turn the ldp into a stable , '' big tent '' party that could win thumping super-majorities at the polls by winning votes from a broad cross-section of interest groups , while also not abusing those super-majorities by ramming through unpopular policies . in particular , ikeda 's renunciation of constitutional revision , long seen as a holy grail by ldp conservatives , set the course for japan 's stable conservative rule under u.s . hegemony for the next several decades , and paved the way for the decline of the opposition japan socialist party . ikeda 's income doubling plan also proved to be an astonishing success , helping greatly extend the lifespan of japan 's postwar '' economic miracle . '' although the initial target growth rate of the plan was 7.2 % per year , by the mid 1960s japan 's gdp growth rate reached as high as 11.6 % , and averaged greater than 10 % over the entire decade , with the economy achieving the goal of doubling its size in less than seven years . perhaps even more importantly , according to kapur , ikeda 's income doubling plan '' enshrined 'economic growthism ' as a sort of secular religion of both the japanese people and their government , bringing about a circumstance in which both the effectiveness of the government and the worth of the populace came to be measured above all by the annual percentage change in gdp . '' similarly , japanese economist takafusa nakamura concluded that '' ikeda was the single most important figure in japan 's rapid economic growth . he will be remembered as the man who pulled together a national consensus for economic growth and who strove unceasingly for the realization of that goal . '' . honors . domestic honors . grand cordon of the order of the chrysanthemum ( 13 august 1965 ; posthumous ) senior second rank ( 13 august 1965 ; posthumous ) . foreign honor . : honorary grand commander of the order of the defender of the realm ( s.m.n . ) ( 1964 ) . see also . japanese post-war economic miracle osamu shimomura . references . further reading . - - - - - - - - - - -