Tourism in Puerto Rico

tourism growth . the inauguration of the condado vanderbilt hotel on 16 october 1919 marked the beginning of upscale tourism in puerto rico . flores , ronald . '' new hotels on the horizon '' . ( february/march 2009 ) ¡qué pasa ! . puerto rico tourism company . retrieved 19 march 2013 . the tourism industry experienced moderate levels of growth in 2014 , driven primarily by the introduction of new cruise lines and airfare activity and the development of new hotels on the island . nonstop flights to puerto rico from frankfurt , madrid , bogota , chicago , atlanta , miami , houston , los angeles , philadelphia , and new york are currently available . new direct routes from europe and latin america were in the works by 2014 . competition . cuba and puerto rico have perennially competed for the top tourist destination in the caribbean . puerto rico 's tourism has been helped by poor u.s . relations with cuba . in 2015 , the u.s . reestablished diplomatic relations with cuba and loosened the travel restrictions for americans . this decision boosted cuban tourism and surpassed puerto rico for total visitors , but in 2017 , the u.s . government planned to re-enforce travel restrictions to cuba . puerto rico also competes with the dominican republic , aruba , jamaica and florida for american and international visitors . tourists going to saint barthélemy catch a connecting flight from puerto rico . . marketing campaigns . the puerto rico tourism company spent 1 million in 2002 , featuring celebrities , to advertise the tourism to puerto rico . in 2017 , despacito , a wildly popular song by two puerto rican artists caused a spike in tourism to puerto rico , especially to an area of san juan called la perla , featured in the song 's video . on july 1 , 2018 , puerto rico 's government passed a law to create a new tourism organization , discover puerto rico . this was part of a larger plan to use tourism to revitalize the island after hurricane maria . the new discover puerto rico campaign started that month . an april 2019 report stated that the tourism team '' after hitting the one-year anniversary of the storm in september 2018 , the organization began to shift towards more optimistic messaging . the '' have we met yet ? '' campaign was intended to highlight the island 's culture and history , making it distinct , different than other caribbean destinations . in 2019 , discover puerto rico planned to continue that campaign , including '' streaming options for branded content '' . the video series '' discover puerto rico with lin-manuel '' starring actor , songwriter and lyricist lin-manuel miranda , became available on all jetblue aircraft on 1 october 1 2019 and would continue until 30 january 2020 . . destinations . tourist destinations vary around the island . located on the northwestern part of the island are aguadilla , where the old ramey air force base is located ; arecibo , famous for its observatory ; and rincón , favored for its surf . in 2015 puerto rico had 19 casinos , mainly located in san juan . bayamón has its parque de las ciencias ( science park ) . cabo rojo is famous for its beautiful beaches . cataño has the bacardi factory , the world 's largest rum distillery . fajardo has the fajardo lighthouse and a luminicent bay , las croabas fishing village , the paso fino horse national competition ring , and the seven seas beach . on the northeastern side , beaches in luquillo include balneario la monserrate , playa azul , and la pared and la selva , where leatherback turtles often nest . in the southwest are mayagüez , home of the dr . juan a . rivero zoo and the local beer , medalla brewery ; and ponce with its ponce historic zone . there are over 1,046 restored buildings , plus the world-renowned museo de arte de ponce , the imposing castillo serrallés , the nostalgic hacienda buena vista coffee plantation , and its whimsical parque de bombas firehouse in ponce . san juan has old san juan , with its cobble-stone streets and small alleys , the puerto rican museum of art , and the el morro castle , an old fortress . near san juan is el yunque national forest , the only tropical rain forest in the u.s . with 30,000 acres—a place to hike and see waterfalls . during the 2019 government shutdown , san juan 's two colonial-era fortresses—castillo san felipe del morro and castillo san cristóbal—were closed to visitors . however , since the end of the shutdown on january 25 , 2019 , they have since been reopened . trujillo alto is home to lake carraizo dam . two smaller puerto rican islands are culebra island , with its solitary beaches such as flamenco beach is another popular destination spot ; and vieques with many beaches , two spanish castles and lighthouses , eye-catching mountains and sought-after marine reefs . puerto rico is considered one of the best places in the world to catch atlantic tarpon . . cruise ship tourism . in spite of damage caused by previous hurricanes , particularly maria in 2017 , an april 2019 report stated that '' 1.7 million cruise ship passengers are expected to visit this fiscal year '' . in late november 2019 however , reports indicated that 90 calls to san juan by royal caribbean ships would be cancelled during 2020 and 2021 . this step would mean 360,000 fewer visitors , with a loss to the island 's economy of 44 million . as well , 30 ship departures from san juan were being canceled . the rationale for this decision was discussed in a news report : the reason for the cancellations is the privatization of the cruise docks in san juan due to much-needed maintenance that is needed . around 250 million investment is needed to make sure cruise ships can continue to dock there in the years to come . there is an urge for governer wanda vazquez to not go ahead with the privatization so this news is fluid . . airports . culebra airport , island of culebra eugenio maría de hostos airport , mayagüez fernando luis ribas dominicci airport , san juan humacao airport , humacao luis muñoz marín international airport , san juan mercedita airport , ponce rafael hernández airport , aguadilla the antonio rivera rodríguez airport on the island of vieques serves visitors and locals to and from vieques . it is a one-runway , primary commercial service airport . . gallery . statue of conguero in caguas , puerto rico.jpg statue of in caguas cruise ship leaving san juan , puerto rico.jpg cruise ship leaving san juan san juan city wall 6.jpg historic old san juan culebra - playa de flamenco.jpg flamenco beach , culebra island rain forest of el yunque , puerto rico.jpg el yunque national forest surfing in middle beach , isabela.jpg surfing in isabela view of san juan from a cruise ship.jpg san juan from a cruise ship old san juan 's blue brick roads i.jpg cobblestone streets in old san juan . see also . list of puerto rico landmarks public holidays in puerto rico tourism in the united states puerto rico travel experience