Paulinus of York

early life . paulinus was a monk from rome sent to the kingdom of kent by pope gregory i in 601 , along with mellitus and others , as part of the second group of missionaries sent to convert the anglo-saxons to christianity . he was probably an italian by birth . costambeys '' paulinus ( st paulinus ) '' oxford dictionary of national biography the second group of missionaries arrived in kent by 604 , but little is known of paulinus 's further activities until he went to northumbria . paulinus remained in kent until 625 , when he was consecrated as bishop by justus , the archbishop of canterbury , on 21 july . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 224 he then accompanied æthelburg , the sister of king eadbald of kent , to northumbria where she was to marry king edwin of northumbria . a condition of the marriage was that edwin had promised that he would allow æthelburg to remain a christian and worship as she chose . bede , writing in the early 8th century , reports that paulinus wished to convert the northumbrians , as well as provide religious services to the new queen . there is some difficulty with bede 's chronology on the date of æthelburh 's marriage , as surviving papal letters to edwin urging him to convert imply that eadbald only recently had become a christian , which conflicts with bede 's chronology . the historian d . p . kirby argues that paulinus and æthelburh must therefore have gone to northumbria earlier than 624 , and that paulinus went north , not as a bishop , but as a priest , returning later to be consecrated . the historian henry mayr-harting agrees with kirby 's reasoning . mayr-harting coming of christianity p . 66 another historian , peter hunter blair , argues that æthelburh and edwin were married before 625 , but that she did not go to northumbria until 625 . kirby earliest english kings pp . 33–34 if kirby 's arguments are accepted , then the date of paulinus 's consecration needs to be changed by a year , to 21 july 626 . kirby earliest english kings p . 206 footnote 2 bede describes paulinus as '' a man tall of stature , a little stooping , with black hair and a thin face , a hooked and thin nose , his aspect both venerable and awe-inspiring '' . quoted in blair world of bede p . 95 . bishop of york . bede relates that paulinus told edwin that the birth of his and æthelburg 's daughter at easter 626 was because of paulinus 's prayers . the birth coincided with a foiled assassination attempt on the king by a group of wessex from wessex . edwin promised to convert to christianity and allow his new daughter eanflæd to be baptised if he won a victory over wessex . he did not fulfill his promise immediately after his subsequent military success against the west saxons however , only converting after paulinus had revealed the details of a dream the king had before he took the throne , during his exile at the court of king rædwald of east anglia . in this dream , according to bede , a stranger told edwin that power would be his in the future when someone laid a hand on his head . as paulinus was revealing the dream to edwin , he laid his hand on the king 's head , which was the proof edwin needed . a late seventh-century hagiography of pope gregory i claims that paulinus was the stranger in the vision ; if true , it might suggest that paulinus spent some time at rædwald 's court , yorke kings and kingdoms p . 28 although bede does not mention any such visit . it is unlikely that it was supernatural affairs and paulinus 's persuasion alone that caused edwin to convert . the northumbrian nobles seem to have been willing and the king also received letters from pope boniface v urging his conversion . eventually convinced , edwin and many of his followers were baptised at york in 627 . lapidge '' paulinus '' blackwell encyclopedia of anglo-saxon england one story relates that during a stay with edwin and æthelburg at their palace in yeavering , paulinus spent 36 & nbsp ; days baptising new converts . paulinus also was an active missionary in lindsey , stenton anglo-saxon england pp . 115–116 and his missionary activities help show the limits of edwin 's royal authority . williams kingship and government p . 17 pope gregory 's plan had been that york would be england 's second metropolitan see , so paulinus established his church there . although built of stone , no trace of it has been found . paulinus also built a number of churches on royal estates . yorke conversion of britain p . 161 his church in lincoln has been identified with the earliest building phase of the church of st paul in the bail . among those consecrated by paulinus were hilda , later the founding abbess of whitby abbey , blair world of bede p . 147 and hilda 's successor , eanflæd , edwin 's daughter . blair world of bede p . 149 as the only roman bishop in england , paulinus also consecrated another gregorian missionary , honorius , as archbishop of canterbury after justus ' death , some time between 628 and 631 . . bishop of rochester . edwin was defeated by an alliance of gwynedd welsh and mercian angles , being killed at the battle of hatfield chase , on a date traditionally given as 12 october 633 . one problem with the dating of the battle is that pope honorius i wrote in june 634 to paulinus and archbishop honorius saying that he was sending a pallium , the symbol of an archbishop 's authority , to each of them . the pope 's letter shows no hint that news of edwin 's death had reached rome , almost nine months after the supposed date of the battle . the historian d . p . kirby argues that this lack of awareness makes it more likely that the battle occurred in 634 . kirby earliest english kings p . 56 edwin 's defeat and death caused his kingdom to fragment into at least two parts . it also led to a sharp decline in christianity in northumbria when edwin 's immediate successors reverted to paganism . widowed queen æthelburg fled to her brother eadbald 's kent kingdom . paulinus went with her , along with edwin and æthelburg 's son , daughter , and grandson . the two boys went to the continent for safety , to the court of king dagobert i . æthelburg , eanflæd , and paulinus remained in kent , where paulinus was offered the see , or bishopric , of rochester , which he held until his death . because the pallium did not reach paulinus until after he had left york , it was of no use to him . paulinus 's deputy , james the deacon , remained in the north and struggled to rebuild the roman mission , stenton anglo-saxon england p . 116 . death and veneration . paulinus died on 10 october 644 at rochester , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 221 where he was buried in the sacristy of the church . blair world of bede pp . 97–98 his successor at rochester was ithamar , the first englishman consecrated to a gregorian missionary see . sharpe '' naming of bishop ithamar '' english historical journal p . 889 after paulinus 's death , paulinus was revered as a saint , with a feast day on 10 october . when a new church was constructed at rochester in the 1080s his relics , or remains , were translated ( ritually moved ) to a new shrine . there also were shrines to paulinus at canterbury , and at least five churches were dedicated to him . farmer oxford dictionary of saints p . 418 although rochester held some of paulinus 's relics , the promotion of his cult there appears to have occurred after the norman conquest . rollason '' shrines of saints '' archaeology data services he is considered a saint by the roman catholic church , the anglican communion , and the orthodox church . holford-stevens and blackburn oxford book of days p . 409 walsh dictionary of saints p . 475 paulinus 's missionary efforts are difficult to evaluate . bede implies that the mission in northumbria was successful , but there is little supporting evidence , and it is more likely that paulinus 's missionary efforts there were relatively ineffectual . although osric , one of edwin 's successors , was converted to christianity by paulinus , he returned to paganism after edwin 's death . hilda , however , remained a christian , and eventually went on to become abbess of the influential whitby abbey . northumbria 's conversion to christianity was mainly achieved by irish missionaries brought into the region by edwin 's eventual successor , oswald . mayr-harting coming of christianity p . 68 . see also . list of members of the gregorian mission . notes . citations . references . . further reading . . external links . & nbsp ; – listing of most contemporary and close to contemporary mentions of paulinus in the primary sources . includes some spurious charter listings .