Dinant

geography . dinant is positioned in the upper meuse valley , at a point where the river cuts deeply into the western condroz . sited in a steep sided valley , between the rock face and the river . the original settlement had little space in which to grow away from the river , and it therefore expanded into a long , thin town , on a north-south axis , along the river shore . during the 19th century , the former île des batteurs ( drummers ' island ) to the south was attached directly to the town when a branch of the meuse was filled in . dinant has been enriched by the agricultural opportunities presented by the fertile land on the plateau that overlooks it . within the town , brassware production is a traditional craft that has benefited from the presence of the broad and , at this point , easily navigable river which has facilitated easy delivery of the raw materials and ready distribution of the resulting products of the artisans ' workshops . another traditional source of wealth is provided by the limestone cliffs overlooking the town , which supported a high-end quarrying industry , producing black marble and bluestone , and whose distribution also benefitted from the proximity of the relatively wide and deep navigable river . history . origins to the 10th century . the name dinant comes from the celtic divo-nanto , meaning '' sacred valley '' or '' divine valley '' ; it can also be translated as '' celestial gorge '' or '' luminous gorge '' ( as in modern welsh nant dwyfol ) . the dinant area was already populated in neolithic , celtic , and roman times . the first mention of dinant as a settlement dates from the 7th century , when perpète of maastricht , bishop of tongeren , moved his principal residence from maastricht to dinant and founded the church of saint vincent . in 870 , charles the bald gave part of dinant to be administered by the count of namur , the other part by the bishopric of tongeren , which was by that time based in liège . in the 11th century , the emperor henry iv granted several rights over dinant to the prince-bishopric of liège , including market and justice rights . from that time on , the city became one of the 23 ‘ ‘ bonnes villes ’ ’ ( or principal cities ) of the prince-bishopric . the first stone bridge on the meuse and major repair to the castle , which had been built earlier , also date from the end of the 11th century . throughout this period , and until the end of the 18th century , dinant shared its history with its overlord liège , sometimes rising in revolt against it , sometimes partaking in its victories and defeats , mostly against the neighbouring county of namur . late middle ages . its strategic location on the meuse exposed dinant to battle and pillage , not always by avowed enemies : in 1466 , philip the good , duke of burgundy , uncle of louis de bourbon , prince-bishop of liège , and philip ’ s son charles the bold punished an uprising in dinant during the liège wars , by casting 800 burghers into the meuse and setting fire to the city . the city 's economic rival was bouvignes , downriver on the opposite shore of the meuse . late medieval dinant and bouvignes specialised in metalwork , producing finely cast and finished objects in a silvery brass alloy , called dinanderie and supplying aquamaniles , candlesticks , patens and other altar furniture throughout the meuse valley ( giving these objects their cautious designation '' mosan '' ) , the rhineland and beyond . henri pirenne gained his doctorate in 1883 with a thesis on medieval dinant . the old regime and world war i . left in the 16th- and 17th-centuries wars between france and spain , dinant suffered destruction , famine and epidemics , despite its neutrality . in 1675 , the french army under marshal françois de créquy occupied the city . dinant was briefly taken by the austrians at the end of the 18th century . the whole bishopric of liège was ceded to france in 1795 . the dinanderies fell out of fashion and the economy of the city now rested on leather tanning and the manufacture of playing cards . the famous couques de dinant also appeared at that time . the city suffered devastation again at the beginning of the first world war . on the 15 august 1914 , french and german troops fought for the town in the battle of dinant , among the wounded was lieut . charles de gaulle . on 23 august , 674 inhabitants were summarily executed by saxon troops of the german army & mdash ; the biggest massacre committed by the germans in 1914 . within a month , some five thousand belgian and french civilians were killed by the germans at numerous similar occasions . . sights . the city 's landmark is the notre dame de dinant . it was rebuilt in gothic style on its old foundations after falling rocks from the adjacent cliff partially destroyed the former romanesque style church in 1227 . several stages for a pair of towers on the west end were completed before the project was abandoned in favour of the present central tower with a famous onion dome and facetted multi-staged lantern . above the church rises the vertical flank of the rocher surmounted by the fortified citadel of dinant that was first built in the 11th century to control the meuse valley . the prince-bishopric of liège rebuilt and enlarged it in 1530 ; the french destroyed it in 1703 . its present aspect , with the rock-hewn stairs ( 408 steps ) , is due to rebuilding in 1821 , during the united kingdom of the netherlands phase of dinant 's chequered history . a cable car is available during the high season to take visitors from the collegiate church of notre-dame to the top of the citadel . apart from the main block is the rocher bayard that was said to have been split by giant hoof of bayard , the giant horse carrying the renaud de montauban on their legendary flight from charlemagne through the ardennes , told in les quatre fils aymon , a famous 12th-century chanson de geste . in reality the rock has been divided by the soldiers of louis xiv after the conquest of dinant in order to construct a road alongside the meuse . the house of adolphe sax , inventor of the saxophone located in the street of the same name . a little museum , the mr sax 's house , pays attention to his life and saxophones . image : dinant-2004.jpg from the north file:0 dinant - la collégiale n.-d . de l'assomption et la meuse ( 1 ) . jpg dinant towards the south , seen from the citadel file : dinant from tourist office.jpg dinant from tourist office file : dinant ( 1892 ) by jan hillebrand wijsmuller ( 1855-1925 ) . jpg dinant in 1892 , by jan hillebrand wijsmuller file:2019 panorama dinant.jpg 2019 panorama dinant . gastronomic culture . the flamiche dinantaise is the local version of quiche made with a cheese called '' boulette de romedenne '' . the couque de dinant is europe 's hardest biscuit , with a honey-sweetened flavour that is impressed with a carved wooden mould before baking . the beer brand leffe originates from dinant and there is a museum there . transport . dinant 's railway station is on the left bank of the river . there is hourly train service to brussels , about a 90-minute ride . . healthcare . dinant hosts the saint-vincent and saint-anne sites ( centre hospitalier de dinant ) of the chu uclouvain namur university hospital , the provinces ' largest employer and serving as teaching hospital for the university of louvain . born in dinant . david of dinant , philosopher ( birth in dinant is uncertain , 12th century ) joachim patinir or patenier , 1485–1524 , the first specialist landscape painter antoine joseph wiertz , painter ( 19th century ) adolphe sax , inventor of the saxophone ( 19th century ) georges pire , priest of the dominican order and nobel peace prize recipient for 1958 andré-eugène pirson ( dinant , 21 march 1817-brussels , 28 december 1881 ) , governor of the national bank of belgium ( nbb ) from 1877 until 1881 andré buzin , artist and stamp designer ( 20th century ) alex miskirtchian , boxer . twin cities and twinning . : cagayan de oro : hoddesdon , england : chios : dinan . see also . rape of belgium . references . external links . official web site in french , dutch , and english dinant groups on flickr citadel of dinant : official web site map of dinant with localisation of adolphe sax house