Kim Dae-jung

death sentence and exile . in 1980 , kim was arrested and sentenced to death on charges of sedition and conspiracy in the wake of another coup by chun doo-hwan and a gwangju massacre in gwangju , his political stronghold . pope john paul ii sent a letter to then-south korean president chun doo-hwan on 11 december 1980 , asking for clemency for kim , a catholic , and with the intervention of the united states government , in the early 1980s kim described this '' intervention '' at an annual general meeting of amnesty international-usa . he was bound and naked , on the floor of a room with other dissidents awaiting helicopter rides out over the sea of japan where they would '' disappear '' . a u.s . embassy official walked in , pointed to him , and said '' him , not yet . '' the sentence was commuted to 20 years in prison . he was given exile in the u.s . and temporarily settled in boston and taught at harvard university as a visiting professor to the center for international affairs . during his period abroad , he authored a number of opinion pieces in leading western newspapers that were sharply critical of the south korean government . on 30 march 1983 , kim presented a speech on human rights and democracy at emory university in atlanta , georgia and accepted an honorary doctor of laws degree by the institution . two years later , in 1985 , he returned to his homeland . road to the presidency from 1987 to 1997 . kim was again put under house arrest upon his return to seoul , but resumed his role as one of the principal leaders of the opposition . when chun doo-hwan succumbed to the popular demands in 1987 and allowed the country 's first honest presidential election , kim dae-jung and the other leading opposition figure , kim young-sam , initially promised to unite behind one candidate . however , due to a dispute between the two men , kim dae-jung split off from the main opposition party , the reunification democratic party , and formed the peace democratic party to run for the presidency . as a result , the opposition vote was split in two , and ex-general roh tae-woo – chun doo-hwan 's hand-picked successor – won with only 36.5 % of the popular vote . kim young-sam receiving 28 % and kim dae-jung 27 % of the vote . in 1992 , kim made yet another failed bid for the presidency , this time solely against kim young-sam , who had merged the rdp with the ruling democratic justice party to form the democratic liberal party ( which eventually became the grand national party ) . many thought kim dae-jung 's political career was effectively over when he took a hiatus from politics and departed for the united kingdom to take a position at clare hall , cambridge university as a visiting scholar . however , in 1995 he announced his return to politics and began his fourth quest for the presidency . the situation became favorable for him when the public revolted against the incumbent government in the wake of the nation 's economic collapse in the asian financial crisis just weeks before the presidential election . allied with kim jong-pil , he defeated lee hoi-chang , kim young-sam 's designated successor , in the election held on 18 december 1997 . when he was sworn in as the eighth president of south korea on 25 february 1998 , it marked the first time in korean history that the ruling party peacefully transferred power to a democratically elected opposition victor . the election was marred with controversy , as two candidates from the ruling party split the conservative vote ( 38.7 % and 19.2 % respectively ) , enabling kim to win with only 40.3 % of the popular vote . kim 's chief opponent , lee hoi-chang , was a former supreme court justice and had graduated at the top of his class from seoul national university school of law . lee was widely viewed as elitist and his candidacy was further damaged by charges that his sons dodged mandatory military service . kim 's education in contrast was limited to vocational high school , and many koreans sympathized with the many trials and tribulations that kim had endured previously . in 1997 , the '' north winds '' scandal involving lawmakers of lee hoi-chan 's party , met with north korean agents in beijing ; in exchange for bribes , the north would instigate a skirmish on the dmz right before the presidential election that would cause a panic in an attempt to hamper kim dae-jung 's campaign . lee 's colleagues were later prosecuted . the preceding presidents bak jeong-hui , jeon du-hwan , roh tae-woo , and kim young-sam originated from the gyeongsang region , which became wealthier since 1945 partly due to the policies of the park , chun and roh 's regimes . kim dae-jung was the first president to serve out his full term who came from the jeolla region in the southwest , an area that had been neglected and less developed , at least partly because of discriminatory policies of previous presidents . kim 's administration included more individuals from jeolla province , leading to charges of reverse discrimination . however , the actual numbers of the ministers and administrators of kim dae jung 's government from the jeolla region indicate that they were not over-represented . presidency term ( 1998–2003 ) . during his presidency , he introduced south korea 's contemporary welfare state , successfully shepherded the country 's economic recovery , brought in a new era of economic transparency and fostered a greater role for south korea in the world stage , including the fifa world cup , jointly hosted by south korea and japan in 2002 . kim completed his 5-year presidential term in 2003 and was succeeded by roh moo-hyun . a presidential library at yonsei university was built to preserve kim 's legacy , and there is a convention center named after him in the city of gwangju , the kim dae-jung convention center . economic achievements . kim dae-jung took office in the midst of the economic crisis that hit south korea in the final year of kim young-sam 's term . he vigorously pushed economic reform and restructuring recommended by the international monetary fund , in the process significantly altering the landscape of south korean economy . he commenced the gold-collecting campaign in south korea to overcome the debt to the international monetary fund . name '' britannica '' / > after the economy shrank by 5.8 percent in 1998 , it grew 10.2 percent in 1999 . in effect , his policies were to make for a fairer market by holding the powerful chaebol ( conglomerates ) accountable , e.g . , greater transparency in accounting practices . state subsidies to large corporations were dramatically cut or dropped . and kim dae-jung administration built up country-wide high-speed ict infrastructure and fostered it and venture businesses as the future source of growth . . north korea policy . his policy of engagement with north korea has been termed the sunshine policy . he moved to begin détente foreign relations of north korea , which culminated in a historic summit meeting in 2000 in pyongyang with north korean leader kim jong-il . this marked a critical juncture in inter-korean relations . on 13 october 2000 , he was awarded the nobel peace prize for these efforts . a big consequence of these efforts is that on september 15 , 2000 , the korean unification flag was carried into an olympic stadium during an olympic opening ceremony for the first time . however , the historic event was tainted significantly by allegations that at least several hundred million dollars had been paid to north korea . this is the cash-for-summit scandal . hyundai transferred 500 million to the north just months before the summit , triggering criticism that s.korean government paid for the summit . hyundai claimed the money was a payment for exclusive business rights in electric power facilities , communication lines , an industrial park , cross-border roads and railway lines in north korea . and in this regard , park jie-won was charged with violating domestic laws on foreign exchange trade and inter-korean cooperation affairs while orchestrating covert money transfers by hyundai to north korea . mr . park played a pivotal role in arranging the first inter-korean summit . in may 2006 , he was sentenced for three years in prison . park was released in february 2007 , and pardoned in december 2007 . also in order to persuade north korea to attend the summit , several '' unconverted long-term prisoners '' kept by south korea were released and returned to north korea . . relationship with former presidents . after kim achieved the presidency and moved into the blue house , there was uncertainty and considerable speculation about how he would handle the office . he had been sentenced to death by chun doo hwan . chun and his successor roe tae woo had been sentenced by kim dae jung 's predecessor president kim young sam . kim dae jung pardoned chun . controversies . in 1999 , the furgate scandal damaged kim dae-jung and his party 's reputation . . post-presidency . kim called for restraint against the north koreans for detonating a nuclear weapon and defended the continued sunshine policy towards pyongyang to defuse the crisis . he also received an honorary doctorate at the university of portland on 17 april 2008 where he delivered his speech , '' challenge , response , and god . '' . illness and death . kim died on 18 august 2009 at 13:43 kst , at severance hospital of yonsei university in seoul . he was first admitted to hospital suffering from pneumonia on 13 july . the cause of death was cardiac arrest caused by multiple organ dysfunction syndrome . an interfaith state funeral was held for him on 23 august 2009 in front of the national assembly building , with a procession leading to the seoul national cemetery where he was interred according to catholic traditions . he is the second person in south korean history to be given a state funeral after park chung-hee . north korea sent a delegation to his funeral . . see also . liberalism in south korea cash-for-summit scandal kt ( film ) list of korean nobel laureates . references . external links . kim dae-jung presidential library