Soka Gakkai

peace , culture , and education '' . in the 1970s , the soka gakkai began to re-conceptualize itself as an organization promoting the theme of '' peace , culture , and education . '' in later years , the three themes were institutionalized within the 1995 charter of the soka gakkai international . . peace activities . the group 's peace activities can be traced back to the toda era & nbsp ; – at an athletic meeting in 1957 , toda called for a complete ban on nuclear weapons . a 1975 petition drive against nuclear weapons by the gakkai 's youth division garnered 10 million signatures , and was handed over to the united nations . richard h . seager , encountering the dharma : daisaku ikeda , soka gakkai , and the globalization of buddhist humanism , university of california press:2006 , p . 83 . culture of peace . the soka gakkai was included in a collective buddhist response to unesco 's '' declaration on the role of religion in the promotion of a culture of peace '' , established in barcelona in december 1994 . the soka gakkai 's contribution to building a culture of peace is summarized by person-to-person diplomacy , the promotion of small community discussion meetings with egalitarian mores reflecting the lotus tradition , the promotion of the values of compassion , wisdom , and courage to promote action to nurture world citizenship , and participation in cultural events to foster the culture of peace . david w . chappell , '' introduction '' , in david w . chappell ( ed . ) , buddhist peacework : creating cultures of peace , wisdom publications : 1999 , pp . 22–23 peace and human rights activists such as dr . lawrence carter of morehouse college and rabbi abraham cooper of the simon wiesenthal center , who partnered with the soka gakkai in various exhibits and presentations , praise the organization 's efforts . . support of united nations . sgi has been in consultative status with the united nations economic and social council since 1983 . as an ngo working with the united nations , sgi has been active in public education with a focus mainly on peace and nuclear weapons disarmament , human rights and sustainable development . each year , ikeda publishes a peace proposal which examines global challenges in the light of buddhist teachings . the proposals are specific and wide-ranging , covering topics as constructing a culture of peace , promoting the development of the united nations , nuclear disarmament , the prohibition of child soldiers , the empowerment of women , the promotion of educational initiatives in schools such as human rights and sustainable development education , and calls to reawaken the human spirit and individual empowerment . anwarul k . chowdhury , '' introduction , '' olivier urbain ( ed ) , a forum for peace : daisaku ikeda 's proposals to the un . ib tauris , 2013 , , pp . xi-xiv the toda institute for global peace and policy research has published a compilation of topical excerpts . olivier urbain ( ed ) , a forum for peace : daisaku ikeda 's proposals to the un . ib tauris , 2013 , . exhibitions . the soka gakkai uses its financial resources for a number of civic activities . as a non-governmental organization of the united nations , it has participated in many activities and exhibitions in conjunction with the un . the soka gakkai has been active in public education with a focus mainly on peace and nuclear weapons disarmament , human rights and sustainable development . it has sponsored exhibits such as '' a culture of peace for children '' , which was featured in the lobby of the un building in new york and '' nuclear arms : threat to our world '' . soka gakkai also contributed to the earth charter initiative with the '' seeds of change '' exhibit , '' a 'map ' showing the way towards a sustainable lifestyle '' . sgi promotes environmental initiatives through educational activities such as exhibitions , lectures and conferences , and more direct activities such as tree planting projects and those of its amazon ecological conservation center run by sgi in brazil . one scholar cites daisaku ikeda , sgi 's president , to describe such initiatives as a buddhist-based impetus for direct public engagement in parallel with legal efforts to address environmental concerns . in india , bharat soka gakkai ( sgi in india ) debuted the traveling exhibit '' seeds of hope '' , a joint initiative of sgi and earth charter international . at the exhibit opening in panaji , the indian state capital of goa , regional planning head edgar ribeiro spoke of lagging efforts to implement environmental laws and that : '' only a people 's movement can take sustainability forward . '' in malaysia , tunku abdul rahman university college president datuk dr tan chik heok said that this exhibition helped '' to create the awareness of the power of a single individual in bringing about waves of positive change to the environment , as well as the society . '' . establishment of institutions . the soka gakkai has established multiple institutions and research facilities to promote its values of peace . the institute of oriental philosophy ( founded in 1962 ) , among other goals , clarifies the essence of buddhism to peace studies . the amazon ecological research center ( founded by ikeda in 1992 ) outside manaus , brazil has pioneered reforestation , the creation of a regional seed bank and experiments in agroforestry . the ikeda center for peace , learning , and dialogue ( founded in 1993 as the boston research center for the 21st century ) , promotes dialogue between scholars and activists to prevent war and promote respect for life . karel dobbelaere , '' toward a pillar organization ? '' in global citizens , machacek and wilson ( eds . ) , pp . 243 , 250 the toda peace institute ( formerly called the toda institute for global peace and policy research ) ( founded in 1996 ) conducts peace-oriented international policy research through international conferences and frequent publications . seager , p . 107 . responses to the organization . soka gakkai 's pacifist stand has been questioned , along with the group 's support of komeito , without denying that the group is very active in '' trying to establish the basis for world peace '' . in japan , there is a widespread negative perception of sgi 's pacifist movement , which is considered to be mere public relations for the group . nobel peace and chemistry prize winner linus pauling has praised daisaku ikeda specifically for his work to foster a lasting worldwide peace . dr . lawrence carter , the chaplain at the martin luther king jr . international chapel at morehouse college , considers the soka gakkai an important ally in getting the message of civil rights and non-violence to cultures beyond those that are christian . he has said that ikeda and the soka gakkai , with activities such as victory over violence , have helped in his work to '' revive the king legacy '' . the simon wiesenthal center , an international jewish rights organization , has also worked with the soka gakkai . rabbi abraham cooper headed its efforts in the pacific rim , and in co-operation with the soka gakkai opened a japanese version of the center 's holocaust exhibit . cooper said the organization 's involvement actually improved the exhibit , and that through the soka gakkai , the wiesenthal center has found more partners in japan . . cultural activities . the soka gakkai sponsors many cultural activities for its membership as well as the general public . cultural institutions . the soka gakkai 's subsidiary organizations also have a social presence . the min-on concert association is a subsidiary of the soka gakkai which ikeda established in 1963 . it claims to sponsor over 1100 concerts each year . it has sponsored tours by international artists such as the la scala opera company , about which ikeda told min-on 's director that he '' wanted average japanese people to see first class art , even if we lost a lot of money '' . ikeda also founded the tokyo fuji art museum in 1983 . it houses collections of western and oriental art , and has participated in exchanges with museums around the world . karel dobbelaere , '' toward a pillar organization ? '' in global citizens , machacek and wilson ( eds . ) , page 245 . performance art . soka gakkai considers dance and other genres of performance art to be a major aspect of its peace activities . it has a long tradition of '' culture festivals , '' originating in the 1950s , which take the form of group gymnastics ( through its world-famous gymnastic formations ) , marching bands , traditional ensembles , orchestras , ballet , or choral presentations . the soka gakkai perceives these activities as vehicles for its members to experience the skills of cooperating with others , opportunities to engage in the personal discipline that performing arts provide , and occasions to overcome obstacles and to undertake one 's own '' human revolution . '' they enhance peer networks and understanding of and commitment to the goals of the organization . in addition , they are viewed as expressions of buddhist humanism and are aligned to the soka gakkai 's ideals about creating a peaceful and more humane society . the tradition , which began in japan , has been copied in other soka gakkai organizations in the world . cultural performances and the youth of soka singapore , 26ff the organization 's musical and dance wings are organized into ensembles or groups in the local and national levels and are categorized as : women 's corps of drums/marching bands ( kotekitai corps of the sg ) marching band/concert band ( taiyo ongakutai bands of the sg ) drum and bugle corps symphony orchestras pop bands traditional groups male/female/mixed choirs youth dance groups adult dance groups/ballet ensembles gymnastic formation groups ( all-male/mixed ) . educational activities . the educational activities of the soka gakkai are often subsumed under the title of soka education . several educational institutions were either founded by the soka gakkai or were inspired by the educational writings of the soka gakkai 's three presidents . . organization . formally , the soka gakkai international is the umbrella organization for all national organizations , while soka gakkai by itself refers to the japanese arm . soka gakkai maintains an international political presence as a registered non-governmental organization with the united nations . the basic functional organizational unit is the block – a group of members in a neighborhood who meet regularly for discussion , study and encouragement . a number of blocks form a district , and districts are grouped into chapters . from there the soka gakkai is organized into areas , regions , prefectures and , finally , territories – all under the umbrella of the national organization . discussion and study meetings , the basic organizational activities , are conducted mainly at the block level , though there are occasional meetings held at every level . . membership . soka gakkai has , together with its international offshoot soka gakkai international ( sgi ) , been described as '' the world 's largest buddhist lay group and america 's most diverse '' . soka gakkai international claims a total of over 12 million adherents . the majority of these belong to the japanese organization , whose official membership count is 8.27 million households . according to statistics from the agency for cultural affairs ( a body of the japanese ministry of education ) , the japanese organization had 5.42 million individual members in 2000 . a study in europe found that most of new members joined because of the personalities of the people they met within the organization ; but the biggest reason for continuing is the positive changes they see in their own lives . . list of soka gakkai presidents . the following are the list of the presidents of the soka gakkai : tsunesaburō makiguchi – ( 18 november 1930 – 18 november 1944 ) jōsei toda – ( 3 may 1951 – 2 april 1958 ) daisaku ikeda – ( 3 may 1960 – 24 april 1979 ) + ( honorary president of the soka gakkai international : 1979 – incumbent ) : ja : 北条浩 – ( 24 april 1979 – 18 july 1981 ) einosuke akiya – ( 18 july 1981 – 9 november 2006 ) minoru harada – ( 9 november 2006 – incumbent ) . economic and social influence . the soka gakkai 's newspaper , the seikyo shimbun , has a readership base of 5.5 million . forbes magazine estimated that the organization has an income of at least 1.5 billion per year . religion scholar hiroshi shimada has estimated the wealth of the soka gakkai at ¥500 billion . sgi 's president , daisaku ikeda , has been described by journalist teresa watanabe as one of the most powerful and enigmatic individuals in japan . a 1995 san francisco sfgate article describes ikeda as a '' charismatic leader '' who can display a violent temper in private . according to religious scholar jane hurst , there is no indication he has exploited his position and his home has been described as '' modest '' . . japanese politics . . humanitarian work . the soka gakkai conducts humanitarian aid projects in disaster stricken regions . as an organization it is not only dedicated to personal spiritual development but also to engaged community service . after the march 11 , 2011 earthquake and tsunami in japan , soka gakkai facilities became shelters for the displaced and storage centers for food and supplies for the victims . the relief effort also included community support by youth groups , global fundraising for the victims , and spiritual support . sgi-chile members collected supplies to deliver to a relief center after the country 's 2014 earthquake . . public perception . today , soka gakkai is rarely criticized in mainstream news media . ikeda occasionally contributes editorials to major newspapers , which also print reports on gakkai business . since the komeito party joined the ruling government coalition in 1999 , widespread criticism by the media of the soka gakkai has abated and the soka gakkai is gaining acceptance as part of the japanese mainstream . mette fisker-nielsen , pp . 65–66 . name '' oxford university press '' > there has been a '' fractured view '' of the soka gakkai in japan . on the one hand it is seen as a politically and socially engaged movement ; takesato watanabe , '' the movement and the japanese media '' in david machacek and bryan wilson ( eds . ) , global citizens , oxford university press , 2000 . '' the soka gakkai is exceptional in that no other large japanese religious organization engages in both social and political issues—from the promotion of human rights to the protection of the environment and abolition of nuclear weapons—as actively as it does . '' ( p . 217 ) on the other , it is still viewed with suspicion by some japanese . '' when i conducted a survey of 235 doshisha university students a few years ago asking their opinions about the gakkai and how much they knew about its peace education programs , over 80 percent responded that they had a negative image of the movement and about 60 percent thought that its '' peace movement '' is little more than promotional propaganda . the few respondents with a positive image were either soka gakkai members , were related members , or were friends of members . '' phillip e . hammond and david w . machacek , '' soka gakkai international '' in j . gordon melton , martin baumann ( eds . ) , religions of the world : a comprehensive encyclopedia of beliefs and practices , abc-clio , 2010 , p . 2658 . '' daisaku ikeda ( b . 1928 ) , soka gakkai 's charismatic third president , led the international growth of the movement . although ikeda and his successor , einosuke akiya , have gone to great lengths to improve the movement 's public image , suspicion remains . soka gakkai 's political involvement through the organ of the komeito , a political party founded by the soka gakkai , and the near godlike reverence that members have for president ikeda have tended to perpetuate public distrust . although it has been subjected to a generalized suspicion toward eastern religious movements in the united states , europe , and south america , the movement 's history outside of japan has been tranquil by comparison to its japanese history . '' james r . lewis claims the soka gakkai 's perception has suffered from sensationalist and often irresponsible treatment by the media even though the group has matured into a responsible member of society . '' '' for over half a century , one of the most controversial new religions in japan has been soka gakkai . although this group has matured into a responsible member of society , its ongoing connection with reformist political activity served to keep it in the public eye . until relatively recently , it also had a high profile as the result of sensationalist and often irresponsible media coverage . apparently as a direct consequence of the social consensus against this religion , some scholars have felt free to pen harsh critiques of soka gakkai -- critiques in which the goal of promoting understanding has been eclipsed by efforts to delegitimate soka gakkai by portraying it as deluded , wrong , and/or socially dangerous . & nbsp ; . soka gakkai also spread to the united states and europe , where it aroused controversy as a result of its intense proselytizing activities . although it was never as controversial as groups like the hare krishna movement or the unification church , soka gakkai—which in the united states went under the name nichiren shoshu of america after soka gakkai broke with nichiren shōshū—was not infrequently stereotyped as a brainwashing cult , particularly by anti-cult authors . '' other scholars reject the cult label . macioti , p . 124 . '' it should be clear to all by now that soka gakkai is not a '' sect . '' it is not a small , two-faced cult , characterized by obscure and hidden agendas . rather it is a movement that has given life to varied associations , all of which are engaged in promoting culture , and raising interest around the theme of values—and a movement that demands to be examined more closely by using scientific methodologies and instruments of evaluation . '' some scholars who utilize the bryan r . wilson typology of newly emerging denominations categorize it as '' gnostic-manipulationist '' , a category of teachings holding that the world can improve as people master the right means and techniques to overcome their problems . bryan wilson , religion in secular society . penguin , 1969 bryan wilson , magic and the millennium , heinemann , london , 1973 , pp . 18–30 according to anne mette fisker-nielsen , '' soka gakkai 's relentless , but highly successful , proselytizing in the 1950s stirred up fear in wider society . soka gakkai was portrayed by the mass media as aggressive even violent & nbsp ; – although it is difficult to find evidence . '' mette fisker-nielsen , anne ( 2012 ) '' religion and politics in contemporary japan : soka gakkai youth and komeito '' , routledge , p . 52 . throughout the 1950s , the soka gakkai was a relatively radical movement that remained outside mainstream japanese society , but since the foundation of the komeito in the 1960s , it has considerably moderated its activities and has become a very mainstream movement , especially after the komeito joined the coalition government in 1999 . soka gakkai has long been a subject of criticism in the japanese weekly tabloid news/magazine press . press criticism of the soka gakkai should be seen against the backdrop of negative press coverage of new religious movements in general . mette fisker-nielsen , anne ( 2012 ) '' religion and politics in contemporary japan : soka gakkai youth and komeito '' , routledge , pp . 7–9 it is important to understand that japanese journalism is unlike that of the west . scholars point out that less than two percent of journalists in japan have degrees in journalism . that plus feeble libel laws leave little recourse for the victims of malicious defamation . associate professor of religion at hamilton college , richard seager writes that it is time to cease being overly intrigued by the soka gakkai ’ s history of controversy . “ over the course of a relatively short period , the soka gakkai moved from the margins of japanese society into its mainstream . ” . cult appellation . during the early postwar decades , the soka gakkai found itself embroiled in various controversies and appellations of '' cult '' and '' cult of personality '' have become attached to it . claims of personality adulation towards daisaku ikeda is among the centerpoint of criticism from outsiders and former practitioners of the organization . some criticism are also sourced from its former affiliate , nichiren shoshu who shared the same negative sentiment in 28 november 1991 citing claims of heresy . nevertheless , in accordance to the organization 's views , these charges have largely resulted from both negative and distorted media coverage . newer scholarship has generally refuted the soka gakkai 's former cult appellation , noting the organization 's maturation , progressive qualities , and its calls to its membership to be excellent citizens . macioti , p . 124 . '' it should be clear to all by now that soka gakkai is not a ‘ sect . ’ it is not a small , two-faced cult , characterized by obscure and hidden agendas . rather it is a movement that has given life to varied associations , all of which are engaged in promoting culture , and raising interest around the theme of values—and a movement that demands to be examined more closely by using scientific methodologies and instruments of evaluation . '' criticism of the organization continues to exist , to which the organization describes its vision and structure as a continuing work of humanistic progress and continuous improvement . international perception . the republic of uruguay honored the 25th anniversary of the sgi 's founding with a commemorative postage stamp . the stamp was issued on october 2 , the anniversary of sgi president ikeda 's first overseas journey in 1960 . in 2005 , national youth council of singapore award the youth of soka gakkai in singapore for their '' community and youth services '' work . the soka gakkai of the republic of cuba ( sgrc ) attained juridical recognition in 2007 , following an official visit of daisaku ikeda in 1996 . it has a membership of approximately 500 individuals spread throughout most of the country 's provinces . in 2008 , ikeda was a recipient of the order of friendship , a state-issued award of the russian federation bestowed on foreign nationals whose work , deeds and efforts were aimed at the betterment of relations with the russian federation and its people . in 2012 , president ma ying-jeou of the republic of china ( taiwan ) commended the taiwan soka association for many years of effort in the areas of public welfare , education , and religious teaching . he pointed out that it had received from the taiwanese government numerous awards such as '' national outstanding social organization award '' , the '' award for contribution to social education '' , and '' outstanding religious organization award '' . in 2015 , italian prime minister matteo renzi signed an agreement that recognizes the soka gakkai as a '' concordat '' ( it : '' intesa '' ) that grants the religions status in '' a special 'club ' of denominations consulted by the government in certain occasions , allowed to appoint chaplains in the army - a concordat is not needed for appointing chaplains in hospitals and jails - and , perhaps more importantly , to be partially financed by taxpayers ' money . '' eleven other religious denominations share this status . in the same year , the soka gakkai constituent organization in the united states ( sgi-usa ) spearheaded the first '' buddhist leaders ' summit '' at the white house which was attended by 125 leaders and teachers from 63 different buddhist communities and organizations . in india the soka gakkai is associated with a renewed interest in buddhism among urban , upper middle class , english-speaking youth . among the european new religious movements , the european soka gakkai organization is one of the most active participants in dialogues with the european commission 's bureau of european policy advisors . while they are not all formally affiliated with the soka gakkai , there are a number of overseas institutions that perceived to be associated with the soka gakkai , or with ikeda . these include the ikeda peace institute in cambridge , massachusetts ; the toda institute of oriental philosophy in hawaii ; and educational institutions in the united states , brazil , singapore , malaysia and china . see also . religion in japan buddhism in japan . notes . references . sōka gakkai in america : accommodation and conversion by phillip e . hammond and david w . machacek . london : oxford university press , '' the sōka gakkai : buddhism and the creation of a harmonious and peaceful society '' by daniel a . metraux in engaged buddhism : buddhist liberation movements in asia . christopher s . queen and sallie b . king , eds . suny press , 1996 . the new believers : a survey of sects , cults and alternative religions . david v barrett . octopus publishing group , 2003 the lotus and the maple leaf : the sōka gakkai in canada by daniel a . metraux ( university press of america , 1996 ) fundamentals of buddhism ( second edition ) by yasuji kirimura ( nichiren shōshū international center now sgi , 1984 ) . sōka gakkai kaibō ( '' dissecting sōka gakkai '' ) by the editors of aera ( asahi shimbun , 2000 ) . ( japanese ) a public betrayed : an inside look at japanese media atrocities and their warnings to the west . adam gamble & takesato watanabe . regnery publishing , inc . , 2004 . ( sera ) southeast review of asian studies 29 ( 2007 ) . '' religion , politics , and constitutional reform in japan , '' by daniel metraux , 157–72 . westward dharma : buddhism beyond asia . charles s . prebish and martin baumann , eds . 2002 . igami , minobu . 1995 . tonari no sōka gakkai the sōka gakkai next door , tokyo : takarajima . proselytizing and the limits of religious pluralism in contemporary asia . by juliana finucane , r . michael feener , pages 103 122 . neo yeow ann aaron . further reading . books . strand , clark : waking the buddha - how the most dynamic and empowering buddhist movement in history is changing our concept of religion . strand examines how the soka gakkai , based on the insight that '' buddha is life '' , has evolved a model in which religion serves the needs of its practitioners , rather than the practitioners adhering to dogma and traditions for their own sake . middleway press , 2014 . editors of aera : sōkagakkai kaibai ( 創価学会解剖 : '' dissecting sōkagakkai '' ) . asahi shimbun , october 1995 . aera is a weekly investigative news magazine published by one of japan 's leading news organizations ; this book attempts to present a dry , fair assessment of sōkagakkai and daisaku ikeda and contains several interviews with gakkai leaders . shimada , hiroki : sōkagakkai no jitsuryoku ( 創価学会の実力 : '' the true extent of sōkagakkai 's power '' ) . shinchosha , august 2006 . argues that the sōka gakkai is not ( or is no longer ) as powerful as many of its opponents fear , and that it is losing ground internally as all but the most dedicated are turned off by the leadership and fewer members need the organization for social bonding . also notes that it is becoming more like a civic rather than a religious organization , and that inactive members do n't resign because they want to avoid the ostracism and harassment that can result . shimada , hiroki : kōmeitō vs . sōkagakkai ( 公明党vs.創価学会 : '' the kōmeitō and the sōka gakkai '' ) . asahi shinsho , june 2007 . describes the relationship between kōmeitō and sōka gakkai and the development of their history . touches on the sōka gakkai–nichiren shōshū split , describing it as the result of a power struggle and financial constraints , as well as on the organized harassment of opponents by sōka gakkai members , the organization 's use of its media vehicles to vilify opponents , and ikeda 's demand for unquestioning loyalty . tamano , kazushi : sōkagakkai no kenkyū ( 創価学会の研究 : '' research on the sōkagakkai '' ) . kodansha gendai shinsho , 2008 . this book is an attempt to review scholarly studies of sōka gakkai from the 1950s to the 1970s and shifts in perceptions of the organization as journalists took over from scholars . tamano takes the perspective of a social scientist and describes sōka gakkai as a socio-political phenomenon . he is also somewhat critical of some views shimada expressed in the latter 's recent publications . yamada , naoki : sōkagakkai towa nanika ( 創価学会とは何か : '' explaining sōkagakkai '' ) . shinchosha , april 2004 . yatomi , shin : buddhism in a new light . examines soka gakkai interpretations of buddhist concepts . world tribune press , 2006 . . news media ( websites ) . '' celebrating in earnest : buddhists mark the start of a new year with joy and a strong sense of purpose '' by michelle boorstein , the washington post , january 1 , 2008 koichi miyata , soka university , department of humanities '' critical comments on brian victoria 's '' engaged buddhism : a skeleton in the closet ? '' . external links . soka gakkai international sokanet - sōka gakkai 's official website ( in japanese ) lecture by levi mclaughlin on sgi , princeton university soka spirit , published by sgi-usa soka gakkai , published by the world religions & spirituality project ( wrsp ) ikeda center for peace learning and dialogue tokyo fuji art museum fired staff speak out about japanese politics 1:07:00 seikyo shimbun documentary on soka gakkai '' embattled buddhists : under the rising sun '' buddhist in america