John Gower

life . few details are known of gower 's early life . he was probably born into a family which held properties in kent and suffolk . stanley and smith use a linguistic argument to conclude that '' gower ’ s formative years were spent partly in kent and partly in suffolk '' . southern and nicolas conclude that the gower family of kent and suffolk can not be related to the yorkshire gowers because their coats of arms are drastically different . macaulay and other critics have observed that he must have spent considerable time reading the bible , ovid , secretum secretorum , petrus riga , speculum speculationum , valerius maximus , john of salisbury , and others . he once met richard ii . in the prologue of the first recension of the confessio amantis , he tells how the king , chancing to meet him on the thames ( probably circa 1385 ) , invited him aboard the royal barge , and that their conversation then resulted in a commission for the work that would become the confessio amantis . left note line 22 later in life his allegiance switched to the future henry iv , to whom later editions of the confessio amantis were dedicated . much of this is based on circumstantial rather than documentary evidence , and the history of revisions of the confessio amantis , including the different dedications , is yet to be fully understood . the source of gower 's income remains a mystery . he may have practised law in or around london . george campbell macaulay lists several real estate transactions to which gower was a party . macaulay 's introduction to the french works suggests that gower may have been a dealer in wool . this is based on remarks from mirour d l'omme line 25360ff . from 1365 he received ten pounds ' rent for the manor of wygebergh in essex . from 1382 until death he received forty pounds per annum from selling feltwell in norfolk and moulton in suffolk . in 1399 henry iv granted him a pension , in the form of an annual allowance of two pipes ( 1 tun 240 gallons ) of gascony wine . carlson estimates the value of the two pipes as 3 to 4 pounds wholesale or 8 pounds retail . gower 's friendship with chaucer is also well documented . when chaucer was sent as a diplomat to italy in 1378 , gower was one of the men to whom he gave power of attorney over his affairs in england . the two poets also paid one another compliments in their verse : chaucer dedicated his troilus and criseyde in part to '' moral gower '' , and gower reciprocated by placing a speech in praise of chaucer in the mouth of venus at the end of the confessio amantis ( first recension viii.2950-70 ) . the introduction to the man of law 's tale ( lines 77–89 ) contains an apparent reference to gower 's tales of canacee and tyro appolonius . tyrwhitt ( 1822 ) believed that this offended gower and led to the removal of venus ’ praise of chaucer . twentieth century sources have more innocent reasons for the deletion . at some point during the middle 1370s , he took up residence in rooms provided by the priory of st mary overie ( now southwark cathedral ) . in 1398 , while living here , he married , register of william of wykman ii . f.299b . not verified probably for the second time : his wife , agnes groundolf , who survived him . in his last years , and possibly as early as 1400 , he became blind . after his death in 1408 , gower was interred in an ostentatious tomb in the priory church ( now southwark cathedral ) , where it remains today . macaulay provides much information and speculation about gower . some of his conclusions are inferences drawn from the trilingual writings of gower . where possible he draws upon legal records and other biographers . . works . gower 's verse is by turns religious , political , historical , and moral—though he has been narrowly defined as '' moral gower '' ever since chaucer graced him with the epithet . his primary mode is allegory , although he shies away from sustained abstractions in favour of the plain style of the raconteur . his earliest works were probably ballades in anglo-norman french , some of which may have later been included in his work the cinkante ballades . the first work which has survived is in the same language , however : it is the speculum meditantis , also known by the french title mirour de l'omme , a poem of just under 30,000 lines , containing a dense exposition of religion and morality . according to yeager '' gower 's first intent to write a poem for the instructional betterment of king and court , at a moment when he had reason to believe advice about social reform might influence changes predictably to take place in an expanded jurisdiction , when the french and english peoples were consolidated under a single crown . '' gower 's second major work , the vox clamantis , was written in latin . the first book has an allegorical account of the peasants ' revolt which begins as an allegory , becomes quite specific and ends with an allusion to william walworth ’ s suppression of the rebels . gower takes the side of the aristocracy but the actions of richard ii are described by '' the captain in vain endeavoured to direct the ship ’ s course '' . subsequent books decry the sins of various classes of the social order : priests , friars , knights , peasants , merchants , lawyers . the last two books give advice to king richard ii and express the poet 's love for england . as gower admits , vox clamatis prologos libri secunti much of vox clamantis was borrowed from other authors . macaulay refers to this as '' schoolboy plagiarism '' peter classifies mirour and vox as '' complaint literature '' in the vein of langland . his third work is the confessio amantis , a 30,000-line poem in octosyllabic english couplets , which makes use of the structure of a christian confession ( presented allegorically as a confession of sins against love ) as a frame story within which a multitude of individual tales are told . like his previous works , the theme is very much morality , even where the stories themselves have a tendency to describe rather immoral behaviour . one scholar asserts that confessio amantis '' almost exclusively '' made gower 's '' poetic reputation . '' grey , douglas . '' john gower . '' oxford dictionary of national biography . oxford up , 2004 . fisher views the three major works as '' one continuous work '' with in praise of peace as a capstone . there is '' movement from the courtly tone of the cinkante balades to the moral and philosophical tone of the traitie . '' leland ( ca 1540 ) states '' that the three works were intended to present a systematic discourse upon the nature of man and society . '' they provide as organized and unified a view as we have of the social ideals on england upon the eve of the renaissance . this view may be subsumed under the three broad headings : individual virtue , legal justice , and the administrative responsibility of the king . the works progress from the description of the origins of sin and the nature of the vices and virtues at the beginning of the mirour de l'omme , through consideration of social law and order in the discussion of the three estates in the mirour and vox clamatis , to a final synthesis of royal responsibiity of empedoclean love in the confessio amantis . in later years gower published a number of minor works in all three languages : the cinkante ballades , a series of french ballades on romantic subjects . yeager ( 2011 ) argues that these sonnets were composed throughout gower 's lifetime . the english poem in praise of peace '' is a political poem in which gower , as a loyal subject of henry iv , approves his coronation , admires him as the saviour of england , dilates on the evil of war and the blessing of peace , and finally begs him to display clemency and seek domestic peace '' fisher argued that it was '' gower 's last important poem . it sums up the final twenty years of both his literary career and his literary achievement . '' short latin works on various subjects with several poems addressed to the new henry iv . according to yeager ( 2005 ) '' his final metered thoughts were in latin , the language that gower , like most of his contemporaries , associated with timeless authority . '' critics have speculated on which late work triggered the royal wine allowance mentioned in the life section . candidates are cronica tripertita , in praise of peace , o recolende henry was crowned 13 october 1399 . his grant to gower was doubtless in recognition of the political support reflected in the chronica tripertita and other latin poems . the epistola brevi ( aka o recolende ) ( macaulay , 4:345 ) would appear to contain an acknowledgement of the grant ( lines 19–21 ) . or an illustrated presentation copy of confessio with dedication to henry iv . according to meyer-lee '' no known evidence relates the collar or grant of wine to his literary activity . '' gower 's poetry has had a mixed critical reception . in the 16th century , he was generally regarded alongside chaucer as the father of english poetry . in the 18th and 19th centuries , however , his reputation declined , largely on account of a perceived didacticism and dullness ; e.g . the american poet and critic james russell lowell claimed gower '' positively raised tediousness to the precision of science '' . after publication of macaulay 's edition ( 1901 ) of the complete works , he has received more recognition , notably by c . s . lewis ( 1936 ) , wickert ( 1953 ) , fisher ( 1964 ) , yeager ( 1990 ) and peck ( 2006 ) . however , he has not obtained the same following or critical acceptance as geoffrey chaucer . most of the late minor works can be found in the trilingual trentham manuscript . -- > . prediction of the peasants ' revolt . when wickert was attempting to date vox clamantis books two to seven , she found two passages which predict the revolt . one is mirour which uses the metaphor of the stinging nettle to predict the impending catastrophe . the second is the final couplet of vox clamantis book five chapter 10 . this predicts trouble in a short time . gower 's warnings and call for reform were ignored both before and after the events of 1381 . . chaucer influence . chaucer used octosyllabic lines in the house of fame but eschewed iambic rhythm . he '' left it to gower to invent the iambic tetrameter , and to later centuries of poets to solve the problems of its potential monotony ; he himself merely polished the traditional middle english short line . '' fisher concludes that they were living near each other in the period 1376 to 1386 . they influenced each other in several ways : they imported italian models and learned '' to count beats in such a way as to produce a regular number of syllables . '' this led via mirour to the iambic tetrameter of confessio and chaucer 's pentameter . after 1376 both poets turned from love poetry to more serious topics . for gower this was the '' moralistic social complaint in the mirour d l'omme and vox clamatis , while chaucer wrestled more painfully in the house of fame and parliament of fowls with the relation between the style and substance of courtly poetry and social satire . '' gower '' took the risk of composing in english only after chaucer had achieved success and fame with troilus and criseyde . '' the most of the individuals in the general prologue are members of classes criticized in mirour and vox clamantis . chaucer has omitted the higher ranks of the secular and clerical hierarchies . the language and the introduction of satire are the invention of chaucer . gower is criticized in the introduction to the man of law 's tale . some commentators have interpreted these remarks to indicate a breach between the two poets . fisher interprets them and along with the details of the tale as a friendly competition between two poets . . manuscripts . sebastian sobecki 's discovery of the early provenance of the trilingual trentham manuscript reveals gower as a poet who was not afraid to give henry iv stern political advice . sobecki also claims to have identified gower 's autograph hand in two manuscripts . sobecki . '' ecce patet tensus : the trentham manuscript , in praise of peace , and john gower 's autograph hand . '' . list of works . mirour de l'omme , or speculum hominis , or speculum meditantis ( french , c.1376–1379 ) vox clamantis ( latin , c.1377–1381 ) confessio amantis ( english , c.1386–1393 ) traité pour essampler les amants marietz ( french , 1397 ) cinkante balades ( french , 1399–1400 ) cronica tripertita ( latin , c.1400 ) in praise of peace ( english , c.1400 )