USS Kearsarge (LHD-3)

namesake . named in honor of , a sloop-of-war that gained fame hunting confederate raiders during the american civil war . the sloop was named for mount kearsarge in merrimack county , new hampshire . construction . kearsarges keel was laid down on 6 february 1990 maritimequest uss kearsarge lhd-3 photo gallery at litton-ingalls shipbuilding corporation of pascagoula , mississippi . ingalls built kearsarge using efficient pre-outfitting and modular construction techniques . hundreds of smaller sub-assemblies , containing piping , ventilation ducting and other hardware , as well as major machinery equipment , generators , and electrical panels were constructed . the sub-assemblies were then joined with others to form assemblies , which were in turn welded together to form five completed hull and superstructure modules . these giant modules , each weighing thousands of tons , were joined together on land to form the completed ship 's hull . the result of this early outfitting was a ship that was over 70 percent complete at launch . she was launched on 26 march 1992 , in a ceremony attended by then-chairman of the joint chiefs of staff general colin powell . the warship was christened on 16 may 1992 , and commissioned on 16 october 1993 . characteristics . the assault support system on the ship coordinates vertical and horizontal movement of troops , cargo and vehicles . a monorail system , moving at speeds up to 600 & nbsp ; ft/min ( 3 & nbsp ; m/s ) , transports cargo and supplies from storage and staging areas throughout the ship to a well deck , which opens to the sea through huge gates in the ship 's stern . there , the cargo , troops and vehicles are loaded onto landing craft for transit to the beach . the landing craft can '' fly '' out of the dry well deck , or the well deck can be flooded so that conventional landing craft can float out on their way to the beach . simultaneously , helicopters can be lifted from the hangar deck to the flight deck by two deck-edge elevators and loaded with supplies from three massive cargo elevators . kearsarges armament suite includes the nato rim-7 sea sparrow point defense system for anti-aircraft support , rim-116 rolling airframe missiles , 25-mm chain guns and the phalanx ciws to counter threats from low-flying aircraft and close-in small craft . missile decoy launchers augment the anti-ship missile defenses . operations . kearsarge is capable of amphibious assault , advance force and special purpose operations , as well as non-combatant evacuation and other humanitarian missions . since her commissioning , she has performed these missions all over the world , including evacuating non-combatants from freetown , sierra leone , on 31 may 1997 and rescuing air force captain scott o'grady from serb-controlled territory in bosnia on 8 june 1995 . operation noble obelisk was the evacuation of civilians from sierra leone in 1997 undertaken by uss kearsarge . more than 400 americans and more than 3000 third-country nationals were taken aboard kearsarge over 4 days . global security.org '' operation noble obelisk '' accessed december 26 , 2013 w . m . kennedy operation noble obelisk : an examination of unity of effort . naval war coll . , newport , ri . joint military operations dept.technical report feb 2001 additionally , kearsarge is fully equipped with state-of-the-art command and control ( c & c ) systems for flagship command duty , and her medical facilities are second in capability only to the navy 's hospital ships , and . these facilities allowed kearsarge to serve a dual role during the 1999 nato bombing of the federal republic of yugoslavia , as a platform for bombing missions against yugoslav forces in operation allied force , and as a treatment facility for albanian refugees in operation shining hope . on 19 august 2005 , kearsarge and were targeted by rockets while in port in jordan . the rockets flew over ashlands bow and struck the pier adjacent to the ships . the vessels were not hit but one jordanian soldier was killed and another was wounded . in 2006 , 2008 , and again in 2017 , uss kearsarge served as the principal attraction for new york 's '' fleet week '' . in august 2007 , the ship visited the port of valletta , malta on the way to a six-month deployment to iraq ( 5th fleet aor ) . the ship deployed sailors and marines in a relief effort in bangladesh following cyclone sidr and provided support for president george w . bush 's january 2008 visit to israel . on 6 august 2008 , kearsarge deployed in support of operation continuing promise . the ship 's crew , along with augments from the united states marine corps , the united states air force , the united states army , the united states coast guard , the united states public health service , canadian forces , and other multi-national forces and ngo 's , provided medical , construction and humanitarian services to six central , south , and caribbean american countries ( colombia , the dominican republic , guyana , haiti , nicaragua , and trinidad ) . the ship also provided humanitarian assistance and disaster relief ( ha/dr ) operations in haiti following four atlantic hurricanes . on 2 march 2011 , kearsarge , along with , traveled through the suez canal in response to the 2011 libyan civil war . robert gates had said days earlier that he ordered the two warships into the mediterranean , along with an extra 400 marines , in case they are needed to evacuate civilians or provide humanitarian relief . as of 20 march , av-8b harrier ii attack aircraft from kearsarge have been reported attacking libyan targets as part of operation odyssey dawn . on 22 march , v-22 ospreys from kearsarge conducted a successful trap operation to recover the crew of a usaf f-15e strike eagle after it crashed in libya due to a mechanical failure during a combat mission . the daily telegraph reported a military source , stating that , during the rescue , strafing runs were carried out and two harriers dropped two 500 & nbsp ; lb bombs on a convoy of libyan vehicles , with other reports alleging that libyan civilians were wounded in the operation . the ship returned to home port at norfolk on 16 may 2011 . following a three-day delay due to bad weather , kearsarge deployed from naval station norfolk on 11 march 2013 for a scheduled eight-month deployment . one of her first port visits was to cyprus . kearsarge later docked at the israeli port of eilat for several days beginning on 14 may 2013 before continuing her deployment . one of her mv-22s exercised in a joint operation with . in september 2017 , kearsarge was called upon to assist in search-and-rescue operations during hurricane maria , after contact was lost with a ship carrying four people that issued a distress signal while battling seas and winds off the coast of vieques , puerto rico . the united states coast guard , navy , and the british royal navy utilized an hc-130 aircraft , a fast response cutter , and navy helicopters . a woman and two children were rescued , but a man died aboard their capsized vessel . kearsarge participated in ft . lauderdale 's 2018 fleet week . . deployments . january to august , 1995 ; mediterranean april to october , 1997 - north atlantic - mediterranean april to october , 1999 ; mediterranean april to october , 2001 ; mediterranean january to july , 2003 ; north atlantic - mediterranean - indian ocean - persian gulf march to october , 2005 ; mediterranean september , 2007 to february , 2008 ; mediterranean - indian ocean - persian gulf . august , 2010 to may , 2011 ; mediterranean - west africa . awards . uss kearsarge has been awarded the golden anchor for retention excellence , ronald reagan distinguished service award , the cno environmental safety award , the admiral flatley memorial award ( aviation safety ) , secnav energy award ( 2002 ) , department of energy ( doe ) federal energy management program ( femp ) mobility energy efficiency award ( 2002 ) , the chief of naval operations safety award and the commander naval surface force atlantic safety award . additionally , kearsarge has qualified for the following medals and unit awards : combat action ribbon , humanitarian award , navy unit commendation ( three awards ) , meritorious unit commendation ( one award ) , battle efficiency '' e '' award ( seven awards ) , national defense service medal ( two awards ) , global war on terrorism expeditionary medal , kosovo campaign medal ( with bronze star ) , armed forces service medal , sea service deployment ribbon ( five awards ) , and the nato medal . . shield and crest . blue and gold are colors traditionally associated with the navy and symbolize the sea and excellence . the green chevron suggests the green-peaked mount kearsarge in new hampshire . the amphibious nature of the combat operations of the present uss kearsarge is represented by green and blue , alluding land and sea . the arrowheads , together with the white chevronel , which represents a shore line , allude to assault landings . the stars commemorate the battle stars the third kearsarge received for korean war and vietnam war service . the wings of the crest symbolize the aviation capabilities of both the present and the third kearsarge ; they are gold for the honor and achievement . the white anchor recalls the round-the-world cruise of the second kearsarge of the great white fleet in 1907 and denotes the naval prowess of the uss kearsarges . the blue-and-gray wavy bar highlights the civil war service for the first uss kearsarge . the swords ( one a navy cutlass and the other a marine mameluke ) are crossed , to denote cooperation and teamwork , as well as the combined combat mission of the u.s . navy and marine corps . motto ~ '' proud . bold . trustworthy . '' . see also . new hampshire historical marker no . 243 : mount kearsarge and the u.s.s . kearsarge . references . external links . kearsarges official website navsource.org : uss kearsarge maritimequest uss kearsarge lhd-3 photo gallery uss kearsarge history at u.s . carriers popular mechanics profile of uss kearsarge during 2008 fleet week historic image of uss kearsarge by e . caner at historic camera