River Avon, Warwickshire

etymology . '' avon '' derives from the british language , '' river '' , which also survives as a number of river avon ( disambiguation ) , and as modern welsh and breton avon , '' river '' . this makes it an example of a tautological place name . course . the source of the avon is from a spring near the village of naseby in northamptonshire . for the first few miles of its length from the village of welford it forms the border between northamptonshire and leicestershire , on this section , it has been dammed to create stanford reservoir . upon reaching dow bridge on watling street it enters warwickshire . it then flows in a generally west-southwesterly direction , passing through the towns and villages of rugby , wolston , ( bordering leamington spa ) , warwick , stratford-upon-avon , welford-on-avon , bidford-on-avon , evesham and pershore , before it joins the river severn at tewkesbury . the river has a total length of and a catchment size of . the avon 's tributaries include the rivers swift , leam , stour , sowe , dene , arrow , isbourne and swilgate as well as many minor streams and brooks . a long distance footpath has been created which follows the river from its source to the river severn at tewkesbury . the route is marketed as shakespeare 's avon way , and is long . it uses existing footpaths and tracks to stay as close to the river as is reasonably possible . . prehistory . before the last ice age about 50,000 years ago , the warwickshire avon was a small river which drained northwards to the river trent . during the wolstonian glacial period , ice advanced into the midlands from the north , east and west blocking the flow of the avon to its former confluence with the trent . the waters were thus trapped : on the north , east and west by the glacier , and by the cotswolds to the south , resulting in the formation of a large glacial lake , which has been called lake harrison . at its maximum , it is considered that this glacial lake covered the whole of warwickshire and was over deep . after about 10,000 years , when the glacier finally retreated , the water was able to cut through the previous watershed and to escape to the southwest , so forming the present day route of the river . . navigation . from alveston weir , which is upstream of stratford-upon-avon , downstream to tewkesbury and the river severn , the river has been rendered navigable by the construction of locks and weirs . the stratford-upon-avon canal links to the avon through a lock in the park in front of the royal shakespeare theatre in stratford-upon-avon . the river avon can be used by boats with a maximum length of , beam of , height of and draught of from tewkesbury to evesham . above evesham , beam is restricted to and draught to . the river is crossed by two manually operated pedestrian chain ferry , these being the hampton ferry in evesham and the stratford-upon-avon ferry in stratford-upon-avon . traffic is now exclusively leisure-oriented . overnight moorings are available at stratford-upon-avon , luddington , welford-on-avon , barton , bidford-on-avon , harvington , offenham , evesham , craycombe , wyre , pershore , defford , comberton , birlingham , eckington , strensham and tewkesbury . there are boatyards at stratford-upon-avon , welford-on-avon , barton , bidford-on-avon , evesham , and tewkesbury . the river forms part of the avon ring , a circular cruising route which is long , and includes 129 locks . from tewkesbury it follows the course of the river severn , the worcester and birmingham canal and the stratford-upon-avon canal to arrive back at the avon at stratford-upon-avon . history . the navigation works on the avon were originally authorised by an order in council and letters patent of charles i in 1635 , which named william sandys as the grantee , with powers to improve both this river and the river teme . he had already bought a number of mills on the river , but there were few objections from millers at those he did not own , for he built pound locks with two sets of gates , to enable vessels to pass by without the large loss of water associated with flash locks . the only objections were from sir william russell , who owned strensham mill , and whose grievance was about land purchase , rather than the navigation works . by 1641 it was reported that the river was navigable to within of warwick . after a period of decline , navigation rights along the river were confirmed by a clause in the stour and salwarpe navigation act of 1662 . further improvements were made to the river above evesham from 1664 by a syndicate led by andrew yarranton . he was working for lord windsor and others , and the work included the construction of three navigation weirs , which were a type of flash lock with a single barrier . these were used to enable boats to pass over shoals , and with the exception of the one at pensham , were not built adjacent to mills . the pensham watergate did at times hinder the proper operation of the mill , when the water levels rose above the gate . once yarranton 's work was completed , barges of 30 tonnes could navigate to stratford . ownership of the navigation was formally divided into the upper and lower avon in 1717 , with evesham being the dividing point . the lower avon navigation between evesham and the river severn was leased by george perrott in 1758 , who spent over £4,000 upgrading the locks and weirs to enable 40-ton barges to navigate the river . the work was completed by 1768 . perrott then intended to sell the navigation , but when the stratford canal was being promoted , he had a clause inserted into the bill to force the worcester and birmingham canal to make payments to him in view of the expected drop in tolls that the navigation would experience . once the stratford canal was completed , there was fierce competition between the upper and lower avon companies , with coal from the worcester and birmingham coming up-river to evesham , and coal coming down-river from stratford . as the tolls dropped , perrott leased the lower river to the worcester and birmingham canal company from 1830 until 1851 . meanwhile , the upper avon navigation between stratford and evesham was owned by relatives of lord windsor , who had died in 1758 , and its condition gradually deteriorated . because of the sinuous course of the upper river , it was never really considered as a through navigation , except for a brief period when william james thought it could become a through route . he bought all of the shares in the upper avon company in 1813 , and persuaded the stratford canal shareholders that there should be a junction between their canal and the river at stratford , which was opened on 24 june 1816 . in 1822 , he spent £6,000 repairing the locks on the upper river , and became bankrupt . the navigation was taken over by seven men , all connected with the stratford canal , who turned lucy 's lock at stratford into a two-rise staircase lock , constructed three new locks , and improved the river by dredging . most of the subsequent traffic was local , competing with the lower avon for the delivery of coal to evesham . the upper avon was leased to the stratford canal from 1842 , but there was little traffic , and the lease was not renewed in 1847 . the arrival of the oxford , worcester and wolverhampton railway at stratford sealed its fate , and when the company failed to sell the navigation to local landowners for £150 , they effectively abandoned it in 1857 . john broughton , who was the railway manager at stratford , was persuaded to buy the navigation for £300 by local traders , but the venture was short-lived . broughton was succeeded , and the railway , now called the west midland railway , became part of the great western railway . in 1875 , the gwr decided it would no longer maintain the river , and an appeal to the railway commissioners in 1877 ruled that they were not obliged to do so . the lower avon navigation never quite fell into total disuse . the worcester and birmingham canal renewed their lease in 1851 for a further 21 years , but traffic was severely hit by the opening of a railway link from ashchurch to evesham in 1864 . receipts had dropped to £139 in 1872 , and the canal company did not renew their lease again . somehow the navigation remained open , and as the commercial traffic declined , there was a gradual increase in pleasure usage . by the end of the world war ii only one barge was plying the stretch between tewkesbury and pershore , and the river above pershore became unnavigable . . restoration . the first moves to return the waterway to a navigable condition occurred in march 1949 , when the evesham journal published an article on its history and decline . robert aickman started a correspondence with the editor of the article , suggesting that the river could be restored . c . douglas barwell sought legal advice on how best the proposal could be managed , out of which the lower avon navigation trust ltd ( lant ) was constituted as a charity in 1950 , and the bbc broadcast news of the proposals in april 1950 . by may 1952 , despite being in a period of great austerity , lant had raised over £4,000 towards the work , and the involvement of the royal engineers , who helped with the reconstruction of chadbury lock as a training exercise , increased public awareness , and enabled further public appeals for funds to be made . by 1962 , lant had raised over £50,000 , the 7 locks from tewkesbury to evesham were restored to working order , re-opening the lower avon , and plans were already being made to rebuild evesham town lock and press on towards stratford . mrs barwell , the wife of douglas barwell , formally opened the waterway in june 1962 . mr . barwell received an obe for his work on the navigation . an anonymous benefactor was about to give £80,000 in 1963 towards the restoration on the upper avon , while a donation of £5,000 enabled evesham lock to be rebuilt and opened on 11 june 1964 . collins brothers , who owned the lock site , with the main dam , sluice and weir , donated them to the lower avon navigation trust in 1966 , extending the jurisdiction of the lower avon above its historical limits . the other waterway to stratford , the stratford-upon-avon canal , had been restored by the national trust and was opened by elizabeth bowes-lyon exactly a month later , and her involvement caught the public 's imagination . although the upper avon was in a much worse condition than the lower avon , the upper avon navigation trust ltd ( uant ) was constituted in 1965 to rebuild it . the project was led by david hutchings , fresh from completing the stratford canal restoration , who obtained permission to build a new lock at stratford in early 1966 , and launched an appeal for £6,000 to fund it . work began on 19 july 1966 , once half the cost had been raised . the concept of building new locks and weirs , with most of the work being undertaken by volunteers , was new . negotiation with the severn river authority led to an agreement that such works could be constructed , which was eventually formalised when a private bill was put before parliament , which became the upper avon navigation act 1972 . further funding came from an inland waterways association national restoration fund , launched in 1969 . work continued , with phase one , covering the section from evesham to bidford bridge , being declared open on 12 june 1971 , during an iwa boat rally at bidford . the estimated cost for the complete restoration was £250,000 , all of which was raised by public subscriptions , with the exception of a grant for £25,000 from the department of the environment , which was made at the time of the phase 1 opening . the project , which involved the construction of nine new locks , reopening a navigation which had been derelict for over 100 years , was completed on 1 june 1974 , when queen elizabeth the queen mother returned to stratford to declare it open . it was the largest project of its type to that date , and hutchings was awarded an mbe for his leadership . . proposed extension . there have been proposals to extend the navigation upstream from alveston to a link with the grand union canal at either warwick or leamington spa . this was first considered by the severn trent water authority in 1974 , who conducted a survey , the cost of which was partly funded by the inland waterways association . this would open up a stretch of river that has never previously been navigable , but the proposal has not been universally welcomed . landowners at warwick castle and charlecote park have attempted to claim the river as private property , although the 1636 order of council state that the river was free to coventry . despite much local support , there is still some opposition to the scheme . . commercial traffic . commercial traffic returned to the avon in may 2010 , as part of a scheme to build flood defences at the town of pershore , following flooding in 2007 , which caused damage to a number of properties . clay banks are being constructed , with most of the material coming from birlingham , further downstream . some 15,000 tonnes of clay is being excavated and transported by barge to the construction works . at birlingham , the excavation will be managed to create a wetland reserve for wildlife , with of wet grassland and of open water and reed beds . worcestershire wildlife trust is working with the landowner to create the reserve , which will be called the john bennett reserve . the use of barges to transport the clay is estimated to save 3,000 truck trips between the two sites . . see also . other rivers named avon river severn rivers of the united kingdom soft flowing avon . bibliography . . references . . external links . shakespeare 's avon , the website of lant and uant