Chameleon

senses . chameleons have the most distinctive eyes of any reptile . the upper and lower eyelids are joined , with only a pinhole large enough for the pupil to see through . each eye can pivot and focus independently , allowing the chameleon to observe two different objects simultaneously . this gives them a full 360-degree arc of vision around their bodies . prey is located using monocular depth perception , not stereopsis . chameleons have very good eyesight for reptiles , letting them see small insects from a 5–10 meter distance . in fact , chameleons have the highest magnification ( per size ) of any vertebrate . ott , m . , and f . schaeffel . ( 1995 ) . a negatively powered lens in the chameleon . nature 373:692-694 like snakes , chameleons do not have an outer or a middle ear , so there is neither an ear opening nor an eardrum . however , chameleons are not deaf : they can detect sound frequencies in the range of 200–600 & nbsp ; hz . le berre and bartlett , p . 31 chameleons can see in both visible and ultraviolet light . chameleons exposed to ultraviolet light show increased social behavior and activity levels , are more inclined to bask and feed , and are also more likely to reproduce , as it has a positive effect on the pineal gland . feeding . thumb all chameleons are primarily insectivores that feed by ballistically projecting their long tongues from their mouths to capture prey located some distance away . while the chameleons ' tongues are typically thought to be one and a half to two times the length of their bodies ( their length excluding the tail ) , smaller chameleons ( both smaller species and smaller individuals of the same species ) have recently been found to have proportionately larger tongue apparatuses than their larger counterparts . thus , smaller chameleons are able to project their tongues greater distances than the larger chameleons that are the subject of most studies and tongue length estimates , and can project their tongues more than twice their body length . anderson , christopher v . ( 2009 ) rhampholeon spinosus feeding video . chamaeleonidae.com the chameleon 's tongue apparatus consists of highly modified hyoid , tongue muscles , and collagen . the hyoid bone has an elongated , parallel-sided projection , called the entoglossal process , over which a tubular muscle , the accelerator muscle , sits . the accelerator muscle contracts around the entoglossal process and is responsible for creating the work to power tongue projection , both directly and through the loading of collagenous elements located between the entoglossal process and the accelerator muscle . the tongue retractor muscle , the hyoglossus , connects the hyoid and accelerator muscle , and is responsible for drawing the tongue back into the mouth following tongue projection . tongue projection occurs at extremely high performance , reaching the prey in as little as 0.07 seconds , having been launched at accelerations exceeding 41 g . the power with which the tongue is launched , known to exceed 3000 w kg −1 , exceeds that which muscle is able to produce , indicating the presence of an elastic power amplifier to power tongue projection . the recoil of elastic elements in the tongue apparatus is thus responsible for large percentages of the overall tongue projection performance . one consequence of the incorporation of an elastic recoil mechanism to the tongue projection mechanism is relative thermal insensitivity of tongue projection relative to tongue retraction , which is powered by muscle contraction alone , and is heavily thermally sensitive . while other ectotherm become sluggish as their body temperatures decline , due to a reduction in the contractile velocity of their muscles , chameleons are able to project their tongues at high performance even at low body temperatures . the thermal sensitivity of tongue retraction in chameleons , however , is not a problem , as chameleons have a very effective mechanism of holding onto their prey once the tongue has come into contact with it , including surface phenomena , such as wet adhesion and interlocking , and suction . the thermal insensitivity of tongue projection thus enables chameleons to feed effectively on cold mornings prior to being able to behaviorally elevate their body temperatures through thermoregulation , when other sympatric lizards species are still inactive , likely temporarily expanding their thermal niche as a result . . bones . certain species of chameleons have bones that glow when under ultraviolet light , also known as biogenic fluorescence . some 31 different species of calumma chameleons , all native to madagascar , displayed this fluorescence in ct scans . the bones emitted a bright blue glow and could even shine through the chameleon 's four layers of skin . the face was found to have a different glow , appearing as dots otherwise known as tubercles on facial bones . the glow results from proteins , pigments , chitin , and other materials that make up a chameleon 's skeleton , possibly giving chameleons a secondary signaling system that does not interfere with their color-changing ability , and may have evolved from sexual selection . . distribution and habitat . image : minute leaf chameleon ( brookesia minima ) lokobe.jpg brookesia minima , lokobe strict reserve . the 30 species of chameleons in the genus brookesia are tiny , usually brown-colored and mainly terrestrial. thumb chameleons primarily live in the mainland of sub-saharan africa and on the island of madagascar , although a few species live in northern africa , southern europe ( spain , italy , greece ) , the middle east , southern india , sri lanka , and several smaller islands in the western indian ocean . there are introduced , feral populations of veiled and jackson 's chameleons in hawaii , and isolated pockets of feral jackson 's chameleons have been reported in california , florida and texas . chameleons inhabit all kinds of tropics and mountain rain forests , savannas , and sometimes deserts and steppes . the typical chameleons from the subfamily chamaeleoninae are arboreal , usually living in trees or bushes , although a few ( notably the namaqua chameleon ) are partially or largely terrestrial . most species from the subfamily brookesiinae , which includes the genera brookesia , rieppeleon , and rhampholeon , live low in vegetation or on the ground among leaf litter . many species of chameleons are threatened by extinction . declining chameleon numbers are due to habitat loss . . reproduction . image : chameleon - tanzania - usambara mountains.jpg thumb left west usambara two-horned chameleon ( kinyongia multituberculata ) in the usambara mountains , tanzania image : chameleon hebron , palestine.jpg thumb right chamaeleo chamaeleon found in hebron . chameleons are mostly oviparous , with some being ovoviviparous . the oviparous species lay eggs three to six weeks after copulation . the female will dig a hole — from , deep depending on the species — and deposit her eggs . clutch sizes vary greatly with species . small brookesia species may only lay two to four eggs , while large veiled chameleons ( chamaeleo calyptratus ) have been known to lay clutches of 20–200 ( veiled chameleons ) and 10–40 ( panther chameleons ) eggs . clutch sizes can also vary greatly among the same species . eggs generally hatch after four to 12 months , again depending on species . the eggs of parson 's chameleon ( calumma parsonii ) , a species which is rare in captivity , are believed to take more than 24 months to hatch . chameleons lay flexible-shelled eggs which are affected by environmental characteristics during incubation . the egg mass is the most important in differentiating survivors of chameleon during incubation . an increase in egg mass will depend on temperature and water potential . to understand the dynamics of water potential in chameleon eggs , the consideration of exerted pressure on eggshells will be essential because the pressure of eggshells play an important role in the water relation of eggs during entire incubation period the ovoviviparous species , such as the jackson 's chameleon ( trioceros jacksonii ) have a five- to seven-month gestation period . each young chameleon is born within the sticky transparent membrane of its yolk sac . the mother presses each egg onto a branch , where it sticks . the membrane bursts and the newly hatched chameleon frees itself and climbs away to hunt for itself and hide from predators . the female can have up to 30 live young from one gestation . . diet . chameleons generally eat insects , but larger species , such as the common chameleon , may also take other lizards and young birds . the range of diets can be seen from the following examples : the veiled chameleon , chamaeleo calyptratus from arabia , is insectivorous , but eats leaves when other sources of water are not available . it can be maintained on a diet of crickets . they can eat as many as 15–50 large crickets a day . jackson 's chameleon ( trioceros jacksonii ) from kenya and northern tanzania eats a wide variety of small animals including ants , butterflies , caterpillars , snails , worms , lizards , geckos , amphibians , and other chameleons , as well as plant material , such as leaves , tender shoots , and berries . it can be maintained on a mixed diet including kale , dandelion leaves , lettuce , bananas , tomatoes , apples , crickets , and waxworms . the common chameleon of europe , north africa , and the near east , chamaeleo chamaeleon , mainly eats wasps and mantises ; such arthropods form over three quarters of its diet . some experts advise that the common chameleon should not be fed exclusively on crickets ; these should make up no more than half the diet , with the rest a mixture of waxworms , earthworms , grasshoppers , fly , and plant materials such as green leaves , oats , and fruit . temperature influences the amount of food eaten . some chameleons like the panther chameleon of madagascar regulate their vitamin d3 levels , of which their insect diet is a poor source , by exposing themselves to sunlight since its uv component increases internal production . . predation and defence . chameleons are preyed upon and consumed by a variety of other animals . birds and snakes represent the most important predation of adult chameleons and invertebrates , especially ants , put a high predatory pressure on chameleon eggs and juveniles . stuart-fox , d ( 2014 ) . chameleon behavior and color change . in k . a . tolley , & a . herrel ( eds . ) , the biology of chameleons ( pp . 115–130 ) . berkeley : university of california press . chameleons are unlikely to be able to flee from predators and rely on crypsis as their primary defense . measey , g . j . , raselimanana , a . , & herrel , a . ( 2014 ) . ecology and life history of chameleons . in k . a . tolley , & a . herrel ( eds . ) , the biology of chameleons ( pp . 85–114 ) . berkeley : university of california press . chameleons can change both their colors and their patterns ( to varying extents ) to resemble their surroundings or disrupt the body outline and remain hidden from a potential enemy ’ s sight . only if detected , chameleons actively defend themselves . they adopt a defensive body posture , present an attacker a laterally flattened body to appear larger , warn with an open mouth and , if needed , utilize feet and jaws to fight back . vocalization is sometimes incorporated into threat displays . . parasites . chameleons are parasite by nematode worms , including threadworms ( filarioidea ) . threadworms can be transmitted by biting insects such as ticks and mosquitoes . other roundworms are transmitted through food contaminated with roundworm eggs ; the larvae burrow through the wall of the intestine into the bloodstream . le berre and bartlett , p . 110 chameleons are subject to several protozoan parasites , such as plasmodium which causes malaria , trypanosoma which causes sleeping sickness , and leishmania which causes leishmaniasis . chameleons are subject to parasitism by coccidia , le berre and bartlett , p . 109 including species of the genera choleoeimeria , eimeria , and isospora . . historical understandings . the chameleon was featured in historia animalium ( gessner book ) ( 1563 ) , copied from de aquatilibus ( 1553 ) by pierre belon . . references . bibliography . le berre , françois ; bartlett , richard d . ( 2009 ) the chameleon handbook . barron 's educational series . 3rd edition . further reading . davison , linda j . chameleons : their care and breeding . hancock house publishers , 1997 . de vosjoli , philippe . essential care of chameleons . advanced vivarium systems , 2004 .