Girolamo Fracastoro

life . fracastoro was born in verona , republic of venice and educated at padua where at the age of 19 he was appointed professor at the university . on account of his eminence in the practice of medicine , he was elected physician of the council of trent . a bronze statue was erected in his honor by the citizens of padua , while his native city commemorated their great compatriot with a marble statue . he lived and practised in his hometown . in 1546 he proposed that epidemic diseases are caused by transferable tiny particles or '' spores '' that could transmit infection by direct contact , indirect contact , or even without contact over long distances . girolamo fracastoro the columbia encyclopedia , sixth edition . 2001–2005 . in his writing , the '' spores '' of diseases may refer to chemicals rather than to any living entities . he appears to have first used the latin word fomes , meaning tinder , in the sense of infectious agent , in his essay on contagion de contagione et contagiosis morbis , published in 1546 : '' i call fomites from the latin fomes , meaning '' tinder '' such things as clothes , linen , etc . , which although not themselves corrupt , can nevertheless foster the essential seeds of the contagion and thus cause infection . '' fracastoro , girolamo ( 1546 ) . on contagion , contagious diseases and their cure . his theory remained influential for nearly three centuries , before being superseded by a fully developed germ theory . the name for syphilis is derived from fracastoro 's 1530 epic poem in three books , syphilis sive morbus gallicus ( '' syphilis or the french disease '' ) , about a shepherd boy named syphilus who insulted the greek god apollo and was punished by that god with a horrible disease . the poem suggests using mercury and '' guaiaco '' as a cure . in 1546 his book ( de contagione , '' on contagion '' ) also gave the first description for typhus . the collected works of fracastoro appeared for the first time in 1555 . alongside syphilis , fracastoro wrote a biblical epic in two books , joseph , and a collection of miscellaneous poems , carmina . joseph was translated under the title the maidens blush , or joseph by josuah sylvester . a full edition and english translation of fracastoro 's poetry was prepared by james gardner for the i tatti renaissance library . of interest , in 1546 fracastoro described an epidemic in cattle that devastated farmers near verona , italy . that disease is now recognized as foot-and-mouth disease ( fmd ) , an animal illness of great antiquity . mahy bwj . ( 2005 ) introduction and history of foot-and-mouth disease virus . in : mahy b.w . ( eds ) foot-and-mouth disease virus . current topics in microbiology and immunology , vol 288 . springer , berlin , heidelberg . a portrait of fracastoro that has been in the collection of the national gallery since 1924 has recently been attributed to the renowned italian painter titian . the re-attribution has led scholars to speculate that titian may have painted the portrait in exchange for syphilis treatment . . fracastoro 's landmarks in verona . a marble portrait statue of girolamo fracastoro by the carrarese sculptor danese cattaneo ( completed 1559 ) stands on a beautiful arch in the central piazza dei signori of verona , near the monument to dante alighieri . on its base is the inscription : '' hier fracastorio \ paulli philippi f \ ex publica auctoritate \ dicata \ an sal mdlix '' . according to a popular legend the stone ball fracastoro holds in his right hand , symbolizing the world , will fall on the first honorable person to walk under the arch . over the centuries many people have passed every day under the arch , but the ball remains in place . image : girolamo_fracastoro 's statue in verona 1.jpg the statue in its context image : girolamo fracastoro 's statue in verona 4.jpg the statue with the inscription . fracastoro 's landmarks on the moon . the moon crater fracastorius is named after him . geology and fossils . the following is a discussion of the role of fracastoro in contemporaneous debates about the origin and nature of marine fossils discovered in excavations in verona during 1517 , as quoted from w : charles lyell principles of geology : it was not till the earlier part of the sixteenth century that geological phenomena began to attract the attention of the christian nations . at that period a very animated controversy sprung up in italy , concerning the true nature and origin of marine shells , and other organized fossils found abundantly in the strata of the peninsula . the excavations made in 1517 , for repairing the city of verona , brought to light a multitude of curious petrifactions , and furnished matter for speculation to different authors , and among the rest to fracastoro , who declared his opinion , that fossil shells had all belonged to living animals , which had formerly lived and multiplied , where their exuviæ are now found . he exposed the absurdity of having recourse to a certain 'plastic force , ' which it was said had the power to fashion stones into organic forms ; and , with no less cogent arguments , demonstrated the futility of attributing the situation of the shells in question to the flood myth , a theory obstinately defended by some . that inundation , he observed , was too transient , it consisted principally of fluviatile waters ; and if it had transported shells to great distances , must have strewed them over the surface , not buried them at vast depths in the interior of mountains . his clear exposition of the evidence would have terminated the discussion forever , if the passions of mankind had not been enlisted in the dispute ; and even though doubts should for a time have remained in some minds , they would speedily have been removed by the fresh information obtained almost immediately afterwards , respecting the structure of fossil remains , and of their living analogues . the clear and philosophical views of fracastoro were disregarded , and the talent and argumentative powers of the learned were doomed for three centuries to be wasted in the discussion of these two simple and preliminary questions : first , whether fossil remains had ever belonged to living creatures ; and secondly , whether , if this be admitted , all the phenomena could be explained by the noachian deluge . charles lyell , principles of geology , 1832 , p.20-21 . seeds of disease theory . 19th century bacteriologists studied fracastoro ’ s works , and his “ seeds of disease ” theory as a predecessor to germ theory . . works . syphilis , sive morbi gallici ( 1530 ) di vino temperatura ( 1534 ) homocentricorum sive de stellis , de causis criticorum dierum libellus ( 1535 ) homocentrica ( 1538 ) naugerius sive de poetica dialogus ( c . 1540 ) de contagione et contagiosis morbis ( 1546 ) syphilis sive de morbo gallico ( 1539 , poem ) . notes . references . the latin text available in google books ( see link below ) is from poemata selecta italorum : qui seculo decimo sexto latine scripserunt . oxford and london : slatter et munday ( ox . ) longman , hurst , rees , & orme ( london ) 1808 , p . & nbsp ; 65-110 . external links . poems ( siphilis , lib . 1-3 and others in : poemata selecta italorum , qui seculo decimo sexto latine scripserunt , london 1808 , 65-135 . ( latin text ) hieronymi fracastorii syphilis sive morbus gallicus . - basileae , 1536 . ( latin text ) hieronymi fracastorii homocentrica ; eiusdem de causis criticorum dierum per ea quae in nobis sunt – 1538 . ( latin text ) hieronymi fracastorii veronensis opera omnia . 1584 . ( astron . , medical , & philosophical writings , latin text ) hieronymi fracastorii veronensis operum pars prior . 1591 . ( philosoph . & medical writings , latin text ) fracastor – la syphilis ( 1530 ) – le mal français ( extrait du livre de contagionibus , 1546 ) , paris , 1869 ( latin and french transl . ) di cicco , c . : fracastoro , girolamo ( 1478-1553 ) 17° congress eur . acad . dermatology and venereology , paris 2008 , ( abstract in english , links to publ . ) nahum tate 's english translation of syphilis ( a translation of 1686 in a reprint of 1714 ) , the first full translation of syphilis into any language . excerpts of an english translation of syphilis sive morbus gallicus university of oklahoma libraries , history of science collections , online galleries places and memorials related to girolamo fracastoro