Charlie's Angels

episodes . attempted spin-off . abc attempted to create a spin-off of charlie 's angels in 1980 called toni 's boys . condon , jack and david hofstede , charlie 's angels casebook , pomegranate press , ltd . , 2000 pgs . 254-256 the backdoor pilot aired near the end of season four , simply titled '' toni 's boys '' ( season 4 , episode 23 ) . the episode starred barbara stanwyck as antonia '' toni '' blake , a wealthy widow socialite and friend of charlie 's who ran a detective agency . the agency was staffed by three good looking male detectives—cotton harper ( stephen shortridge ) , matt parrish ( bruce bauer ) , and bob sorensen ( bob seagren ) —who took direction from toni , and solved crimes in a manner similar to the angels . the show was not picked up as a regular series for the following season . . crossovers . the character dan tanna ( played by robert urich ) from the detective series vega appeared in the episode '' angels in vegas '' a week before the vega season one debut . the crossover was simply used to reintroduce the dan tanna character and to promote vega as an ongoing series . in the episode '' love boat angels '' , the angels went on another popular aaron spelling show , the love boat , and met the crew . gavin macleod , bernie kopell , fred grandy , ted lange , and lauren tewes guest starred as their the love boat characters . the episode aired on september 12 , 1979 as the fourth-season premiere and the debut episode of shelley hack as tiffany welles . the episode placed number one in the nielson ratings for the week . kate jackson , jaclyn smith , and cheryl ladd also appeared as themselves in the first episode of the spelling-produced comedy series , the san pedro beach bums , in the fall of 1977 . . syndication . the show was first syndicated on local stations such as ktla in los angeles and wnew in new york in september 1981 , and later on tnt , tv land , cloo , ion , cozi tv , metv and gettv . , all five seasons of the show can be purchased in the usa on itunes . , the series is still available for syndication to local television stations in the united states . , the show is airing on the u.s . digital broadcast television networks cozi tv and gettv and the streaming services crackle , imdb tv and the roku channel . other versions . the series spawned a franchise with a film series which is a continuation of the story with new generations of angels . it has also inspired many remakes and reinterpretations throughout the years and in different countries . it has also been featured in various other media . film series . the charlie 's angels 1976 original television series inspired flower films production company 's two films , charlie 's angels ( 2000 ) and charlie 's angels : full throttle ( 2003 ) , with john forsythe returning as charlie . whereas most movie remakes of 1970s tv shows , like starsky and hutch , are actually remakes , the charlie 's angels films are set in a different time and thus closer to a film revival . the mythology goes that whenever an angel leaves , she is replaced so there are always three . the second film had more nods to the tv series than the first film , with jaclyn smith making a brief cameo as kelly garrett . charlie 's angels is a 2000 american action comedy film based on the charlie 's angels 1976 original television series . unlike the original series , which had dramatic elements , the film featured more comical elements than were seen in the series . the film was directed by mcg , adapted by screenwriters ryan rowe , ed solomon , and john august , and starring cameron diaz , drew barrymore , and lucy liu as three women working in a private detective agency in los angeles . john forsythe reprised his role as the unseen charlie 's voice from the original series . making cameo appearances are tom green ( who was dating barrymore at the time of production ) and ll cool j . a sequel , entitled full throttle , was released in 2003 , directed by mcg and written by john august , and cormac and marianne wibberley . it is the sequel to 2000s charlie 's angels , itself based on the 1976 television original series charlie 's angels . in an ensemble cast , cameron diaz , drew barrymore and lucy liu return as the angels natalie , dylan , and alex , respectively . it also features bruce willis , demi moore , carrie fisher , shia labeouf , robert patrick , crispin glover , justin theroux , matt leblanc , luke wilson , john cleese , and rodrigo santoro , with jaclyn smith reprising her role as kelly garrett , and bernie mac as bosley 's brother . this was john forsythe 's final film appearance before his retirement and his death in 2010 . the film opened in the united states on june 27 , 2003 , and was number one at the box office for that weekend , also making a worldwide total of 259.2 million . on september 15 , 2015 , it was announced that sony pictures entertainment was rebooting the charlie 's angels franchise , and elizabeth banks was in talks to direct the film . in july 2018 , it was announced that kristen stewart , naomi scott and ella balinska would play the leading trio of the fighting team , and banks would also appear as bosley , with the film featuring multiple characters named bosley . it was later revealed that the new movie would not be a reboot or a remake of the franchise but rather a continuation that will incorporate the events of the original tv series and the mcg-directed 2000s films . . behind the camera . in 2004 , a television film entitled behind the camera : the unauthorized story of charlie 's angels aired on nbc ; it was based on the book charlie 's angels casebook , by jack condon and david hofstede . reboot . four women ( including future star tea leoni ) were selected to be in a show called angels '88 , which was to serve as an updated version of the show . the show was later named angels '89 after production delays , but the project was abandoned before notice was taken . in november 2009 , abc began to make a television revival of charlie 's angels , with josh friedman handling both writing and executive producing duties , and drew barrymore and leonard goldberg sharing co-production duties . developed by alfred gough and miles millar for abc , the reboot series premiered by the network on september 22 , 2011 . on october 14 of the same year , abc canceled the reboot series after one month , due to low ratings . it concluded on november 10 , 2011 , with seven episodes ( the eighth and last one was unaired in the us ) . international versions . from 1998 to 1999 , telemundo and sony produced a show called ángeles . the weekly hour format did not catch on with hispanic viewers , who are accustomed to watching telenovelas nightly , and the series was soon canceled . in 2002 , a german version of charlie 's angels , wilde engel , was produced by the german channel rtl . the show was known as anges de choc in french-speaking countries , and as three wild angels in english-speaking ones . in 2004 , taiwanese version of charlie 's angels titled asian charlie 's angels , was produced by the asian channel imaginasian . subsequent angels . natalie cook , played by cameron diaz in charlie 's angels ( 2000 ) & charlie 's angels : full throttle ( 2003 ) dylan sanders , played by drew barrymore in charlie 's angels ( 2000 ) & charlie 's angels : full throttle alex munday , played by lucy liu in charlie 's angels ( 2000 ) & charlie 's angels : full throttle madison lee , played by demi moore in charlie 's angels : full throttle ( 2003 ) a character in the charlie 's angels : full throttle movie with '' retcon '' involving her being a former angel sabina wilson , played by kristen stewart in charlie 's angels ( 2019 ) elena houghlin , played by naomi scott in charlie 's angels ( 2019 ) jane kano , played by ella balinska in charlie 's angels ( 2019 ) rebekah , played by elizabeth banks in charlie 's angels ( 2019 ) a character in the charlie 's angels 2019 film with '' retcon '' involving her being a former angel ingrid , played by hannah hoekstra in charlie 's angels ( 2019 ) danica patrick , ronda rousey , laverne cox , hailee steinfeld , lili reinhart , aly raisman , chloe kim and huda kattan , are all appeared in cameos as the angels in charlie 's angels ( 2019 ) . reboot angels . kate prince , played by annie ilonzeh in charlie 's angels ( 2011 ) abby simpson , played by rachael taylor in charlie 's angels ( 2011 ) eve french , played by minka kelly and young eve , played by taylor blackwell in charlie 's angels ( 2011 ) gloria martinez , played by nadine velazquez and young gloria , played by anahi article in charlie 's angels ( 2011 ) zoe sinclair / oswald , played by peyton list in charlie 's angels ( 2011 ) . unofficial angels . connie bonnet ( 1988–1989 ) , played by claire yarlett , in angels '89 pam ryan ( 1988–1989 ) , played by caren loping , in angels '89 trisha lawrence ( 1988–1989 ) , played by sandra canning , in angels '89 bernie colter ( 1988–1989 ) , played by téa leoni , in angels '89 adriana vega ( 1998–1999 ) , played by patricia manterola , ángeles elena sanchez ( 1998–1999 ) , played by sandra vida , ángeles gina navarro ( 1998–1999 ) , played by cole pitman , ángeles christina '' chris '' rabe ( 2002-2003 ) , played by birgit stauber , wilde engel franziska borgardt ( 2002-2003 ) , played by susann uplegger , wilde engel lena heitmann ( 2002-2003 ) , played by eva habermann , wilde engel betty ( 2004 ) , played by qu ying , asian charlie 's angels cindy ( 2004 ) , played by kelly lin , asian charlie 's angels annabelle ( 2004 ) , played by annie wu , asian charlie 's angels angie ( 2004 ) , played by christy chung , asian charlie 's angels rebecca ( 2005 ) , played by vanessa petruo , wilde engel ida ( 2005 ) , played by tanja wenzel , wilde engel aiko ( 2005 ) , played by zora holt , wilde engel in charlie 's angels : full throttle ( 2003 ) , eve and mary-kate and ashley olsen appear as future angels but only in dylan sanders ' imagination . collectible items . during the tv show 's run , hasbro industries produced an extensive range of charlie 's angels merchandise , which was distributed in the us , the uk , and other international markets . a numerous variety of collectible items were produced , including two versions of dolls , board games , numerous posters , several sets of trading cards , notebooks , a lunchbox and thermos set , a charlie 's angels toy van , children 's beauty products and even record albums . author sherrie a . inness , in the text 'disco divas : women and popular culture in the 1970s ' writes that '' charlie 's angels merchandise was big business , hasbro industries spent over 2.5 million to advertise its charlie 's angels dolls '' . in the uk , as was common with many popular us programs of the era , a series of tie-in hardcover annuals were published by world international publishing ltd , containing stories , comics , photos , puzzles and features on the stars . there are four charlie 's angels annuals in total . although it was not connected to the show , a farrah fawcett red swimsuit poster became the biggest selling poster in history with 12 million copies sold . this poster also helped the burgeoning popularity of the series . the red swimsuit that helped make farrah fawcett a 1970s icon became part of the smithsonian 's collection in 2011 . the picture has been immortalized as a black label barbie collection doll and the legendary red bathing suit has been donated to the smithsonian institution in washington , d.c . the designer of that swimsuit is norma kamali . . comics . two british comic strip versions were produced . the first appeared in the polystyle publication target in april 1978 , drawn by john canning . target was a sister title to the long-running tv comic aimed at older children and featuring tv action and crime shows of the day . proving unpopular , it folded in august and merged back into tv comic where canning 's angels strip continued until october 1979 . the second strip was printed in junior tv times look-in , debuting in november 1979 ( as soon as polystyle 's deal expired ) , written by angus allan and drawn by jim baikie and bill titcombe . in june 2018 , a six-issue limited comic book series based on the television series was launched by dynamite entertainment . a crossover comic book series with charlie 's angels and the bionic woman , titled charlie 's angels vs . the bionic woman was released on july 3 , 2019 . . see also . the doll squad , a film about another group of shapely female operatives cagney & lacey sto para pente , a greek tv series she spies . references . external links .