William Kempe

life . in a 1615 lawsuit brought by thomasina ( née heminges ) ostler , widow of william ostler , against her father , john heminges , the recently deceased actor william kempe was referred to as a gentleman ( willelmo kempe nuper de londonia generoso defuncto ) , . and it has been suggested that he was a member of the kempe family of olantigh , a property north of wye in kent : kemp 's parentage is unknown , though it has been conjectured that , despite his plebeian performance persona , he was linked in some way to the kempes of ollantighe , near ashford in kent , who were a wealthy catholic dynasty . sir thomas kempe ( 1517–1591 ) did indeed have a son named william ; . however , the claim that this william kempe was the actor can not be correct , since he was buried at wye church on 27 march 1597 ( honneyman , 125–9 ; bannerman , 3 ; private information , a . findlay ) . nonetheless , this putative connection might help explain the otherwise surprising story—dramatized in the play the travailes of the three english brothers ( 1607 ) by day , rowley , and wilkins—that when william kemp the actor was in italy in 1601 he had an encounter with the celebrated traveller sir anthony shirley : for sir anthony and his two equally famous brothers were related to the ollantighe kempes through their mother , who was sir thomas kempe 's daughter . possibly , then , the actor had some tie of kinship to ollantighe , at an outlying point on the family tree ; or perhaps in recommending himself to shirley he was just opportunistically taking advantage of the name he shared with shirley 's mother . . kempe is usually given an approximate birth year of 1560 . he first enters the historical record as a performer with leicester 's men at leicester house in may 1585 the earl made a special payment of ten shillings for this performance . and continued in this service after leicester 's departure for the low countries to take part in the eighty years ' war . leicester 's nephew , philip sidney , sent letters home by way of a man he called '' will , my lord of lester 's jesting player '' and it is now generally accepted this was kempe . sidney complained in a letter to francis walsingham that '' will '' had delivered the letters to lady leicester rather than sidney 's wife , frances walsingham . after a brief return to england , kempe accompanied two other future lord chamberlain 's men , george bryan and thomas pope , to elsinore where he entertained frederick ii of denmark . kempe 's whereabouts in the later 1580s are not known , but that his fame as a performer was growing during this period is indicated by thomas nashe 's an almond for a parrot ( 1590 ) . nashe dedicated this work to kempe , calling him '' vicegerent general to the ghost of dick tarlton . '' similarly , the title-page of the quarto of a knack to know a knave advertises kempe 's '' merriments '' . ( because title-pages were a means to draw attention to a book , the mention of kempe suggests that he had become an attraction in his own right . ) critics have generally viewed the scene in which kempe performs as rather flat ( collier , 97 ) and it is assumed that the scene provided a framework within which kempe could improvise . entries in the stationers ' register indicate that three jigs ( short comic plays ) perhaps written by kempe were published between 1591 and 1595 . two of these have survived . by 1592 kempe was one of lord strange 's men , listed in the privy council authorisation for that troupe to play seven miles out of london . in 1594 , upon the dissolution of strange 's men , kempe , along with burbage and shakespeare , joined the lord chamberlain 's men and remained with that company until early 1599 , when a still-unclear sequence of events removed him from the company . although he had been a sharer in the plans to construct the globe theatre , he appeared in no productions in the new theatre , which was open by mid-1599 , and evidence from shakespeare 's henry v , in which there is no promised continued role for falstaff , and hamlet , containing its famous complaint at improvisational clowning ( act 3 , scene 2 ) , indicates some of the circumstances in which kempe may have been dropped . james shapiro , ( 2005 ) . 1599 , a year in the life of william shakespeare . faber and faber , london . pp.42–49 . kemp played his last role for shakespeare in 1598 . robert hornback the english clown tradition from the middle ages to shakespeare 1843843560 - 2013 '' nd of the stupid puritan stereotype generally , that shakespeare wrote his own strict , stupid puritan clown for kemp — for whatever reason , kemp 's last shakespearean role — in 1598 . like the “ foolish mayre or foolish justice ” . . final years . after his departure from the chamberlain 's men in early 1599 , kempe continued to pursue his career as a performer . in february and march 1600 , he undertook what he would later call his '' nine days wonder '' , in which he morris danced from london to norwich ( a distance of about 110 miles or 177 & nbsp ; km ) in a journey which took him nine days spread over several weeks , often amid cheering crowds . later that year he published a description of the event to prove to doubters that it was true . the year kempe gives was 1599 old style , which has caused some later confusion . that kempe 's jig took place in 1600 ( new style ) is established by a record of the payment of his prize money by the norwich city corporation . however , his activities after this famous stunt are as obscure as his origins . on evidence from the travels of the three english brothers , he is assumed to have made another european tour , perhaps reaching italy , but by 1601 he was borrowing money from philip henslowe and had joined worcester 's men . the last undoubted mention of him occurs in henslowe 's diary in late 1602 . parish records record the death of '' kempe , a man '' in st . saviour , southwark , late in 1603 . while this is not necessarily the comedian , the record fits his departure from the documentary record . performance style . in his time , kempe was as famous for his stage jigs as for his acting in regular drama . the jig , a kind of rustic cousin to commedia dell'arte , featured as many as five performers in a partially improvised song-and-dance routine . jigs had plots , often bawdy , but the emphasis was on dancing and physical comedy . two of kempe 's jigs survive in english , and two more in german . examples of the jigs may be seen in the manuscript collection of john dowland ( now in the cambridge university library ) . a famous 17th century jig called kemp 's jig was named after will kempe and was published in the first book of john playford 's the english dancing master of 1651 . the tune has received a number of modern renditions , including those by jan akkerman and gryphon . as an actor , kempe is certainly associated with two roles : dogberry in much ado about nothing and peter in romeo and juliet . ( in the quarto text of the latter , and in both quarto and first folio text of the former , he is identified in speech prefixes and stage directions . ) from these hints , a list of kempe 's parts has been deduced which , if conjectural , is not improbable : costard in love 's labours lost , bottom in a midsummer night 's dream , lancelot gobbo in the merchant of venice , and cob in ben jonson 's every man in his humour . falstaff is a more ambiguous case . though falstaff presents some features of an elizabethan dramatic clown , his character is higher in class and more complex than the other roles with which kempe is associated . in period fiction . kempe appears as a character in parnassus plays , possibly written during his lifetime or very shortly after his death . in it he praises shakespeare for outdoing university-educated playwrights . in modern fiction . film and tv . in the 1978 tv series will shakespeare kempe is portrayed by derek royle as an oafish alcoholic . he is ousted from the troupe and replaced by robert armin when they think he has betrayed their involvement in the essex rebellion . in fact armin is the informer , who has framed kempe to replace him . in the 1998 john madden film shakespeare in love , he is played by veteran character actor patrick barlow . in 2005 's tv-film a waste of shame he is portrayed by john voce . in the 2007 doctor who episode '' the shakespeare code '' , kempe is played by david westhead . in the 2016 bbc sitcom upstart crow , kempe is played by spencer jones as a parody of modern comedian ricky gervais . in the 2017 television series will , he is portrayed by william houston . literature . kempe is a key character in kevin sylvester 's 2015 novel for young adults neil flambé and the bard 's banquet , published by simon & schuster books kempe appears in ann young 's 2002 novel for young adults the nine days wonder , published by east hall press . in neil gaiman 's 1991 graphic novel the sandman : dream country , kempe is depicted in the issue a midsummer night 's dream , a short story about shakespeare 's first performance of the play . kempe also appears in king of shadows , a 1999 children 's fiction book which shows kempe as a clown dancing a nine days ' morris . in harry turtledove 's alternate history 2002 novel ruled britannia kempe is one of the main characters . his off-stage personality is indistinguishable from the characters he plays on stage , and his antics provide much of the humour in the novel , which is set during a time of grim peril . in j . b . cheaney 's 2004 novel the true prince along with more of the lord chamberlain 's men . kempe 's jig is referenced in geoffrey hill 's poem '' after reading children of albion ( 1969 ) '' from his a treatise of civil power , published in 2007 . stage . kempe was the title character in dan roentsch 's play will kemp . roentsch '' '' will kemp '' & f false william gibson depicts kempe as a moody tragedian in his 1968 play a cry of players , a significant departure from kempe 's actual performance style . in 2008 , comedian tim fitzhigham re-enacted kemp 's nine day 's wonder by morris dancing from london to norwich , forming the basis of his play the bard 's fool , performed at the edinburgh fringe . . footnotes . references . records of early english drama – norwich 1540–1642 , 1984 , 114–115 norwich mayors ' court books xiii p . & nbsp ; 418 – record of payment to kemp for his jig bald , r . c . '' leicester 's men in the low countries . '' review of english studies 19 ( 1943 ) , 395–7 . collier , j . p . lives of the original actors in shakespeare 's plays . london : shakespeare society , 1853 . nielsen , james . '' kempe at the globe . '' shakespeare quarterly 44 ( 1993 ) , 466–468 . nunzeger , edwin . a dictionary of actors and of other persons associated with the public presentation of plays in england before 1642 . new haven : yale university press , 1929 . shapiro , james . 1599 , a year in the life of william shakespeare , '' prologue '' and chapter 1 , '' a battle of wills '' . ( 2005 ) , 1–49 . wright , louis . '' will kemp and commedia dell'arte . '' modern language notes 41 ( 1926 ) , 516–520 . external links . text of kempe 's nine days wonder at project gutenberg .