1962 in music

specific locations . 1962 in british music 1962 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1962 in country music 1962 in jazz . events . january 1 – the beatles and the tremeloes both audition at decca records in london which has the option of signing one group only . the beatles are rejected , mainly as they come from liverpool and the others are dagenham-based , nearer london . january 5 – the first album on which the beatles play , my bonnie , credited to '' tony sheridan and the beat brothers '' ( recorded last june in hamburg and produced by bert kaempfert ) , is released by polydor . january 24 – brian epstein signs on to manage the beatles . february 16 – conductor bruno walter , the day before his death , ends his last letter with : '' despite all the dark experiences of today i am still confident that palestrina will remain . the work has all the elements of immortality '' . liner notes to the rafael kubelik/nicolai gedda/dietrich fischer-dieskau dg recording . march 18 – the 7th eurovision song contest , held at villa louvigny in luxembourg city , is won by france with the song '' un premier amour '' , performed by isabelle aubret . march 19 – bob dylan releases his debut album , bob dylan , in the united states , featuring mostly folk standards . april 6 – new york philharmonic concert of april 6 , 1962 : leonard bernstein causes controversy with his remarks before a concert featuring glenn gould with the new york philharmonic , when he ( bernstein ) announces that although he disagrees with gould 's slow tempi in brahms ' piano concerto no . 1 , he finds gould 's ideas fascinating and will conduct the piece anyway . bernstein 's action receives a withering review from the new york times music critic harold c . schonberg . april 7 – mick jagger and keith richards meet brian jones at the ealing club , a blues club in london . april 10 – former beatle stuart sutcliffe dies from cerebral paralysis caused by a brain hemorrhage in hamburg , germany . april 12 – a recording is made of bob dylan 's concert at the town hall , in new york city by columbia records . ( columbia eventually release the recording of '' tomorrow is a long time '' from this concert . ) april 24 – bob dylan begins recording the freewheelin ' bob dylan in new york . may 29 – the 4th annual grammy awards are held in chicago , los angeles and new york . henry mancini wins the most awards with five , including record of the year and song of the year for his song '' moon river '' . judy garland 's judy at carnegie hall wins album of the year , while peter nero wins best new artist . june 6 – the beatles play their first session at emi 's abbey road studios in london . june 19 – the film version of the musical the music man is released to theaters by warner bros . august 2 – robert allen zimmerman legally changes his name to bob dylan in the new york supreme court . august 16 – the beatles fire drummer pete best and replace him with ringo starr . august 17 – telstar is released in the uk . the song will eventually be the first song by a british group ever to reach the top spot on the billboard top 100 in the united states , proving to be a precursor to the british invasion . august 18 – the beatles play their first live engagement with the line-up of john , paul , george and ringo , at hulme hall , port sunlight on the wirral peninsula . august 20 – albert grossman becomes bob dylan 's manager . august 23 – john lennon marries cynthia powell in an unpublicised register office ceremony at mount pleasant , liverpool . september 21 – new musical express , the british music magazine , publishes a story about two 13-year-old schoolgirls , sue and mary , releasing a disc on decca and adds '' a liverpool group , the beatles , have recorded 'love me do ' for parlophone records , set for october 5 release . '' september 22 – bob dylan appears for the first time at carnegie hall in new york city as part of a hootenanny including the first public performance of '' a hard rain 's a- gon na fall '' . september 23 – opening concert at the new york philharmonic 's new home , david geffen hall at lincoln center for the performing arts , conducted by leonard bernstein and broadcast live on television across the united states by nbc . the opening work , aaron copland 's specially commissioned connotations , sends '' shock waves through the world of music '' . other commissions featured include darius milhaud 's overture philharmonique and samuel barber 's andromache 's farewell for soprano and orchestra . the following day , john browning premières barber 's piano concerto at the venue and on october 4 william schuman 's symphony no . 8 is premièred here . october 5 – the beatles ' first single in their own right , '' love me do '' / '' p.s . i love you '' , is released in the uk on emi 's parlophone label . october 14 – italian tenor sergio franchi makes his american tv debut on the ed sullivan show . october 17 – the beatles make their first televised appearance , on granada television 's local news programme people and places . october 20 – peter , paul and mary 's self-titled debut album reaches no . 1 on the billboard 200 album chart . october 21 – sergio franchi makes his american concert debut at carnegie hall ( sans microphone ) , promoted by sol hurok . november 11 ken russell 's film elgar is shown in bbc television 's monitor series in the united kingdom . joan baez has all of her first three albums on the billboard charts , on their way to gold status . two pete seeger classic songs reach the billboard pop charts : '' where have all the flowers gone '' recorded by the kingston trio reaches no . 21 . '' if i had a hammer '' , recorded by peter , paul and mary , reaches no . 10 . the first american folk blues festival , initiated by german promoters , tours europe ; artists include sonny terry , brownie mcghee and t-bone walker . its only uk date , 21 october at the free trade hall , manchester , is influential on the british r & b scene , with the audience including mick jagger , keith richards and brian jones of the rolling stones with jimmy page , paul jones , john mayall and other musicians , and with a second show filmed and shown on independent television . georges auric becomes director of the opéra national de paris . andré hodeir 's book , since debussy , makes controversial claims about the importance of jean barraqué as a composer . josé manuel calderón becomes the first dominican musician to record bachata , at the radiotelevisión dominicana studios . the spokane philharmonic orchestra becomes the spokane symphony . dalida is named calabrian citizen of honour and receives the radio monte carlo oscar with johnny hallyday . paul & paula make their first appearance together while attending howard payne college in brownwood , texas . the mashed potato is a popular dance craze , with several songs based around the style . lou harrison visits taiwan ; on his return he forms , with william colvig , richard dee and lily chin , the first american ensemble to play traditional chinese music . sergio franchi is signed to an rca red seal recording contract in london by norman luboff . bands formed . booker t . & the mg's herman 's hermits the rolling stones the trashmen question mark and the mysterians the routers . albums released . adam faith – adam faith after hours – joni james alice faye sings her famous movie hits – alice faye along comes ruth – ruth brown all aboard the blue train – johnny cash all alone – frank sinatra all the sad young men – anita o'day baby it 's you – the shirelles bashin ' : the unpredictable jimmy smith – jimmy smith because you 're mine – keely smith the best of ball , barber and bilk – kenny ball , chris barber , and acker bilk the best of irving berlin 's songs from mr . president – perry como with kaye ballard and sandy stewart the best of julie – julie london the best of sam cooke – sam cooke bewitching-lee – peggy lee big band percussion – ted heath and his music big band specials – june christy billy rose 's jumbo – soundtrack blues cross country – peggy lee bobby vee meets the crickets – bobby vee and the crickets a bobby vee recording session – bobby vee bobby vee 's golden greats – bobby vee bob dylan – bob dylan ( debut album ) bo diddley – bo diddley bo diddley & company – bo diddley bo diddley 's a twister – bo diddley bobby darin sings ray charles – bobby darin bouquet of roses – les paul and mary ford buddy and soul – buddy greco bursting out with the all-star big band ! – oscar peterson by request – perry como cafrune – jorge cafrune cal tjader plays harold arlen – cal tjader cal tjader plays the contemporary music of mexico and brazil – cal tjader the cannonball adderley sextet in new york – cannonball adderley sextet cannonball in europe ! – cannonball adderley cha cha de amor – dean martin cherokeely swings – keely smith chuck berry twist – chuck berry the classic della – della reese close up in swing – erroll garner coltrane – john coltrane come waltz with me – steve lawrence comin ' home baby – mel tormé dance with ike & tina turner 's kings of rhythm – kings of rhythm danny boy and other songs i love to sing – andy williams dear lonely hearts – nat king cole del shannon – del shannon dinah '62 – dinah washington dino : italian love songs – dean martin dino latino – dean martin dizzy on the french riviera – dizzy gillespie do n't go in the lion 's cage tonight – julie andrews do n't mess with tess – teresa brewer do n't worry 'bout me – billy eckstine drinking again – dinah washington duet – doris day with andré previn dynamite ! – ike & tina turner the electrifying aretha franklin – aretha franklin ella swings brightly with nelson – ella fitzgerald ella swings gently with nelson – ella fitzgerald the fabulous hits of dinah shore – dinah shore the first family – vaughn meader first time out – clare fischer folklore – jorge cafrune for those who think young – joanie sommers for twisters only – chubby checker french style – dean martin full house – wes montgomery the garland touch – judy garland the gift of love – jack jones girls ! girls ! girls ! ( ost ) – elvis presley go – dexter gordon go on home – patti page golden age of donegan – lonnie donegan gospel time – ruth brown great motion picture themes – various artists hancock – tony hancock hello young lovers – nancy wilson high flying – lambert , hendricks & ross hits of the rockin ' 50s – bobby vee horn a-plenty – al hirt howlin ' wolf – howlin ' wolf howling wolf sings the blues – howlin ' wolf ( released , recorded 1951–52 ) hymns from the heart – johnny cash i cry by night – kay starr i feel a song coming on – joni james i left my heart in san francisco – tony bennett i wan na be loved – dinah washington i 'm your girl – joni james in love – dinah washington in other words – petula clark india 's most distinguished musician in concert – ravi shankar instant party ! – everly brothers it 's trad , dad ! ( ost ) – various artists i 've got a lot of livin ' to do – jack jones jazz workshop revisited – cannonball adderley let 's talk about love – joanie sommers joan baez in concert – joan baez johnny get angry – joanie sommers jorge cafrune – jorge cafrune just plain country – kay starr lena.lovely and alive – lena horne lena on the blue side – lena horne let 's face the music – shirley bassey with the nelson riddle orchestra let 's go ! with the routers – the routers let 's love – buddy greco let 's talk about love – joanie sommers linger awhile – vic damone live at the diplomat – damita jo the lively ones – vic damone love letters – julie london love makes the world go 'round – anna maria alberghetti marion montgomery swings for winners and losers – marion montgomery matt monro – matt monro miles davis at carnegie hall – miles davis a million dollars ' worth of twang volume 2 – duane eddy modern sounds in country and western music – ray charles modern sounds in country and western music volume two – ray charles moon beams – bill evans moon river and other great movie themes – andy williams more cole español – nat king cole mr . broadway – tony bennett the music man ( ost ) – various artists my bonnie – tony sheridan my son , the folk singer – allan sherman nancy wilson/cannonball adderley – nancy wilson and cannonball adderley nat king cole sings/george shearing plays – nat king cole and the george shearing quintet nina at the village gate – nina simone nina simone sings ellington – nina simone no strings – la vern baker , chris connor , bobby short oh ! look at me now – bobby darin on stage with the george mitchell minstrels – george mitchell minstrels on the way up – ann-margret out of the shadows – the shadows past midnight – margaret whiting patti page sings golden hits of the boys – patti page peter , paul and mary – peter , paul and mary a picture of you – joe brown poema de amor – elis regina point of no return – frank sinatra porgy and bess – original soundtrack pot luck – elvis presley ramblin ' rose – nat king cole rapture – johnny mathis the real ambassadors – dave brubeck , louis armstrong , carmen mcrae , and lambert , hendricks & ross rock ' n ' roll no.2 – elvis presley ( re-issue ) romantic italian songs – sergio franchi rhythm is my business – ella fitzgerald s wonderful 's marvellous – ray conniff sacred songs – harry secombe sammy davis jr . all-star spectactular – sammy davis , jr . sammy davis jr . belts the best of broadway – sammy davis , jr . sarah + 2 – sarah vaughan see see rider – la vern baker sentimentally yours – patsy cline the shirelles and king curtis give a twist party – the shirelles and king curtis side by side – sandler & young sinatra and strings – frank sinatra sinatra and swingin ' brass – frank sinatra sinatra sings great songs from great britain – frank sinatra sinatra sings of love and things – frank sinatra sinatra–basie : an historic musical first – frank sinatra and count basie sincerely yours – robert goulet sing something simple – cliff adams singers something warm – oscar peterson the song is paris – jackie paris sophisticated lady – julie london soul – timi yuro the sound of johnny cash – johnny cash strange enchantment – vic damone sugar ' n ' spice – peggy lee surfin ' safari – the beach boys swinging all the way with frances faye – frances faye take good care of my baby – bobby vee takin ' off – herbie hancock time for 2 – anita o'day and cal tjader tears and laughter – dinah washington the tender , the moving , the swinging aretha franklin – aretha franklin things and other things – bobby darin 32 minutes and 17 seconds – cliff richard and the shadows this is anita – anita o'day this was my love – jack jones time for two – anita o'day and cal tjader tony bennett at carnegie hall – tony bennett tope puestro – jorge cafrune tops with me – helen shapiro trumpet and strings – al hirt twangy guitar – silky strings – duane eddy twist with chubby checker – chubby checker twist with keely smith – keely smith twistin ' and twangin ' – duane eddy twistin ' knights at the roundtable – bill haley & his comets twistin ' the night away – sam cooke two of us – robert goulet vamp of the roaring twenties – dorothy provine the vivacious one – ann-margret warm and willing – andy williams we wish you a merry christmas – ray conniff west side story – oscar peterson trio what kind of fool am i and other show-stoppers – sammy davis jr . what kind of fool am i ? – keely smith whispering hope – jo stafford and gordon macrae you 'll never walk alone – doris day you 're mine you – sarah vaughan . biggest hit singles . the following singles achieved the highest chart positions in 1962 . gyorgy ligeti – poème symphonique francis jackson – intrada for organ , op . 84 no . 6 andré jolivet – concerto for cello n°1 wojciech kilar – riff 62 for symphony orchestra darius milhaud a frenchman in new york invocation à l'ange raphael overture philharmonique symphony no . 12 rurale krzysztof penderecki – stabat mater francis poulenc sonata for oboe sonata for clarinet william schuman – symphony no . 8 dmitri shostakovich – symphony no . 13 ( shostakovich ) ezra sims – third quartet la monte young – the second dream of the high-tension line stepdown transformer . opera . camargo guarnieri – um homem só ( tragic opera in one act , libretto by gianfrancesco guarnieri , premiered on november 29 at the theatro municipal in rio de janeiro ) mario castelnuovo-tedesco – the importance of being earnest carlisle floyd – the passion of jonathan wade michael tippett – king priam bruno maderna – don perlimplin ( ovvero il trionfo dell'amore e dell'immaginazione ) . jazz . musical theatre . all-american & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway production blitz ! ( lionel bart ) – london production a funny thing happened on the way to the forum ( stephen sondheim ) – broadway production gentlemen prefer blondes & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production the golden apple & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; off-broadway revival of 1954 broadway production i can get it for you wholesale & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway production little mary sunshine & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production little me & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway production opened at the lunt-fontanne theatre on november 17 and ran for 257 performances no strings broadway production opened at the 54th street theater on march 15 and ran for 580 performances scapa london production opened at the adelphi theatre on march 8 and ran for 44 performances stop the world – i want to get off ( anthony newley and leslie bricusse ) – broadway production . musical films . bees saal baad , starring biswajeet billy rose 's jumbo released december 6 starring doris day , jimmy durante , stephen boyd and martha raye gypsy starring rosalind russell , natalie wood and karl malden . directed by mervyn leroy . the music man starring robert preston , shirley jones and hermione gingold . directed by morton dacosta . the road to hong kong state fair wild guitar . births . january 4 robin guthrie ( the cocteau twins ) peter steele ( type o negative ) january 8 – chris marion , american musician ( little river band ) january 13 – trace adkins , american country music singer-songwriter january 15 – tony rebel , reggae/dancehall artist january 16 – paul webb ( talk talk ) january 22 – jimmy herring , american guitarist january 28 – sam phillips ( singer ) , singer january 31 – sophie muller , british music video director february 1 – tomoyasu hotei , japanese guitarist ( boøwy ) february 4 – clint black , american singer-songwriter , guitarist and producer february 5 – martin nievera , filipino singer and tv personality february 6 – axl rose ( guns n ' roses , la guns , ac/dc ) february 7 david bryan , keyboardist for the band bon jovi garth brooks , country singer february 10 – cliff burton , bassist for metallica d . 1986 february 11 – sheryl crow , american singer february 17 – david mccomb , australian singer-songwriter and guitarist ( the triffids and the blackeyed susans ) ( d . 1999 ) february 19 – francisco alejandro gutierrez , singer february 21 – mark arm , born mark mclaughlin , american grunge vocalist ( mudhoney ) february 22 olivier latry , french organist michael wilton , american progressive metal guitarist queensrÿche february 24 – michelle shocked , american musician march 2 – jon bon jovi , lead singer for the band bon jovi march 5 – craig reid and charlie reid , the proclaimers march 7 – taylor dayne , american singer march 10 – gary clark ( musician ) , scottish singer-songwriter , music producer ( the veronicas , delta goodrem , reece mastin , gin wigmore ) march 15 – terence trent d'arby , american-born english singer march 17 – clare grogan , scottish actress and singer march 24 angèle dubeau , canadian violinist renee rosnes , canadian jazz pianist/composer rita , israeli pop singer and actress march 30 – m.c . hammer , american rapper march 31 – phil leadbetter , american musician april 3 – mike ness ( social distortion ) april 8 – izzy stradlin of guns n ' roses , ju ju hounds april 12 art alexakis , american singer and musician ( everclear ) michael english , american christian singer april 13 – hillel slovak , american rock musician ( red hot chili peppers ) ( d . 1988 ) april 16 – ian mackaye , lead singer of minor threat and fugazi may 2 — alain johannes , musician and producer . eleven ( band ) , queens of the stone age , them crooked vultures . may 9 – david gahan , english singer ( depeche mode ) may 12 – brett gurewitz ( bad religion ) may 14 ian astbury , british rock singer ( the cult ) c.c . deville , american rock guitarist ( poison ) may 16 – erwin gutawa , indonesian composer may 28 – brandon cruz , american child actor and musician may 31 – corey hart june 8 – nick rhodes ( duran duran ) june 10 – wong ka kui , hong kong composer , songwriter , musician and singer ( died 1993 ) june 15 – andrea rost , hungarian lyric soprano june 16 – femi kuti , nigerian saxophonist june 19 – paula abdul , american pop vocalist june 20 – mark de gli antoni , soul coughing june 21 – viktor tsoi , soviet underground singer and songwriter ( died 1990 ) june 22 – bobby gillespie , scottish musician ( primal scream ) june 23 chuck billy , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( testament and dublin death patrol ) steve shelley , american musician ( sonic youth and crucifucks ) june 26 – andrej šeban , guitarist june 27 – michael ball , british stage actor and singer july 7 – mark white , bassist ( spin doctors ) july 8 – joan osborne , american singer july 13 – rhonda vincent , american singer-songwriter and mandolin player july 21 – lee aaron , canadian rock and jazz singer july 22 steve albini , guitarist martine st . clair , canadian singer and actress july 26 – mairéad ní mhaonaigh , irish musician july 27 – karl mueller ( soul asylum ) ( d . 2005 ) july 29 – lisa ono , japanese-brazilian bossa nova singer august 4 – paul reynolds ( a flock of seagulls ) august 7 – andrew glover , composer august 17 – gilby clarke , american rock musician ( guns n ' roses ) august 25 – vivian campbell , rock guitarist ( def leppard ) september 26 – tracey thorn , english singer , songwriter and writer . october 3 – tommy lee , drummer ( mötley crüe ) october 5 – ken noda , concert pianist and composer october 12 – chris botti , jazz trumpeter october 15 – mark reznicek , alternative rock drummer ( toadies ) october 16 flea , american-australian actor and rock bassist ( red hot chili peppers ) dmitri hvorostovsky , operatic baritone ( d . 2017 ) october 25 – chad smith , rock drummer ( red hot chili peppers ) november 1 magne furuholmen , norwegian rock keyboardist ( a-ha ) anthony kiedis , american lead singer of red hot chili peppers november 2 ron mcgovney , american rock bassist ( metallica ) graham waterhouse , english composer november 3 – marilyn , born peter robinson , pop vocalist november 9 – steve '' silk '' hurley , house-music producer and club dj november 11 mic michaeli , swedish rock keyboardist ( europe ) james morrison , australian musician november 12 – brix smith , american singer and guitarist ( the fall and the adult net ) november 18 – kirk hammett , lead guitarist of metallica november 20 – peng liyuan , chinese folk singer and first lady november 21 – steven curtis chapman , american christian music singer-songwriter november 27 charlie benante , anthrax mike bordin ( faith no more ) november 28 – matt cameron ( soundgarden , pearl jam ) december 4 – vinnie dombroski ( sponge ) december 5 – josé cura , argentine tenor december 8 – marty friedman ( megadeth ) december 25 – francis dunnery , lead singer , it bites december 28 – michel petrucciani , french musician ( d . 1999 ) december 31 – jennifer higdon , american composer . deaths . january 29 – fritz kreisler , violinist , 86 february 5 – jacques ibert , composer , 71 february 7 – roy atwell , american actor , comedian and composer , 83 february 17 – bruno walter , conductor , 85 february 22 – attila the hun , calypso singer , 69 march 24 – jean goldkette , jazz musician , 69 april 10 – stuart sutcliffe , former member of the beatles , 21 ( cerebral paralysis caused by a brain hemorrhage ) may 24 – cloe elmo , operatic contralto , 52 may 27 – egon petri , pianist , 81 june 12 – john ireland , pianist and composer , 82 june 13 – sir eugene aynsley goossens , conductor , 69 june 15 – alfred cortot , pianist and conductor , 84 july 11 – rené maison , operatic tenor , 66 july 12 – roger wolfe kahn , bandleader , 54 ( heart attack ) july 25 – christie macdonald , actress and singer , 87 august 19 – emilius bangert , composer and organist , 79 september 6 hanns eisler , composer , 64 dermot troy , lyric tenor , 35 ( heart attack ) october 6 – solomon linda , zulu musician , 53 october 15 – joseph noyon , french organist and composer , 74 november 19 – clara clemens , concert contralto and daughter of mark twain , 88 december 7 – kirsten flagstad , operatic soprano , 67 december 13 – harry barris , us singer , composer and pianist , 57 ( alcohol-related ) december 22 – roy palmer , jazz trombonist , 70 december 31 – bella alten , operatic soprano , 85 date unknown – palladam sanjiva rao , flautist and carnatic musician . awards . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1962 : un premier amour , sung by isabelle aubret for france ( music by claude-henri vic , text by roland stephane valade ) . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1962 . ivor novello awards . best-selling a-side – the tornados , '' telstar '' tony osborne . see also . list of billboard hot 100 number-one singles of 1962 . references .