John Mayall

biography . born in macclesfield , cheshire in 1933 , mayall was the son of murray mayall , a guitarist and jazz music aficianado . from an early age , john was drawn to the sounds of american blues players such as lead belly , albert ammons , pinetop smith and eddie lang , and taught himself to play the piano , guitars , and harmonica . biography at the official john mayall site . as of 2009 there is no privileged source for biographical data on john mayall . the book john mayall : blues breaker by richard newman , sanctuary publishing , ltd . ( 1996 ) ; is an unauthorized biography disavowed by mayall himself . many of his songs have lyrics directly referring to events in his life . mayall spent three years in korea for national service and , during a period of leave , he bought his first electric guitar . back in england , he enrolled at manchester college of art ( now part of manchester metropolitan university ) and started playing with semi-professional bands . after graduation , he obtained a job as an art designer but continued to play with local musicians . in 1963 , he opted for a full-time musical career and moved to london . his previous craft would be put to good use in the designing of covers for many of his coming albums . since the end of the 1960s mayall has lived in the us . a brush fire destroyed his house in laurel canyon in 1979 , seriously damaging his musical collections and archives . mayall has been married twice , and has six grandchildren . his second wife , maggie mayall , is an american blues performer , and since the early 1980s took part in the management of her husband 's career . the pair divorced in 2011 '' maggie mayall : no limit blues '' , interview by michael limnios , blues.gr , 19 may 2012 and maggie wrote online about the experience . the divorce diaries by maggie mayall , 7 december 2011 in 2005 mayall was appointed officer of the order of the british empire ( obe ) in the honours list . . early years . in 1956 , with college fellow peter ward , mayall had founded the powerhouse four which consisted of both men and other local musicians with whom they played at local dances . in 1962 mayall became a member of the blues syndicate . the band was formed by trumpeter john rowlands and alto saxophonist jack massarik , who had seen the alexis korner band at a manchester club and wanted to try a similar blend of jazz and blues . it also included rhythm guitarist ray cummings and drummer hughie flint , whom mayall already knew . in 1962 john and his band were frequent and popular artists at all night r & b sessions at the 'twisted wheel ' cellar club in central manchester . alexis korner persuaded mayall to opt for a full-time musical career and move to london , where korner introduced him to many other musicians and helped them to find gigs . in late 1963 , with his band , which was now called the bluesbreakers , mayall started playing at the marquee club . the line-up was mayall , ward , john mcvie on bass and guitarist bernie watson , formerly of cyril davies and the r & b all-stars . the next spring mayall obtained his first recording date with producer ian samwell . the band , with martin hart at the drums , recorded two tracks : '' crawling up a hill '' as well as '' mr . james '' . shortly after , hughie flint replaced hart and roger dean took the guitar from bernie watson . this line-up backed john lee hooker on his british tour in 1964 . mayall was offered a recording contract by decca and , on 7 december 1964 , a live performance of the band was recorded at the klooks kleek . a later studio-recorded single , '' crocodile walk '' , was released along with the album , but both failed to achieve any success and the contract was terminated . in april 1965 former yardbirds guitarist eric clapton replaced roger dean and john mayall 's career entered a decisive phase . a chronicle of the main events in mayall 's early career is to be found in blues-rock explosion , eds . stravick , s . and roos , j . , ( 2001 ) old goat , . mid-1960s through 1971 . . eric clapton as guitarist , 1965–66 . in 1965 , with eric clapton as their new guitar player , the bluesbreakers began attracting considerable attention . that summer the band cut a couple of tracks for a single , '' i 'm your witchdoctor '' b/w '' telephone blues '' ( released in october ) . during clapton 's stay with the bluesbreakers , the ( in ) famous graffito '' clapton is god '' appeared on a wall in the london underground . in august , however , clapton left for a jaunt to greece with a bunch of relative musical amateurs calling themselves the 'glands ' . john weider , john slaughter , and geoff krivit attempted to fill in as bluesbreaker guitarist but , finally , peter green took charge . john mcvie was dismissed , and during the next few months jack bruce , from the graham bond , played bass . in november 1965 clapton returned , and green departed as mayall had guaranteed clapton his spot back in the bluesbreakers whenever he tired of the glands . marc roberty , the eric clapton scrapbook , 1994 , new york : citadel press , p.14 mcvie was allowed back , and bruce left to join manfred mann , but not before a live date by the mayall-clapton-bruce-flint line-up was recorded on mayall 's two-track tape recorder at london 's flamingo club in november . the rough recording provided tracks that later appeared on the 1969 compilation looking back and the 1977 primal solos . roberty , pp . & nbsp ; 12–14 the same line-up also entered the studio to record a planned single , '' on top of the world '' , which was not released at that time . mayall and clapton cut a couple of tracks without the others ( although some sources give this as occurring back in the summer ) : '' lonely years '' b/w '' bernard jenkins '' was released as a single the next august on producer mike vernon 's purdah records label ( both tracks appeared again two decades later in clapton 's crossroads box set ) . in a november 1965 session , blues pianist-singer champion jack dupree ( originally from new orleans but in the 1960s living in europe ) got mayall and clapton to play on a few tracks . in april 1966 the bluesbreakers returned to decca studios to record a second lp with producer vernon . the sessions , with horn arrangements for some tracks ( john almond on baritone sax , alan skidmore on tenor sax , and dennis healey on trumpet ) , lasted just three days . blues breakers with eric clapton was released in the uk on 22 july 1966 . several of the 12 tracks were covers of pure chicago blues ( side 1 kicking off strong with otis rush 's '' all your love '' and freddy king 's hit instrumental '' hide away '' here spelled without a space as '' hideaway '' ) ; mayall wrote or arranged 5 ( such as '' double crossing time '' , a slow blues with a scorching solo by co-writer clapton ) ; and eric debuted as lead vocalist , and began his practice of paying tribute to robert johnson , with '' ramblin ' on my mind '' . the album was mayall 's commercial breakthrough , rising to no . 6 on the british chart , and has since gained classic status , largely for the audacious aggressiveness and molten fluidity of clapton 's guitar playing . '' it 's eric clapton who steals the limelight , '' reports music mag beat instrumental , adding with unintended understatement , '' and no doubt several copies of the album will be sold on the strength of his name . '' beat instrumental , september 1966 in the meantime , on 11 june the formation of cream—clapton , bassist jack bruce , and drummer ginger baker—had been revealed in the music press , much to the embarrassment of clapton , who had not said anything about this to mayall . ( after a may bluesbreakers gig at which baker had sat in , he and clapton had first discussed forming their own band , and surreptitious rehearsal jams with bruce soon commenced . ) eric 's last scheduled gig with the bluesbreakers was 17 july in bexley , south-east of london ; cream made a warmup club debut 29 july in manchester and its '' official '' live debut two days later at the sixth national jazz and blues festival , windsor . peter green as guitarist , 1966–67 . mayall had to replace clapton , and he succeeded in persuading peter green to come back . during the following year , with green on guitar and various other sidemen , some 40 tracks were recorded . the album a hard road was released in february 1967 . today its expanded versions include most of this material , and the album itself also stands as a classic . in early 1967 , mayall released an ep recorded with american blues harpist paul butterfield . but peter green gave notice and soon started his own project , peter green 's fleetwood mac , which eventually was to include all three of mayall 's bluesbreakers at this time : green , mcvie , and drummer mick fleetwood who was a bluesbreaker for only a few weeks . two live albums , '' live in 1967 '' volumes i and ii , featuring this lineup were released on forty below records in 2015 and 2016 . mick taylor as guitarist , 1967–69 . mayall 's first choice to replace green was 18-year-old david o'list , guitarist from the attack . o'list declined , however , and went on to form the nice with organist keith emerson . through both a '' musicians wanted '' ad in melody maker on 10 june and his own search , mayall found three other potential guitarists for his bluesbreakers , a black musician named terry edmonds , john moorshead , and 18-year-old mick taylor . the latter made the band quickly , but mayall also decided to hire edmonds as a rhythm guitarist for a few days . in the meantime , on a single day in may 1967 , mayall had assembled a studio album to showcase his own abilities . former artwoods drummer keef hartley appeared on only half of the tracks , and everything else was played by mayall . the album was released in november titled the blues alone . a six-piece line-up—consisting of mayall , mick taylor as lead guitarist , john mcvie still on bass , hughie flint or hartley on drums , and rip kant and chris mercer on saxophones—recorded the album crusade on 11 and 12 july 1967 . these bluesbreakers spent most of the year touring abroad , and mayall taped the shows on a portable recorder . at the end of the tour , he had over sixty hours of tapes , which he edited into an album in two volumes : diary of a band , vols . 1 & 2 , released in february 1968 . meanwhile , a few line-up changes had occurred : mcvie had departed and was replaced by paul williams , who himself soon quit to join alan price and was replaced by keith tillman ; dick heckstall-smith had taken the sax spot . following a us tour , there were more line-up changes , starting with the troublesome bass position . first mayall replaced bassist tillman with 15-year-old andy fraser . within six weeks , though , fraser left to join free and was replaced by tony reeves , previously a member of the new jazz orchestra . hartley was required to leave , and he was replaced by new jazz orchestra drummer jon hiseman ( who had also played with the graham bond organisation ) . henry lowther , who played violin and cornet , joined in february 1968 . two months later the bluesbreakers recorded bare wires , co-produced by mayall and mike vernon , which came up to no . 6 . hiseman , reeves , and heckstall-smith then moved on to form colosseum . the mayall line-up retained mick taylor and added drummer colin allen ( formerly of zoot money 's big roll band / dantalian 's chariot , and georgie fame ) and a young bassist named stephen thompson . in august 1968 the new quartet recorded blues from laurel canyon . on 13 june 1969 , after nearly two years with mayall , taylor left and joined the rolling stones . mark-almond period , 1969–70 . chas crane filled in briefly on guitar . drummer allen departed to join stone the crows . this left as the only holdover bassist thompson who would also eventually join stone the crows . mayall tried a new format with lower volume , acoustic instruments , and no drummer . he recruited acoustic fingerstyle guitarist jon mark and flautist-saxophonist john almond . mark was best known as marianne faithfull 's accompanist for three years and for having been a member of the band sweet thursday ( which included pianist nicky hopkins and future cat stevens collaborator alun davies , also a guitarist ) . almond had played with zoot money and alan price and was no stranger to mayall 's music—he had played baritone sax on 4 cuts of blues breakers with eric clapton and some of a hard road . this new band was markedly different from previous mayall projects , and its making is well documented both on the 1999 double cd the masters and on the 2004 dvd the godfather of british blues/the turning point . along with the big change in sound , mayall decided on a big change in scenery : a move to los angeles . the new band made its us debut at the newport jazz festival on 5 july , whilst the performance of 12 july at the fillmore east provided the tracks for the live album the turning point . a studio album , empty rooms , was recorded with the same personnel , with mayall 's next bassist , former canned heat member larry taylor , playing bass in a duet with thompson on '' to a princess . '' . harvey mandel as guitarist , 1970–71 . mayall continued the experiment of formations without drummers on two more albums , although he took on a new electric blues-rock-r & b band in guitarist harvey mandel and bassist larry taylor , both plucked from canned heat , and wailing violinist don '' sugarcane '' harris , lately of the johnny otis show and formerly with the mothers of invention . on usa union ( recorded in los angeles , 27–28 july 1970 ) , though , mandel was compelled to make do without his remarkable sustain and usage of feedback as musical , even melodic , technique ; and on memories the band was stripped down to a trio with taylor and ventures guitarist gerry mcgee . in november 1970 mayall launched a recording project involving many of the most notable musicians with whom he had played during the previous several years . the double album back to the roots features clapton , mick taylor , gerry mcgee and harvey mandel on guitar ; sugarcane harris on violin ; almond on woodwinds ; thompson and larry taylor on bass ; and hartley on drums . paul lagos was with sugarcane and ended up drumming on five . mayall wrote all the songs and sang all the vocals , as usual by now , plus played harmonica , guitar , keyboards , drums , and percussion . the london sessions took place in january 1971 and as such represent some of clapton 's last work before derek and the dominos ' attempted layla follow-up sessions and band disintegration that spring . back to the roots did not promote new names , and usa union and memories had been recorded with american musicians . mayall had exhausted his catalytic role on the british blues-rock scene and was living in l.a . yet , the list of musicians who benefited from association with him , starting with ruling the london blues scene , remains impressive . pete frame , the complete rock family trees , omnibus press 1993 . . 1970s . by the start of the 1970s mayall had relocated in the usa where he spent most of the next 15 years , recording with local musicians for various labels . in august 1971 , mayall produced a jazz-oriented session for bluesman albert king the result was shelved , but ultimately it was released in 1986 as the lost session . mayall had played in 1968 at the winterland and the fillmore in san francisco , sharing triple bills with albert king and jimi hendrix ( concert available from wolfgang 's vault ) . and a few months later took on tour the musicians present in the studio . a live album jazz blues fusion was released in the following year , with mayall on harmonica , guitar and piano , blue mitchell on trumpet , clifford solomon and ernie watts on saxophones , larry taylor on bass , ron selico on drums and freddy robinson on guitar . a few personnel changes are noted at the release of a similar album in 1973 , the live moving on . during the next decade mayall continued shifting musicians and switching labels and released a score of albums . tom wilson , don nix and allen toussaint occasionally served as producers . at this stage of his career most of mayall 's music was rather different from electric blues played by rock musicians , incorporating jazz , funk or pop elements and even adding female vocals . a notable exception is the last of the british blues ( 1978 ) , a live album excused apparently by its title for the brief return to this type of music . a recording of the show at the bottom line in new york , 10 july 1977 is available from wolfgang 's vault . return of the bluesbreakers . in 1982 mayall was reunited with mick taylor , john mcvie and colin allen , three musicians of his 1960s line-ups , for a two-year world tour from which a live album would emerge a decade later . in 1984 mayall restored the name bluesbreakers for a line-up comprising the two lead guitars of walter trout and coco montoya , bassist bobby haynes and drummer joe yuele . the mythic name did , perhaps , something to enhance the interest in a band which by all standards was already remarkable . a successful world tour and live recordings achieved the rest . in the early 1990s most of the excitement was already spent and buddy whittington became the sole lead guitarist in a formation which included then organist tom canning . 2000s . on the occasion of the 40th year of his career , mayall invited fellow musicians for the recording of a celebratory album . along for the ride appeared in 2001 , credited to john mayall and friends with twenty names listed on the cover , including some bluesbreakers , old and new , and also gary moore , jonny lang , steve cropper , steve miller , otis rush , billy gibbons , greg rzab , chris rea , jeff healey and shannon curfman . to celebrate his 70th birthday , mayall reunited with special guests eric clapton , mick taylor and chris barber during a fundraiser show . this '' unite for unicef '' concert took place on 19 july 2003 at the liverpool arena , and was captured on film for a dvd release . in 2005 , mayall was appointed an obe in the honours list . in november 2008 , mayall announced on his website he was disbanding the bluesbreakers , to cut back on his heavy workload and give himself freedom to work with other musicians . three months later a solo world tour was announced , with : rocky athas on guitar , greg rzab on bass , and jay davenport on drums . tom canning , on organ , joined the band for the tour which started in march 2009 . an album was released in september 2009 . since then , mayall has continued to tour with the same backing band , minus canning , who left due to other priorities . in 2018 , mayall made a new addition to his band ; his first female lead guitarist , carolyn wonderland . . forty below records period . in 2013 , mayall signed with producer eric corne 's label , forty below records . the two have produced 4 studio albums together , a special life featuring accordionist c.j . chenier , find a way to care , talk about that featuring joe walsh and nobody told me . corne also re-mastered some live recordings from 1967 featuring peter green , john mcvie and mick fleetwood released as live in 1967 volumes i and ii . in 2016 , mayall was inducted into the blues hall of fame . on june 25 , 2019 , the new york times magazine listed john mayall among hundreds of artists whose material was reportedly destroyed in the 2008 universal fire . mayall 's autobiography , blues from laurel canyon : my life as a bluesman , co-written with author joel mciver , was published by omnibus press in august 2019 . . band members . current members john mayall – vocals , keyboards , harmonica , rhythm guitar ( 1963–present ) greg rzab – bass , occasional percussion ( 1999–2000 , 2009–present ) jay davenport – drums , percussion ( 2009–present ) carolyn wonderland- lead guitar ( 2018–present ) as of 2020 . . discography . studio albums . see also . john mayall & the bluesbreakers british blues eric clapton peter green mick taylor . references . external links . john mayall 's website mayall : sessions , concerts concerts in wolfgang 's vault : fillmore west '68 ; bottom line '77 abc records press release john mayall interview 2007 – by brian d . holland john mayall interview with jarrod dicker ( 2009 ) john mayall interview ( 2010 ) published in the french magazine guitar part john mayall interview for the namm ( national association of music merchants ) oral history program july 3 , 2015