House of Vasa

kingdom of sweden . gustav i of sweden . gustav eriksson , a son of cecilia månsdotter and erik johansson vasa , was probably born in 1496 . the birth most likely took place in rydboholm castle , northeast of stockholm , the manor house of the father , erik . the newborn got his name , gustav , from erik 's grandfather gustav anundsson . since the end of the 14th century , sweden had been a part of the kalmar union with denmark–norway . the danish dominance in this union occasionally led to uprisings in sweden . during gustav 's childhood , parts of the swedish nobility tried to make sweden independent . gustav and his father erik supported the party of sten sture the younger , regent of sweden from 1512 , and its struggle against the danish king christian ii . following the battle of brännkyrka in 1518 , where sten sture 's troops beat the danish forces , it was decided that sten sture and king christian would meet in österhaninge for negotiations . to guarantee the safety of the king , the swedish side sent six hostages to be kept by the danes for as long as the negotiations lasted . however , christian did not show up for the negotiations , violated the deal with the swedish side , and took the hostages to copenhagen . the six hostages were hemming gadh , lars siggesson ( sparre ) , jöran siggesson ( sparre ) , olof ryning , bengt nilsson ( färla ) – and gustav eriksson . election as king . the election of gustav eriksson as a regent made many swedish nobles , who had so far stayed loyal to king christian , switch sides . some noblemen , still loyal to the king , chose to leave sweden , while others were killed . as a result , the swedish privy council lost old members who were replaced by supporters of gustav eriksson . most fortified cities and castles were conquered by gustav 's rebels , but the strongholds with the best defenses , including stockholm , were still under danish control . in 1522 , after negotiations between gustav eriksson 's faction and lübeck , the hanseatic city joined the war against denmark . the winter of 1523 saw their joint forces attack the danish and norwegian areas of scania , halland , blekinge , and bohuslän . during this winter , christian ii was overthrown and replaced by frederick i . the new king openly claimed the swedish throne and had hopes lübeck would abandon the swedish rebels . the german city , preferring an independent sweden to a strong kalmar union dominated by denmark , took advantage of the situation and put pressure on the rebels . the city wanted privileges on future trade as well as guarantees regarding the loans they had granted the rebels . the privy council and gustav eriksson knew the support from lübeck was absolutely crucial . as a response , the council decided to appoint gustav eriksson king . the ceremonial election of gustav as king of sweden took place when the leading men of sweden met in strängnäs in june 1523 . when the councilors of sweden had chosen gustav as king , he met with the two visiting councilors of lübeck . the german representatives supported the appointment without hesitation and declared it an act of god . gustav stated he had to bow to what was described as the will of god . in a meeting with the privy council , gustav eriksson announced his decision to accept . in the following ceremony , led by the deacon of strängnäs , laurentius andreae , gustav swore the royal oath . the next day , bishops and priests joined gustav in roggeborgen where andreae raised the holy sacrament above a kneeling gustav eriksson . flanked by the councilors of lübeck , gustav eriksson was brought to strängnäs cathedral where the king sat down in the choir with the swedish privy councilors on one side , and the lübeck representatives on the other . after the hymn '' te deum '' , andreae proclaimed gustav eriksson king of sweden . he was , however , still not crowned . in 1983 , in remembrance of the election of gustav as swedish king on 6 june , that date was declared the national day of sweden . eric xiv of sweden . eric xiv was born at tre kronor on 13 december 1533 . before the age of two , he lost his mother . in 1536 , his father , gustav vasa , married margaret leijonhufvud ( 1516–51 ) , a swedish noblewoman . he was crowned as eric xiv , but was not necessarily the 14th king of sweden named eric . he and his brother charles ix ( 1604–11 ) adopted regnal numbers according to johannes magnus 's partly fictitious history of sweden . there had , however , been at least six earlier swedish kings with the name of eric , as well as pretenders about whom very little is known . in domestic politics , eric 's ambitions were strongly opposed by the swedish nobility , including his half-brother , the later john iii of sweden ( 1537–92 ) . john was the duke of finland and was married to a polish princess , which made him friendly with poland . john pursued an expansionist policy in livonia ( now estonia , latvia , and lithuania ) which led to contention between the brothers . in 1563 , john was seized and tried for high treason by eric 's order . in the fall of 1568 , the dukes and the nobles rebelled , and eric was dethroned . he was then imprisoned by duke john , who took power . eric 's most trusted counsellor , jöran persson ( 1530–68 ) , took much of the blame for the actions directed against the nobility during eric xiv 's reign and was executed shortly after john iii ascended to the throne . john iii of sweden . john further initiated peace talks with denmark and lübeck to end the northern seven years ' war , but rejected the resultingtreaties of roskilde ( 1568 ) where his envoys had accepted far-reaching danish demands . after two more years of fighting , this war was concluded without many swedish concessions in the treaty of stettin ( 1570 ) . during the following years he defeated russia in the livonian war , and regained narva by the treaty of plussa in 1583 . his foreign policy was affected by his connection to poland ; his son sigismund iii vasa was made king of poland in 1587 . in january 1569 , john was recognized as king by the same riksdag that forced eric xiv off the throne . but this recognition was not without influence from john ; duke karl received confirmation on his dukedom without the restrictions of his power that the arboga articles imposed . the nobility 's power and rights were extended and their responsibilities lessened . john was still concerned about his position as king as long as eric was alive . in 1571 he ordered erik 's guards to kill him if there was any suspicion of an escape attempt . it is possible this is how erik died in 1577 . polish–lithuanian commonwealth . sigismund iii vasa was born when his parents , john iii and catherine jagiellon , were held prisoner by john 's brother king eric xiv , but john replaced eric in 1568 . sweden had become protestant , but young sigismund was raised catholic . his polish connection came through his mother , daughter of sigismund i the old , and the jagiellonian dynasty had ruled poland and then the polish–lithuanian commonwealth since 1386 . sigismund was elected king of the polish–lithuanian commonwealth on 19 august 1587 . from that time his official name and title became '' sigismund iii , by the grace of god , king of poland , grand duke of lithuania , ruthenia , prussia , masovia , samogitia , livonia and also hereditary king of the swedes , goths and wends '' ; after his father died in 1592 , he added '' hereditary king of the swedes , goths , and vandals '' . royal titles in latin : sigismundus tertius dei gratia rex poloniæ , magnus dux lithuaniæ , russiæ , prussiæ , masoviæ , samogitiæ , livoniæque , necnon suecorum , gothorum vandalorumque hæreditarius rex . english translation : sigismund iii , by the grace of god , king of poland , grand duke of lithuania , ruthenia , prussia , masovia , samogitia , livonia , and also hereditary king of the swedes , goths and vandals . opposition to sigismund . however , as was often the case with the polish electoral monarchy , the outcome was strongly contested by the '' losers '' and the greedy and stubborn polish nobility who backed maximilian iii , archduke of austria . upon hearing of his election king sigismund slipped through the clutches of the protestants in sweden and landed in poland on 7 october . he immediately agreed to give up several royal privileges to the sejm ( parliament ) of the commonwealth in the hope of winning over some of his enemies and settling the disputed election . lesser prussian treasurer jan dulski proclaimed him king on behalf of the crown marshal andrzej opaliński . on 27 december , he was crowned in wawel cathedral in kraków . it seemed that the issue of who would be king of poland had been settled when maximilian iii invaded at the head of his army to claim his crown . the hostilities did not last long as hetman jan zamoyski at the head of a polish army loyal to king sigismund met and successfully defeated the austrian troops at the battle of byczyna and took maximilian iii as prisoner of war . however , at the request of pope sixtus v , king sigismund iii released maximilian who surrendered his claim to the polish commonwealth in 1589 . king sigismund also tried to maintain peace with his powerful neighbor by marrying archduchess anne of austria in 1592 . it was always his intention to be allied with catholic austria against the protestant forces that were tearing christendom apart . polish-swedish union . after the death of john iii of sweden , his son sigismund succeeded to the throne of sweden . sigismund at that time was already the elected king of poland ( since 1587 ) . sigismund certainly valued the swedish throne and upon learning about the death of his father , and the pretensions to the throne of his uncle , duke charles ix of sweden , he asked the sejm ( polish parliament ) for permission to leave the commonwealth and go to sweden , where he could secure the swedish crown . the sejm gave him permission , and on 3 august 1593 , sigismund , accompanied by his wife , anna of habsburg , and other followers , departed for sweden . the agreement of 19 february seemed to have calmed the situation ; sigismund was crowned in uppsala cathedral and became the king of sweden . the kingdom of sweden was now in a personal union with poland-lithuania . in july , sigismund left sweden in the hands of the regency council and returned to poland . sweden was to be ruled jointly by the privy council of sweden and sigismund 's uncle duke charles . sigismund , however , reneged on his earlier promises , opening catholic schools , and giving catholics prominent posts . charles in turn did not give up on acquiring the swedish throne and pursued his own political agenda . the new riksdag he summoned at arboga in 1597 – again despite the king 's orders – saw few participants , and only one from the privy council . even so , duke charles did not achieve support for his military action , but initiated it nonetheless . parts of southern sweden were successfully taken . several of the privy council members fled to poland to convince sigismund to take counteractions . sigismund sent a diplomatic mission , in an attempt to solve the conflict by negotiations . charles at first looked ready to negotiate but in fact he was playing for time , trying to confirm his power at another riksdag ( in arboga ) , recruiting peasants for his army , and isolating sigismund 's followers . war against sigismund . in 1598 , the sejm gave sigismund the go-ahead to wage a military campaign against his opponents in sweden ; however it refused to give him significant support . sigismund 's army was composed mostly of mercenaries ( germans and hungarians ) , supported by a relatively small polish force ( although with some artillery ) . sigismund 's campaign was poorly planned . he was unable to coordinate his troop movements with his supporters , particularly fleming who was supposed to attack charles from finland . after initial successes ( the taking of kalmar and defeating charles ' troops at stegeborg ) , sigismund 's forces were defeated on september 25 , 1598 , at the battle of stångebro , ( also known as the battle of stångebro ) . sigismund was captured and forced to hand over some of his followers such as the chancellor of sweden , erik larsson sparre , ( 1550–1600 ) . in may 1599 , charles ' forces captured the last fortress held by sigismund , kalmar . on july 24 , 1599 , the riksdag in stockholm officially dethroned sigismund . the new king of sweden was charles ix of sweden , and the polish–swedish union was dissolved after barely seven years of existence . in march 1600 , some of sigismund 's supporters were executed , including five senators in an event known as the linköping bloodbath . tsardom of russia . polish-muscovite war ( 1605–1618 ) . the polish–muscovite war or the polish–russian war ( 1605–1618 ) , in poland known as the dimitriads , took place in the early 17th century as a sequence of military conflicts and eastward invasions carried out by the polish–lithuanian commonwealth , or the private armies and mercenaries led by the magnates ( the commonwealth aristocracy ) , when the russian tsardom was torn by a series of civil wars , the time most commonly referred to in the russian history as the '' time of troubles '' , sparked by the russian dynastic crisis and overall internal chaos . the sides and their goals changed several times during this conflict : the polish–lithuanian commonwealth was not formally at war with russia until 1609 , and various russian factions fought amongst themselves , allied with the commonwealth and other countries or fighting against them . sweden also participated in the conflict during the course of the ingrian war ( 1610–1617 ) , sometimes allying itself with russia , and other times fighting against it . the aims of the various factions changed frequently as well as the scale of the parties ' goals , which ranged from minor border adjustments to imposing the polish kings or the polish-backed impostors ' claims to the russian throne and even the creation of a new state by forming a union between the commonwealth and russia . russian homage in 1611 . the war can be divided into four stages . in the first stage , certain commonwealth szlachta ( nobility ) , encouraged by some boyar ( russian aristocracy ) , but without the official consent of the polish king sigismund iii vasa , attempted to exploit russia 's weakness and intervene in its civil war by supporting the impostors for the tsardom , false dmitriy i and later false dmitriy ii , against the crowned tsars , boris godunov and vasili shuiski . the first wave of the polish intervention began in 1605 and ended in 1606 with the death of false dmitri i . the second wave started in 1607 and lasted until 1609 , when tsar vasili made a military alliance with sweden . in response to this alliance , the polish king sigismund iii decided to intervene officially and to declare war upon russia , aiming to weaken sweden 's ally and to gain territorial concessions . hetman of the crown stanisław żółkiewski held a triumphal entry by the kraków suburb of the royal palace , leading with him the prisoners : the russian tsar wasyl iv szujski , his brothers : dimitri szujski with his wife - grand duchess ekaterina grigoryevna , daughter grigory malyuta skuratov and ivan shuysky mikhail shein , and filaret , the non-canonical patriarch of moscow and all russia . after early commonwealth victories ( battle of klushino ) , which culminated in polish forces entering moscow in 1610 , sigismund 's son , prince władysław iv vasa , was briefly elected tsar . władysław iv vasa – tsar of russia . with the intensification of the polish–muscovite war ( 1605–18 ) , in 1609 , the royal family moved to their residence in vilnius , capital of the grand duchy of lithuania . there he witnessed the fire of vilnius , an event which even required the royal family to evacuate their residence in the vilnius castle . later that year , władysław , aged 15 , was elected tsar by muscovy 's aristocracy council of seven boyars , who overthrew tsar vasily shuysky during the polish-muscovite war and muscovy 's time of troubles . his election was ruined by his father , sigismund , who aimed to convert muscovy 's population from orthodox religion to catholicism . sigismund refused to agree to the boyar 's request to send prince władysław to moscow and his conversion to orthodoxy . instead , sigismund proposed that he should reign as a regent in muscovy instead . 9 this unrealistic proposal led to a resumption of hostilities . briefly , beginning in 1610 , władysław struck muscovite silver and gold coins ( kopek ) in the russian mints in moscow and novgorod with his titulary tsar and grand prince vladislav zigimontovych of all russia . władysław tried to regain the tsar 's throne himself , organizing a campaign in 1616 . despite some military victories , he was unable to capture moscow . the commonwealth gained some disputed territories in the truce of deulino , but władysław was never able to reign in russia ; the throne during this time was instead held by tsar michael romanov . he held on to the title , without any real power , until 1634 . likely , the failure of this campaign showed władysław the limits of royal power in poland , as major factors for the failure included significant autonomy of the military commanders , which did not see władysław as their superior , and lack of funds for the army , as the polish parliament ( sejm ) refused to subsidize the war . elective-hereditary monarchy in poland-lithuania . silver age . the election sejm of 1632 eventually concluded in the election of władysław ; he had no serious other contenders . the decision on who would be the commonwealth 's next king was reached on 8 november , but as the pacta conventa were not yet ready , the official announcement was delayed until 13 november . in the pacta conventa , władysław pledged himself to fund a military school and equipment ; to find a way to fund a naval fleet ; to maintain current alliances ; not to raise armies , give offices or military ranks to foreigners , negotiate peace treaties or declare war without the sejm 's approval ; not to take a wife without the senate 's approval ; to convince his brothers to take an oath to the commonwealth ; and to transfer the profits from the royal mint to the royal treasury rather than to a private treasury . when the election result had been announced by the crown grand marshal , łukasz opaliński , the nobility ( szlachta ) , who had taken part in the election , began festivities in honor of the new king , which lasted three hours . władysław was crowned in the wawel cathedral , in kraków on 6 february in the following year . władysław iv owed nominal allegiance to the imperial habsburgs as a member of the order of the golden fleece . his relationship with the habsburgs was relatively strong ; although he was not above carrying some negotiations with their enemies , like france , he refused cardinal richelieu 's 1635 proposal of an alliance and a full-out war against them , despite potential lure of territorial gains in silesia . he realized that such a move would cause much unrest in a heavily catholic commonwealth , that he likely lacked the authority and power to push such a change of policy through the sejm , and that the resulting conflict would be very difficult . 42 from 1636 onward , for the next few years , władysław strengthened his ties with the habsburgs . in the meantime , władysław still tried to take a leading role in european politics , and negotiate a peaceful settlement to the thirty years ' war , a settlement which he hoped would ease his way into regaining the swedish crown . following the armistice of stuhmsdorf , władysław came to increasingly realize that his prospects for regaining the swedish throne were dim . in the years 1636–1638 he proposed several reforms to strengthen his and his dynasty 's power in the commonwealth . his first plan was an attempt to secure a hereditary province within the country , which would not be threatened by the possible power shift following a future royal election ; this , however , did not gain sufficient support in the sejm . władysław used the title of the king of sweden , although he had no control over sweden whatsoever and never set foot in that country . john ii casimir vasa . john casimir for most of his life remained in the shadow of his older half-brother , władysław iv vasa . he had few friends among the polish nobility . unfriendly , secretive , dividing his time between lavish partying and religious contemplation , and disliking politics , he did not have a strong power base nor influence at the polish court , instead supporting unfavorable habsburg policies . he did , however , display talent as a military commander , showing his abilities in the smolensk war against muscovy ( 1633 ) . the deluge . in 1648 john casimir was elected by the polish parliament to succeed his half-brother on the polish throne . the reign of the last of the vasas in the polish–lithuanian commonwealth would be dominated by the russo-polish war ( 1654–67 ) , followed by the war with sweden ( '' the deluge '' ) , the scene for which had been set by the commonwealth 's two previous vasa kings . most of poland was invaded by the swedish army during the deluge without much of a fight , due to the conspiratorial complicity of polish and lithuanian governors and nobility . in the course of a few years , the commonwealth rose to force the swedes out of poland , ending the short-lived intrusions and campaigns , however , at a high cost . most of the cities and towns in the commonwealth were sacked , plundered and some were burnt to the ground , mostly by the retreating enemy units . although the reign of john casimir is remembered to be one of the most disastrous and perhaps most unsuccessful in the history of poland and the polish–lithuanian commonwealth , he is often referred to as the '' warrior king '' that fought bravely to save his nation and his people . in 1660 john ii casimir was forced to renounce his claim to the swedish throne and acknowledge swedish sovereignty over livonia and the city of riga in modern-day latvia . john casimir had married his brother 's widow , marie louise gonzaga ( polish : maria ludwika ) , who was a major support to the king . marie louise suddenly died in 1667 and this may have caused the monarch 's early political decline . abdication and death . on 16 september 1668 , grief-stricken after the death of his wife in the previous year , john ii casimir abdicated the throne of the polish–lithuanian commonwealth , and returned to france , where he joined the jesuits and became abbot of abbey of saint-germain-des-prés in paris . following his abdication michał korybut wiśniowiecki ( michael i ) was elected the new king and was crowned on september 29 , 1669 . before his death john casimir intended to return to poland , however shortly before the journey in autumn 1672 he fell dangerously ill to the news of the fall of kamieniec podolski , which was seized by the ottomans . he then turned to pope clement x to ask for assistance for the commonwealth in a defensive war against the turks . the french , who were secretly in contact with him during his stay in the abbey , were astonished by such a great affection of the king to remember the loss of his kingdom , and so concerned about the loss of only one city . nevertheless , distressed and seriously ill john ii casimir died shortly after the unexpected turkish invasion of poland on december 16 , 1672 from apoplexy and was buried inside the wawel cathedral in kraków . his heart was interred in the abbey of saint-germain-des-prés . swedish line . charles ix of sweden . the riksdag at linköping , 24 february 1604 declared that sigismund abdicated the swedish throne , that duke charles was recognized as the sovereign . he was declared king as karl ix ( anglicized as charles ix ) . charles 's short reign was one of uninterrupted warfare . the hostility of poland and the breakup of russia involved him in overseas contests for the possession of livonia and ingria , the polish–swedish war ( 1600–1611 ) and the ingrian war , while his pretensions to claim lappland brought upon him a war with denmark in the last year of his reign . in all these struggles , he was more or less unsuccessful , owing partly to the fact that he and his forces had to oppose superior generals ( e.g . jan karol chodkiewicz and christian iv of denmark ) and partly to sheer ill-luck . compared with his foreign policy , the domestic policy of charles ix was comparatively unimportant . it aimed at confirming and supplementing what had already been done during his regency . he did not officially become king until 22 march 1604 . the first deed in which the title appears is dated 20 march 1604 ; but he was not crowned until 15 march 1607 . gustav ii adolf vasa . gustavus adolphus was born in stockholm as the oldest son of duke charles of the vasa dynasty and his second wife , christina of holstein-gottorp . at the time , the king of sweden was gustavus adolphus ' cousin sigismund . the staunch protestant duke charles forced the catholic sigismund to let go of the throne of sweden in 1599 , a part of the preliminary religious strife before the thirty years ' war , and reigned as regent before taking the throne as charles ix of sweden in 1604 . crown prince gustav adolph had gagnef-floda in dalecarlia as a duchy from 1610 . upon his father 's death in october 1611 , a sixteen-year-old gustavus inherited the throne ( declared of age and able to reign himself at seventeen as of 16 december ) , as well as an ongoing succession of occasionally belligerent dynastic disputes with his polish cousin . sigismund iii wanted to regain the throne of sweden and tried to force gustavus adolphus to renounce the title . in a round of this dynastic dispute , gustavus invaded livonia when he was 31 , beginning the polish-swedish war ( 1625–1629 ) . he intervened on behalf of the lutherans in germany , who opened the gates to their cities to him . his reign became famous from his actions a few years later when in june 1630 he landed in germany , marking the swedish intervention in the thirty years ' war . gustavus intervened on the anti-imperial side , which at the time was losing to the holy roman empire and its catholic allies ; the swedish forces would quickly reverse that situation . gustavus was married to maria eleonora of brandenburg , the daughter of john sigismund , elector of brandenburg , and chose the prussian city of elbląg as the base for his operations in germany . he died in the battle of lützen in 1632 . his early death was a great loss to the lutheran side . this resulted in large parts of germany and other countries , which had been conquered for lutheranism , to be reconquered for catholicism ( via the counter-reformation ) . his involvement in the thirty years ' war gave rise to the saying that he was the incarnation of '' the lion of the north '' , or as it is put in german '' der löwe von mitternacht '' . thirty years ' war . gustav ii adolf 's success in making sweden one of the great powers of europe , and perhaps the most important power in the thirty years ' war after france and spain , was due not only to his military brilliance , but also to important institutional reforms in sweden 's government . the chief among these reforms was the institution of the first parish registrations , so that the central government could more efficiently tax and conscript its populace . gustavus adolphus was an extremely able military commander . his innovative tactical integration of infantry , cavalry , logistics and particularly his use of artillery , earned him the title of the '' father of modern warfare '' . future commanders who studied and admired gustav ii adolf include napoleon i of france and carl von clausewitz . his advancements in military science made sweden the dominant baltic power for the next one hundred years ( see swedish empire ) . he is also the only swedish monarch to be styled '' the great '' . this decision was made by the swedish estates of the realm , when they convened in 1633 . thus , by their decision he is officially , to this day , to be called gustaf adolf the great ( gustavus adolphus magnus ) . gustavus adolphus was the main figure responsible for the success of swedish arms during the thirty years ' war and led his nation to great prestige . as a general , gustavus adolphus is famous for employing mobile artillery on the battlefield , as well as very aggressive tactics , where attack was stressed over defense , and mobility and cavalry initiative were emphasized . christina , queen of sweden . christina was the only surviving legitimate child of king gustav ii adolph and his wife maria eleonora of brandenburg . at the age of six she succeeded her father on the throne upon his death at the battle of lützen , and began ruling when she reached the age of 18 . christina is remembered as one of the most educated women of the 1600s . she was fond of paintings , books , manuscripts , and sculptures . with her interest in religion , philosophy , mathematics and alchemy , she attracted many scientists to stockholm , wanting the city to become the '' athena of the north '' . she was intelligent , fickle and moody ; she rejected the sexual role of a woman . she caused a scandal when she decided not to marry and in 1654 when she abdicated her throne . she changed her name to kristina augusta wasa and converted to catholic church , adopting the name christina alexandra . at the age of 28 the '' minerva of the north '' moved to rome . the pope described christina as '' a queen without a realm , a christian without faith , and a woman without shame '' . notwithstanding all that , she became a leader of the theatrical and musical life and protected many baroque artists , composers , and musicians . swedish noblemen . johan kristiernsson vasa of örby in the province of uppland erik johansson vasa ( 1470–1520 ) , privy councillor , lord of rydboholm castle in the roslagen . regents of sweden . kettil karlsson ( c . 1433–1465 ) , bishop of linköping , reigned as lord protector and regent of sweden 1464–1465 . monarchs of sweden . gustav i ( born 1496 , reigned 1523–1560 ) eric xiv ( reigned 1560–1568 ) john iii ( reigned 1568–1592 ) sigismund ( reigned 1592–1599 ) charles ix ( reigned 1599–1611 ; officially became king in march 1604 ) gustavus adolphus ( gustav adolf the great ) ( reigned 1611–1632 ) christina ( reigned 1632–1654 ) in 1654 christina , the daughter of gustavus adolphus , the protestant champion of the thirty years ' war , abdicated , converted to roman catholicism and left the country . the throne passed to her half-cousin charles x of the house of palatinate-zweibrücken , a cadet branch of the wittelsbachs . the kings of the house of holstein-gottorp , which produced the kings of sweden from 1751 to 1818 , emphasized their vasa descent through a female line . the current ruling house of bernadotte similarly claims a vasa mantle : charles xiv was an adopted son of charles xiii ; his son oscar i married a vasa descendant josephine of leuchtenberg ; their grandson gustav v married victoria of baden who was a great-grandchild of gustav iv adolf of the house holstein-gottorp . image : polish house of vasa coa.svg thumb coat of arms of the polish branch of the house of vasa as elected kings of poland ( lithuania and ruthenia ) and rightful hereditary kings of sweden ( finland and estonia ) . monarchs of poland and lithuania . sigismund iii vasa ( 1587–1632 ) władysław iv ( 1632–1648 ) john ii casimir ( 1648–1668 ) john iii of sweden married catherine jagellonka , the sister of sigismund ii augustus . when sigismund ii of poland died without issue , the son of john iii of sweden and catherine jagellonka was elected king of poland and grand duke of lithuania as sigismund iii in 1587 . on john 's death , sigismund also gained the swedish throne . left however , sigismund was catholic , which ultimately led to his losing the throne in sweden . his lutheran uncle charles ix succeeded him . we thus have two houses of vasa from this point onwards : the senior , catholic branch ruling in poland and lithuania , and the cadet , protestant branch ruling in sweden . this arrangement led to numerous wars between the two states . after john , the polish vasa died out . see also rulers of poland . family tree .