Rod of Asclepius

greek mythology and greek society . the rod of asclepius takes its name from the greek god asclepius , a deity associated with healing and medicinal arts in greek mythology . asclepius ' attributes , the snake and the staff , sometimes depicted separately in antiquity , are combined in this symbol . see for example pausanias , description of greece 2.26.1–28.1 ( here translated by jones ) 2nd a.d . : '' the image of asklepios is , in size , half as big as zeus olympios at athens , and is made of ivory and gold . an inscription tells us that the artist was thrasymedes , a parian , son of arignotos . the god is sitting on a seat grasping a staff ; the other hand he is holding above the head of the serpent . '' the most famous temple of asclepius was at epidaurus in north-eastern peloponnese . another famous healing temple ( or asclepeion ) was located on the island of kos , where hippocrates , the legendary '' father of medicine '' , may have begun his career . other asclepieia were situated in trikala , gortys ( arcadia ) , and pergamum in asia . in honor of asclepius , a particular type of non-venomous snake was often used in healing rituals , and these snakes & nbsp ; – the aesculapian snakes & nbsp ; – crawled around freely on the floor in dormitories where the sick and injured slept . these snakes were introduced at the founding of each new temple of asclepius throughout the classical world . from about 300 bce onwards , the cult of asclepius grew very popular and pilgrims flocked to his healing temples ( asclepieia ) to be cured of their ills . ritual purification would be followed by offerings or sacrifices to the god ( according to means ) , and the supplicant would then spend the night in the holiest part of the sanctuary & nbsp ; – the abaton ( or adyton ) . any dreams or visions would be reported to a priest who would prescribe the appropriate therapy by a process of interpretation . sigerist . chapter 3 , religious medicine : asclepius and his cult , p . 63ff . some healing temples also used sacred dogs to lick the wounds of sick petitioners . farnell , chapter 10 , '' the cult of asklepios '' ( pp . 234–279 ) the original hippocratic oath began with the invocation '' i swear by apollo the healer and by asclepius and by hygieia and panacea and by all the gods . '' the serpent and the staff appear to have been separate symbols that were combined at some point in the development of the asclepian cult . stephen lock , john m . last , george dunea , the oxford illustrated companion to medicine , 2001 , p261 '' in early statues of asclepius the rod and serpent were represented separately . '' the significance of the serpent has been interpreted in many ways ; sometimes the shedding of skin and renewal is emphasized as symbolizing rejuvenation , '' asklepios ' reptile was a healing creature : in ancient mythology the snake , whose skin was shed and rejuvenated , symbolized eternity and restoration of life and health '' albert r . jonsen , the new medicine and the old ethics , harvard university press , 1990 , p122 ; this interpretation was current in antiquity , as can be seen in an account of apollodorus : '' your marvel at the serpent curling around him and say that it is the symbol of the healing art , because just as the serpent sloughs the skin of old age , so the medical art releases from illness . '' ( in e . edelstein and l . edelstein ( eds . ) , asclepius : a collection and interpretation of the testimonies , baltimore , 1945 , p12 ) while other assessments center on the serpent as a symbol that unites and expresses the dual nature of the work of the apothecary physician , who deals with life and death , sickness and health . '' . the ancient conception of the serpent as the embodiment of the mystery of one absolute life of the earth , which entails a continual dying and resurrection . the combination of corruption and salvation , of darkness and light , of good and evil in the asklepian symbol . '' jan schouten , the rod and serpent of asklepios , symbol of medicine , 1967 , p2 the ambiguity of the serpent as a symbol , and the contradictions it is thought to represent , reflect the ambiguity of the use of drugs , albert r . jonsen , the new medicine and the old ethics , harvard university press , 1990 , p122-123 which can help or harm , as reflected in the meaning of the term pharmakon , which meant '' drug '' , '' medicine '' , and '' poison '' in ancient greek . henry e . sigerist , a history of medicine , oxford university press , 1987 , p27-28 however the word may become less ambiguous when '' medicine '' is understood as something that heals the one taking it because it poisons that which afflicts it , meaning medicine is designed to kill or drive away something and any healing happens as a result of that thing being gone , not as a direct effect of '' medicine '' . snake oil were known to have medicinal properties in ancient times , and in ancient greece , at least some were aware that snake venom that might be fatal if it entered the bloodstream could often be imbibed . snake venom appears to have been 'prescribed ' in some cases as a form of therapy . james a . kelhoffer , miracle and mission , mohr siebeck , 2000 , p438-439 '' . it was known , at least by some people in antiquity , that a snake 's venom is not harmful if imbibed , but rather only if it enters directly into a person 's blood stream . for example , the first-century ce historian lucan writes that the younger cato , when leading his troops through libya during the roman civil war , informed his men about this very point . 'the poison of snakes is only deadly when mixed with the blood ; their venom is in their bite , and they threaten death with their fangs . there is no death in the cup . ' '' he also mentions an account of cornelius celsus ( first century ce ) '' 'for a serpent 's poison , like certain hunter 's poisons . , does no harm when swallowed , but only in a wound ' '' . '' likewise , galen relates a rather peculiar healing by asclepius involving viper 's venom . the god appeared to a wealthy man in pergamum and prescribed 'that he should drink every day of the drug produced from the vipers and should anoint the body from the outside . ' . the elder philostratus describes a similar practice of 'the wise asclepiads , ' who 'heal the bites of venomous creatures . using the virus itself as a cure of many diseases . ' '' the staff has also been variously interpreted . one view is that it , like the serpent , '' conveyed notions of resurrection and healing '' , while another ( not necessarily incompatible ) is that the staff was a walking stick associated with itinerant physicians . andre menez , the subtle beast , snakes from myth to medicine , 2003 , p14 cornutus , a greek philosopher probably active in the first century ce , in the theologiae graecae compendium ( ch . 33 ) offers a view of the significance of both snake and staff : in any case , the two symbols certainly merged in antiquity as representations of the snake coiled about the staff are common . it has been claimed that the snake wrapped around the staff was a species of rat snake , elaphe longissima , the aesculapian snake . gerald david hart , martin st . j . forrest , asclepius : the god of medicine , 2000 , p42 . theories . some commentators have interpreted the symbol as a direct representation of traditional treatment of dracunculiasis , the guinea worm disease . dickson despommier , people , parasites , and plowshares : learning from our body 's most terrifying invaders , columbia university press , 2016 ( first edition in 2013 ) , pp . 147–163 ( chapter 7 on dracunculus medinensis ) , . the worm emerges from painful ulcerous blisters . the blisters burn , causing the patient to immerse the affected area in water to cool and soothe it . the worm senses the temperature change and discharges its larvae into the water . the traditional treatment was to slowly pull the worm out of the wound over a period of hours to weeks and wind it around a stick . the modern treatment may replace the stick with a piece of sterile gauze , but is otherwise largely identical . biblical scholars look to the book of numbers , in which the nehushtan ( hebrew : נחושתן or נחש הנחושת ) was a brass serpent on a pole that god told moses to erect , saying that anyone bitten by a snake would live if they looked at it . '' and the lord said unto moses , make thee a fiery serpent , and set it upon a pole : and it shall come to pass , that every one that is bitten , when he looketh upon it , shall live . and moses made a serpent of brass , and put it upon a pole , and it came to pass , that if a serpent had bitten any man , when he beheld the serpent of brass , he lived . this biblical account is the earliest known record of the pole/serpent combination ( though the exact configuration is not known ) . . modern use . a number of organizations and services use the rod of asclepius as their logo , or part of their logo . these include : . asia . . south pacific . australian medical association australian medical students ' association australian veterinary association bhp emergency services ( west australian iron ore ) medical council of new zealand royal new zealand army medical corps royal australian army medical corps . canada . ambulance paramedics of british columbia canadian association of physician assistants canadian dental association canadian medical association medical council of canada royal canadian medical service . europe . . nigeria . nigerian medical association . kenya . kenya medical research institute kenya medical training college . south africa . south african medical research council former coat of arms south african military health service tygerberg academic hospital , cape town , south africa . united states . . worldwide . aerospace medical association medical protection society star of life , symbol of emergency medical services world health organization . variation . in russia , the emblem of main directorate for drugs control features a variation with a sword and a snake on the shield . confusion with the caduceus . . unicode . the rod of asclepius has a code point in the miscellaneous symbols table of the unicode standard , at . see also . aaron 's rod bowl of hygieia caduceus chakra nāga nehushtan ningishzida phurba . notes . references . external links . no : asklepios asklepiosstaven