Ciclosporin

medical uses . ciclosporin is approved by the fda to treat and prevent graft-versus-host disease in bone marrow transplantation and to prevent rejection of kidney , heart , and liver transplants . sandimmune label it is also approved in the us for treating of rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis , persistent nummular keratitis following adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis , and as eye drops for treating dry eyes caused by sjögren 's syndrome and meibomian gland dysfunction . in addition to these indications , ciclosporin is also used in severe atopic dermatitis , kimura disease , pyoderma gangrenosum , chronic hives , acute systemic mastocytosis , and posterior or intermediate uveitis with noninfective cause . it is also used , albeit infrequently , in severe rheumatoid arthritis and related diseases . ciclosporin has also been used in people with acute severe ulcerative colitis and hives that do not respond to treatment with steroids . . side effects . side effects of ciclosporin can include gum enlargement , increased hair growth , seizure , peptic ulcers , pancreatitis , fever , vomiting , diarrhea , confusion , hypercholesterolemia , dyspnea , numbness and tingling ( particularly of the lips ) , pruritus , high blood pressure , potassium retention ( possibly leading to hyperkalemia ) , kidney and liver dysfunction , burning sensations at finger tips , and an increased vulnerability to opportunistic fungal and viral infections . ciclosporin causes hypertension by inducing vasoconstriction in the kidneys and increasing sodium reabsorption . the increase in blood pressure can cause cardiovascular events ; it is thus recommended that the lowest effective dose for people requiring long-term treatment be used . ciclosporin use after a kidney transplantation is associated with hyperuricemia and , in some cases , gout . this is due to the decrease in renal function , which leads to uric acid retention . use of azathioprine as an alternative has shown to reduce the incidence of gouty arthritis . ciclosporin is listed as an iarc group 1 carcinogen ( i.e . there is sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in humans ) , agents classified by the iarc monographs , volumes 1–110 specifically leading to squamous cell skin cancer and non-hodgkin lymphoma . . pharmacology . mechanism of action . ciclosporin 's main effect is to lower the activity of t-cells ; it does so by inhibiting calcineurin in the calcineurin–phosphatase pathway and preventing the mitochondrial permeability transition pore from opening . ciclosporin binds to the cytosolic protein cyclophilin ( immunophilin ) of lymphocytes , especially of t cells . this cyclosporin—cyclophilin complex inhibits calcineurin , which is normally responsible for activating the transcription of interleukin 2 . in t-cells , activation of the t-cell receptor normally increases intracellular calcium , which acts via calmodulin to activate calcineurin . calcineurin then dephosphorylates the transcription factor nfatc ( nuclear factor of activated t-cells ) , which moves to the t-cell nucleus and increases the transcription of genes for il-2 and related cytokines . ciclosporin , by preventing the dephosphorylation of nf-at , leads to reduced t cell effector ; it does not affect cytostatic activity . ciclosporin also binds to the cyclophilin d protein that constitutes part of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore ( mptp ) . the mptp is found in the mitochondrial membrane of cardiac muscle cells and moves calcium ions into the mitochondria . when open , enters the mitochondria and causes the muscle cells ( and thus the heart ) to contract . if unregulated , the influx of can contribute to mitochondrial swelling and dysfunction . . pharmacokinetics . ciclosporin is a cyclic peptide of 11 amino acids ; it contains a single chirality ( chemistry ) , which is rarely encountered in nature . unlike most peptides , ciclosporin is not synthesized by ribosomes . some sources list the fungus under an alternative species name hypocladium inflatum gams such as pritchard and sneader in 2005 : however , the name , '' beauveria nivea '' , also appears in several other articles including in a 2001 online publication by harriet upton entitled '' origin of drugs in current use : the cyclosporin story '' ( retrieved june 19 , 2005 ) . mark plotkin states in his book medicine quest , penguin books 2001 , pages 46-47 , that in 1996 mycology researcher kathie hodge found that it is in fact a species of cordyceps . ciclosporin is highly metabolized in humans and animals after ingestion . the metabolites , which include cyclosporin b , c , d , e , h , and l , have less than 10 % of ciclosporin 's immunosuppressant activity and are associated with higher kidney toxicity . individual ciclosporin metabolites have been isolated and characterized but do not appear to be extensively studied . biosynthesis . cyclosporin is synthesized by a nonribosomal peptide synthetase , cyclosporin synthetase . the enzyme contains an adenylation domain , a thiolation domain , a condensation domain , and an n-methyltransferase domain . the adenylation domain is responsible for substrate recognition and activation , whereas the thiolation domain covalently binds the adenylated amino acids to phosphopantetheine , and the condensation domain elongates the peptide chain . cyclosporin synthetase substrates include l-valine , l-leucine , l-alanine , glycine , 2-aminobutyric acid , 4-methylthreonine , and d-alanine , which is the starting amino acid in the biosynthetic process . with the adenylation domain , cyclosporin synthetase generates the acyl-adenylated amino acids , then covalently binds the amino acid to phosphopantetheine through a thioester linkage . some of the amino acid substrates become n-methylated by s-adenosyl methionine . the cyclization step releases cyclosporin from the enzyme . amino acids such as d-ala and butenyl-methyl-l-threonine ( bmt ) indicate cyclosporin synthetase requires the action of other enzymes . the racemization of l-ala to d-ala by alanine racemase is pyridoxal phosphate-dependent . the formation of butenyl-methyl-l-threonine is performed by a bmt polyketide synthase that uses acetate/malonate as its starting material . dewick , p . ( 2001 ) medicinal natural products . john wiley & sons , ltd . 2nd ed . . gene cluster . tolypocladium inflatum , the species currently used for mass production of cyclosporin , has the biosynthetic genes arranged into a 12-gene cluster . of these 12 genes , sima is the cyclosporin synthetase , simb is the alanine racemase , and simg ( similar to is the polyketide synthase . these genes are associated with an active retrotransposon . although these sequences are poorly-annotated on genbank and other databases , 90 % similar sequences can be found for the cyclosporin-producing beauveria felina ( or amphichorda ~ ) . simb has two paralogs in the same organism with different but overlapping functions thanks to their low speficity . . history . in 1970 , new strains of fungi were isolated from soil samples taken from norway and from wisconsin in the us by employees of sandoz ( now novartis ) in basel , switzerland . both strains produced a family of natural products called cyclosporins . two related components that had antifungal activity were isolated from extracts from these fungi . the norwegian strain , tolypocladium inflatum gams , was later used for the large scale fermentation of ciclosporin . the immunosuppressive effect of the natural product ciclosporin was discovered in december 1971 in a screening test on immune suppression designed and implemented by hartmann f . stähelin at sandoz . the chemical structure of cyclosporin was determined in 1976 , also at sandoz . the success of the drug candidate ciclosporin in preventing organ rejection was shown in kidney transplants by r.y . calne and colleagues at the university of cambridge , and in liver transplants performed by thomas starzl at the university of pittsburgh hospital . the first patient , on 9 march 1980 , was a 28-year-old woman . in the united states , the food and drug administration ( fda ) approved ciclosporin for clinical use in 1983 . . society and culture . name . the natural product was named cyclosporin by the german speaking scientists who first isolated it and cyclosporine when translated into english . per international nonproprietary name ( inn ) guidelines for drugs , the y was replaced with i so that the inn for the medication is spelled ciclosporin . ciclosporin is the inn and the british approved name ( ban ) , while cyclosporine is the united states adopted name ( usan ) and cyclosporin is a former ban . available forms . ciclosporin exhibits very poor solubility in water , and , as a consequence , suspension and emulsion forms of the medication have been developed for oral administration and for injection . ciclosporin was originally brought to market by sandoz ( now novartis ) , under the brand name sandimmune , which is available as soft gelatin capsules , an oral solution , and a formulation for intravenous administration . these are all nonaqueous compositions . sandimmune prescribing information a newer microemulsion , orally-administered formulation , neoral , neoral prescribing information is available as a solution and as soft gelatin capsules . the neoral compositions are designed to form microemulsions in contact with water . generic ciclosporin preparations have been marketed under various trade names , including cicloral ( sandoz ) , gengraf ( abbott ) and deximune ( dexcel pharma ) . since 2002 , a topical emulsion of ciclosporin for treating inflammation caused by keratoconjunctivitis sicca ( dry eye syndrome ) has been marketed under the trade name restasis ( 0.05 % ) . ikervis is a similar formulation with a concentration of 0.1 % . inhaled ciclosporin formulations are in clinical development , and include a solution in propylene glycol and liposome dispersions . . . research . neuroprotection . ciclosporin is currently in a phase ii/iii ( adaptive ) clinical study in europe to determine its ability to ameliorate neuronal cellular damage and reperfusion injury ( phase iii ) in traumatic brain injury . this multi-center study is being organized by neurovive pharma and the european brain injury consortium using neurovive 's formulation of ciclosporin called neurostat ( also known by its cardioprotection trade name of ciclomulsion ) . this formulation uses a lipid emulsion base instead of cremophor and ethanol . neurostat was recently compared to sandimmune in a phase i study and found to be bioequivalent . in this study , neurostat did not exhibit the anaphylactic and hypersensitivity reactions found in cremophor- and ethanol-based products . ciclosporin has been investigated as a possible neuroprotective agent in conditions such as traumatic brain injury , and has been shown in animal experiments to reduce brain damage associated with injury . ciclosporin blocks the formation of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore , which has been found to cause much of the damage associated with head injury and neurodegenerative diseases . ciclosporin 's neuroprotective properties were first discovered in the early 1990s when two researchers ( eskil elmér and hiroyuki uchino ) were conducting experiments in cell transplantation . an unintended finding was that csa was strongly neuroprotective when it crossed the blood–brain barrier . this same process of mitochondrial destruction through the opening of the mpt pore is implicated in making traumatic brain injuries much worse . . cardiac disease . ciclosporin has been used experimentally to treat cardiac hypertrophy ( an increase in cell volume ) . inappropriate opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore ( mptp ) manifests in ischemia ( blood flow restriction to tissue ) and reperfusion injury ( damage occurring after ischemia when blood flow returns to tissue ) , after myocardial infarction ( heart attack ) and when mutations in mitochondrial dna polymerase occur . the heart attempts to compensate for disease state by increasing the intracellular to increase the contractility cycling rates . constitutively high levels of mitochondrial cause inappropriate mptp opening leading to a decrease in the cardiac range of function , leading to cardiac hypertrophy as an attempt to compensate for the problem . csa ( cyclosporin a ) has been shown to decrease cardiac hypertrophy by affecting cardiac myocytes in many ways . csa binds to cyclophilin d to block the opening of mptp , and thus decreases the release of protein cytochrome c , which can cause programmed cell death . cypd is a protein within the mptp that acts as a gate ; binding by csa decreases the amount of inappropriate opening of mptp , which decreases the intramitochondrial . decreasing intramitochondrial allows for reversal of cardiac hypertrophy caused in the original cardiac response . decreasing the release of cytochrome c caused decreased cell death during injury and disease . csa also inhibits the phosphatase calcineurin pathway ( 14 ) . inhibition of this pathway has been shown to decrease myocardial hypertrophy . . veterinary use . the medication is approved in the united states for the treatment of atopic dermatitis in dogs . unlike the human form of the medication , the lower doses used in dogs mean the drug acts as an immunomodulator and has fewer side effects than in humans . the benefits of using this product include the reduced need for concurrent therapies to bring the condition under control . it is available as an ophthalmic ointment for dogs called optimmune , manufactured by intervet , which is part of merck . it is also used to treat sebaceous adenitis ( immune response against the sebaceous glands ) , pemphigus foliaceus ( autoimmune blistering skin disease ) , inflammatory bowel disease , anal furunculosis ( anal inflammatory disease ) , and myasthenia gravis ( a neuromuscular disease ) . it is sometimes prescribed for extreme cases of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia .