Albany, Oregon

media . newspaper . the primary media outlet is the daily newspaper albany democrat-herald which is owned and published by lee enterprises . the democrat-herald started as a political tool for one of oregon 's first senators . the democrat-herald traces its origin to the albany democrat newspaper , founded by delazon smith in 1859 . lee enterprises also publishes the mid-valley times , the sunday version of the paper . radio . albany has eight different radio stations that are either broadcast or have offices within albany and many others that serve the area . the fm stations are , 107.9fm khpe that uses the tagline ( hope-fm ) which is a christian contemporary music radio station , and 99.9fm krkt-fm , a country radio station that both broadcast from albany . there is also 101.5fm kfly , which is based out of eugene , oregon , but maintains an office in the albany area . along with the fm stations there are five am stations . 790 am kwil , is the am version of khpe ( 107.9fm ) . the others range from adult standard such as ksho ( 920 am ) , comedy radio and seattle mariners baseball games kthh ( 990 am ) , to sports kejo ( 1240 am ) , and kgal ( 1580 am ) the local news and talk radio station . infrastructure . transportation . . highway . albany is adjacent to interstate 5 , while oregon route 99e runs through it in a north and south direction and u.s . route 20 runs through it in an east and west direction . just outside the south end of albany oregon route 34 runs from east to west . air . albany municipal airport is a general aviation airport on the eastern edge of albany and has been open since 1920 and is believed to be the oldest operating airfield in oregon . in 1998 , the airport became the first airport in oregon to be named to the national register of historic places , and was the city of albany 's fourth national historic district , it held its first air show in 1931 and has been home to exhibits , helicopter rides and young eagles flights for children as part of the annual northwest art & air festival . it has a single runway with the specs of 16–34 3,004 x 75 , and is an asphalt runway . the closest airports with commercial air service available are the eugene airport to the south and the portland international airport to the north . bus . public transportation within albany is provided by albany transit system ( ats ) . connections to corvallis are provided by bus service via the linn-benton loop and the valley retriever thruway inter-county bus systems . ats , the linn-benton loop , and the valley retriever all provide bus service to and from the amtrak station . train . amtrak , the national passenger rail system , provides service to albany from its albany station at 10th avenue sw on two routes . long-haul train route the coast starlight ( with service from los angeles to seattle ) stops in albany daily in both directions . amtrak cascades commuter trains operate between vancouver , british columbia and eugene , oregon , and serve albany several times daily in each direction . the amtrak cascades line is the proposed path of the pacific northwest corridor high-speed rail line . the albany station would be one of many stops along the proposed , passenger line . the station itself was constructed in 1909 for the southern pacific railroad and is built of masonry . it is one of the oldest continuously operating passenger rail stations in the u.s . and has one of the best-equipped engine shops in the northwest . southern pacific 4449 , a steam locomotive which resides at the oregon rail heritage center in portland , occasionally visited the shop for repairs when it was residing at the brooklyn roundhouse in portland ( before 2012 ) , as did several other locomotives stored at the now-demolished roundhouse . beginning in 2004 , the station and the surrounding area underwent an 11.3 million restoration that was funded with a combination of federal , state , local , and amtrak money . in 2006 the city received the award in downtown excellence from the oregon downtown development association for the renovation of the station . bridges . albany has both the ellsworth street bridge which was constructed in 1926 and the lyon street bridge that was constructed in 1973 . they are both two-lane bridges that make up part of u.s . route 20 . the two bridges connect linn to the south with benton county in the north as they pass across the willamette river . this makes up the major connection of downtown albany with the north end of town and to corvallis . paths and trails . albany has many paths and trails open to both pedestrian and bicyclists . simpson park trail is a dirt pedestrian trail with a round trip distance of . the dirt trail starts at the parking lot of simpson park and continuing until the path ends in a grassy area with one very narrow path heading back toward the river . periwinkle creek trail though is the longest of all the paved trails . it is a flat bicycle and pedestrian path that runs along periwinkle creek from the northwest corner of grand prairie park to the albany boys and girls club , and travels a round trip distance of . there are many other trails throughout the city to include , cox creek loop and waverly lake loop , dave clark trail , oak creek greenbelt trail , takena landing trail , timber linn park trails , and a proposed swanson park connector a paved path on the north side of highway 99 that connects swanson park with the nearby amtrak/transit center . albany has made a growing effort to increase itself as a bicyclist friendly town through increasing the number of paths and trails that are open to them . the city was recently recognised as a bicycle-friendly community for 2010 by the league of american bicyclists for its efforts . . health care . albany is served by samaritan albany general hospital , a 76-bed medical facility that is the main hospital for the city and has been in operation since 1924 . albany is also served by samaritan north albany urgent care and geary street urgent care , both of which are part of samaritan health services . the unaffiliated albany family & specialty medicine also provides medical services to the community . . notable people . jerry andrus ( 1918–2007 ) – magician mike barrett ( born 1968 ) – tv announcer of the nba charles b . bellinger ( 1839–1905 ) – federal district court judge , editor of the state rights democrat ( now the albany democrat-herald ) george earle chamberlain ( 1854–1928 ) – 11th governor of oregon daveigh chase ( born 1990 ) – actress abigail scott duniway ( 1834–1915 ) – writer , newspaper publisher , and women 's rights advocate members of falling up – christian rock band gary the retard ( born 1952 ) – member of the howard stern shows wack pack alan l . hart ( 1890–1962 ) – physician and novelist , was raised in albany dave johnson ( born 1963 ) – olympic athlete and former west albany high school teacher percy r . kelly ( 1870–1949 ) – american attorney and jurist in the state of oregon frank morse ( born 1943 ) – politician sam shoen ( 1916–1999 ) – founder of u-haul corp . , operated a barbershop in the st . francis hotel at first ave . and calapooia st . while a student at oregon state college in the early 1940s delazon smith ( 1816–1860 ) – politician elmo smith ( 1909–1968 ) – 27th governor of oregon james k . weatherford ( 1850–1935 ) – speaker of the oregon house of representatives ( 1876 ) and state senator '' death closes colorful career of weatherford ; funeral service friday , '' capital journal '' ( salem , or ) , aug . 1 , 1935 , pg . 16 . mae yih ( born 1928 ) – member of the oregon legislative assembly . references . further reading . the city of albany , state of oregon . portland , or : lewis & dryden printing co . , 1891 . '' mayors of albany : men who have served since the earliest municipal organization , '' morning daily herald albany , vol . 4 , no . 33 ( jan . 6 , 1889 ) , pg . 3 . external links . entry for albany in the oregon blue book official website albany chamber of commerce albany visitors association city-data entry for albany linn county roots entry for albany albany carousel documentary produced by oregon public broadcasting albany covered bridge route