Conyers Middleton

early life . middleton was born at richmond , north yorkshire in 1683 . his mother , barbara place ( d . 1700 ) was the second wife of william middleton ( c.1646–1714 ) , the rector of hinderwell . conyers middleton had two brothers and a half-brother . middleton was educated at the minster school , york before entering trinity college , cambridge in march 1699 . he graduated with a ba in 1703 . he was elected a fellow of the college in 1705 and took his ma in 1706 in 1707 he was ordained a deacon , and a priest in 1708 . in 1710 dr . middleton married sarah morris , the daughter of thomas morris ( died 1717 ) of mount morris , monks horton , hythe , kent , and widow of councillor and recorder robert drake of cambridge ( died 1702 ) , of the family drake of ash . in due course elizabeth montagu ( 1718-1800 ) became a step-grand-daughter . dispute with bentley . middleton was one of the thirty fellows of trinity college who on 6 february 1710 petitioned the bishop of ely , as visitor of the college , to take steps against richard bentley the master , at odds with the fellowship . in 1717 , he became involved in a dispute with bentley over the awarding of degrees . george i visited the university , and the degree of doctor of divinity was conferred on 32 people , including middleton . bentley , as regius professor of divinity , demanded a fee of four guineas from each of the new doctors in addition to the established complimentary '' broad-piece '' . middleton , after some dispute , consented to pay , taking bentley 's written promise to return the money if the claim should be finally disallowed . he was then created doctor . having vainly applied for a return of the fee , he sued for it as a debt in the vice-chancellor 's court . after various delays and attempts to make up the quarrel , the vice-chancellor issued a decree ( 23 september 1718 ) for bentley 's arrest . bentley 's refusal to submit to this decree led to further proceedings , and to his degradation from all his degrees by a grace of the senate on 18 october . the matter was then pursued in a pamphlet war and bentley brought an action against the publisher of the anonymous on the present state of trinity college ( 1719 ) , which was the work of middleton with john colbatch . middleton claimed ( 9 february 1720 ) the pamphlet as his own ; bentley continued to prosecute the bookseller , until middleton made a declaration of his authorship before witnesses . bentley then laid an information against him in the king 's bench , based on a passage in the pamphlet about the impossibility of obtaining redress in '' any proper court of justice in the kingdom '' . the proceedings were slow , and meanwhile middleton took advantage of bentley 's proposals for an edition of the new testament to attack him in a sharp pamphlet . bentley replied , using terms of gross abuse directed mainly against colbatch , to whom he chose to attribute the authorship . bentley 's reply was condemned by the cambridge heads of houses . colbatch brought an action against him , and middleton wrote a longer and more temperate rejoinder ( possibly helped by charles ashton ) . when middleton 's case was heard in the court of king 's bench ( trinity term 1721 ) , he was found guilty of libel . sentence was delayed . friends subscribed towards his expenses , and he obtained the intercession of a highly placed person for a lenient sentence . the chief justice john pratt advised the two doctors to avoid scandal by a compromise , and bentley finally accepted an apology . middleton , however , had to pay his own costs , and expenses of his opponent . the dispute flared up again , to end on a note of bathos . middleton 's supporters ( 14 december 1721 ) , passed a vote through the university senate making him a librarian—a salaried '' protobibliothecarius '' of the university library—a new post , on the pretext of the king 's recent donation of bishop john moore 's library . middleton in 1723 published a plan for the future arrangement of the books ; but with swipes at bentley for retaining some manuscripts ( the codex bezæ among them ) in his own house , and on the court of king 's bench . bentley appealed to the court , and on 20 june 1723 middleton was fined , and ordered to provide securities for good behaviour for a year . middleton went off to italy . on his return he renewed his old suit for the four guineas . bentley did not oppose him , and in february 1726 middleton at last got back his fee , together with 12s . costs . . later life . middleton stayed in rome during a great part of 1724 and 1725 . henry hare , 3rd baron coleraine , a fellow collector , was his companion on this journey . middleton made a collection of antiquities , of which he later published a description ; he sold it to horace walpole in 1744 . his first wife , sarah morris , died on 19 february 1731 . in 1731 middleton was appointed first woodwardian professor of geology , and delivered an inaugural address in latin , pointing out the benefits which might be expected from a study of fossils in confirming the history of noah 's flood . he resigned the chair in 1734 , on his second marriage . middleton 's sceptical tendency became clearer , and zachary pearce accused him of covert infidelity . he was threatened with a loss of his cambridge degrees . middleton replied in two pamphlets , making such explanations as he could . in 1733 , however , an anonymous pamphlet ( by philip williams the public orator ) declared that his books ought to be burnt and he should be banished from the university , unless he made a recantation . middleton made an explanation in a final pamphlet , but for some time remained silent on theological topics . his relationship with edward harley , 2nd earl of oxford was damaged . middleton 's major work , his life of cicero ( 1741 ) , was a success . he was attacked by samuel parr in 1787 , however , for knowing plagiarism : parr claimed it was based on de tribus luminibus romanorum , a scarce work by william bellenden . middleton 's second wife mary died in 1745 , and he returned to controversial theology in 1747 . he looked for ecclesiastical preferment , but was unpopular with the bishops . middleton lived at hildersham , near cambridge , and married again shortly before he died , on 28 july 1750 . . works . a modern opinion is that middleton stood out as an especially lethal species of the polemical divine . at best sarcastic and withering , at worst poisonous and unfair , middleton justly deserved his reputation . on the other hand , alexander pope thought he and nathaniel hooke were the only prose writers of the day who deserved to be cited as authorities on the language . samuel parr , while exposing middleton 's plagiarisms , praised his style . an edition of his works , containing several posthumous tracts , but not including the life of cicero , appeared in four volumes in 1752 , and in five volumes in 1755 . early works . the pamphlets from the struggle with bentley were : a full and impartial account of all the late proceedings … against dr . bentley , 1719 . second part of the above , 1719 . some remarks upon a pamphlet entitled “ the case of dr . bentley further stated and vindicated ” … , 1719 . a true account of the present state of trinity college in cambridge under the oppressive rule of their master , richard bentley , late d.d . , 1720 . remarks , paragraph by paragraph , upon the proposals lately published by richard bentley for a new edition of the greek testament and latin version , 1721 . some further remarks … containing a full answer to the editor 's late defence … , 1721 . bibliothecæ cantabrigiensis ordinandæ methodus quædam … , 1723 . middleton visited italy , and drew conclusions on the pagan origin of christian church ceremonies and beliefs ; he subsequently published these in his letter from rome , showing an exact conformity between popery and paganism ( 1729 ) . this work led to an attack from the catholic side by richard challoner , in the preface to the catholic christian instructed in the sacraments , sacrifice and ceremonies of the church ( 1737 ) ; challoner in particular accused middleton of misrepresenting the articles of the tridentine creed that applied to saints and images . edwin hubert burton , the life and times of bishop challoner ( 1691–1781 ) vol . 1 ( 1909 ) , p . 101 ; archive.org . middleton retaliated through the legal system , and challoner in 1738 left for douai . thomas seward wrote further on the subject in a 1746 '' sequel '' to middleton and henry mower ( i.e . more ) . . controversy with the medical profession . in 1726 , prompted by the harveian oration by richard mead , with an appendix by edmund chishull , middleton offended the medical profession with a dissertation de medicorum apud veteres romanos degentium conditione dissertatio ; quà contra viros celeberrimos jac . sponium et rich . meadium , m.d . , servilem atque ignobilem eam fuisse ostenditur , 1726 . contending that the healing art among the ancients was exercised only by slaves or freedmen . he was answered by john ward , joseph letherland , and others , to whom middleton replied . dissertationis … contra anonymos quosdam … auctores defensio , 1727 . middleton let the matter drop after meeting mead socially ; but two related works , an appendix seu definitiones , pars secunda and a letter from middleton to another opponent , charles la motte , were later published in 1761 by william heberden the elder . . deistic controversy . middleton had remonstrated with daniel waterland when the latter replied to matthew tindal 's christianity as old as the creation . middleton took a line which in exposed him to the reproach of infidelity . in professing to indicate a short and easy method of confuting tindal , he laid emphasis on the indispensableness of christianity as a mainstay of social order . this brought him into conflict with those who held the same views as waterland . middleton was attacked from many quarters , and produced several apologetic pamphlets . his letter to waterland from rome , however , hinted that middleton himself was active in deism . middleton wrote '' deity can be conceived to interpose himself ; the universal good and salvation of man . '' . classical scholarship . his life of cicero ( 1741 ) was largely told in the words of the writings of cicero . middleton 's reputation was enhanced by this work ; but , as was later pointed out , he drew largely from a rare book by william bellenden , de tribus luminibus romanorum . the work was undertaken at the request of john hervey , 2nd baron hervey ; from their correspondence came the idea for the roman senate , published in 1747 . middletonian controversy on miraculous powers . the years 1747–8 produced middleton 's most significant theological writings . the introductory discourse and the free inquiry a free inquiry into the miraculous powers , which are supposed to have subsisted in the christian church , 1749 . addressed '' the miraculous powers which are supposed to have subsisted in the church from the earliest ages . '' middleton suggested two propositions : that ecclesiastical miracles must be accepted or rejected in the mass ; and that there is a distinction between the authority due to the early church fathers ' testimony to the beliefs and practices of their times , and their credibility as witnesses to matters of fact . in 1750 , he attacked thomas sherlock 's notions of antediluvian prophecy , which had been published 25 years before . an examination of the lord bishop of london 's discourses concerning the use and intent of prophecy , with … a further inquiry into the mosaic account of the fall , 1750 . among those who answered , or defended sherlock , were : thomas ashton ; julius bate ; anselm bayly ; zachary brooke ; thomas church ; joseph clarke ; william cooke ; william dodwell ; ralph heathcote ; john jackson ; laurence jackson ; john rotheram ; thomas rutherforth ; and thomas secker . their odnb articles . methodism founder john wesley wrote an extensive response to middleton recording his disagreement with him in january 1749 . wesley , j . , letter to dr . conyers middleton , 4 january 1749 , accessed 4 march 2018 reflections on the variations , or inconsistencies , which are found among the four evangelists was posthumous , published in 1752 . family . although middleton died childless , he married three times . firstly , in 1710 , to sarah drake , the widow of counsellor drake of cambridge , and daughter of mr . morris of oak morris in kent ; secondly , in 1734 , to his cousin mary , daughter of the rev . conyers place of dorchester , who died 26 april 1745 , aged 38 ; thirdly , at the end of his life , to anne , daughter of john powell of boughrood , in radnorshire , who had lived as a companion to mrs . trenchard , widow of john trenchard , later married to thomas gordon . elizabeth montagu was a granddaughter of sarah drake , and she spent much time as a child with the middletons in cambridge , as did her sister sarah scott . . references . sir leslie stephen , english thought in the eighteenth century , ch . vi . notes . ; attribution