Sex change

natural sex change . in animals . thumb some species exhibit sequential hermaphroditism . in these species , such as many species of coral reef fishes , sex change is a normal anatomical process . clownfish , wrasses , moray eels , goby and other fish species are known to change sex , including reproductive functions . a school of clownfish is always built into a hierarchy with a female fish at the top . when she dies , the most dominant male changes sex and takes her place . in the wrasses ( the family labridae ) , sex change is from female to male , with the largest female of the harem changing into a male and taking over the harem upon the disappearance of the previous dominant male . natural sex change , in both directions , has also been reported in mushroom corals . this is posited to take place in response to environmental or energetic constraints , and to improve the organism 's evolutionary fitness ; similar phenomena are observed in some dioecy . yossi loya and kazuhiko sakai , '' bidirectional sex change in mushroom stony corals '' , proceedings of the royal society b , 22 october 2008 chickens can sometimes undergo natural sex changes . normally , female chickens have just one functional ovary , on their left side . although two sex organs are present during the embryonic stages of all birds , once a chicken 's female hormones come into effect , it typically develops only the left ovary . the right gonad , which has yet to be defined as an ovary , testes , or both ( called an ovotestis ) , typically remains dormant . certain medical conditions can cause a chicken 's left ovary to regress . in the absence of a functional left ovary , the dormant right sex organ may begin to grow ; if the activated right gonad is an ovotestis or testes , it will begin secreting androgens . the hen does not completely change into a rooster , however . this transition is limited to making the bird phenotypically male . the condition could also be caused by mycotoxins that can develop when animal feed is stored , and these have the same effect as synthetic hormones . in about 10 percent of cases , if eggs fertilized with male chromosomes are cooled by a few degrees for three days after laying , the relative activity of the sex hormones will favour development of female characteristics . the sex chromosomes work by coding for enzymes that affect the bird 's development in the egg and during its life . this cooling will produce a chicken with a fully functioning and reproductively fertile female body-type ; even though the chicken is genetically male . . apparent sex change in humans . several medical conditions can result in an apparent sex change in humans , where the appearance at birth is somewhat , mostly , or completely of one sex , but changes over the course of a lifetime to being somewhat , mostly , or completely of the other sex . overwhelming majority of natural sex changes are from a female appearance at birth to a male appearance after puberty , due to either 5-alpha-reductase deficiency ( 5alpha-rd-2 ) or 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency ( 17beta-hsd-3 ) . genetic females ( with two x chromosomes ) with congenital adrenal hyperplasia lack an enzyme needed by the adrenal gland to make the hormones cortisol and aldosterone . without these hormones , the body produces more androgens . this causes male sex characteristics to appear early ( or inappropriately ) . genetic males ( xy sex-determination system ) with androgen insensitivity syndrome ( ais ) are resistant to androgens . as a result , the person has some or all of the physical characteristics of a female , despite having the genetic makeup of a male . the degree of sexual ambiguity varies widely in persons with incomplete ais . incomplete ais can include other disorders such as reifenstein syndrome which is associated with breast development in men . . sex change as medical procedure . the term '' sex change '' to refer to sex reassignment surgery , that is , a set of medical procedures undergone by transgender people to alter their sexual characteristics from male to female or from female to male , is considered offensive and inaccurate by many in the transgender community . the term is also sometimes used for the medical procedures intersex people undergo , or , more often , are subjected to as children . the term '' sex change '' is sometimes also used for the whole process of changing gender role ( '' living as a woman '' instead of living as a man , or vice versa ) , not limited to medical procedures . ( this process is often much more important to transgender people than the medical procedures themselves , although medically induced changes and surgeries may be needed to make a change of gender role possible , both socially and legally ; they can also have a very significant impact on the person 's well-being . ) many people regard the term '' sex reassignment surgery '' as preferable to '' sex change '' . sex in humans is usually determined by four factors : chromosomes gonads ( ovary and/or testicles and the associated gametes , eggs and sperm ) hormone status sex organ and secondary sex characteristics not all of these factors can be changed : chromosomes can not be changed gonads can be removed , but not replaced hormone status can be changed existing secondary sex characteristics can to some extent be changed ; existing ones mostly through surgery , non-existing ones can be induced to grow through hormones . for example : changing a male genital anatomy into a good or even excellent female appearance with functioning is complicated but entirely possible ; changing a female genital anatomy into an even reasonably male appearing one , however , is extremely complicated and not successful very often ; function is always limited . sex reassignment is usually preceded by a period of feminization or masculinization . this is accomplished through hormone replacement therapy , where , for those transitioning to female , estrogens and antiandrogens and sometimes progestogens are prescribed . for those transitioning to male , androgens are prescribed . the most common minimum waiting period before gender reassignment surgery is two years , as specified by the standards of care for the health of transsexual , transgender , and gender nonconforming people . hormone replacement therapy is normally started after sufficient counseling , and/or after a period of living 'full-time ' ( in the target gender ) typically for a minimum of six months . this waiting period may vary depending on local regulations and is sometimes nonexistent . many trans people become medical tourists , as gender reassignment surgery is typically less expensive , less regulated , and sometimes performed by much more experienced surgeons in countries such as thailand . people who undergo sex reassignment surgery reversal are said to have detransition . references . external links . list of transgender people