David Jenkins (bishop)

early life . jenkins was born in bromley , kent , to lionel jenkins , who worked in a bank , and his wife dora ( née page ) . his family were methodism . he was educated at st dunstan 's college , catford . having attended a church of england ordination conference at bangalore during his service in india , he took up a scholarship to enter queen 's college , oxford , where he graduated in 1954 . during the second world war , he was called up in the autumn of 1943 . introduction . he was commissioned in the royal artillery after officer training at harrogate in april 1945 . between pages 106-107 . at the end of the war he was a staff officer at general headquarters in india . in 1946 he was attached to the 10th indian field regiment , royal indian artillery before its disbandment . introduction . he demobilised as a captain in 1947 . . ordained ministry . jenkins trained for ordination at lincoln theological college . he was ordained in the church of england as a deacon in 1953 , and as a priest in 1954 by the bishop of birmingham . he served as curate at st philip 's cathedral , birmingham . he was chaplain and fellow of queen 's college , oxford ( 1954–1969 ) , and a lecturer in theology at the university of oxford ( 1955–1969 ) . he also worked for the world council of churches and the william temple foundation . he was appointed professor of theology at the university of leeds in 1979 , and was made emeritus professor when he left leeds in 1984 . university of leeds , list of emeritus professors in addition to his teaching appointments jenkins had been examining chaplain to the bishops of lichfield ( 1956–69 ) , newcastle upon tyne ( 1957–69 ) , bristol ( 1958–84 ) , wakefield ( 1978–84 ) and bradford ( 1979–84 ) . . bishop of durham . his selection as bishop of durham was controversial due to allegations that he held heterodox beliefs , particularly regarding the virgin birth and the bodily resurrection . between his selection and consecration , he said in an interview : '' i would n't put it past god to arrange a virgin birth if he wanted . but i do n't think he did . '' his widely quoted comment about the resurrection of christ being '' just a conjuring trick with bones '' , is a misrepresentation ; his actual words as recorded on television say the reverse ; the resurrection is not a conjuring trick with bones . the original line appears to have been '' the resurrection is real . that 's the point . all i said was 'literally physical ' . i was very careful in the use of language . after all , a conjuring trick with bones proves only that somebody 's very clever at a conjuring trick with bones . '' '' profile : the one true bishop of durham : dr david jenkins , retiring scourge of sacred cows '' , the independent , 5 february 1994 according to his bbc obituary , he considered '' the resurrection was not a single event , but a series of experiences that gradually convinced people that jesus 's life , power , purpose and personality were actually continuing . '' nonetheless , jenkins ' public pronouncements caused great disquiet , particularly within his own diocese . as a result of doubts concerning his elevation to bishop , a petition signed by more than 12,000 people was submitted to the archbishop of york . three days after his consecration as bishop on 6 july 1984 , york minster was struck by lightning , resulting in a disastrous fire which some interpreted as a sign of divine wrath at jenkins 's appointment . dr runcie discounts 'wrath of god ' theory , the glasgow herald , 10 july 1984 as a bishop , jenkins was known for his willingness to speak his mind . in 1989 he made an extended appearance on the television discussion programme after dark , alongside among others steven rose , frank cioffi , dorothy rowe and michael bentine . after leaving office in 1994 he continued to voice his opinions , such as in a bbc interview in 2003 . . political views . jenkins also became identified with opposition to the policies of the thatcher and major governments and subsequently was a critic of new labour . he argued that what these governments shared was a dogmatic faith in the market which had many pseudo-religious elements to it . this led him to write at length about what he saw as the intellectual deficiencies of economic theory and market theorising and its pseudo-theological character . his book market whys and human wherefores : thinking again about markets , politics , and people was an extended layman 's critique of economic theory and its application to policy , in which he described himself as an 'anxious idiot ' using the latter term in its original meaning of an ordinary person with no professional expertise . market whys and human wherefores : thinking again about markets , politics , and people , david jenkins , cassell , 2000 , pages 10–11 it nevertheless diagnosed many of the problems with economic theory and its application to a deregulated economy that would later be seen as prescient in the light of the global economic crisis of 2007 onwards . in dilemmas of freedom , he also challenged the idea that markets created freedom . dilemmas of freedom , university of southampton , 1989 in price , cost , excellence and worth : can the idea of a university survive the force of the market ? he similarly questioned whether they were compatible with the idea of a university price , cost , excellence and worth : can the idea of a university survive the force of the market ? , centre for the study of theology in the university of essex , 1991 while in the market and health care , he addressed the issue of health care in a similar vein . the market and health care , university of edinburgh , centre for theology and public issues , 1990 . controversies . in 2005 , he became one of the first clerics in the church of england to participate to the public blessing of a civil partnership between two homosexual men , one of whom was a church of england priest . in 2006 , jenkins was banned from preaching in some of his local churches after reportedly '' swearing '' in a sermon , using the words '' bloody '' and '' damn '' . bishop banned from pulpit for swearing , the times , 27 august 2006 in 2002 he published his memoir the calling of a cuckoo : not quite an autobiography . the calling of a cuckoo : not quite an autobiography , david jenkins , a & c black , 2003 . personal life . in 1949 , jenkins married stella mary peet , known as mollie . she died in 2008 . the couple had two sons and two daughters . his daughter rebecca , an author of crime novels set in 19th-century durham , family affair , northern echo , 6 april 2011 acted as his assistant and pr officer while he was the bishop of durham . jenkins died on 4 september 2016 at the age of 91 . . selected works . he wrote numerous books on christian theology which include : guide to the debate about god original edition 1966 ( 2nd ed . cambridge ; cambridgeshire : lutterworth press , 1985 . ) the glory of man , london : scm press , 1967 living with questions investigations into the theory and practice of belief in god , london : scm press , 1969 what is man , london : scm press 1970 , 1985 the contradiction of christianity , london : s.c.m . press , 1976 ( based on the edward cadbury lectures given at the university of birmingham in 1974 ) the god of freedom and the freedom of god , london : the hibbert trust god , miracle and the church of england london : scm , 1987 god , jesus and life in the spirit london : scm press , 1988 god , politics and the future , london : scm press 1988 still living with questions , london : scm , 1990 ( with rebecca jenkins ) free to believe , london : bbc books , 1991 . he also gave the bampton lectures on the incarnation at oxford . biography on biography.com . see also . anglican views of homosexuality . references .