Messiah in Judaism

role in judaism . restoring judaism 's 613 commandments . currently , many of the 613 commandments can not be done until the restoration of the the third temple and the universal resettlement of the jewish people in land of israel according to one count , only 369 can be kept , meaning that 40 % of mitzvot are not possible to perform . the messiah will enable all 613 to be fulfilled by building the the third temple and bringing the jewish people to land of israel . qualifications . . presumptive messiah . there are four requirements for the presumptive messiah , as maimonides states , '' a king will arise from the house of david who diligently contemplates the torah and observes its mitzvot as prescribed by the written law and the oral law as david , his ancestor , will compel all of israel to walk in ( the way of the torah ) and rectify the breaches in its observance , and fight the wars of god , we may , with assurance , consider him mashiach . '' . messianic lineage . 1 . the meaning of '' a king will arise from the house of david וְאִם יַעֲמֹד מֶלֶךְ מִבֵּית דָּוִד '' is that the messiah must be born jewish , and of direct patrilineal descent from king david ( through king solomon ( get source ) ) . however , the messiah does not immediately need to have the legal status of a king . . personally observant . 2 . the meaning of '' who diligently contemplates the torah and observes its mitzvot as prescribed by the written law and the oral law as david , his ancestor הוֹגֶה בַּתּוֹרָה וְעוֹסֵק בְּמִצְוֹת כְּדָוִד אָבִיו כְּפִי תּוֹרָה שֶׁבִּכְתָב וְשֶׁבְּעַל פֶּה '' is that the messiah is both a diligent torah scholar as well as performs the mitzvos in an exemplary fashion . encourages jewish observance . 3 . the meaning of '' will compel all of israel to walk in ( the way of the torah ) and rectify the breaches in its observance וְיָכֹף כָּל יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵילֵךְ בָּהּ וּלְחַזֵּק בִּדְקָהּ '' is that the messiah will encourage non-religious jews to become religious as well as encourage religious jews to increase in their observance . . removes impediments to judaism . 4 . the meaning of '' and fight the wars of god וְיִלָּחֵם מִלְחֲמוֹת ה '' is that the messiah will work on removing obstacles to observance of judaism , the term '' fight the wars of god '' does not exclusively imply physical wars . ( get source ) . summary . these qualifications are all related to the messiah 's role in restoring judaism . the messiah needs to be personally observant of torah and mitzvot as well as a torah scholar . then he encourages both nonobservant and observant jews to increase their jewish piety and observance of judaism . finally , he starts removing obstacles that prevent jews from observing judaism . definite messiah . maimonides then states '' if he succeeds in the above , conquers the surrounding nations , builds the temple in its place , and gathers the dispersed of israel , he is definitely the mashiach . '' these qualities relate to removal of obstacles to observance and enabling jewish people to fulfill all 613 commandments . disqualification factors for messiah . there are 2 factors of which either one leads to the disqualification of a messianic candidate . as maimonides states '' if he did not succeed to this degree or was killed , he surely is not the redeemer promised by the torah . '' . not successful . 1 . the meaning of '' if he did not succeed to this degree ( וְאִם לֹא הִצְלִיחַ עַד כֹּה ) '' has some dispute over the meaning . the more popular understanding is that to disqualify a messianic candidate , his effects and actions must cease . ( there are other understandings which i did not understand at time of edit ) . killed . 2 . the meaning of '' or was killed אוֹ נֶהֱרָג '' implies killed by human beings . two periods in messianic era . the talmud states . two ways for messiah to come . in a meritorious and a non-meritorious manner . ( get source and quote ) . non-meritorious state-by year 6000 . . meritorious state . . etymology . in jewish eschatology , the term mashiach , or '' messiah '' , refers specifically to a future jewish king from the davidic line , who is expected to save the jewish nation , and will be anointed with holy anointing oil and rule the jewish people during the messianic age . the messiah is often referred to as '' the king messiah '' ( or '' messianic king '' ) , or , in hebrew , , and , in aramaic , malka meshiḥa . in a generalized sense , messiah has '' the connotation of a savior or redeemer who would appear at the end of days and usher in the kingdom of god , the restoration of israel , or whatever dispensation was considered to be the ideal state of the world . '' and in the hebrew bible a messiah is a king or high priest traditionally anointed with holy anointing oil . however , the terminology of messiah does not exclusively refer to those who are jewish , as the hebrew bible refers to cyrus the great , king of persia , with the term messiah meyer , eduard ( 1901-1906 ) . '' cyrus '' jewish encyclopedia . vol . 4 , p . 404 . '' this prophet , cyrus , through whom were to be redeemed his chosen people , whom he would glorify before all the world , was the promised messiah , 'the shepherd of yhwh ' ( xliv . 28 , xlv . 1 ) . '' for his decree allowing the building of the second temple . origins and history . pre-exile jewish eschatology ( 8th–6th cent . bce ) . the roots of jewish eschatology are to be found in the pre-exile prophets , including isaiah and jeremiah , and the exile prophets ezekiel and deutero-isaiah . jewish virtual library , eschatology the main tenets of jewish eschatology are the following , in no particular order , elaborated in the books of isaiah , jeremiah and ezekiel : end of world ( before everything as follows ) . god redeems the jewish people from the captivity that began during the babylonian exile , in a new exodus god returns the jewish people to the land of israel god restores the davidic line and the the third temple god creates a regent from the house of david ( i.e . the jewish messiah ) to lead the jewish people and the world and usher in an messianic age all nations recognize that the god of israel is the only true god god resurrects the dead god creates a world to come judaism . second temple period ( 516 bce–70 ce ) . early in the second temple period hopes for a better future are described in the jewish scriptures . after the return from the babylonian exile , the persian king cyrus the great was called '' messiah '' in isaiah , due to his role in the return of the jewish exiles . a number of messianic ideas developed during the later second temple period , ranging from this-worldly , political expectations , to apocalyptic expectations of an endtime in which the dead would be resurrected and the kingdom of heaven would be established on earth . r . j . zwi werblowsky ( 1987 ) , messianism : jewish messianism , encyclopedia of religion the messiah might be a kingly '' son of david , '' or a more heavenly '' son of man '' , but '' messianism became increasingly eschatological , and eschatology was decisively influenced by apocalypticism '' , while '' messianic expectations became increasingly focused on the figure of an individual savior . '' according to zwi werblowsky , '' the messiah no longer symbolized the coming of the new age , but he was somehow supposed to bring it about . '' the '' lord 's anointed '' thus became the '' savior and redeemer '' and the focus of more intense expectations and doctrines . '' messianic ideas developed both by new interpretations ( pesher , midrash ) of the jewish scriptures , but also by visionary revelations . . apocalypticism . messiah in apocalypticism . religious views on whether hebrew bible passages refer to a messiah may vary from and among scholars of ancient israel , looking at their meaning in original context , and from and among rabbinical scholars . the reading of messianic attestations in passages from isaiah , jeremiah and ezekiel is anachronism , because messianism developed later than these texts . according to james c . vanderkam , there are no jewish texts before the 2nd century bce which mention a messianic leader , though some terms point in this direction , and some terms , such as the servant songs from isaiah , were later interpreted as such . according to zwi werblowsky , the repressive regime of hellenistic greek seleucid king antiochus iv ( r . 175–163 bce ) led to renewed messianic expectations , as reflected in the book of daniel . his rule was ended by the maccabean revolt ( 167-160 bce ) , and the installment of the hasmonean dynasty ( 167-37 bce ) . the maccabees ruled judea semi-independently from the seleucid empire from 167-110 bce , fully independently from 110-63 bce , and as a roman client state from 63-37 bce , when herod the great came to power . with the end of the hasmonean dynasty , the belief in a messianic leader further developed . according to james c . vanderkam , the apocalyptic genre shows a negative attitude towards the foreign powers which ruled judea , but rejection of these powers was not the only cause of the development of the apocalyptic genre . according to vanderkam , '' the vast majority of second temple texts have no reference to a messianic leader of the endtime . '' the animal apocalypse ( ca . 160 bce ) is the first to do so , but after that time , only some apocalypses , and some texts which are not apocalypses but do contain apocalyptic or eschatological teachings , refer to a messianic leader . according to vanderkam , the lack of messianic allusions may be explained by the fact that judea was governed for centuries by foreign powers , often without great problems , or a negative stance by jews toward these gentile powers . in the first millennium bce , in the qumran texts , the psalms of solomon , and the similitudes of enoch , '' both foreign and native rulers are castigated and hopes are placed on a messiah ( or messiahs ) who will end the present evil age of injustice . after the first jewish–roman war ( 66-70 ce ) , texts like 2 baruch and 4 ezra reflect the despair of the time . the images and status of the messiah in the various texts are quite different , but the apocalyptic messiahs are only somewhat more exalted than the leaders portrayed in the non-apocalyptic texts . charleswoth notes that messianic concepts are found in the old testament pseudepigrapha , which include a large number of apocalypses . book of daniel . the book of daniel ( mid-2nd c . bce ) was quoted and referenced by both jews and christians in the 1st century ce as predicting the imminent end-time . the concepts of immortality and resurrection , with rewards for the righteous and punishment for the wicked , have roots much deeper than daniel , but the first clear statement is found in the final chapter of that book : '' many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake , some to everlasting life , and some to everlasting shame and contempt . '' without this belief , christianity , in which the resurrection of jesus plays a central role , would have disappeared , like the movements following other charismatic jewish figures of the 1st century . 1 enoch . the book of enoch ( 1 enoch , 3rd-1st c . bce ) is an ancient jewish apocalyptic religious work , ascribed by tradition to enoch , the great-grandfather of noah . barker , margaret . ( 2005 ) 1987 . '' chapter 1 : the book of enoch , '' in the older testament : the survival of themes from the ancient royal cult in sectarian judaism and early christianity . london : spck ; sheffield phoenix press . barker , margaret . ( 2005 ) 1998 . the lost prophet : the book of enoch and its influence on christianity . london : spck ; sheffield phoenix press . enoch contains a prophetic exposition of the millennialism . the older sections ( mainly in the book of the watchers ) of the text are estimated to date from about 300 bce , while the latest part ( book of parables ) probably to the 1st century bce . fahlbusch , e . ; bromiley , g.w . the encyclopedia of christianity : p–sh page 411 , ( 2004 ) 1 enoch is the first text to contain the idea of a preexistent heavenly messiah , called the '' son of man . '' joseph jacobs , moses buttenwieser ( 1906 ) , messiah , jewish encyclopedia 1 enoch , and also 4 ezra , transform the expectation of a kingly messiah of daniel 7 into '' an exalted , heavenly messiah whose role would be to execute judgment and to inaugurate a new age of peace and rejoicing . '' he is described as an angelic being , who '' was chosen and hidden with god before the world was created , and will remain in his presence forevermore . '' he is the embodiment of justice and wisdom , seated on a throne in heaven , who will be revealed to the world at the end of times , when he will judge all beings . 1 enoch was influential in molding new testament doctrines about the messiah , the son of man , the messianic kingdom , demonology , the resurrection , and eschatology . ephraim isaac , 1 enoch : a new translation and introduction in james charlesworth ( ed . ) the old testament pseudoepigrapha , vol . 1 , pp . 5-89 ( new york , doubleday , 1983 , , page 10 . messianic allusions . messianic allusions to some figures include to menahem ben hezekiah who traditionally was born on the same day that the second temple was destroyed . the messiah texts – page 24 raphael patai – 1988 '' the list of legendary redeemers , or quasi-messianic charismatic figures , includes moses , elijah ( see chapter 14 ) , . ( the first temple was destroyed ) , menahem ben hezekiah ( who was born on the very day the second temple was destroyed ) ; '' . christianity . jewish christianity . christianity started as a second temple period messianic jewish sect . most of jesus 's teachings were intelligible and acceptable in terms of second temple judaism ; what set the followers of jesus apart from other jews was their faith in jesus as the resurrected messiah . while ancient judaism acknowledged multiple messiahs , the two most relevant being the messiah ben joseph and the traditional messiah ben david , christianity acknowledges only one ultimate messiah . jesus would have been viewed by many as one or both . according to larry hurtado , '' the christology and devotional stance that paul affirmed ( and shared with others in the early jesus-movement ) was not a departure from or a transcending of a supposedly monochrome jewish messianism , but , instead , a distinctive expression within a variegated body of jewish messianic hopes . '' larry hurtado , paul ’ s messianic christology . rejection of jesus as the messiah . according to maimonides , jesus was the most damaging of all false messiahs . maimonides . mishneh torah , sefer shofetim , melachim umilchamot , chapter 11 , halacha 4 . chabad translation by eliyahu touge . however , since the traditional jewish belief is that the messiah has not yet come and the messianic age is not yet present , the total rejection of jesus as either messiah or deity has never been a central issue for judaism . judaism has never accepted any of the claimed fulfillments of prophecy that jesus in christianity . judaism forbids the worship of a person as a form of idolatry , since the central belief of judaism is jewish principles of faith god is one . devarim ( deuteronomy ) 6:4 . calculation of appearance . according to the talmud , babylonian talmud rosh hashana 31a and sanhedrin 97a the midrash , pirke de rabbi eliezer , gerald friedlander , sepher-hermon press , new york , 1981 , p . 141 . and the zohar , zohar ( 1:117a ) and zohar vayera 119a the 'deadline ' by which the messiah must appear is year 6000 ( approximately the year 2240 in the gregorian calendar , though calculations vary ) . elaborating on this theme are numerous early and late jewish scholars , including the ramban , ramban on genesis ( 2:3 ) isaac abrabanel , abarbanel on genesis 2 abraham ibn ezra , ramban quoting ibn ezra at leviticus ( 25:2 ) rabbeinu bachya , bachya on genesis 2:3 the vilna gaon , safra d'tzniusa , ch . 5 the lubavitcher rebbe , sefer hasichos 5750:254 the ramchal , derech hashem 4:7:2 aryeh kaplan , and rebbetzin esther jungreis . . see also . armilus old testament messianic prophecies quoted in the new testament list of jewish messiah claimants year 6000 . notes . references . sources . ; printed sources ; web-sources . further reading . emet ve-emunah : statement of principles of conservative judaism , ed . robert gordis , jewish theological seminary of america , 1988 mashiach rabbi jacob immanuel schochet , published by s.i.e . , brooklyn , ny , 1992 ; lccn 92090728 ( also available in spanish , portuguese , italian , french , persian , hebrew , and braille translations ) miriam naomi mashiah mishneh torah , maimonides , chapter on hilkhot melakhim umilchamoteihem ( laws of kings and wars ) moses maimonides 's treatise on resurrection , trans . fred rosner philosophies of judaism by julius guttmann , trans . by david silverman , jps . 1964 reform judaism : a centenary perspective , central conference of american rabbis . external links . jewish encyclopedia : messiah moshiach and the future redemption who is the messiah ? by jeffrey a . spitzer why did the majority of the jewish world reject jesus as the messiah , and why did the first christians accept jesus as the messiah ? by rabbi shraga simmons the messiah , by the university of calgary videos on topic of moshiach by jewish rabbis