Transcription (biology)

background . a dna transcription unit encoding for a protein may contain both a coding sequence , which will be translated into the protein , and regulatory sequences , which direct and regulate the synthesis of that protein . the regulatory sequence before ( '' upstream '' from ) the coding sequence is called the five prime untranslated region ( 5'utr ) ; the sequence after ( '' downstream '' from ) the coding sequence is called the three prime untranslated region ( 3'utr ) . as opposed to dna replication , transcription results in an rna complement that includes the nucleotide uracil ( u ) in all instances where thymine ( t ) would have occurred in a dna complement . only one of the two dna strands serve as a template for transcription . the antisense strand of dna is read by rna polymerase from the 3 ' end to the 5 ' end during transcription ( 3 ' → 5 ' ) . the complementary rna is created in the opposite direction , in the 5 ' → 3 ' direction , matching the sequence of the sense strand with the exception of switching uracil for thymine . this directionality is because rna polymerase can only add nucleotides to the 3 ' end of the growing mrna chain . this use of only the 3 ' → 5 ' dna strand eliminates the need for the okazaki fragments that are seen in dna replication . this also removes the need for an rna primer to initiate rna synthesis , as is the case in dna replication . the non-template ( sense ) strand of dna is called the coding strand , because its sequence is the same as the newly created rna transcript ( except for the substitution of uracil for thymine ) . this is the strand that is used by convention when presenting a dna sequence . transcription has some proofreading mechanisms , but they are fewer and less effective than the controls for copying dna . as a result , transcription has a lower copying fidelity than dna replication . . major steps . transcription is divided into initiation , promoter escape , elongation , and termination . . initiation . transcription begins with the binding of rna polymerase , together with one or more transcription factor , to a specific dna sequence referred to as a '' promoter '' to form an rna polymerase-promoter '' closed complex '' . in the '' closed complex '' the promoter dna is still fully double-stranded . rna polymerase , assisted by one or more general transcription factors , then unwinds approximately 14 base pairs of dna to form an rna polymerase-promoter '' open complex '' . in the '' open complex '' the promoter dna is partly unwound and single-stranded . the exposed , single-stranded dna is referred to as the '' transcription bubble . '' rna polymerase , assisted by one or more general transcription factors , then selects a transcription start site in the transcription bubble , binds to an initiating ntp and an extending ntp ( or a short rna primer and an extending ntp ) complementary to the transcription start site sequence , and catalyzes bond formation to yield an initial rna product . in bacteria , rna polymerase holoenzyme consists of five subunits : 2 α subunits , 1 β subunit , 1 β ' subunit , and 1 ω subunit . in bacteria , there is one general rna transcription factor known as a sigma factor . rna polymerase core enzyme binds to the bacterial general transcription ( sigma ) factor to form rna polymerase holoenzyme and then binds to a promoter . ( rna polymerase is called a holoenzyme when sigma subunit is attached to the core enzyme which is consist of 2 α subunits , 1 β subunit , 1 β ' subunit only ) . in archaea and eukaryotes , rna polymerase contains subunits homologous to each of the five rna polymerase subunits in bacteria and also contains additional subunits . in archaea and eukaryotes , the functions of the bacterial general transcription factor sigma are performed by multiple general transcription factors that work together . in archaea , there are three general transcription factors : tbp , tfb , and tfe . in eukaryotes , in rna polymerase ii-dependent transcription , there are six general transcription factors : tfiia , tfiib ( an ortholog of archaeal tfb ) , tfiid ( a multisubunit factor in which the key subunit , tbp , is an ortholog of archaeal tbp ) , tfiie ( an ortholog of archaeal tfe ) , tfiif , and tfiih . the tfiid is the first component to bind to dna due to binding of tbp , while tfiih is the last component to be recruited . in archaea and eukaryotes , the rna polymerase-promoter closed complex is usually referred to as the '' preinitiation complex . '' transcription initiation is regulated by additional proteins , known as activators and repressors , and , in some cases , associated coactivators or coactivator , which modulate formation and function of the transcription initiation complex . . promoter escape . after the first bond is synthesized , the rna polymerase must escape the promoter . during this time there is a tendency to release the rna transcript and produce truncated transcripts . this is called abortive initiation , and is common for both eukaryotes and prokaryotes . abortive initiation continues to occur until an rna product of a threshold length of approximately 10 nucleotides is synthesized , at which point promoter escape occurs and a transcription elongation complex is formed . mechanistically , promoter escape occurs through dna scrunching , providing the energy needed to break interactions between rna polymerase holoenzyme and the promoter . in bacteria , it was historically thought that the sigma factor is definitely released after promoter clearance occurs . this theory had been known as the obligate release model . however , later data showed that upon and following promoter clearance , the sigma factor is released according to a stochastic model known as the stochastic release model . in eukaryotes , at an rna polymerase ii-dependent promoter , upon promoter clearance , tfiih phosphorylates serine 5 on the carboxy terminal domain of rna polymerase ii , leading to the recruitment of capping enzyme ( ce ) . the exact mechanism of how ce induces promoter clearance in eukaryotes is not yet known . elongation . one strand of the dna , the template strand ( or noncoding strand ) , is used as a template for rna synthesis . as transcription proceeds , rna polymerase traverses the template strand and uses base pairing complementarity with the dna template to create an rna copy ( which elongates during the traversal ) . although rna polymerase traverses the template strand from 3 ' → 5 ' , the coding ( non-template ) strand and newly formed rna can also be used as reference points , so transcription can be described as occurring 5 ' → 3 ' . this produces an rna molecule from 5 ' → 3 ' , an exact copy of the coding strand ( except that thymines are replaced with uracils , and the nucleotides are composed of a ribose ( 5-carbon ) sugar where dna has deoxyribose ( one fewer oxygen atom ) in its sugar-phosphate backbone ) . mrna transcription can involve multiple rna polymerases on a single dna template and multiple rounds of transcription ( amplification of particular mrna ) , so many mrna molecules can be rapidly produced from a single copy of a gene . the characteristic elongation rates in prokaryotes and eukaryotes are about 10-100 nts/sec . in eukaryotes , however , nucleosomes act as major barriers to transcribing polymerases during transcription elongation . in these organisms , the pausing induced by nucleosomes can be regulated by transcription elongation factors such as tfiis . elongation also involves a proofreading mechanism that can replace incorrectly incorporated bases . in eukaryotes , this may correspond with short pauses during transcription that allow appropriate rna editing factors to bind . these pauses may be intrinsic to the rna polymerase or due to chromatin structure . termination . bacteria use two different strategies for transcription termination – rho-independent termination and rho-dependent termination . in rho-independent transcription termination , rna transcription stops when the newly synthesized rna molecule forms a g-c-rich hairpin loop followed by a run of us . when the hairpin forms , the mechanical stress breaks the weak ru-da bonds , now filling the dna–rna hybrid . this pulls the poly-u transcript out of the active site of the rna polymerase , terminating transcription . in the '' rho-dependent '' type of termination , a protein factor called '' rho '' destabilizes the interaction between the template and the mrna , thus releasing the newly synthesized mrna from the elongation complex . transcription termination in eukaryotes is less well understood than in bacteria , but involves cleavage of the new transcript followed by template-independent addition of adenines at its new 3 ' end , in a process called polyadenylation . . role of rna polymerase in post-transcriptional changes in rna . rna polymerase plays a very crucial role in all steps including post-transcriptional changes in rna . as shown in the image in the right it is evident that the ctd ( c terminal domain ) is a tail that changes its shape ; this tail will be used as a carrier of splicing , capping and polyadenylation , as shown in the image on the left . . inhibitors . transcription inhibitors can be used as antibiotics against , for example , pathogenic bacteria ( antibacterials ) and fungi ( antifungals ) . an example of such an antibacterial is rifampicin , which inhibits bacterial transcription of dna into mrna by inhibiting dna-dependent rna polymerase by binding its beta-subunit , while 8-hydroxyquinoline is an antifungal transcription inhibitor . 8-hydroxyquinoline info from sigma-aldrich . retrieved feb 2012 the effects of histone methylation may also work to inhibit the action of transcription . potent , bioactive natural products like triptolide that inhibit mammalian transcription via inhibition of the xpb subunit of the general transcription factor tfiih has been recently reported as a glucose conjugate for targeting hypoxic cancer cells with increased glucose transporter expression . . endogenous inhibitors . in vertebrates , the majority of gene promoters contain a cpg island with numerous cpg sites . when many of a gene 's promoter cpg sites are methylated the gene becomes inhibited ( silenced ) . colorectal cancers typically have 3 to 6 driver mutations and 33 to 66 hitchhiker or passenger mutations . however , transcriptional inhibition ( silencing ) may be of more importance than mutation in causing progression to cancer . for example , in colorectal cancers about 600 to 800 genes are transcriptionally inhibited by cpg island methylation ( see regulation of transcription in cancer ) . transcriptional repression in cancer can also occur by other epigenetic mechanisms , such as altered expression of micrornas . in breast cancer , transcriptional repression of brca1 may occur more frequently by over-expressed microrna-182 than by hypermethylation of the brca1 promoter ( see low expression of brca1 in breast and ovarian cancers ) . transcription factories . active transcription units are clustered in the nucleus , in discrete sites called transcription factories or euchromatin . such sites can be visualized by allowing engaged polymerases to extend their transcripts in tagged precursors ( br-utp or br-u ) and immuno-labeling the tagged nascent rna . transcription factories can also be localized using fluorescence in situ hybridization or marked by antibodies directed against polymerases . there are ~10,000 factories in the nucleoplasm of a hela cell , among which are ~8,000 polymerase ii factories and ~2,000 polymerase iii factories . each polymerase ii factory contains ~8 polymerases . as most active transcription units are associated with only one polymerase , each factory usually contains ~8 different transcription units . these units might be associated through promoters and/or enhancers , with loops forming a '' cloud '' around the factor . . history . a molecule that allows the genetic material to be realized as a protein was first hypothesized by françois jacob and jacques monod . severo ochoa won a nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1959 for developing a process for synthesizing rna in vitro with polynucleotide phosphorylase , which was useful for cracking the genetic code . rna synthesis by rna polymerase was established in vitro by several laboratories by 1965 ; however , the rna synthesized by these enzymes had properties that suggested the existence of an additional factor needed to terminate transcription correctly . in 1972 , walter fiers became the first person to actually prove the existence of the terminating enzyme . roger d . kornberg won the 2006 nobel prize in chemistry '' for his studies of the molecular basis of eukaryotic transcription '' . . measuring and detecting . file : transcription label en.jpg thumb electron micrograph of transcription of ribosomal rna . the forming ribosomal rna strands are visible as branches from the main dna strand . transcription can be measured and detected in a variety of ways : g-less cassette transcription assay : measures promoter strength run-off transcription assay : identifies transcription start sites ( tss ) nuclear run-on assay : measures the relative abundance of newly formed transcripts kas-seq : measures single-stranded dna generated by rna polymerases ; can work with 1,000 cells . rnase protection assay and chip-chip of rnap : detect active transcription sites rt-pcr : measures the absolute abundance of total or nuclear rna levels , which may however differ from transcription rates dna microarrays : measures the relative abundance of the global total or nuclear rna levels ; however , these may differ from transcription rates in situ hybridization : detects the presence of a transcript ms2 tagging : by incorporating rna stem-loop , such as ms2 , into a gene , these become incorporated into newly synthesized rna . the stem loops can then be detected using a fusion of gfp and the ms2 coat protein , which has a high affinity , sequence-specific interaction with the ms2 stem loops . the recruitment of gfp to the site of transcription is visualized as a single fluorescent spot . this new approach has revealed that transcription occurs in discontinuous bursts , or pulses ( see transcriptional bursting ) . with the notable exception of in situ techniques , most other methods provide cell population averages , and are not capable of detecting this fundamental property of genes . northern blot : the traditional method , and until the advent of rna-seq , the most quantitative rna-seq : applies next-generation sequencing techniques to sequence whole transcriptomes , which allows the measurement of relative abundance of rna , as well as the detection of additional variations such as fusion genes , post-transcriptional edits and novel splice sites single cell rna-seq : amplifies and reads partial transcriptomes from isolated cells , allowing for detailed analyses of rna in tissues , embryos , and cancers . reverse transcription . some viruses ( such as hiv , the cause of aids ) , have the ability to transcribe rna into dna . hiv has an rna genome that is reverse transcribed into dna . the resulting dna can be merged with the dna genome of the host cell . the main enzyme responsible for synthesis of dna from an rna template is called reverse transcriptase . in the case of hiv , reverse transcriptase is responsible for synthesizing a complementary dna strand ( cdna ) to the viral rna genome . the enzyme ribonuclease h then digests the rna strand , and reverse transcriptase synthesises a complementary strand of dna to form a double helix dna structure ( '' cdna '' ) . the cdna is integrated into the host cell 's genome by the enzyme integrase , which causes the host cell to generate viral proteins that reassemble into new viral particles . in hiv , subsequent to this , the host cell undergoes programmed cell death , or apoptosis of t cells . however , in other retroviruses , the host cell remains intact as the virus buds out of the cell . some eukaryotic cells contain an enzyme with reverse transcription activity called telomerase . telomerase is a reverse transcriptase that lengthens the ends of linear chromosomes . telomerase carries an rna template from which it synthesizes a repeating sequence of dna , or '' junk '' dna . this repeated sequence of dna is called a telomere and can be thought of as a '' cap '' for a chromosome . it is important because every time a linear chromosome is duplicated , it is shortened . with this '' junk '' dna or '' cap '' at the ends of chromosomes , the shortening eliminates some of the non-essential , repeated sequence rather than the protein-encoding dna sequence , that is farther away from the chromosome end . telomerase is often activated in cancer cells to enable cancer cells to duplicate their genomes indefinitely without losing important protein-coding dna sequence . activation of telomerase could be part of the process that allows cancer cells to become immortal . the immortalizing factor of cancer via telomere lengthening due to telomerase has been proven to occur in 90 % of all carcinogenic tumors in vivo with the remaining 10 % using an alternative telomere maintenance route called alt or alternative lengthening of telomeres .