Fourteen Points

background . the immediate cause of the united states ' entry into world war i in april 1917 was the german announcement of renewed u-boat campaign ( world war i ) and the subsequent sinking of ships with americans on board . but president wilson 's war aims went beyond the defense of maritime interests . in his war message to congress , wilson declared that the united states ' objective was '' to vindicate the principles of peace and justice in the life of the world . '' in several speeches earlier in the year , wilson sketched out his vision of an end to the war that would bring a wikiquote : woodrow wilson president wilson subsequently initiated a secret series of studies named the inquiry , primarily focused on europe , and carried out by a group in new york which included geographers , historians and political scientists ; the group was directed by edward m . house . heckscher , p . 470 . their job was to study allied and american policy in virtually every region of the globe and analyze economic , social , and political facts likely to come up in discussions during the peace conference . the group produced and collected nearly 2,000 separate reports and documents plus at least 1,200 maps . the studies culminated in a speech by wilson to congress on january 8 , 1918 , wherein he articulated america 's long-term war objectives . the speech was the clearest expression of intention made by any of the belligerent nations , and it projected wilson 's progressive domestic policies into the international arena . . speech . the speech , known as the fourteen points , was developed from a set of diplomatic points by wilson and territorial points drafted by the inquiry 's general secretary , walter lippmann , and his colleagues , isaiah bowman , sidney mezes , and david hunter miller . godfrey hodgson , woodrow wilson 's right hand : the life of colonel edward m . house ( yale university press , 2006 ) , pp . 160-63 . lippmann 's draft territorial points were a direct response to the secret treaties of the european allies , which lippmann had been shown by secretary of war newton d . baker . lippmann 's task , according to house , was '' to take the secret treaties , analyze the parts which were tolerable , and separate them from those which were regarded as intolerable , and then develop a position which conceded as much to the allies as it could , but took away the poison . it was all keyed upon the secret treaties . '' in the speech , wilson directly addressed what he perceived as the causes for the world war by calling for the abolition of secret treaties , a arms control , an league of nations mandate in the interests of both native peoples and colonists , and freedom of the seas . wilson also made proposals that would ensure world peace in the future . for example , he proposed the free trade between nations , the promise of self-determination for national minorities , and a world organization that would guarantee the '' political independence and territorial integrity of great and small states alike '' —a league of nations . though wilson 's idealism pervaded the fourteen points , he also had more practical objectives in mind . he hoped to keep russia in the war by convincing the bolsheviks that they would receive a better peace from the allies , to bolster allied morale , and to undermine german war support . the address was well received in the united states and allied nations and even by bolshevik leader vladimir lenin , as a landmark of enlightenment in international relations . wilson subsequently used the fourteen points as the basis for negotiating the treaty of versailles , which ended the war . . text . in his speech to congress , president wilson declared fourteen points which he regarded as the only possible basis of an enduring peace . : . reaction . allies . wilson at first considered abandoning his speech after lloyd george delivered a speech outlining british war aims , many of which were similar to wilson 's aspirations , at caxton hall on january 5 , 1918 . lloyd george stated that he had consulted leaders of '' the great dominions overseas '' before making his speech , so it would appear that canada , australia , new zealand , south africa and newfoundland were in broad agreement . wilson was persuaded by his adviser house to go ahead , and wilson 's speech overshadowed lloyd george 's and is better remembered by posterity . grigg 2002 , pp.383-5 the speech was made without prior coordination or consultation with wilson 's counterparts in europe . clemenceau , upon hearing of the fourteen points , was said to have sarcastically proclaimed , '' the good lord had only ten ! '' . as a major public statement of war aims , it became the basis for the terms of the armistice with germany ( compiègne ) . after the speech , house worked to secure the acceptance of the fourteen points by entente leaders . on october 16 , 1918 , president woodrow wilson and sir william wiseman , the head of british intelligence in america , had an interview . this interview was one reason why the german government accepted the fourteen points and the stated principles for peace negotiations . the report was made as negotiation points , and the fourteen points were later accepted by france and italy on november 1 , 1918 . britain later signed off on all of the points except the freedom of the seas . grigg 2002 , pp.384 the united kingdom also wanted germany to make reparation payments for the war , and thought that should be added to the fourteen points . the speech was delivered 10 months before the armistice with germany and became the basis for the terms of the german surrender , as negotiated at the paris peace conference in 1919 . . central powers . the speech was widely disseminated as an instrument of allied propaganda and was translated into many languages for global dissemination . heckscher , p . 471 . copies were also dropped behind german lines , to encourage the central powers to surrender in the expectation of a just settlement . indeed , in a note sent to wilson by prince maximilian of baden , the german imperial chancellor , in october 1918 requested an immediate armistice and peace negotiations on the basis of the fourteen points . heckscher , pp . 479-88 . . united states . theodore roosevelt , in a january 1919 article titled , '' the league of nations '' , published in metropolitan magazine , warned : '' if the league of nations is built on a document as high-sounding and as meaningless as the speech in which mr . wilson laid down his fourteen points , it will simply add one more scrap to the diplomatic waste paper basket . most of these fourteen points . would be interpreted . to mean anything or nothing . '' cited in newer roosevelt messages , ( ed . griffith , william , new york : the current literature publishing company 1919 ) . vol iii , p 1047 . senator william borah after 1918 wished '' this treacherous and treasonable scheme '' of the league of nations to be '' buried in hell '' and promised that if he had his way it would be '' 20,000 leagues under the sea '' . cited in ivo daalder and james lindsay , america unbound : the bush revolution in foreign policy ( washington : brookings institution press , 2003 ) , p 7 . . treaty of versailles . president wilson contracted spanish flu at the beginning of the paris peace conference and became severely ill with high fevers and bouts of delirium . giving way to french prime minister georges clemenceau to advance demands that were substantially different from wilson 's fourteen points . clemenceau viewed germany as having unfairly attained an economic victory over france because of the heavy damage german forces dealt to france 's industries even during the german retreat , and he expressed dissatisfaction with france 's allies at the peace conference . notably , article 231 of the treaty of versailles , which would become known as the war guilt clause , was seen by the germans as assigning full responsibility for the war and its damages on germany ; however , the same clause was included in all peace treaties and historian sally marks has noted that only german diplomats saw it as assigning responsibility for the war . the allies would initially assess 269 billion marks in reparations . in 1921 , this figure was established at 192 billion marks . however , only a fraction of the total had to be paid . the figure was designed to look imposing and show the public that germany was being punished , but it also recognized what germany could not realistically pay . germany 's ability and willingness to pay that sum continues to be a topic of debate among historians . germany was also denied an air force , and the german army was not to exceed 100,000 men . the text of the fourteen points had been widely distributed in germany as propaganda prior to the end of the war and was well known by the germans . the differences between this document and the final treaty of versailles fueled great anger in germany . the concise encyclopedia of world history ( edited by john bowle ) , publisher : hutchinson of london ( great portland street ) printed by taylor , garnett , evans & co . in 1958 , chapter 20 by john plamenatz ( no isbn available ) german outrage over reparations and the war guilt clause is viewed as a likely contributing factor to the rise of national socialism . by the time of the armistice of 11 november 1918 , foreign armies had only entered germany 's prewar borders twice : at the battle of tannenberg in the east prussia and following the battle of mulhouse , the settlement of the french army in the thann valley . these were both in 1914 . this lack of any allied incursions at the end of the war contributed to the popularization of the stab-in-the-back myth in germany after the war . wilson was awarded the 1919 nobel peace prize for his peace-making efforts . contradictions . ukraine . at the time ukrainian delegations failed to receive any support from france and uk . although some agreements were reached , but neither of the states provided any actual support as in general their agenda was to restore poland and unified anti-bolshevik russia . the post- great war settlement of 1919 and ukraine thus ukrainian representatives arnold margolin and teofil okunevsky had high hopes for american mission , but in the end found it even more categorical than french and british : . notes . references . . external links . text of wilson 's message to congress outlining 14 points january 8 , 1918 text and commentary from ourdocuments.gov interpretation of president wilson 's fourteen points by edward m . house '' president wilson 's fourteen points '' from the world war i document archive wilson 's shorthand notes from the library of congress arthur balfour 's speech on the fourteen points to parliament , on 27 february 1918 – firstworldwar.com woodrow wilson library wilson 's noble peace prize is digitized . from the library of congress