Doritos

history . the term dorito is a contraction of spanish doradito ( little fried and golden thing ) , which is a diminutive of dorado ( fried and golden thing ) . the original product was made at the casa de fritos ( now rancho del zocalo ) at disneyland in anaheim , california , during the early 1960s . using surplus tortillas and taking the original idea from the traditional mexican snack known as totopo , the company-owned restaurant cut them up , fried them , and added basic seasoning , resembling the mexican chilaquiles , but in this case being dry . arch west was the vice president of marketing of frito-lay at the time , and noticed their popularity . he made a deal in 1964 with alex foods , the provider of many items for casa de fritos at disneyland , and produced the chips for a short time regionally , before it was overwhelmed by the volume , and frito-lay moved the production in-house to its tulsa plant . doritos were released nationwide in 1966 , the first tortilla chip to be launched nationally in the united states . according to information resources international , in 1993 , doritos earned 1.2 billion in retail sales , one-third of the total frito-lay sales for the year . nevertheless , in the costliest redesign in frito-lay history , in 1994 the company spent 50 million to redesign doritos to make the chips 20 % larger , 15 % thinner , and rounded the edges of the chip . roger j . berdusco , the vice president of tortilla chip marketing , said a primary reason for the change was '' greater competition from restaurant-style tortilla chips , that are larger and more strongly seasoned '' . the design change was the result of a two-year market research study that involved 5,000 chip eaters . the new design gave each chip rounded corners , making it easier to eat and reducing the scrap resulting from broken corners . each chip was also given more seasoning , resulting in a stronger flavor . the redesigned chips were released in four flavors beginning in january 1995 . in the united states , frito-lay eliminated trans fat from all doritos varieties in 2002 . the same year , the doritos brand began complying with u.s . food and drug administration labeling regulations , four years before the regulations became mandatory . the company was sued in 1993 by charles grady , who claimed that his throat had been damaged while eating doritos . according to his lawsuit , the shape and rigidity of the chips made them inherently dangerous . grady attempted to admit into evidence a study by a former chemistry professor that calculated how best to safely swallow the chips . the pennsylvania supreme court later ruled that the study did not meet scientific standards and could not be presented as evidence . in 2005 , doritos sales in the united states fell by 1.7 % to 595 million . to increase sales in 2006 , the company launched several new flavors , a new label , and more bilingual advertising . frito-lay vice president joe ennen described this as '' the most significant rebranding and relaunch in doritos ' 38-year history . '' on february 21 , 2013 , the doritos logo was changed again , and the advertising slogan '' for the bold '' was adopted . in 2015 , doritos introduced a limited edition rainbow doritos product , which were only available to those making a minimum donation of 10 to the it gets better project , a non-profit organization that supports lgbt youth . the promotion raised 100,000 for the organization , despite some controversy . . ingredients . the original plain chips ( toasted corn , a discontinued us variety as of 2019 , but available in the uk branded as 'lightly salted ' ) are made of ground corn ( maize ) , vegetable oil , and salt . other ingredients vary across the flavored chip varieties . doritos made for the us market generally do not use pork-derived animal rennet in the making of the cheese flavorings used on the chip . nacho cheese doritos ingredients ( u.s . ) , in order of percent of product : whole corn , vegetable oil ( corn , soybean , and/or sunflower oil ) , salt , cheddar cheese ( milk , cheese cultures , salt , rennet ) , maltodextrin , whey , monosodium glutamate , buttermilk solids , romano cheese ( part skim cow 's milk , cheese cultures , salt , enzymes ) , whey protein isolate , onion powder , partially hydrogenated oil and cottonseed oil , corn flour , disodium phosphate , lactose , natural and artificial flavor , dextrose , tomato powder , spices , lactic acid , artificial color ( including yellow 6 , yellow 5 , red 40 ) , citric acid , sugar , garlic powder , red and green bell pepper powder , sodium caseinate , disodium inosinate , disodium guanylate , nonfat milk solids , whey protein isolate , corn syrup solids . in 1996 , the onion , a satirical newspaper and website , featured an article with the headline '' doritos celebrates one millionth ingredient '' , lampooning frito-lay for the sheer number of ingredients found in doritos . concerns have been raised that the oils , flavorings and additives used in doritos and other frito-lay products may be unhealthy . ( huffington post ) dump your doritos , fritos and cheetos ! there 's no excuse for eating junk food anymore . flavors . doritos are sold in many countries worldwide in assorted flavors . they launched nationally in the united states in 1966 , with only one flavor : toasted corn . the product proved successful , but additional market research revealed that many consumers outside the southwest and west considered the chip to be too bland and not spicy enough for what was perceived as a mexican snack . frito-lay therefore developed taco-flavored doritos , which also became successful after they were introduced nationally in 1967 . national distribution of nacho cheese-flavored doritos began in 1972 , and were also a hit . for a short period in the late 1970s , sour cream and onion flavored doritos were available , but were discontinued in the early 1980s . a sesame seed flavored chip was also available for a short time in the late 1970s . in 1986 , cool ranch doritos made their debut and also became popular . cool ranch doritos are sold under the name '' cool original '' in the uk and are called '' cool american '' elsewhere in europe , as ranch dressing is less common in those places . in the 1990s , in partnership with parent company pepsico 's fast food brands , two new flavors of doritos were introduced , taco bell 's taco supreme ( incorporating a '' beef '' flavoring that was quite different from the original 1960s '' taco '' incarnation ) and pizza hut 's pizza cravers . after pepsico yum ! brands , the flavors were simply renamed taco and pizza , respectively , with the pizza flavor discontinued in some markets . at around the same time , due to the popularity of frito-lay 's tostitos brand the unflavored toasted corn was briefly discontinued , then brought back . in 2008 , the taco bell ( complete with the brand name attached ) flavor was temporarily re-released under the '' back by popular demand '' label along with four cheese . in 1990 , jumpin ' jack monterey cheese flavored doritos were introduced . this flavor was later discontinued . in 1995 , chester 's cheese doritos were available for a limited time . this flavor introduced the familiar cheetos flavor cheese on the typical doritos tortilla chip . in 1997 , spicy nacho was introduced . for a brief period in 2004 , doritos introduced new shape and form called '' rollitos '' , which were corn chips shaped into small tubes , like a regular triangular dorito was '' rolled '' up . rollitos flavors included nacho cheesier , zesty taco , cooler ranch and queso picante . in 2013 , this idea was reintroduced and rebranded as '' dinamitas '' , or little sticks of dynamite . there are two varieties , a chili lime combo , and the mojo criollo ( creole magic ) , a lemon-lime and garlic flavored rolled doritos . dinamitas differs slightly in style than rollitos . rollitos had the chips baked , the tube formed with an oil-submersible box press to fry . currently it is rolled into a tube before the baking and frying , a much simpler process . six versions of '' doritos collisions '' , which include two different flavors in the same bag , have been produced . those varieties of doritos collisions are hot wings/blue cheese , zesty taco/chipotle ranch , habanero/guacamole , cheesy enchilada/sour cream , pizza cravers/ranch , and blaze/ultimate cheddar . in 2007 , doritos ran a campaign called '' doritos x-13d flavor experiment '' where black , unidentified bags of doritos were on the market for consumers to identify and name the flavor . the only flavor identification on these chips was '' all american classic '' . reincarnations and relaunches of taco-flavored doritos , including the 2008 '' back by popular demand '' campaign , were different from the original taco flavor ( a sour cream flavor had been added to the recipe around 1985 ) . the taco chips included in the zesty taco and chipotle ranch '' collisions '' bags were thought by customers to be closer to the original , but were later discontinued in most of the united states . in late 2010 , the taco flavor recipe that was used in the 1980s returned in a limited edition '' retro '' styled bag incorporating the original doritos logo , and in early 2011 the company announced that this incarnation would remain in the permanent product line-up . in 2008 , doritos debuted a '' mystery flavor '' quests with prizes being given as puzzles were solved . the mystery flavor was mountain dew . in 2009 , doritos released some new flavors under the banner '' doritos late night '' : '' tacos at midnight '' and '' last call jalapeño popper '' . they also modified the x-13d flavor as all nighter cheeseburger . 2010 saw the release of three successively spicy '' degree burn '' flavors ( blazin ' jalapeño/jalapeño fire , fiery buffalo and scorchin ' habanero ) , cross promoted to '' cool down '' with pepsi 's lime '' cease fire/max citrus freeze '' , and the wasabi flavored mr . dragon 's fire chips . 2010 saw the introduction of doritos to new zealand and with it flavors including nacho cheese , cheese supreme , salted , and salsa . this year also saw the original taco flavor of doritos revived in the original packaging design . in the spring of 2011 , a tapatio hot sauce flavor was released . in february 2011 , doritos canada ran a competition to write the end of a commercial for two new flavors ( '' onion rings n ' ketchup '' and '' blazin ' buffalo and ranch '' ) , and to vote for which of the two flavors would be taken off shelves when the contest ended . onion rings n ' ketchup received the most votes and remained on sale . in the spring of 2015 , doritos roulette was released to us markets for a limited time . while all chips appeared to look the same on the outside , one out of every six chips would be extra spicy . owing to the spicy nature of one variety contained in the pack , in july 2015 george pindar school reported an incident where an asthmatic student '' suffered some difficulty breathing after eating one '' . . marketing . the brand 's marketing campaigns have included many television commercials featuring avery schreiber , jay leno , and ali landry , as well as product placement in movies , such as wayne 's world . . super bowl . for many years , doritos super bowl commercials super bowl . according to thomas l . harris 's value-added public relations , '' the most-used single video news release of 1995 '' was a doritos super bowl commercial featuring recently defeated us state governors mario cuomo and ann richards . the pair were discussing change and the ad ended with viewers aware that the change they referred to was not political , but rather a new packaging for doritos . the ad generated a great deal of publicity before it ever ran and much discussion afterward . the governors later parodied their ad ; when they were interviewed on the cbs news program 60 minutes , the two were often seen eating doritos . harris ( 1999 ) , p . 112 . in 1998 , doritos cast former miss usa ali landry in a new super bowl commercial . in the ad , filmed in a laundromat , she plays a sexy customer who catches doritos chips in her mouth as they come flying helter-skelter . the ad was such a success that frito-lay signed landry , who became known as '' the doritos girl , '' to a three-year contract . for super bowl xli , doritos launched a contest , crash the super bowl , to allow consumers to create their own doritos commercial . the general public was allowed to vote for their favorite of five finalists . according to doritos , the vote was so close that just before the game the company decided to run two of the ads rather than just one . both commercials finished highly in ratings of commercials during this super bowl . the following year , doritos sponsored a contest to find a musician to feature in a super bowl ad . although the ad , featuring winner kina grannis , generated a lot of publicity , it ranked last in popularity among the program 's ads . for nannerpus , doritos relaunched the fan-created commercials , with the winning vote going to the '' free doritos '' ad , which featured an office worker ( comedian steve booth ) with a snow globe ( believing it to be a crystal ball ) '' predicting '' that everyone in the office would get free doritos , then subsequently throws the snow globe into a vending machine selling nothing but nacho cheese & cool ranch doritos . the commercial was ranked by the usa today super bowl ad meter as the best ad for the year , earning the creators of the ad & nbsp ; – joe and dave herbert & nbsp ; – a 1 million prize . they again aired two ads during the game ads and the second place ad also placed in the top five according to usa today . this ad featured a man who discovers that each crunch from his bag of doritos causes whatever is on his mind to become reality ( until he runs out of chips ) . another popular commercial from the group of finalist included an executive making a presentation to other executives on a new ( fictional ) doritos flavor called '' doritos beer '' , which , as the name implies , is beer-flavored doritos , with each chip containing as much alcohol as an equivalent of a 16-oz . can of beer . the executive making the presentation , eating the beer-flavored chips , ends up drunk on the chips and is down to his underwear and a tie by the end of the commercial . for super bowl xliv , four ads were entered , and if three of the commercials sweep the top three positions in that year 's ad meter contest , all of the creators would be awarded a total of 5 million , broken down as 1 million for first place , 600,000 for second and 400,000 for third , plus each maker would get an additional 1 million . dabitch , adland.tv , 01-07-10 for the super bowl xliii as aired in canada , doritos aired the '' chip hat '' commercial advertising their new '' unidentified flavor '' chip flavor that offers a prize of cdn 25,000 + 1 % of all associated sales to someone that can both name , and create an ad for the new flavor . the new winning name , scream cheese ( or , in french , fromage fracassant ) , was submitted by ryan coopersmith of montreal . for the super bowl xliv doritos aired the '' house rules '' commercial , as a '' crash the super bowl '' finalist . it was ranked by adbowl as the second best ad of the year . for super bowl xlvi , an ad aired featuring a grandma and a baby attempting to get a bag of doritos by a slingshot activated by a wheelchair . the bag was stolen by a child , constantly teasing them in the process . the baby reaches the bag and steals it back with just enough force to reach it . flattering the child , grandma and the baby eat the doritos with ease . for super bowl xlix , the ad featured a father offering a large bag of doritos to his son only if he made pigs fly . the son then proceeded to attach rockets to a pig and the father then gave the bag of doritos to his son . other . in 2008 , doritos were promoted by an '' out-of-this-world '' advertising campaign , literally beaming a 30-second advertisement for doritos brand tortilla chips into a planetary system 42 light years away . the project was in collaboration with eiscat space center in svalbard , norway . the '' you make it , we 'll play it '' contest chose the winning advertisement that was transmitted on june 12 , 2008 . the ad was beamed towards 47 ursae majoris , a distant star within the ursa major constellation that is orbited by planets which may harbor life . doritos was the main sponsor of wolverhampton wanderers for the 2002/03 and 2003/04 seasons , the latter of which was spent in the premier league . doritos officially sponsored the '' hail to the cheese stephen colbert 's nacho cheese doritos 2008 presidential campaign coverage . '' the money given to colbert could not be used to directly fund his campaign , so he used the money to fund the colbert report . he claimed that he would not use his show to plug doritos , but plugged the chips during these claims . after the campaign flopped , colbert joked that his '' body will stop producing bright orange waste . '' in march 2008 , colbert partnered with doritos , specifically the spicy sweet chili flavor , to promote his philadelphia-based coverage of the pennsylvania primaries . in 2010 , doritos canada launched a '' viralocity '' competition , asking the public to name a new flavor and to produce an online video advertising the fictional new flavor . natalie armstrong submitted her video , and before long she received the most points based on numerous factors , including most widely viewed , winning a cash prize . in 2010 , doritos launched for the first time in new zealand with nacho cheese , cheese supreme , salsa , and salted flavors . it replaced the long-running cc 's brand . on september 20 , 2011 , retired frito-lay marketing executive arch west , who was credited for creating doritos as the first national tortilla chip brand , died in dallas at age 97 . it is said that corporate response showed little enthusiasm to the tortilla chip idea , but more marketing research led to the doritos release . to coincide with the 50th anniversary of taco bell , doritos and taco bell partnered to form the doritos locos tacos , introduced on march 8 , 2012 . the taco is a standard crunchy taco . the taco comes either as a doritos locos taco supreme ( ground beef , lettuce , diced tomatoes , shredded cheese , and sour cream ) , or a regular doritos locos taco ( ground beef , lettuce , and shredded cheese ) , but the taco shell is made out of nacho cheese doritos . from 1978 to 1997 , both taco bell and doritos were under the same corporate umbrella within pepsico until pepsico spun off its restaurant business into what would eventually become what is now yum ! brands . in march 2012 , a new line of doritos were introduced : doritos jacked . the chips are 40 % larger than standard doritos . in march 2013 , doritos redesigned its packaging and logo as part of its first global marketing campaign . the '' for the bold '' campaign will use crowdsourcing initiatives from 37 countries , emphasizing dorito 's focus on its consumers '' living for the moment '' attitude . the campaign kicked off at the south by southwest music conference . in april 2013 , doritos released doritos locos chips with nacho cheese and cool ranch to match taco bells campaign . in july 2014 , 7-11 released a new snack called doritos loaded . the breaded cheese snack was released by pepsico 's as its first frozen food product , also available in grocery stores . current flavors of doritos ( as of november 2014 ) marketed in canada are nacho cheese , zesty cheese , cool ranch , spicy nacho , jalapeño cheddar , intense pickle , roulette ( nacho cheese with 1 in 7 chips being hot ) and sweet chili heat . brief stints of jacked , taco , guacamole , locos nacho ( taco and nacho ) , locos cool ranch ( taco and cool ranch ) and ketchup have been introduced with guacamole lined to make a return in early 2015 . doritos roasted corn , tapatio hot sauce , and salsa verde are also popular american flavors . other lines of doritos are doritos jacked flavors such as buffalo wings and spicy street taco and the dynamitas flavor lines shaped in tubes . dynamitas come in flavors such as chile limon , nacho picoso , and spicy habanero flavors . in january 2017 , doritos entered the indonesian market . flavors of doritos marketed in indonesia include nacho cheese , barbeque and roasted corn , both of which are distributed by indofood . it was initially imported from saudi arabia . as of late 2017 , it is currently produced locally by indofood fritolay makmur at its factory in tangerang , indonesia . doritos 3d . doritos 3d is a line of puffed doritos introduced in the 1990s and discontinued in the united states in the mid-2000s . these snacks have been described as '' doritos-meets-bugles '' . flavors included jalapeño cheddar , nacho cheese and zesty ranch . the doritos 3d line of puffed doritos is still sold in mexico . on december 21 , 2020 , it was announced that doritos 3d would be returning to shelves on december 28 . the snack is now available in chili cheese nacho and spicy ranch flavors . . see also . the dorito effect ( 2015 book ) list of brand name snack foods . references . bibliography . . external links . frito-lay north america website for doritos doritos uk