Asafoetida

etymology and other names . the english name is derived from asa , a latinised form of persian , meaning 'resin ' , and latin meaning 'smelling , fetid ' , which refers to its strong sulfurous odour . in the united states , a folk spelling and pronunciation is '' asafedity '' . it is called in tamil , in marathi , in odia , in bengali , in kannada , in malayalam ( it was attested as in the 14th century ) , in telugu , and in hindi . in pashto , it is called . pashto–english dictionary its pungent odour has resulted in its being known by many unpleasant names . in french it is known ( among other names ) as , meaning 'devil 's shit' . '' asafoetida : die geur is des duivels ! '' vegatopia ( in dutch ) , retrieved 8 december 2011 . this was used also as a source the book world food café : global vegetarian cooking by chris and carolyn caldicott , 1999 , . in english it is sometimes called devil 's dung , and equivalent names can be found in most germanic languages ( e.g . , german , thomas carlyle 's well-known 19th century novel sartor resartus concerns a german philosopher named teufelsdröckh . swedish , dutch , and afrikaans . also , it is called or in hebrew ; in finnish , or ; in turkish , , or ; and in kashubian it is called . other names for it include ting and haltit or tyib in arabic . and hingu in malay . uses . cooking . this spice is used as a digestive aid , in food as a condiment , and in pickling . it plays a critical flavoring role in indian vegetarian cuisine by acting as a umami enhancer . carolyn beans . meet hing : the secret-weapon spice of indian cuisine.june 22 , 2016 . used along with turmeric , it is a standard component of lentil curry , such as dal , chickpea curries , and vegetable dishes , especially those based on potato and cauliflower . asafoetida is used in vegetarian indian punjabi and south indian cuisine where it enhances the flavor of numerous dishes , where it is quickly heated in hot oil before sprinkling on the food . kashmiri cuisine also uses it in lamb/mutton dishes such as rogan josh . kashmiri recipes ; mutton rogan josh . it is essential to many many south indian dishes . it is sometimes used to harmonise sweet , sour , salty , and spicy components in food . the spice is added to the food at the time of chaunk . sometimes dried and ground asafoetida ( in small quantities ) can be mixed with salt and eaten with raw salad . in its pure form , it is sold in the form of chunks of resin , small quantities of which are scraped off for use . the odor of the pure resin is so strong that the pungent smell will contaminate other spices stored nearby if it is not stored in an airtight container . cultivation and manufacture . the resin-like gum comes from the dried sap extracted from the stem and roots , and is used as a spice . the resin is greyish-white when fresh , but dries to a dark amber colour . the asafoetida resin is difficult to grate and is traditionally crushed between stones or with a hammer . today , the most commonly available form is compounded asafoetida , a fine powder containing 30 % asafoetida resin , along with rice flour or maida ( white wheat flour ) and gum arabic . ferula assa-foetida is a monoecious , herbaceous , perennial plant of the family apiaceae . it grows to high , with a circular mass of leaves . stem leaves have wide sheathing petioles . flowering stems are high and thick and hollow , with a number of schizogenous ducts in the cortex containing the resinous gum . flowers are pale greenish yellow produced in large compound umbels . fruits are oval , flat , thin , reddish brown and have a milky juice . roots are thick , massive , and pulpy . they yield a resin similar to that of the stems . all parts of the plant have the distinctive fetid smell . . composition . typical asafoetida contains about 40–64 % resin , 25 % endogeneous gum , 10–17 % volatile oil , and 1.5–10 % ash . the resin portion is known to contain asaresinotannols a and b , ferulic acid , umbelliferone and four unidentified compounds . handbook of indices of food quality and authenticity . rekha s . singhal , pushpa r . kulkarni . 1997 , woodhead publishing , food industry and trade . more information about the composition , p . 395 . the volatile oil component is rich in various organosulfide compounds , such as 2-butyl-propenyl-disulfide , diallyl sulfide , diallyl disulfide ( also present in garlic ) and dimethyl trisulfide , which is also responsible for the odor of cooked onions . asafoetida . katrina kramer . royal society of chemistry podcast . 22 june 2016 . the organosulfides are primarily responsible for the odor and flavor of asafoetida . history . asafoetida was familiar in the early mediterranean , having come by land across iran . it entered europe from an expedition of alexander the great , who , after returning from a trip to northeastern ancient persia , thought they had found a plant almost identical to the famed silphium of cyrene in north africa—though less tasty . dioscorides , in the first century , wrote , '' the cyrenaic kind , even if one just tastes it , at once arouses a humour throughout the body and has a very healthy aroma , so that it is not noticed on the breath , or only a little ; but the median iranian is weaker in power and has a nastier smell . '' nevertheless , it could be substituted for silphium in cooking , which was fortunate , because a few decades after dioscorides ' time , the true silphium of cyrene became extinct , and asafoetida became more popular amongst physicians , as well as cooks . dangerous tastes : the story of spices . andrew dalby . 2000 . university of california press . spices/ history . 184 pages . asafoetida is also mentioned numerous times in jewish literature , such as the mishnah . m . avodah zarah ch . 1 ; m . shabbat ch . 20 ; et al . maimonides also writes in the mishneh torah '' in the rainy season , one should eat warm food with much spice , but a limited amount of mustard and asafoetida . '' mishneh torah , laws of opinions ( hilchot deot ) 4:8 . though it is generally forgotten now in europe , it is still widely used in india . asafoetida is eaten by brahmins and jains as a substitute for onion and garlic , which they were forbidden to eat . . devotees of the iskcon also use hing in their food , as they are not allowed to consume onions or garlic . their food has to be presented to lord krishna for sanctification ( to become prasadam ) before consumption and onions and garlic ca n't be offered to krishna . asafoetida was described by a number of arab and islamic scientists and pharmacists . avicenna discussed the effects of asafoetida on digestion . ibn al-baitar and fakhr al-din al-razi described some positive medicinal effects on the respiratory system . avicenna ( 1999 ) . the canon of medicine ( al-qānūn fī ' l-ṭibb ) , vol . 1 . laleh bakhtiar ( ed . ) , oskar cameron gruner ( trans . ) , mazhar h . shah ( trans . ) . great books of the islamic world . after the roman empire fell , until the 16th century , asafoetida was rare in europe , and if ever encountered , it was viewed as a medicine . '' if used in cookery , it would ruin every dish because of its dreadful smell , '' asserted garcia de orta 's european guest . '' nonsense , '' garcia replied , '' nothing is more widely used in every part of india , both in medicine and in cookery . '' during the italian renaissance , asafoetida was used as part of the exorcism ritual . . see also . ammoniacum chaat masala muskroot south asian pickle turmeric durian , a fruit with a pungent odor many find disagreeable . references . external links . gernot katzer 's spice pages , botany , etymology , uses—detailed sally 's place , additional information from ammini ramachandran saudi aramco world article on the history of asafoetida