1936 in music

specific locations . 1936 in british music 1936 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1936 in country music 1936 in jazz . events . january 4 – billboard magazine publishes its first music hit parade march 28 – inaugural concert of the são paulo city symphony orchestra , conducted by ernst mehlich april 19 – in barcelona , alban berg 's violin concerto is given its première , by louis krasner may 2 – peter and the wolf ( петя и волк , petya i volk ) , a russian fairy tale of sergei prokofiev 's composition , debuts at the nezlobin theater in moscow , soviet union , but attracts little attention at this time . december 24 – release of the film natalka poltavka in ukraine , the first filmed russian opera . nat king cole 's recording career begins . count basie begins recording with his own band , which includes lester young . josé iturbi becomes conductor of the rochester philharmonic orchestra . john serry sr . begins extended appearances at the star light roof in the waldorf astoria hotel with the lester lanin orchestra in new york city . published popular music . '' at the codfish ball '' w . sidney d . mitchell m . lew pollack . introduced by shirley temple and buddy ebsen in the film captain january '' au revoir ( but not goodbye ) '' w.m . joe gilbert '' awake in a dream '' w . leo robin m . frederick hollander . introduced by marlene dietrich in the film desire . '' bojangles of harlem '' w . dorothy fields m . jerome kern . introduced by fred astaire in the film swing time . '' by strauss '' w . ira gershwin m . george gershwin . introduced by gracie barrie and robert shafter in the revue the show is on '' christopher columbus '' w . andy razaf m . leon berry '' cloudy '' m . mary lou williams '' cool water '' w.m . bob nolan '' does your heart beat for me ? '' w . mitchell parish m . russ morgan '' down in the depths ( on the ninetieth floor ) '' w.m . cole porter . introduced by ethel merman in the musical red , hot and blue . '' easy to love '' w.m . cole porter . introduced by james stewart and reprised by frances langford in the film born to dance '' empty saddles '' w . j . keirn brennan m . billy hill '' everybody swing '' w . sidney clare m . harry akst '' fancy meeting you '' w . e . y . harburg m . harold arlen . introduced by dick powell and jeanne madden in the film stage struck . '' farewell to dreams '' w . gus kahn m . sigmund romberg '' a fine romance '' w . dorothy fields m . jerome kern . introduced by fred astaire and ginger rogers in the film swing time . '' gee , but you 're swell '' w . charles tobias m . abel baer '' get thee behind me satan '' w.m . irving berlin . introduced by harriet hilliard in the film follow the fleet '' glad to be unhappy '' w . lorenz hart m . richard rodgers . introduced by doris carson and david morris in the musical on your toes '' gloomy sunday '' w . ( eng ) sam m . lewis m . rezső seress '' the glory of love '' w.m . billy hill '' goodnight , irene '' w.m . huddie '' leadbelly '' ledbetter '' goodnight my love '' w . harry revel m . mack gordon '' goody goody '' w.m . johnny mercer & matty malneck '' has anybody seen our ship ? '' w.m . noël coward '' he ai n't got rhythm '' w.m . irving berlin . introduced by alice faye in the film on the avenue . '' he has n't a thing except me '' w . ira gershwin m . vernon duke . introduced by fanny brice in the revue ziegfeld follies . '' i ca n't escape from you '' w.m . leo robin & richard a . whiting . introduced by bing crosby in the film rhythm on the range . '' i love to singa '' w . e . y . harburg m . harold arlen . introduced by al jolson and cab calloway in the film the singing kid . '' if i should lose you '' w . leo robin m . ralph rainger . introduced by gladys swarthout and john boles in the film rose of the rancho . '' i 'm an old cow hand '' w.m . johnny mercer . introduced by bing crosby in the film rhythm on the range . '' i 'm in the mood for love '' introduced by darla hood in a clubhouse and carl '' alfalfa '' switzer on a radio in the our gang ( little rascals ) short , the pinch singer ( 1936 ) . '' i 'm putting all my eggs in one basket '' w.m . irving berlin . introduced by fred astaire and ginger rogers in the film follow the fleet . '' in the chapel in the moonlight '' w.m . billy hill '' is it true what they say about dixie ? '' w . irving caesar & sammy lerner '' it 's a sin to tell a lie '' w.m . billy mayhew '' it 's de-lovely '' w.m . cole porter . introduced by ethel merman and bob hope in the musical red , hot and blue '' it 's got to be love '' w . lorenz hart m . richard rodgers . introduced by ray bolger and doris carson in the musical on your toes . '' i 've got a feelin ' you 're foolin ' '' w . arthur freed m . nacio herb brown '' i 've got you under my skin '' w.m . cole porter . introduced by virginia bruce in the film born to dance . '' keep a twinkle in your eye '' johnny mercer , rube bloom '' let yourself go '' w.m . irving berlin . introduced by ginger rogers in the film follow the fleet '' let 's call a heart a heart '' w . johnny burke m . arthur johnston from the film pennies from heaven '' let 's face the music and dance '' w.m . irving berlin . introduced by fred astaire in the film follow the fleet . '' life begins at forty '' yellen , shapiro '' little old lady '' w . stanley adams m . hoagy carmichael '' the love bug will bite you '' w.m . pinky tomlin '' me and the moon '' w . walter hirsch m . lou handman '' moonburn '' w . edward heyman m . hoagy carmichael . introduced by bing crosby in the film anything goes '' moonlight and shadows '' w . leo robin m . frederick hollander . introduced by dorothy lamour in the film the jungle princess '' music in may '' w . christopher hassall m . ivor novello . introduced by dorothy dickson in the musical careless rapture '' never gon na dance '' w . dorothy fields m . jerome kern . introduced by fred astaire in the film swing time '' the night is young and you 're so beautiful '' w . billy rose & irving kahal m . dana suesse '' on the beach at bali-bali '' w.m . al sherman , jack meskill & abner silver '' the one rose ( that 's left in my heart ) '' w.m . del lyon & lani mcintyre '' one , two , button your shoe '' w . johnny burke m . arthur johnston '' oooh ! look-a there , ai n't she pretty ? '' w . clarence todd m . carmen lombardo '' organ grinder 's swing '' w . mitchell parish & irving mills m . will hudson '' pennies from heaven '' w . johnny burke m . arthur johnston '' pick yourself up '' w . dorothy fields m . jerome kern . introduced by fred astaire and ginger rogers in the film swing time '' play , orchestra , play '' w.m . noël coward '' poinciana '' w . ( sp ) manuel lliso ( eng ) buddy bernier m . nat simon '' poor little angeline '' w.m . will grosz & jimmy kennedy '' rainbow on the river '' w . paul francis webster m . louis alter '' ridin ' high '' w.m . cole porter '' san francisco '' w . gus kahn m . bronislaw kaper & walter jurmann '' sing me a swing song '' w . stanley adams m . hoagy carmichael '' sing , sing , sing '' w.m . louis prima '' slaughter on tenth avenue '' m . richard rodgers '' there 's a bridle hangin ' on the wall '' w.m . carson robison '' there 's a small hotel '' w . lorenz hart m . richard rodgers '' to you , sweetheart , aloha '' w.m . harry owens '' too good for the average man '' w . lorenz hart m . richard rodgers '' the touch of your lips '' w.m . ray noble '' waltz in swingtime '' w . dorothy fields m . jerome kern '' the way you look tonight '' w . dorothy fields m . jerome kern . introduced by fred astaire in the film swing time '' we saw the sea '' w.m . irving berlin . introduced by fred astaire in the film follow the fleet '' when a lady meets a gentleman down south '' w.m . michael cleary , jacques krakeur & david oppenheim '' when did you leave heaven ? '' w . walter bullock m . richard a . whiting '' when i 'm with you '' w . mack gordon m . harry revel . introduced by shirley temple and tony martin in the film poor little rich girl . '' when my dreamboat comes home '' w.m . cliff friend & dave franklin '' the window cleaner '' george formby , gifford , cliffe '' with my shillelagh under my arm '' w.m . billy o'brien & huntley trevor '' with plenty of money and you '' w . al dubin m . harry warren '' would you ? '' w . arthur freed m . nacio herb brown '' you ( gee but you 're wonderful ) '' w . harold adamson m . walter donaldson '' you ca n't pull the wool over my eyes '' w.m . milton ager , charles newman & murray mencher '' you got ta s-m-i-l-e to be h-a-p-p-y '' w.m . mack gordon & harry revel '' you turned the tables on me '' w . sidney d . mitchell m . louis alter '' you were there '' w.m . noël coward '' ( if you ca n't sing it ) you 'll have to swing it ( mr . paganini ) '' w.m . sam coslow . biggest hit songs . the following songs achieved the highest chart positions in the limited set of charts available for 1936 . compositions . grażyna bacewicz – trio for oboe , violin and piano samuel barber – symphony no . 1 , op . 9 string quartet , op . 11 béla bartók – music for strings , percussion and celesta arnold bax – threnody and scherzo string quartet no . 3 in f major ernest bloch – voice in the wilderness benjamin britten – three divertimenti for string quartet carlos chávez – sinfonía india ( symphony no . 2 ) aaron copland – el salón méxico henry cowell – string quartet no . 4 , '' united '' david diamond – violin concerto no . 1 concerto for string quartet john fernström – clarinet concerto berthold goldschmidt – string quartet no . 2 paul hindemith – trauermusik ( funeral music ) alan hovhaness – cello concerto aram khachaturian – piano concerto bohuslav martinů – concerto for flute , violin and chamber orchestra olivier messiaen – poèmes pour mi , song cycle for piano and soprano sergei prokofiev – peter and the wolf , for narrator and orchestra romeo and juliet ( ballet ) russian overture for orchestra sergei rachmaninoff – symphony no . 3 albert roussel – concertino for cello and orchestra edmund rubbra – sinfonia concertante symphony no . 1 , op . 44 arnold schoenberg – violin concerto , op . 36 ( 1935–36 ) string quartet no . 4 , op . 37 roger sessions – string quartet no . 1 dmitri shostakovich – symphony no . 4 in c minor , op . 43 ( 1935–1936 ) edgard varèse – density 21.5 ralph vaughan williams – dona nobis pacem anton webern – variations for piano ( 1935–1936 ) percy whitlock – sonata for organ in c minor . opera . franco alfano – cirano di bergerac george enescu – œdipe , op . 23 ( completed by 1931 ) ; first staged march 13 , 1935 , at the paris opera emmerich kalman – kaiserin josephine bohuslav martinů – divadlo za branou ( theater behind the gate ) gian carlo menotti – amelia goes to the ball . jazz . musical theater . balalaika london production opened at the adelphi theatre on december 22 and ran for 570 performances . careless rapture ( ivor novello ) – london production opened at the theatre royal on september 11 and ran for 295 performances . new faces of 1936 broadway revue opened at the vanderbilt theatre on may 19 and ran for 193 performances . on your toes broadway production opened on april 11 at the imperial theatre and ran for 315 performances . over she goes ( music : billy mayerl lyrics : desmond carter & frank eyton book : stanley lupino ) london production opened at the saville theatre on september 23 and ran for 248 performances red , hot and blue broadway production opened on october 29 at the alvin theatre and ran for 183 performances . the show is on broadway revue opened at the winter garden theatre on december 25 and ran for 237 performances . swing along london production opened at the gaiety theatre on september 2 and ran for 311 performances this 'll make you whistle london production opened at the palace theatre on september 15 and transferred to daly 's theatre on january 21 , 1937 , for a total run of 190 performances . starred jack buchanan and elsie randolph tonight at 8.30 london production opened at the phoenix theatre on january 9 and ran for 157 performances . white horse inn broadway production opened on october 1 at the center theatre and ran for 223 performances . musical films . anything goes starring bing crosby and ethel merman born to dance released november 27 starring eleanor powell , virginia bruce , james stewart , frances langford , buddy ebsen and the vocal group the foursome . cain and mabel starring marion davies , clark gable and allen jenkins can this be dixie ? starring jane withers , slim summerville , helen wood and thomas beck . directed by george marshall captain january starring shirley temple , guy kibbee and slim summerville . directed by david butler . circus , starring lyubov orlova and directed by grigori aleksandrov , with music by isaak dunayevsky collegiate released january 22 starring jack oakie and frances langford and featuring songwriters mack gordon and harry revel . dancing pirate starring charles collins , frank morgan and steffi duna everybody dance starring cicely courtneidge everything is rhythm starring harry roy and princess pearl ( actress ) and featuring mabel mercer follow the fleet starring fred astaire and ginger rogers the great ziegfeld starring william powell , myrna loy , luise rainer , frank morgan , fanny brice , virginia bruce and ray bolger . hats off starring mae clark and john payne . directed by boris petroff . her master 's voice starring edward everett horton and peggy conklin king of burlesque starring alice faye , jack oakie and warner baxter and featuring fats waller and kenny baker pigskin parade starring stuart erwin , patsy kelly , jack haley , betty grable , dixie dunbar and judy garland and featuring the yacht club boys poor little rich girl released july 24 starring shirley temple , alice faye , jack haley and featuring tony martin . public nuisance no . 1 starring frances day . rhythm on the range released july 1 starring bing crosby and frances farmer . rose-marie starring jeanette macdonald and nelson eddy show boat starring irene dunne , allan jones , helen morgan , paul robeson and hattie mcdaniel soft lights and sweet music film revue featuring ambrose & his orchestra , evelyn dall , turner layton and elisabeth welch stage struck starring dick powell , joan blondell , frank mchugh , jeanne madden and the yacht club boys . suzy starring jean harlow , franchot tone , cary grant and inez courtney swing time starring fred astaire and ginger rogers three smart girls variety parade . births . january 2 iván erőd , hungarian-austrian composer and pianist ( died 2019 ) roger miller , country singer ( died 1992 ) january 8 – zdeněk mácal , czech-american conductor january 12 – raimonds pauls , composer and piano player january 14 – clarence carter , soul singer january 23 – cécile ousset , pianist january 24 doug kershaw , fiddle player jack scott , singer and songwriter ( d . 2019 ) bobby wellins , scottish saxophonist ( d . 2016 ) january 29 & ndash ; james jamerson , american bass guitarist for motown records ( d . 1983 ) february 6 – donnie brooks , singer ( d . 2007 ) february 8 – larry verne , american novelty singer ( d . 2013 ) february 9 – stompin ' tom connors , folk musician ( d . 2013 ) february 19 – bob engermann ( the lettermen ) ( d . 2013 ) february 22 – ernie k-doe , r & b singer ( d . 2001 ) february 24 – luis aguilé , argentine singer , songwriter and actor ( d . 2009 ) march 4 – aribert reimann , pianist and composer march 6 – elmira zherzdeva , soviet singer and voice actress march 17 – ladislav kupkovič , composer ( d . 2016 ) march 20 – lee '' scratch '' perry , reggae artist , composer march 22 – roger whittaker , singer-songwriter march 26 – fred parris ( the five satins ) march 29 – richard rodney bennett , composer and pianist ( d . 2012 ) april 10 – bobby smith ( r & b singer ) ( the spinners ) ( d . 2013 ) april 13 – dieter klöcker , clarinetist ( ( died 2011 ) april 17 – alexander walton ( pete graves ) , r & b singer ( the moonglows ) ( d . 2006 ) april 22 – glen campbell , country singer ( the beach boys ) ( d . 2017 ) april 23 – roy orbison , singer-songwriter ( d . 1988 ) april 29 zubin mehta , conductor april stevens , singer may 2 – engelbert humperdinck , born arnold george dorsey , pop singer may 6 – sylvia robinson , hip hop singer ( mickey & sylvia ) ( d . 2011 ) may 14 – bobby darin , singer ( d . 1973 ) may 23 – ingeborg hallstein , german opera singer may 24 – harold budd , american avant-garde composer ( d . 2020 ) may 25 – tom t . hall , country singer may 28 – maki ishii , japanese composer ( d . 2003 ) june 6 – levi stubbs , vocalist ( the four tops ) ( d . 2008 ) june 15 – alexandru hrisanide , romanian pianist and composer ( d . 2018 ) june 19 tommy devito , rock singer ( the four seasons ) shirley goodman , r & b singer ( shirley & lee , shirley & company ) ( d . 2005 ) june 20 – billy guy , r & b singer ( the coasters ) ( d . 2002 ) june 22 kris kristofferson , singer-songwriter and actor hermeto pascoal , composer and instrumentalist june 30 – dave van ronk , folk singer ( d . 2002 ) july 10 – david zinman , violinist and conductor july 13 – vaza azarasvili , georgian composer july 30 – buddy guy , blues guitarist august 4 – elsbeary hobbs ( the drifters ) ( d . 1996 ) august 7 – charles pope ( the tams ) ( d . 2013 ) august 23 – rudy lewis ( the drifters ) ( d . 1964 ) august 29 – gilbert amy , french composer and conductor august 31 – igor zhukov , russian pianist ( d . 2018 ) september 7 – buddy holly , singer and songwriter ( d . 1959 ) september 18 – big tom , irish country music singer ( d . 2018 ) september 21 – dickey lee , country singer-songwriter october 3 james darren , actor and singer steve reich , composer october 5 – george jones jr . ( the edsels ) ( d . 2008 ) october 7 – charles dutoit , conductor october 24 – bill wyman ( the rolling stones ) november 11 – jack keller , songwriter ( d . 2005 ) november 14 antonio gades , flamenco dancer ( d . 2004 ) cornelius gunter ( the coasters ) ( the flairs ) ( d . 1990 ) november 18 – don cherry , jazz musician ( d . 1995 ) november 22 – hans zender , conductor ( d . 2019 ) november 19 – ray collins , rock musician ( the mothers of invention ) ( d . 2012 ) december 14 – arve tellefsen , violinist december 17 tommy banks , canadian jazz pianist , composer and politician ( d . 2018 ) tommy steele , british singer . deaths . january 1 – harry b . smith , us songwriter , 75 january 7 – guy d'hardelot , composer and pianist , 77 january 22 – louis glass , composer , 71 january 23 – dame clara butt , contralto opera singer , 63 january 25 – hermann bischoff , composer , 68 february 11 – florence smithson , singer , 51 . march 6 – rubin goldmark , pianist and composer , 63 march 21 – alexander glazunov , composer , 70 march 26 – maximilian maksakov , opera singer ( b . 1869 ) april 7 – marilyn miller , us actress , dancer and singer , 37 april 18 – ottorino respighi , composer , 56 april 24 – bernard van dieren , composer , 48 may 5 – eva von der osten , operatic soprano , 54 may 24 – claudia muzio , opera singer , 47 may 25 – ján levoslav bella , composer and conductor , 92 june 27 – mike bernard , ragtime musician , 61 august 15 – sir henry lytton , gilbert & sullivan comic baritone singer and actor , 71 august 19 – harry plunket greene , baritone concert singer , 71 august 28 – albert périlhou , french composer , organist and pianist , 90 september 5 – béla szabados , composer , 69 september 11 - byron g . harlan , singer , 75 october 11 – antonio josé martínez palacios , spanish composer , 33 october 22 – anne caldwell , playwright and lyricist , 68 november 11 – sir edward german , composer , 74 november 17 – ernestine schumann-heink , contralto singer , 75 december 6 – emil adamič , composer , 58 december 31 – oreste riva , composer , 76 . date unknown albert gorter , conductor and composer ( b . 1862 ) herbert de pinna songwriter and composer . references .