Nüshu

features . unlike standard written chinese , which is logogram ( each character represents a word or part of a word ) , nüshu is phonetic , with each of its approximately 600–700 characters representing a syllable . this is about half the number required to represent all the syllables in tuhua , as tonal distinctions are frequently ignored , making it '' the most revolutionary and thorough simplification of chinese characters ever attempted '' . zhao liming , '' the women 's script of jiangyong '' . in jie tao , bijun zheng , shirley l . mow , eds , holding up half the sky : chinese women past , present , and future , feminist press , 2004 , pp . 39–52 . zhou shuoyi , described as the only male to have mastered the script , compiled a dictionary listing 1,800 variant characters and allographs . it has been suggested that nüshu characters appear to be italic variant forms of kaishu chinese characters , as can be seen in the name of the script , though some have been substantially modified to better fit embroidery patterns . the strokes of the characters are in the form of dots , horizontals , virgules , and arcs . the script is traditionally written in vertical columns running from right to left , but in modern contexts it may be written in horizontal lines from left to right , just like modern-day chinese . unlike in standard chinese , writing nüshu script with very fine , almost threadlike , lines is seen as a mark of fine penmanship . about half of nüshu is modified chinese characters used logographically . in about 100 , the entire character is adopted with little change apart from skewing the frame from square to rhomboid , sometimes reversing them ( mirror image ) , and often reducing the number of strokes . another hundred have been modified in their strokes , but are still easily recognizable , as is nü 'woman ' above . about 200 have been greatly modified , but traces of the original chinese character are still discernible . the rest of the characters are phonetic . they are either modified characters , as above , or elements extracted from characters . there are used for 130 phonetic values , each used to write on average ten homophonous or nearly homophonous words , though there are allographs as well ; women differed on which chinese character they preferred for a particular phonetic value . . history . it is not known when or how nüshu came into being , but—because it is clearly based in the standard chinese script , hanzi—nüshu could not have been created before standardization of hanzi ( circa 900 ) . many of the simplifications found in nüshu had been in informal use in standard chinese since the song and yuan dynasty ( 13th–14th century ) . it seems to have reached its peak during the latter part of the qing dynasty ( 1644–1911 ) . though a local educated worker at the jiangyong cultural office ( zhou shuoyi ) had collected , studied and translated many nüshu texts into standard chinese , he was unable to draw outside attention to the script until a report was submitted to the central government on this subject in 1983 . during the latter part of the 20th century , owing more to wider social , cultural and political changes than the narrow fact of greater access to hanzi literacy , younger girls and women stopped learning nüshu , and it began falling into disuse , as older users died . the script was suppressed by the japanese during their invasion of china in the 1930s-40s , because they feared that the chinese could use it to send secret messages . , and also during china 's cultural revolution ( 1966–76 ) . additional text - chapter 12 , an introduction to language and linguistics , jeff connor-linton and ralph fasold , cambridge university press , the last original writers of the script died in the 1990s ( the last one in 2004 ) . it is no longer customary for women to learn nüshu , and literacy in nüshu is now limited to a few scholars who learned it from the last women who were literate in it . however , after yang yueqing made a documentary about nüshu , the government of the people 's republic of china started to popularize the effort to preserve the increasingly endangered script , and some younger women are beginning to learn it . recent years . thumb yang huanyi , an inhabitant of jiangyong county , hunan province and the last person proficient in this writing system , died on september 20 , 2004 , age 98 . the language and locale have attracted foreign investment building up infrastructure at possible tourist sites and a 209,000 grant from the ford foundation to build a nüshu museum scheduled to open in 2007 . however , with the line of transmission now broken , there are fears that the features of the script are being distorted by the effort of marketing it for the tourist industry . chinese composer tan dun has created a multimedia symphony entitled '' nu shu : the secret songs of women '' for harp , orchestra , and 13 microfilms . tan dun spent 5 years conducting field research in hunan province , documenting on film the various songs the women use to communicate . those songs become a 3rd dimension to his symphony , and are projected alongside the orchestra and harp soloist . lisa see describes the use of nüshu among 19th-century women in snow flower and the secret fan . adoption . the nüshu script is used to write a distinct local chinese variety known as xiangnan tuhua that is spoken by the people of the xiao river and yongming river region of northern jiangyong county , hunan . this dialect , which differs enough from those of other parts of hunan that there is little mutual intelligibility , is known to its speakers as '' dong language '' . it is written only in the nüshu script . there are differing opinions on the classification of xiangnan tuhua , as it has features of several different chinese varieties . some scholars classify it under xiang chinese or pinghua and other scholars consider it a hybrid dialect . in addition to speaking tuhua , most local people in jiangyong are bilingual in the hunan dialect of southwestern mandarin , which they use for communication with people from outside the area where tuhua is spoken , as well as for some formal occasions . if hunan southwestern mandarin is written , then it is always written using standard chinese characters and not with the nüshu script . jiangyong county has a mixed population of han chinese and yao people , but nüshu is used only to write the local chinese dialect ( xiangnan tuhua , , and there are no known examples of the script being used to write the local yao language . . works . a large number of the nüshu works were '' third day missives '' . they were cloth bound booklets created by laotong , '' sworn sisters '' and mothers and given to their counterpart '' sworn sisters '' or daughters upon their marriage . they wrote down songs in nüshu , which were delivered on the third day after the young woman 's marriage . this way , they expressed their hopes for the happiness of the young woman who had left the village to be married and their sorrow for being parted from her . a language by women , for women , washington post , feb 24 , 2004 other works , including poems and lyrics , were handwoven into belts and straps , or embroidered onto everyday items and clothing . in unicode . nüshu is included in the unicode standard under the name '' nushu '' ( because unicode character names , block names , and script names can only use ascii letters ) . 396 nüshu letters were added to the nushu block as part of unicode version 10.0 which was released in june 2017 . an iteration mark for nüshu , , is in the ideographic symbols and punctuation block . the unicode block for nüshu is u+1b170–u+1b2ff :