Jumping the shark

history . the phrase jump the shark is based on a scene in the fifth season premiere episode of the 1970s american tv series happy days titled '' hollywood : part 3 '' , written by fred fox , jr . , which aired on september 20 , 1977 . in the episode , the central characters visit los angeles , where a water-skiing fonzie ( henry winkler ) answers a challenge to his bravery by wearing swim trunks and his trademark leather jacket , and jumping over a confined shark . the stunt was created as a way to showcase winkler 's real-life water ski skills . for a show that in its early seasons depicted universally relatable adolescent and family experiences against a backdrop of 1950s nostalgia , this incident marked a tonal change . the lionization of an increasingly superhuman fonzie , who was initially a supporting character in the series , became the focus of happy days . the series continued for seven years after fonzie 's shark-jumping stunt , with a number of changes in cast and situations . tv tropes : jumping the shark on marc maron 's wtf podcast , ron howard talked about the first time the phrase was used , by happy days co-star don most : '' donny 's reading it and he kinda looks down , then says 'what do you think of the script ? ' and i shrugged and replied 'people like the show , it 's hard to argue with being number one ' and he looked up and said , 'he 's jumping a shark now ? ' . that was the first time i saw that phrase bracketed , before it was even done , you 've got to give props to donny most . '' the phrase '' jumping the shark '' was coined in 1985 by jon hein 's roommate at the university of michigan , sean connolly , when they were talking about favorite television shows that had gone downhill , and the two began identifying other shows in which a similar '' jump the shark '' moment had occurred . hein described the term as '' a defining moment when you know from now on … it 's all downhill … it will never be the same . '' in 1997 , hein created a website to publish his current list of approximately 200 television shows and his opinions of the moments each '' jumped the shark '' ; the site became popular and grew with additional user-contributed examples . hein subsequently wrote two '' jump the shark '' books and later became a regular on the howard stern show around the time he sold his website to gemstar ( owners of tv guide ) . in a 2010 los angeles times article , former happy days writer fred fox , jr . , who wrote the episode that later spawned the phrase , said , '' was the shark jump episode of happy days deserving of its fate ? no , it was n't . all successful shows eventually start to decline , but this was not happy days time . '' fox also points not only to the success of that episode ( '' a huge hit '' with over 30 & nbsp ; million viewers ) , but also to the continued popularity of the series . fonzie was not the first fictional character to encounter a shark on water skis . in the p . g . wodehouse 1922 novel right ho , jeeves , bertie wooster 's cousin angela does so while aquaplaning on the french riviera . since 2017 , the guardian newspaper in the uk has published a humorous weekly column in its saturday listings guide featuring tv programmes that – in the opinion of its journalists – have '' jumped the shark '' . barry zuckerkorn , a character portrayed by winkler on a later television sitcom , arrested development , literally hopped over a shark in season 2 , a nod to the infamous stunt his character on happy days performed . broader usage . the idiom has been used to describe a wide variety of situations , such as the state of advertising in the digital video recorder era and views on rural education policy , the anomalous pursuit of a company acquisition , and the decline of republics into degraded democracy and empire . . examples . automotive journalist dan neil used the expression to describe the mini countryman , a much larger evolution of the previously small cars marketed by mini . in march 2011 , in a review titled '' what part of 'mini ' did you not grasp , bmw ? '' . neil said the bigger car abandoned the company 's design ethos and that '' with the countryman , tiny sharks have been jumped '' . similar to the example above , automotive blog the truth about cars used the expression in a 2010 retrospective piece to describe the cadillac cimarron , a rebadged chevrolet cavalier the cadillac luxury car division sold in the 1980s that ended up being a commercial failure which brand equity ; '' yes , as if there was ever any doubt , gm truly jumped the shark with the cimarron , and it led the way for what was gm 's most disastrous decade ever , the eighties . only gm could have such utterly outsized hubris to think it could get away with dressing up a cavalier and pawning it off as a bmw-fighter , without even touching the engine , among other sins . '' in september 2011 , after republican presidential candidate for the united states michele bachmann repeated an anecdote shared with her claiming that the hpv vaccine causes '' intellectual disability '' , radio commentator rush limbaugh said , '' michele bachmann , she might have blown it today . well , not blown it & mdash ; she might have jumped the shark today . '' in august 2014 , the city manager of black rock city , nevada described burning man , an annual event at nearby black rock desert , as having '' jumped the shark '' , when the 2014 event & mdash ; which had been previously noted for core values of radical self-expression and self-reliance & mdash ; featured incongruously posh vip lounges , cell phone towers , private jets , and '' glamping '' . the implication that burning man has '' jumped the shark '' ( or is a fallen utopia ) is questioned by cultural anthropologist graham st john , who argues that burning man was never a utopia in the first place . graham st john , '' jumping the shark ? the enigma of burning man '' , beyond burning man , 22 april 2020 in january 2018 , journalist keith olbermann criticized the inclusion of esports players on the sports journalism website the players ' tribune , saying that they '' have jumped the shark by publishing pieces by snotty random kids playing children 's games '' in response to an article by doublelift , a league of legends player . . related idioms . nuke the fridge . in 2008 , time magazine identified a term modeled after '' jump the shark '' : '' nuke the fridge . '' specifically applicable to film , the magazine defined the term : '' to exhaust a hollywood franchise with disappointing sequels . '' the phrase derives from a scene in the fourth indiana jones film , indiana jones and the kingdom of the crystal skull , in which indiana jones survives an atomic bomb detonation by fitting himself into a lead-lined refrigerator to shield himself from the radiation . the explosion annihilates its surroundings but sends the refrigerator flying sufficiently distant for the protagonist to escape unhurt . the scene was criticized as being scientifically implausible . within two days of the film 's premiere , the phrase '' nuke the fridge '' had gone viral , describing film scenes that similarly stretched credulity . director steven spielberg later said the scene was '' my silly idea '' and was glad to have been part of the pop-culture phrase , while the film 's executive producer george lucas took similar credit believing that jones would have had an even chance of surviving the blast . . marrying irving . marrying irving is a metaphor coined by a participant in washington post columnist gene weingarten 's weekly online chat , '' chatological humor '' on february 8 , 2005 . the term specifically references the comic strip cathy by cathy guisewite . on valentine 's day , february 14 , 2004 irving , cathy 's long-time love-interest proposed marriage . they were married almost a year later on february 5 , 2005 ; the strip , which had been in print since 1976 , ended october 3 , 2010 . this term indicates the specific strip or storyline in which a cartoonist uses a plot tactic or stunt that seems to run completely counter to the long-standing vision for the comic ( in the case of cathy , the strip for most of its existence had centered on the title character 's struggles as a single , early-middle-age , slightly overweight woman ) . as such , fans and long-time readers may notice a decline in quality for subsequent comics , though this is not always true . quality may remain adequate ( or on-par with prior work ) but the overall vision for the comic may be too drastically altered for it to retain its original attraction . marrying irving moments in comics may be seen as desperate attempts to retain readers and newspaper distribution by completely breaking with tradition and/or creating a news-worthy event . they may be seen as '' it 's about time '' events in a comic strip 's course where an event , long-time avoided , is finally allowed to occur . growing the beard . '' growing the beard '' refers to the opposite of jumping the shark ; i.e . when a show dramatically improves in quality . the term derives from the star trek : the next generation character william riker , who was clean-shaven for the first season but grew a beard before the second , which is often considered to be better in terms of storytelling . . notes . references . external links . the 40 jump the shark moments from 40 popular classic tv shows