Shneur Zalman of Liadi

biography . early life . shneur zalman was born in 1745 in the small town of liozna , polish–lithuanian commonwealth ( present-day belarus ) . he was the son of baruch , lubavitcher rabbi 's memoirs : the memoirs of rabbi joseph isaac schneersohn 1971 '' judah loewe , as follows : rabbi judah — betzalel — samuel — judah leib — moses of posen — shneur zalman — baruch — shneur zalman of liady '' who was a paternal descendant of the mystic and philosopher rabbi judah loew ben bezalel . hayom yom , introduction according to meir perels of prague , the maharal was the great-great-grandson of judah leib the elder who allegedly descended paternally from hai gaon and therefore also from the davidic line , however several modern historians such as otto muneles and shlomo engard have criticized this claim . see the maharal of prague 's descent from king david , by chaim freedman , published in avotaynu vol 22 no 1 , spring 2006 shneur zalman was a prominent ( and the youngest ) disciple of dov ber of mezeritch , the '' great maggid '' , who was in turn the successor of the founder of hasidic judaism , yisrael ben eliezer , known as the baal shem tov . he displayed extraordinary talent while still a child . by the time he was eight years old , he wrote an all-inclusive commentary on the torah based on the works of rashi , nahmanides and abraham ibn ezra . 'sipurie chassidim lenoar ' kfar chabad 1984 until the age of twelve , he studied under issachar ber in lyubavichi ( lubavitch ) ; he distinguished himself as a talmudist , such that his teacher sent him back home , informing his father that the boy could continue his studies without the aid of a teacher . the lubavitcher rebbe 's memoirs , vol 1 . at the age of twelve , he delivered a discourse concerning the complicated laws of kiddush hachodesh , to which the people of the town granted him the title '' rav '' . hayom yom , 7 of shvat at age fifteen he married sterna segal , the daughter of yehuda leib segal , a wealthy resident of vitebsk , and he was then able to devote himself entirely to study . during these years , shneur zalman was introduced to mathematics , geometry and astronomy by two learned brothers , refugees from bohemia , who had settled in liozna . one of them was also a scholar of the kabbalah . thus , besides mastering rabbinic literature , he also acquired a fair knowledge of the sciences , philosophy , and kabbalah . he became an adept in isaac luria 's system of kabbalah , and in 1764 he became a disciple of dov ber of mezeritch . in 1767 , at the age of 22 , he was appointed maggid of liozna , a position he held until 1801 . misnagdim . in the course of the hasidic movement 's establishment , opponents ( misnagdim ) arose among the local jewish community . disagreements between hasidim and their opponents included debates concerning knives used by butchers for shechita , the phrasing of prayers among others . see the hasidic movement and the gaon of vilna by elijah judah schochet . for a full treatment of this subject see the great maggid by jacob immanuel schochet , 3rd ed . 1990 , ch . x , . shneur zalman and a fellow hasidic leader , menachem mendel of vitebsk ( or , according to the tradition in the soloveitchik family , levi yitzchok of berditchev ) , attempted to persuade the leader of lithuanian jewry , the vilna gaon , of the legitimacy of hasidic practices . however , the gaon refused to meet with them . an encounter with the alter rebbe - program one hundred sixty eight - living torah . children and succession . shneur zalman 's sons were : dovber schneuri who eventually succeeded him , chaim avraham , and moshe . shneur zalman 's daughters were named freida , devorah leah and rochel . other families have lore telling that they are also descendants , but they are undocumented in existing family records . dovber shneuri . dovber schneuri succeeded his father as rebbe of the chabad movement . at the age of 39 , while studying in the city of kremenchug , shneur zalman died . encyclopedia of hasidism , entry : schneuri , dovber . naftali lowenthal . aronson , london 1996 . shneuri then moved to the small border-town of lubavichi , from which the movement would take its name . his accession was disputed by one of his father 's prime students , aharon halevi of strashelye , however the majority of shneur zalman 's followers stayed with schneuri , and moved to lubavichi . thus chabad had now split into two branches , each taking the name of their location to differentiate themselves from each other . he established a yeshivah in lubavitch , which attracted gifted young scholars . his son-in-law , menachem mendel schneersohn , headed the yeshivah , and later became his successor . thus , while schneuri succeeded his father as rebbe of the chabad movement , a senior disciple of his father , aharon halevi of strashelye , a popular and respected figure , differed with him on a number of issues and led a breakaway movement . strashelye . when schneur zalman died , many of his followers flocked to one of his top students , aharon halevi of strashelye . he had been shneur zalman 's closest disciple for over thirty years . while many more became followers of dovber shneuri , the strashelye school of chassidic thought was the subject of many of dovber 's discourses . aharon halevi emphasized the importance of basic emotions in divine service ( especially the service of prayer ) . dovber shneuri did not reject the role of emotion in prayer , but emphasized that if the emotion in prayer is to be genuine , it can only be a result of contemplation and understanding ( hisbonenus ) of the explanations of chassidus , which in turn will lead to an attainment of '' bittul '' ( self-nullification before the divine ) . in his work entitled kuntres hispa'alus ( '' tract on ecstasy '' ) , dovber shneuri argues that only through ridding oneself of what he considered disingenuous emotions could one attain the ultimate level in chassidic worship ( that is , bittul ) . ehrlich , leadership in the chabad movement , pp . 160–192 , esp . pp . 167–172 . . moshe schneersohn . moshe schneersohn ( born c . 1784 - died , before 1853 ) was the youngest son of shneur zalman . according to scholars he converted to catholicism and died in a st . petersburg asylum . chabad sources say that his conversion and related documents were faked by the church , but belarusian state archives in minsk uncovered by historian shaul stampfer support the conversion . . lithuania . during the latter portion of dovber 's life , his students dispersed over europe , and after dovber 's death , shneur zalman became the leader of hasidism in lithuania , along with his senior colleague menachem mendel of vitebsk . when menachem mendel died ( in 1788 ) , shneur zalman was recognized as leader of the chassidim in lithuania . “ shneor zalman ben baruch ” . jewishencyclopedia.com . at the time lithuania was the center of the misnagdim ( opponents of hasidism ) , and shneur zalman faced much opposition . in 1774 he and menachem mendel of vitebsk traveled to vilna in an attempt to create a dialogue with the vilna gaon who led the misnagdim and had issued a ban ( cherem ) against the hasidim , but the gaon refused to see them ( see vilna gaon antagonism to hasidism and hasidim and mitnagdim ) . undaunted by this antagonism , he succeeded in creating a large network of hasidic centers . he also joined opposition to napoleon 's advance on russia by recruiting his disciples to the czar 's army . rabbi schneur zalman of liadi , rabbi nissan mindel , new york : kehot , 1973 , pp . 251–252 he was also active in canvassing financial support for the jewish settlements in the land of israel , then under the control of the ottoman empire . philosophy : chabad . : see hasidic philosophy as a talmudist , shneur zalman endeavored to place kabbalah and hasidism on a rational basis . in his seminal work , tanya , he defines his approach as '' '' ( '' mind ruling over the heart/emotions '' ) . he chose the name '' chabad '' for this philosophy—the hebrew acronym for the intellectual attributes ( sefirot ) chochma ( '' wisdom '' ) , bina ( '' understanding '' ) , and da'at ( '' knowledge ” ) . according to shneur zalman , a man is neither a static nor a passive entity . he is a dynamic being who must work to develop his potential talent and perfect himself . the world of hassidism , h . rabinowicz p.74 , hartmore house 1970 both in his works and in his sermons he '' indicated an intelligent and not a blind faith '' , and assumed an intellectual accessibility of the mystical teachings of the kabbalah . this intellectual basis differentiates chabad from other forms of hasidism - in this context referred to as '' chagas '' —the '' emotional '' attributes ( sefirot ) of chesed ( '' kindness '' ) , gevurah ( '' power '' ) , and tiferes ( '' beauty '' ) . as shneur zalman , founder of the chabad intellectual school in hasidism , shared the same hebrew birthday ( 18th of ellul , some 47 years apart ) with the baal shem tov , founder of the whole hasidic movement , habad tradition identifies them symbolically with the 2 great luminaries of the 4th day of creation ( genesis 1:16 : '' and god made the two great luminaries : the greater light to rule the day , and the lesser light to rule the night '' . in rabbinic esoteric midrash , the sun and moon were originally created equal ( '' 2 great lights '' ) , the moon only later losing its light ( '' the lesser '' ) . accordingly , as the '' 2 great luminaries '' of hasidism , the baal shem tov corresponds to the sun , shneur zalman to the moon before it was diminished . the baal shem tov revealed infinite divine faith , shneur zalman drew the faith of hasidic thought down into intellectual grasp . audio recording talk , '' the beginning of the end '' of the jewish year , by yitzchak ginsburgh , explaining the kabbalistic meaning of 18th ellul . ginsburgh connects the 2 later descending revelations of the baal shem tov and shneur zalman on 18th ellul , with the earlier ohr of the maharal who died on that day , 18th ellul 1609 . the maharal taught a kabbalistic philosophy of divine paradox , later revealed and explicated by the baal shem tov and shneur zalman in likkutei sichos talks , the 7th rebbe equates the hasidic rebbes followed in chabad with different sephirot divine manifestations : the baal shem tov with keter infinite faith , shneur zalman with chokhmah wisdom , the 2nd chabad rebbe with binah understanding , etc . opposition to napoleon and support for the tsar . during the french invasion of russia , while many polish hasidic rebbe supported napoleon or remained quiet about their support , shneur zalman openly and vigorously supported the tsar . while fleeing from the advancing french army he wrote a letter explaining his opposition to napoleon to a friend , moshe meizeles : should napoleon be victorious . '' : politics and spirituality in early modern jewish messianism , hillel levine , jerusalem studies in jewish thought 16–17 , 2001 some argue that shneur zalman 's opposition stemmed from napoleon 's attempts to arouse a messianic view of himself in jews , opening the gates of the ghettos and emancipating their residents as he conquered . he established an ersatz sanhedrin , recruiting jews to his ranks , and spreading rumors about his conquest of the holy land to make jews subversive for his own ends . napoleon and the jews , kobler , f . , new york , 1976 . thus , his opposition was based on a practical fear of jews turning to the false messianism of napoleon as he saw it . yisroel hopsztajn of kozienice , another hasidic leader , also considered napoleon a menace to the jewish people , a . marcus , hachasiduth , p . 114 . but believed that after victory over russia , messiah will arrive . menachem mendel schneerson identifies hopsztajn as the chasidic leader who preferred that napoleon defeat the czar . igros kodesh , vol . 15 , p . 450 . . arrests . in 1797 following the death of the gaon , leaders of the vilna community accused the hasidim of subversive activities - on charges of supporting the ottoman empire , since shneur zalman advocated sending charity to support jews living in the ottoman territory of palestine . in 1798 he was arrested on suspicion of treason and brought to st . petersburg where he was held in the peter and paul fortress for 53 days , at which time he was subjected to an examination by a secret commission . ultimately he was released by order of paul i of russia . the hebrew day of his acquittal and release , 19 kislev , 5559 on the hebrew calendar , is celebrated annually by chabad hasidim , who hold a festive meal and make communal pledges to learn the whole of the talmud ; this practice is known as '' chalukat hashas '' . in chabad tradition , his imprisonment is interpreted as a reflection of accusations in heaven that he was revealing his new dimensions of mystical teachings too widely . the traditional tendency to conceal jewish mysticism is founded on the kabbalistic notion of the sephirot . the side of divine chesed seeks to give physical and spiritual blessing without restriction . this is counterbalanced by the side of gevurah , which measures and restricts the flow to the capacity and merit of the recipient . the subsequent sephirah of hod implements any restriction in order to preserve the glory of the divine majesty . in the hasidic story of an earlier episode among the '' holy society '' disciples of dov ber of mezeritch , one of the great followers saw a page of hasidic writings blowing around the courtyard . he regretted the undue dissemination of hasidut for its desecration of divine holiness . in the account , his vocalisation of these thoughts caused a heavenly accusation against the maggid , for revealing too much . the young schneur zalman replied with a famous hasidic parable : the great maggid by jacob immanuel schochet . kehot publications a king had an only son who became ill and all the attending doctors were at a loss of how to heal him . a wise person understood the only possible cure . he told the king that he would have to desecrate the royal crown by removing its most precious jewel . this would have to be ground up and fed to the king 's son . the king regretted the loss to his majesty but immediately agreed that the life of his son was more important . the jewel was ground and the solution was fed to the son . most of the cure fell to the ground , but the son received a few drops and became cured . concluded schneur zalman in defence of hasidic dissemination , the king represents god , and the son represents the jewish community , who recognise the '' god of israel '' . at the time of the emerging hasidic movement , the jewish people were at a physical and spiritual low ebb . the only cure would be the dissemination of the inner divine teachings of hasidic thought . even though this would also involve their desecration , this would fully be justified in order to heal the people . the accusing student of the maggid realised the wisdom of this , and agreed with schneur zalman . when the maggid heard about this , he told schneur zalman that '' you have saved me from the heavenly accusation '' . the story of this parable is famous across other hasidic dynasties as well . chabad commentary asks about this the question of why a new heavenly accusation would have arisen against shneur zalman himself , and result in his incarceration in st . petersburg . had he not already received the heavenly agreement to the wisdom of disseminating chassidic teachings ? since chabad thought presented hasidic thought with a new degree of elucidation in intellectual form , this caused a new , more severe heavenly accusation to emerge . this went beyond the justified spiritual revival and healing of mainstream hasidism . here , in hasidic thought , schneur zalman was seeking to fulfill the messianic impulse to disseminate hasidic philosophy as a preparation for mashiach . therefore , his subsequent exoneration by the tzarist authorities is interpreted in chabad as a new heavenly agreement to begin the fullest dissemination of hasidic thought without its prior limitations . chabad tradition tells that in prison , schneur zalman was visited by the deceased baal shem tov and maggid of mezeritch , who told him the reason for his imprisonment . in reply to the question of whether he should stop , they replied that once released , he should continue with even more dedication . therefore , in chabad thought , the 19th day of kislev is called the '' new year of hasidut '' , complementing the other 4 halachic '' new year '' dates in the hebrew calendar . in 1800 rav shneur zalman was again arrested and transported to st . petersburg , this time along with his son moshe who served as interpreter , as his father spoke no russian or french . he was released after several weeks but banned from leaving st . petersburg . on learning chassidus , brooklyn , 1959 , p . 24 the accession of tsar alexander i ( alexander i of russia ) to the throne , a few weeks later , led to his release ; he was then “ given full liberty to proclaim his religious teachings ” by the russian government . according to some , his first arrest was not the result of anti-hasidic agitators fabricating charges , or officials seeking extortion monies . kerem chabad , kfar chabad , 1992 , pp . 17–21 , 29–31 ( documents from the prosecutor general 's archive in st . petersburg an accusation was made on may 8 , 1798 by hirsh ben david of vilna accused him of trying to assist the french revolution , by sending money to napoleon and the sultan . since this hirsch ben david was untraceable , some were led to believe that there was no such person as hirsh and the authorities were attempting to stir up internecine fighting among the jews . . liadi . after his release he moved his base to liadi , vitebsk region , imperial russia ; rather than returning to liozna . he took up his residence in the town of liadi at the invitation of polish prince stanisław lubomirski , voivode of the town , were zalman settled for the next 12 years . his movement grew there immensely , and to this day he is associated with the town . in 1812 , fleeing the french invasion , he left mogilev , intending to go to poltava , but died on the way in the small village of pena , kursk oblast . he is buried in hadiach . subsequent history of chabad . : see chabad history dovber schneuri moved the movement to the town of lubavitch ( lyubavichi ) in present-day russia . a top follower of shneur zalman , aharon halevi horowitz , established a rival chabad school in strashelye , which did not last after his death . in 1940 , under the leadership of the previous rebbe , yosef yitzchok schneersohn , the chabad-lubavitch movement moved its headquarters to brooklyn , new york in the united states . under the leadership of menachem mendel schneerson , chabad established branches all over the world staffed by its own lubavitch-trained and ordained rabbis with their wives and children . the number of branches continues to grow to this day , and existing branches continue to expand . many descendants of shneur zalman carry surnames such as shneur , shneuri , schneerson , and zalman . works . shneur zalman was a prolific writer . he produced works of both mysticism and halacha . chabad tradition recasts his yiddish name '' shneur '' ( שניאור ) as the two hebrew words '' shnei ohr '' ( שני אור-two ohr ) , referring to schneur zalman 's mastery of both the outer dimensions of talmudic jewish study , and the inner dimensions of jewish mysticism . his works form the cornerstone of chabad philosophy . his ability to explain even the most complex issues of torah made his writings popular with torah scholars everywhere . tanya . he is probably best known for his systematic exposition of hasidic jewish philosophy , entitled likkutei amarim , more widely known as the tanya , said to be first published in 1797 . the legendary 1797 tanya got lost in a fire and no copies survived . the extant version of this work dates from 1814 . due to the popularity of this book , hasidic jews often refer to shneur zalman as the baal hatanya ( lit . '' master of the tanya '' ) . the tanya deals with jewish spirituality and psychology from a kabbalistic point of view , and philosophically expounds on such themes as the oneness of god , tzimtzum , the sefirot , simcha , bitachon ( confidence ) , among many other mystical concepts . shulchan aruch harav . shneur zalman is well known for the shulchan aruch harav , a collection of authoritative codes of halakha commissioned by dovber of mezeritch and composed at the legendary age of twenty-one . the maggid of mezeritch sought a new version of the classic shulkhan arukh for the hasidic movement . the work states a selection of posek , as well as the underlying reasoning , and common hasidic customs . the shulchan aruch harav is considered authoritative by other hasidim , and citations to this work are many times found in non-hasidic sources such as the mishnah berurah used by lithuanian jews and the ben ish chai used by sephardic jews . shneur zalman is also one of three posek on whom shlomo ganzfried based his kitzur shulkhan arukh ( concise version of jewish law ) . siddur . he also edited the first siddur chabad , based on the nusach ari of the famous kabbalist isaac luria of safed , but he altered it for general use , and corrected its textual errors . today 's siddur tehillat hashem is a later print of shneur zalman 's siddur . music . shneur zalman composed a number of hassidic melodies . some accompany certain prayers , others are sung to biblical verses or are melodies without words . depending on the tune they are meant to arouse joy , spiritual ecstasy or teshuvah . one special melody , commonly referred to as the alter rebbe 's niggun or dalet bovos , is reserved by chabad hassidim for ushering a groom and bride to their wedding canopy and other select occasions . other . shneur zalman 's other works include : torah or and likutei torah , chassidic explanations of the weekly torah portions , shir hashirim and the book of esther , drawn from his hasidic discourses and published by his grandson , the tzemach tzedek , who added his own glosses . sefer hama'amarim , also known as maamarei admor hazaken , hassidic discourses : hanachot harap ; et ’ haleich lyozna ; 5562- 2 vol . ; 5563 , 2 vol . ; 5564 ; 5565 , 2 vol . ; 5566 ; 5567 ; 5568 , 2 vol . ; 5569 ; 5570 ; 5571 ; haketzarim ; al parshiyot hatorah vehamoadim , 2 vol . ; inyanim ; ma ’ amarei razal ; nach , 3 vol . hilchot talmud torah , on the torah study . sefer she ’ elot uteshuvot , responsa . siddur im dach , a prayerbook with hasidic discourses boneh yerushalayim . me'ah she'arim . igrot kodesh , 2 vol .