Samuel West

theatre . acting . the writer by ella hickson , directed by blanche mcintyre , at the almeida theatre , london ( april 2018 ) the browning version – directed by clive perry , ( birmingham repertory theatre ) les parents terribles : michael ( february 1989 ) – directed by derek goldby , ( orange tree theatre ) the bread-winner ( 1989 ) – directed by kevin billington , ( theatre royal , windsor and touring ) a life in the theatre ( october 1989 – february 1990 ) – directed by bill bryden , ( theatre royal haymarket , transferred to strand theatre ) simon gray : nigel ( june 1990 ) – directed by simon gray , ( vaudeville theatre ) the sea : willy carson ( 1991 ) – directed by sam mendes , ( royal national theatre ) cain ( 1992 ) – directed by edward hall ( minerva theatre ) mr . cinders a musical comedy : jim lancaster ( december 1992 – february 1993 ) – directed by martin connor ( king 's head theatre ) arcadia : valentine ( april–november 1993 ) – directed by trevor nunn , ( royal national theatre ) the importance of being earnest : algernon – directed by james maxwell , ( royal exchange theatre ) henry iv part 1 and part 2 : hal ( 1996–1997 ) – directed by stephen unwin ( english touring theatre ) journey 's end : captain stanhope ( january–february 1998 ) – directed by david evans-rees ( king 's head theatre ) antony and cleopatra : octavius caesar ( 1998 ) – directed by sean mathias , ( royal national theatre ) richard ii : richard ii ( 2000 ) – directed by steven pimlott , ( rsc ) hamlet : hamlet ( 2001 ) – directed by steven pimlott , ( rsc ) the master and margarita : the master ( 2004 ) – directed by steven pimlott , ( chichester festival theatre ) doctor faustus : faustus ( 2004 ) – directed by steven pimlott , martin duncan and edward kemp , ( minerva theatre ) much ado about nothing : benedick ( 2005 ) – directed by josie rourke , ( crucible theatre ) the exonerated : kerry max cook ( 2006 ) – directed by bob balaban , ( riverside studios ) a number : b1/b2/michael black ( 2006 ) – directed by jonathan munby , ( studio theatre ( sheffield ) and minerva theatre ) betrayal : robert ( 2007 ) – directed by roger michell , ( donmar warehouse ) drunk enough to say i love you ? : guy ( 2008 ) – directed by james mcdonald , ( the public theater ) the family reunion : harry ( 2008 ) – directed by jeremy herrin , ( donmar warehouse ) enron : jeffrey skilling ( 2009 ) – directed by rupert goold , ( minerva theatre , royal court theatre , noël coward theatre ) a number ( revival ) : b1/b2/michael black ( 2010 ) – directed by jonathan munby , ( menier chocolate factory ) kreutzer vs . kreutzer : man ( 2010 ) – directed by sarah giles , ( australian chamber orchestra – on tour and at the sydney opera house ) a number ( revival ) : b1/b2/michael black ( 2011 ) – directed by jonathan munby , ( fugard theatre , cape town ) uncle vanya : astrov ( 2012 ) – directed by lindsay posner , ( vaudeville theatre ) young chekhov : ivanov in ivanov and trigorin in the seagull ( 2015 ) – directed by jonathan kent , ( chichester festival theatre ) . directing . the lady 's not for burning ( 2002 ) , minerva theatre les liaisons dangereuses ( 2003 ) , bristol old vic così fan tutte ( 2003 ) , english national opera at barbican theatre three women and a piano tuner ( 2004 ) , minerva theatre and hampstead theatre ( 2005 ) insignificance ( 2005 ) , lyceum theatre ( sheffield ) the romans in britain ( 2006 ) , crucible theatre the clean house ( 2006 ) , studio theatre ( sheffield ) as you like it ( 2007 ) , crucible theatre and swan theatre ( stratford ) dealer 's choice ( 2007 ) , menier chocolate factory and trafalgar studios waste ( 2008 ) , almeida theatre close the coalhouse door ( 2012 ) , northern stage after electra ( 2015 ) , theatre royal , plymouth and tricycle theatre the watsons ( 2018 minerva theatre , chichester ) . radio . directing . money ( 2011 ) , bbc radio 3 close the coalhouse door ( 2012 ) , bbc radio 4 . audiobooks , reciting and work with musicians . west has recorded over fifty audiobooks , among which are the shakespeare plays all 's well that ends well , coriolanus , henry v , the merchant of venice , a midsummer night 's dream , much ado about nothing , richard ii and macbeth ( directed by steven berkoff ) , the wind on fire trilogy by william nicholson ( the wind singer , slaves of the mastery and firesong ) , the arthur trilogy by kevin crossley-holland ( the seeing stone , at the crossing places and king of the middle march ) , five books by sebastian faulks ( charlotte gray , birdsong , the girl at the lion d'or , human traces and a possible life ) , four by michael ridpath ( trading reality , final venture , free to trade , and the marketmaker ) , two by george orwell ( nineteen eighty-four and homage to catalonia ) , two by mary wesley ( an imaginative experience and part of the furniture ) , two by robert goddard ( closed circle and in pale battalions ) and several compilations of poetry ( realms of gold : letters and poems of john keats , bright star , the collected works of shelley , seven ages , great narrative poems of the romantic age and a shropshire lad ) . also faust , bomber , doctor who : the vengeance of morbius , empire of the sun , brighton rock , fair stood the wind for france , fluke , great speeches in history , how proust can change your life , lady windermere 's fan , peter pan , the alchemist , the day of the triffids , the hairy hands , the lives of christopher chant , the man who made husbands jealous , the queen 's man , the solitaire mystery , the swimming pool library , the two destinies , the velveteen rabbit , the way i found her , the way to dusty death , the woodlanders , under the net , wuthering heights and philip pullman 's grimm tales for young and old . in june 2012 , west recorded an english narration of the book about moomin , mymble and little my by tove jansson for an interactive audiobook developed by spinfy and published by sort of books . in may 2015 , west 's reading of brighton rock was chosen as one of 'the 20 best audiobooks of all time ' by carole mansur of the daily telegraph . as a reciter west has worked with all the major british orchestras , as well as the strasbourg philharmonic orchestra , dallas symphony orchestra and the national symphony orchestra in washington , d.c . works include stravinsky 's oedipus rex and the soldier 's tale , prokofiev 's eugene onegin , beethoven 's egmont , schoenburg 's ode to napoleon , strauss ' enoch arden , saint-saëns ' carnival of the animals , bernstein 's kaddish , walton 's façade and henry v , night mail and the way to the sea by britten and auden , the world premieres of concrete by judith weir at the barbican and howard goodall 's jason and the argonauts at the royal albert hall and the uk premiere of jonathan harvey 's final piece weltethos at the symphony hall , birmingham . in 2007 west made his new york recital debut in the first performance of little red violin by anne dudley and steven isserlis . in november 2010 , west performed a new english translation of grieg 's complete incidental music to ibsen 's play peer gynt with the southampton philharmonic choir at southampton guildhall . he has performed at the proms six times , including the suite version of henry v at the 2002 last night of the proms . he has also appeared with the nash ensemble , the raphael ensemble , the hebrides ensemble , ensemble 360 and the lindsay , dante and endellion quartets at the wigmore hall , london . recordings include prokofief 's eugene onegin with sinfonia 21 and edward downes , salad days and walton 's henry v with the bbc symphony orchestra and leonard slatkin . as a choral singer , west has participated in three choir of london tours to palestine : in may 2006 , when he also gave poetry readings as part of the concert programme ; in april 2007 when he directed the magic flute . and in september 2013 ( see below ) . in 2013 , the centenary year of benjamin britten , west narrated the britten/auden film score night mail with the nash ensemble at the wigmore hall and later added coal face , god ’ s chillun , the peace of britain , the way to the sea and the king 's stamp with the aurora orchestra at the queen elizabeth and fairfield halls . in june he played god in britten 's noye 's fludde in harrogate . in july he appeared in a proms plus broadcast discussing britten 's setting of poetry . in september he toured palestine with the choir of london as staff director of a new opera based on britten 's hymn to st cecilia and sang in britten 's st nicolas . in october , he narrated the concert world premiere of britten in america for the hallé orchestra , which was released on cd together with west 's recordings of speeches to britten 's incidental music for auden and isherwood 's play the ascent of f6 ( the disc , britten to america , was later nominated for a 2014 grammy award for best classical compendium ) . he also toured a program of britten cabaret songs and auden poems across the uk with ruthie culver and the utterjazz quartet . in june 2013 he appeared in the video for handyman blues by billy bragg , directed by johnny vegas . on 14 july 2017 , one month after the grenfell tower fire , bbc 's newshour programme invited west to read out an excerpt from a letter written by an anonymous firefighter giving a personal account of the fire scene and his inner thoughts on duty that night . awards and nominations . as actor 1993 – nominated bafta award for best supporting actor for howards end 1999 – nominated genie award for best actor for rupert 's land 2001 – won london critics ' circle theatre award for best shakespearean performance for hamlet 2001 – won whatsonstage whatsonstage best actor for hamlet 2008 – nominated whatsonstage whatsonstage for best ensemble performance for betrayal 2009 – nominated tma award for best performance in a play for enron 2009 – nominated evening standard award best actor for enron 2010 – nominated whatsonstage whatsonstage for best actor for enron 2010 – nominated olivier award best actor for enron as reader 1999 – won talkie award for charlotte gray by sebastian faulks 2000 – won audie award for realms of gold : letters and poems of john keats 2001 – won spoken word award ( silver ) for the seeing stone by kevin crossley-holland 2001 – won spoken word award ( gold ) for birdsong by sebastian faulks samuel west has received nine audiofile earphones awards for his narration : the day of the triffids by john wyndham ( 1996 ) , peter pan by j.m.barrie ( 1997 ) , charlotte gray by sebastian faulks ( 1999 ) , the way i found her by rose tremain ( 2000 ) , the swimming pool library by alan hollinghurst ( 2007 ) , faust by goethe ( 2011 ) , a shropshire lad by a . e . housman ( 2011 ) , a possible life by sebastian faulks ( 2012 ) and philip pullman 's grimm tales for young and old ( 2013 ) as director 2004 – nominated olivier award for best opera revival for così fan tutte 2008 – nominated olivier award for best revival for dealer 's choice 2009 – nominated theatregoers ' choice award for best director for waste and dealer 's choice . references . external links .