Agenda 21

structure . agenda & nbsp ; 21 is grouped into 4 & nbsp ; sections : section & nbsp ; i : social and economic dimensions is directed toward combating poverty , especially in developing countries , changing consumption patterns , promoting health , achieving a more sustainable population , and sustainable settlement in decision making . section & nbsp ; ii : conservation and management of resources for development includes atmospheric protection , combating deforestation , protecting fragile environments , conservation of biological diversity ( biodiversity ) , control of pollution and the management of biotechnology , and radioactive wastes . section & nbsp ; iii : strengthening the role of major groups includes the roles of children and youth , women , ngos , local authorities , business and industry , and workers ; and strengthening the role of indigenous peoples , their communities , and farmers . section & nbsp ; iv : means of implementation includes science , technology transfer , education , international organization , and financial mechanisms . . development and evolution . the full text of agenda & nbsp ; 21 was made public at the un & nbsp ; conference on environment and development ( earth summit ) , held in rio de janeiro on 13 june 1992 , where 178 & nbsp ; governments voted to adopt the program . the final text was the result of drafting , consultation , and negotiation , beginning in 1989 and culminating at the two-week conference . rio+5 ( 1997 ) . in 1997 , the un & nbsp ; general assembly held a special session to appraise the status of agenda & nbsp ; 21 ( rio +5 ) . the assembly recognized progress as '' uneven '' and identified key trends , including increasing globalization , widening inequalities in income , and continued deterioration of the global environment . a new general assembly resolution ( s-19/2 ) promised further action . rio+10 ( 2002 ) . the johannesburg plan of implementation , agreed to at the world summit on sustainable development ( earth summit & nbsp ; 2002 ) , affirmed un commitment to '' full implementation '' of agenda & nbsp ; 21 , alongside achievement of the millennium development goals and other international agreements . agenda & nbsp ; 21 for culture ( 2002 ) . the first world public meeting on culture , held in porto alegre , brazil , in 2002 , came up with the idea to establish guidelines for local cultural policies , something comparable to what agenda & nbsp ; 21 was for the environment . they are to be included in various subsections of agenda & nbsp ; 21 and will be carried out through a wide range of sub-programs beginning with g8 & nbsp ; countries . rio+20 ( 2012 ) . in 2012 , at the united nations conference on sustainable development the attending members reaffirmed their commitment to agenda & nbsp ; 21 in their outcome document called '' the future we want '' . leaders from 180 nations participated . sustainable development summit ( 2015 ) . agenda 2030 , also known as the sustainable development goals , was a set of goals decided upon at the un sustainable development summit in 2015 . it takes all of the goals set by agenda 21 and re-asserts them as the basis for sustainable development , saying , '' we reaffirm all the principles of the rio declaration on environment and development… '' adding onto those goals from the original rio document , a total of 17 goals have been agreed on , revolving around the same concepts of agenda 21 ; people , planet , prosperity , peace , and partnership . . implementation . the commission on sustainable development acts as a high-level forum on sustainable development and has acted as preparatory committee for summits and sessions on the implementation of agenda & nbsp ; 21 . the un & nbsp ; division for sustainable development acts as the secretariat to the commission and works '' within the context of '' agenda & nbsp ; 21 . implementation by member states remains voluntary , and its adoption has varied . local level . the implementation of agenda & nbsp ; 21 was intended to involve action at international , national , regional and local levels . some national and state governments have legislated or advised that local authorities take steps to implement the plan locally , as recommended in chapter & nbsp ; 28 of the document . these programs are often known as '' local agenda 21 '' or '' la21 '' . manchester metropolitan university for example , in the philippines , the plan is '' philippines agenda & nbsp ; 21 '' ( pa21 ) . the group , iclei-local governments for sustainability , formed in 1990 ; today its members come from over 1,000 & nbsp ; cities , towns , and counties in 88 & nbsp ; countries and is widely regarded as a paragon of agenda & nbsp ; 21 implementation . europe turned out to be the continent where la21 was best accepted and most implemented . in sweden , for example , all local governments have implemented a local agenda 21 initiative . . regional levels . the un department of economic and social affairs ' division for sustainable development monitors and evaluates progress , nation by nation , towards the adoption of agenda & nbsp ; 21 , and makes these reports available to the public on its website . . australia . australia is a signatory to agenda & nbsp ; 21 and 88 of its municipalities subscribe to iclei , an organization that promotes agenda & nbsp ; 21 globally . australia 's membership is second only to that of the united states . . africa . in africa , national support for agenda & nbsp ; 21 is strong and most countries are signatories . but support is often closely tied to environmental challenges specific to each country ; for example , in 2002 sam nujoma , who was then president of namibia , spoke about the importance of adhering to agenda & nbsp ; 21 at the 2002 earth summit , noting that as a semi-arid country , namibia sets a lot of store in the united nations convention to combat desertification ( unccd ) . furthermore , there is little mention of agenda & nbsp ; 21 at the local level in indigenous media . only major municipalities in sub-saharan african countries are members of iclei . agenda & nbsp ; 21 participation in north african countries mirrors that of middle eastern countries , with most countries being signatories but little to no adoption on the local-government level . countries in sub-saharan africa and north africa generally have poorly documented agenda & nbsp ; 21 status reports . by contrast , south africa 's participation in agenda & nbsp ; 21 mirrors that of modern europe , with 21 & nbsp ; city members of iclei and support of agenda & nbsp ; 21 by national-level government . north america . . united states . the national focal point in the united states is the division chief for sustainable development and multilateral affairs , office of environmental policy , bureau of oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs , u.s . department of state . a june 2012 poll of 1,300 united states voters by the american planning association found that 9 % supported agenda 21 , 6 % opposed it , and 85 % thought they did n't have enough information to form an opinion . . support . the united states is a signatory country to agenda & nbsp ; 21 , but because agenda & nbsp ; 21 is a legally non-binding statement of intent and not a treaty , the united states senate did not hold a formal debate or vote on it . it is therefore not considered to be law under article six of the united states constitution . president george h . w . bush was one of the 178 heads of government who signed the final text of the agreement at the earth summit in 1992 , and in the same year representatives nancy pelosi , eliot engel and william broomfield spoke in support of united states house of representatives concurrent resolution 353 , supporting implementation of agenda & nbsp ; 21 in the united states . created by a 1993 executive order , the president 's council on sustainable development ( pcsd ) is explicitly charged with recommending a national action plan for sustainable development to the president . the pcsd is composed of leaders from government and industry , as well as from environmental , labor and civil rights organizations . the pcsd submitted its report , '' sustainable america : a new consensus '' , to the president in early 1996 . in the absence of a multi-sectoral consensus on how to achieve sustainable development in the united states , the pcsd was conceived to formulate recommendations for the implementation of agenda 21 . in the united states , over 528 & nbsp ; cities are members of iclei , an international sustainability organization that helps to implement the agenda & nbsp ; 21 and local agenda & nbsp ; 21 concepts across the world . the united states has nearly half of the iclei 's global membership of 1,200 & nbsp ; cities promoting sustainable development at a local level . the united states also has one of the most comprehensively documented agenda & nbsp ; 21 status reports . in response to the opposition , don knapp , u.s . spokesman for the iclei , has said '' sustainable development is not a top-down conspiracy from the u.n . , but a bottom-up push from local governments '' . the arizona chamber of commerce and industry successfully lobbied against an anti-sustainable development bill in 2012 , arguing '' it would be bad for business '' as it could drive away corporations that have embraced sustainable development . . opposition . anti-agenda 21 theories have circulated in the u.s . some tea party movement activists and others promoted the notion that agenda 21 was part of a un plot to deny property rights , undermine u.s . sovereignty , or force citizens to move to cities . activists believed that the non-binding un resolution was '' the linchpin in a plot to subjugate humanity under an eco-totalitarian regime . '' the conspiracy had its roots in anti-environmentalist ideology and opposition to land-use regulation . agenda 21 fears have played a role in opposition to local government 's efforts to promote resource and land conservation , build bike lanes , and construct hubs for public transportation . the non-profit group iclei – local governments for sustainability usa – was targeted by anti-agenda 21 activists . in 2012 glenn beck co-wrote a dystopian novel titled agenda 21 based in part on concepts discussed in the un plan . in the same year , fears of agenda 21 '' went mainstream '' when the republican national committee adopted a platform resolution stated that '' we strongly reject the u.n . agenda 21 as erosive of american sovereignty . '' several state and local governments have considered or passed motions and legislation opposing agenda 21 . most such bills failed , '' either dying in committee , getting defeated on the statehouse floor or – in the case of missouri 's 2013 bill – getting vetoed by the governor . '' in texas , for example , broadly worded legislation that would prohibit any governmental entity from accepting from or granting money to any '' nongovernmental or intergovernmental organization accredited by the united nations to implement a policy that originated in the agenda 21 plan '' was defeated because it could have cut off funding for groups such as 4-h , the boy scouts of america , and the texas wildlife association . in arizona , a similarly sweeping bill was introduced in the arizona state legislature seeking to mandate that the state could not '' adopt or implement the creed , doctrine , or principles or any tenet '' of agenda 21 and to prohibit the state '' implementing programs of , expending any sum of money for , being a member of , receiving funding from , contracting services from , or giving financial or other forms of aid to '' an array of sustainability organizations . the bill , which was opposed by the state chamber of commerce and the mayor of phoenix , was defeated in 2012 . alabama was one state that did adopt an anti-agenda 21 resolution , unanimously passing in 2012 a measure to block '' any future effort to 'deliberately or inadvertently infringe or restrict private property rights without due process , as may be required by policy recommendations originating in , or traceable to 'agenda 21 . ' '' far right-wing groups , including the john birch society , assert that agenda 21 is part of a scheme using environmental protection as a cover to impose a worldwide dictatorship . agenda 21 : the un , sustainability and right-wing conspiracy theory , southern poverty law center , 1 april 2014 during her 2014 u.s . senate campaign , joni ernst promoted a conspiracy theory claiming agenda 21 would force iowa farmers off their land and into the cities . . europe . the agenda 21 status of european countries is generally well-documented . by 1997 70 % of uk local authorities had committed to agenda 21 . many , such as the london borough of enfield , employed agenda 21 officers to promote the programme . . france . france , whose national government , along with 14 & nbsp ; cities , is a signatory , promotes nationwide programs in support of the goals of agenda & nbsp ; 21 . baltic nations . baltic nations formed the baltic 21 coalition as a regional expression of agenda 21 .