Emma of Waldeck and Pyrmont

early life . emma was born a princess of waldeck and pyrmont on 2 august 1858 in arolsen castle in arolsen , the capital of the small german principality of waldeck ( state ) . she was the fourth daughter of georg viktor , prince of waldeck and pyrmont , and princess helena of nassau . her brother , friedrich , was the last reigning prince of waldeck and pyrmont . her sister , helena , was the wife of prince leopold , duke of albany , a son of queen victoria . her maternal grandfather was william , duke of nassau , a grandson of princess carolina of orange-nassau , through which she inherited a place in the line of succession to the dutch crown until 1887 . emma had a religious education from a very liberal minded pastor . with her english governess , emma studied crafts , drawing , and french literature . her upbringing has been described as fairly informal , though with a focuse on a sense of duty . she was given an interest for social work early on due to the charity work she became involved in already as young , and an interest for medical work due to the illness of her eldest sister , who suffered from tuberculosis . redactie , emma wilhelmine therese van waldeck-pyrmont , in : digitaal vrouwenlexicon van nederland . url : 24/03/2014 emma was described as tactful , sensible and engaging . . queen . princess emma married the elderly king william iii in arolsen on 7 january 1879 , two years after the death of his first wife , sophie of württemberg . george edmundson , history of holland ( 2013 ) , p . 421 david williamson , debrett 's kings and queens of europe ( 1988 ) , p . 101 the marriage was suggested during william 's visit to pyrmont in 1878 . it was an arranged dynastic marriage and emma agreed because of the sense of religious duty she had been raised to , in order to benefit the dynastic marriage policy of her parents . during the engagement , she wad given lessons in the dutch language and politics . the king had three sons from his first marriage , william , maurice , and alexander , all of whom died without any legitimate offspring . with william , emma had her only child , the future queen wilhelmina , on 31 august 1880 . when her last surviving stepson alexander , prince of orange died in 1884 , her daughter became heir to the throne . this changed emma 's own position , since it was likely that her daughter would succeed her spouse as a minor , in which case emma herself would be regent during her minority . during these years , the king retired from public life duue to his health condition , and emma was given the task to act as his nurse . . regency . three days before william died on 23 november 1890 , emma became regent for her incapacitated husband . she continued her regency into the reign of his successor , their underage daughter , wilhelmina , until wilhelmina 's eighteenth birthday on 31 august 1898 . the grand duchy of luxembourg , the crown of which according to the house-treaty should not be inherited by a woman , passed to adolf , duke of nassau , who happened to be queen emma 's maternal uncle . emma was the first woman to rule the netherlands since princess carolina of orange-nassau a century before , and the first woman to rule the kingdom of the netherlands . she took her position of regent seriously . her task was not simple , since william had antagonized many politicians with his autocratic ways . she managed to establish better relations between the royal house and the political world fairly quickly with good advisors , particularly jhr j . röell and jhr gcj van reenen . she met personally with every government minister at least once every two weeks to keep herself informed of all political issues , and strictly adhered to the rules of the constitutional monarchy . she used the trust she gained by respecting the constitutional forms by using her influence within political issues she did care about , which resulted in compromises in which she often managed to get her will . one stateman commented that emma was efficient because she combined a strong will with soft forms , something they had not been used to . as regent emma presided over three cabinets . in 1891 , emma refused to appoint the suggested minister johannes tak van poortvliet , with whom she had a tense relationship , in favor of g . van tienhoven . in 1894 she was convinced by tak van poortvliet to dissolve parliament . when a new cabinet was to be sworn in , she refused until she had read and aproved of their political program . in 1897 , she demanded that both the liberal parties was to be included in the new cabinet and the aceh war was to continue , before she agreed to have the new government sworn in . she wrote and held her speeches in dutch , and engaged herself in the dutch colonial empire , attending the military parades and celebrations associated with imperial achievments . in addition to her administrative duties , emma paid great attention to the education of her daughter . when wilhelmina reached the age of 16 , emma considered her childhood over and wilhelmina spent the next two years being prepared for her job as a reigning queen . during her government , she took wilhelmina on tours through the provinces to visit local charities , hospitals , curches and factories and aquaint wilhelmina with her future duties . queen mother . on 6 september 1898 her daughter queen wilhelmina reached legal majority and queen emma thereby retired from regency . in her farewell speech as regent , she expressed her wish that the netherlands should continue to be great in the way small nations could show greatness . emma continued to live with her daughter until wilhelmina 's marriage to henry of mecklenburg in 1901 , after which she moved to her own residence lange voorhout in the hague . when her granddaughter juliana was born in 1909 , it was declared than in case juliana succeeded to the throne as a minor , her grandmother emma should be regent rather than her father . as queen mother emma continued to attend to public royal representational duties , supporting her daughter and son-in-law , and was a well known figure in her black widow lace . she was called '' queen of charity '' and expecially engaged in improvement of the conditions for those suffering from tuberculosis . she retired from public life when her granddaughter juliana was declared adult and started to participate in public duties in 1927 . the queen mother died in the hague on 20 march 1934 , of complications from bronchitis at the age of 75 , and was buried in delft . honours and arms . ; national orders and decorations ( parlement.nl ) staatsalmanak voor het koninkrijk der nederlanden , 1921 , '' koninkrijk huis der nederlanden '' p . 2 order of the netherlands lion order of orange-nassau order of the house of orange cross of merit of the red cross ; foreign orders and decorations house of habsburg-lorraine : grand cross of the order of elizabeth : grand cordon of the royal order of leopold : legion of honour , december 1896 house of hohenzollern : dame of the order of louise , 1st class house of mecklenburg : house order of the wendish crown : order of the precious crown , 18 june 1898 qajar dynasty : order of aftab , 1st class portuguese royal family : order of saint isabel russian imperial family : order of saint catherine : 812th dame of the order of queen maria luisa , 29 march 1880 siam : dame of the order of the royal house of chakri , 7 september 1897 house of osman : grand cordon of the order of charity . ancestry . references . external links . koningin emma ( 1858–1934 ) at the dutch royal house website