Kali Yuga

etymology . yuga , in this context , means '' an age of the world '' , where its archaic spelling is yug . kali yuga means '' the age of kali ( demon ) '' , '' the age of darkness '' , '' the age of vice and misery '' , or '' the age of quarrel and hypocrisy '' . . possible starting and ending dates . according to the surya siddhanta , kali yuga began at midnight ( 00:00 ) on 18 february 3102 bce . the induand the rg-veda , page 16 , by egbert richter-ushanas , this is also considered the date on which krishna left the earth to return to vaikuntha . this information is placed at the temple of bhalka , the place of this incident ( see photo ) . according to the astronomer and mathematician aryabhata the kali yuga started in 3102 bce . he finished his book aryabhattiyam in 499 ce , in which he gives the exact year of the beginning of kali yuga . he writes that he wrote the book in the '' year 3600 of the kali age '' at the age of 23 . as it was the 3600th year of the kali age when he was 23 years old , and given that aryabhata was born in 476 ce , the beginning of the kali yuga would come to ( 3600 - ( 476 + 23 ) + 1 ( as only one year elapses between 1 bce and 1 ce ) ) 3102 bce . h.d . dharm chakravarty swami prakashanand saraswati . encyclopedia of authentic hinduism the true history and the religion of india , hardbound , 2nd edition , 2003 , retrieved 2015-01-21 according to k . d . abhyankar , the starting point of kali yuga is an extremely rare planetary alignment , which is depicted in the mohenjo-daro seals . going by this alignment the year 3102 bce is slightly off . the actual date for this alignment is 7 february 3104 bce . there is also sufficient proof to believe that vrdhha garga knew of precession at least by 500 bce . garga had calculated the rate of precession to within 30 % of what the modern scholars estimate . . attributes . hindus believe that human civilization degenerates spiritually during the kali yuga . dimitri kitsikis , l'orocc , dans l'âge de kali , editions naaman,1985 , hinduism often symbolically represents morality ( dharma ) as an indian bull . in satya yuga , the first stage of development , the bull has four legs , which is reduced by one in each age that follows . by the age of kali , morality is reduced to only a quarter of that of the golden age , so that the bull of dharma has only one leg . 1.16.20 . references in the mahabharata . the kurukshetra war and the decimation of kauravas thus happened at the yuga-sandhi , the point of transition from one yuga to another . the scriptures mention narada as having momentarily intercepted the demon kali on his way to the earth when duryodhana was about to be born in order to make him an embodiment of arishadvargas and adharma in preparation of the era of decay in values and the consequent havoc . prophesied events . a discourse by markandeya in the mahabharata identifies some of the attributes of kali yuga . mahabharata section clxxxix in relation to rulers , it lists : rulers will become unreasonable : they will levy taxes unfairly . rulers will no longer see it as their duty to promote spirituality , or to protect their subjects : they will become a danger to the world . '' at the end of kali-yuga , when there exist no topics on the subject of god , even at the residences of so-called saints and respectable gentlemen of the three higher varnas ( guna or temperament ) and when nothing is known of the techniques of sacrifice , even by word , at that time the lord will appear as the supreme chastiser . '' ( srimad-bhagavatam ( 2.7 ) with regard to human relationships , markandeya 's discourse says : avarice and wrath will be common . humans will openly display animosity towards each other . ignorance of dharma will occur . religion , honesty , cleanliness , tolerance , mercy , physical strength and memory diminish with each passing day . people will have thoughts of murder with no justification and will see nothing wrong in that . lust will be viewed as socially acceptable and sexual intercourse will be seen as the central requirement of life . sin will increase exponentially , while virtue will fade and cease to flourish . people will addiction to intoxicating drinks and drugs . gurus will no longer be respected and their students will attempt to injure them . their teachings will be insulted , and followers of kama will wrest control of the mind from all human beings . all the human beings will declare themselves as gods or boon given by gods and make it as a business instead of teachings . people will no longer get married and live with each other just for sexual pleasure . weather and environment will degrade with time and frequent and unpredictable rainfalls will happen . earthquakes will be common . maximum age of humans will be 50 years by the end of kali yuga . many fake ideologies will spread throughout the world . the powerful people will dominate the poor people . many diseases will spread . at the end of kali yuga , lord vishnu will take birth on earth to wipe out the sinners . it is mentioned that lord vishnu 's kalki avatar will come to the earth in a white horse which has wings ( here , the destruction caused by the white horse is used as a metaphor for the destruction of darkness in the minds of the human beings ) . 10,000 year golden age . the brahma vaivarta purana ( related to rathantara kalpa ) mentions a ten thousand-year period , starting from the traditional dating of the kali yuga epoch , during which bhakti yogis will be present . ramesh chaturvedi , shantilal nagar . online book 4 , chapter 129 , versus 49–60 krishna foretold that kali yuga will be full of extreme hardships for people with ideals and values . the brahma-vaivarta purana has words spoken by krishna to mother ganga just before the beginning of the kali yuga ( the age of quarrel and strife ) . the kali yuga began approximately five thousand years ago , that golden age is being described below by krishna . predicted in brahma-vaivarta purana 4.129 . the fourth part of the brahma-vaivarta is called kṛṣṇa-janma-khanda . chapter 129 is called golokarohanam , because it describes how krishna returns to his abode . this specific dialogue is between krishna and mother ganga . verse 49 is a question by ganga , verses 50–60 are krishna 's answer . this text is taken from the brahma-vaivarta purana 14 text 59 : the above is supported in 4.90.32–33 : . personification . kali is the reigning lord of kali yuga and his nemesis is kalki , the tenth and final dashavatara . according to the vishnu purana , kali is a negative manifestation working towards the cause of 'the end ' or rather towards eventual rejuvenation of the universe . . in shaivism . some shaivites maintain that the ill effects of kali yuga can only be moderated by the manifestation of shiva himself . shastriji , one of the followers of haidakhan babaji , gave the following narration : '' once parvati asked lord shiva , her husband : '' you have done good work for the people in all ages , but i am afraid for the people in the kali yuga ; how will they safeguard themselves ? '' , then lord shiva told parvati : “ i will appear in the kali yuga and i will create a new state , a new centre of religion - a most important place , where i will live and establish all the gods there . ” the teachings of babaji , 25 december 1981 . shastriji went further to suggest that this promise manifested through the person of haidakhan babaji . '' having some doubt , kartikeya , son of lord shiva , once asked what would happen to man during the kali yuga when there would be so much trouble in the world . the holy utterance of lord shiva was that he would manifest in the kali yuga to uplift the world and liberate those who turn to god . shiva now lives among us in shri babaji , who is doing the services for mankind now from herakhan vishwa mahadham . '' the teachings of babaji . 30 october 1982 . one of the central tenets of haidakhan babaji 's teachings is the message of karma yoga or hard work . in the context of kali yuga haidakhan babaji explained : '' as i have told you before , the thing needed in this age is work ( karma ) . in every age people have reached salvation through different types of action and sadhana ( spiritual discipline ) , but in this age one can reach liberation only through hard work . i want real , practical human beings and only he is a true human being who lives in accordance with this age . we need not consider religion or caste , but look only to hard work . '' the teachings of babaji . 21 march 1983 . . in sikhism . in sikhism , kali yuga is metaphorically used to describe the state of the world as was commonly understood in the 16th century . it is stressed that one should meditate as much as possible to reach the state of mukti and be liberated or be one with god . guru granth sahib on ang:1185 says : . other usage . the kali yuga is an important concept in both theosophy and anthroposophy , and in the writings of helena blavatsky , w.q . judge , rudolf steiner , and traditionalist philosophers such as rené guénon and julius evola , among others . rudolf steiner believed that the kali yuga ended in 1900 . . see also . hindu eschatology hindu units of time kalpa ( day of brahma ) manvantara ( age of manu ) pralaya ( period of dissolution ) yuga cycle ( four yuga ages ) : satya yuga , treta , dvapara , and kali itihasa hindu tradition list of numbers in hindu scriptures vedic-puranic chronology . references . further reading . glass , marty yuga : an anatomy of our fate ( hillsdale , ny : sophia perennis , 2004 ) guénon , rené the crisis of the modern world , translated by arthur osborne , marco pallis and richard c . nicholson ( hillsdale , ny : sophia perennis , 2004 ) martin lings the eleventh hour : the spiritual crisis of the modern world in the light of tradition and prophecy ( cambridge , uk : archetype , 2002 ) sotillos , samuel bendeck '' new age or the kali-yuga ? '' ahp perspective , april/may 2013 , pp . & nbsp ; 15–21 . upton , charles legends of the end : prophecies of the end times , antichrist , apocalypse , and messiah from eight religious traditions ( hillsdale , ny : sophia perennis , 2005 ) . external links .