Javier Bardem

early life . bardem was born in las palmas de gran canaria , in the canary islands , spain . his mother , pilar bardem ( born maría del pilar bardem muñoz ) , is an actress , and his father , josé carlos encinas doussinague ( 1931–1995 ) , was the son of a cattle rancher . according to pilar 's memoirs , josé had a '' capricious and violent will '' who shot up the front door . he changed jobs more than 10 times , leading to evictions and the children going hungry . the two separated shortly after javier 's birth , and his mother raised him and his elder siblings , carlos and mónica , alone . ( another sibling died shortly after birth . ) his father died of leukemia in 1995 . bardem comes from a long line of filmmakers and actors dating back to the earliest days of spanish cinema ; he is a grandson of actors rafael bardem and matilde muñoz sampedro , and a nephew of screenwriter and director juan antonio bardem . both siblings are actors . he also comes from a political background , as his uncle juan antonio was imprisoned by franco for his anti-fascist films . bardem was brought up in the roman catholic faith by his grandmother . as a child , he spent time at theatres and on film sets . at age six , he made his first film appearance , in fernando fernán gómez 's el pícaro ( the scoundrel ) . he also played rugby for the junior spanish national team . though he grew up in a family full of actors , bardem did not see himself going into the family business . actually , painting was his first love . he went on to study painting for four years at madrid 's escuela de artes y oficios . in need of money he took acting jobs to support his painting , but he also says he was a bad painter and eventually abandoned that career pursuit . in 1989 , for the spanish comedy show el día por delante ( the day ahead ) , he had to wear a superman costume for a comedic sketch , a job that made him question whether he wanted to be an actor at all . bardem has confessed to having worked as a stripper ( for one day only ) during his struggling acting career . . career . bardem came to notice in a small role in his first major motion picture , the ages of lulu , when he was 21 , in which he appeared along with his mother , pilar bardem . bigas luna , the director of lulu , was sufficiently impressed to give him the leading male role in his next film , jamón jamón in 1992 , in which bardem played a would-be underwear model and bullfighter . the film , which also starred a teenaged penélope cruz , was a major international success . he then starred again in luna 's next film golden balls ( 1993 ) . bardem 's talent did not go unnoticed in the english-speaking world . in 1997 , john malkovich was the first to approach him , then a 27-year-old , for a role in english , but the spanish actor turned down the offer because his english was still poor . his first english-speaking role came that same year , in with director álex de la iglesia 's perdita durango , playing a santería-practicing bank robber . after starring in about two dozen films in his native country , he gained international recognition in julian schnabel 's before night falls in 2000 , portraying cuban poet reinaldo arenas . he received praise from his idol al pacino ; the message pacino left on bardem 's answering machine was something he considers one of the most beautiful gifts he has ever received . for that role , he received a nomination for the academy award for best actor , the first for a spaniard . immediately after , he turned down the role of danny witwer in minority report which eventually went to colin farrell . instead , in 2002 , bardem starred in malkovich 's directorial debut , the dancer upstairs . malkovich originally had bardem in mind for the role of the detective 's assistant , but the movie 's time trying to find financing gave bardem time to learn english and take on the lead role of the detective . '' i will always be grateful to him because he really gave me my very first chance to work in english '' , bardem has said of malkovich . bardem won best actor at the venice film festival for his role in mar adentro ( 2004 ) , released in the united states as the sea inside , in which he portrayed the quadriplegic turned assisted suicide activist ramón sampedro . he made his hollywood debut in a brief appearance as a crime lord who summons tom cruise 's hitman to do the dirty work of dispatching witnesses in the crime drama collateral . he stars in miloš forman 's 2006 film goya 's ghosts opposite natalie portman , where he plays a twisted monk during the spanish inquisition . in 2007 , bardem acted in two film adaptations : the coen brothers ' no country for old men , and the adaptation of the colombian novel love in the time of cholera with giovanna mezzogiorno by gabriel garcía márquez . in no country for old men , he played a sociopathic assassin , anton chigurh . for that role , he became the first spaniard to win an academy award for best supporting actor . he also won a golden globe award and screen actors guild awards for best supporting actor , the critics ' choice award for best supporting actor , and the 2008 british academy of film and television arts for best supporting actor . bardem 's rendition of chigurh 's trademark word , '' what business is it of yours where i 'm from , friendo ? '' ( in response to the convenience store owner 's query , '' ya 'll gettin ' any rain up your way ? '' ) , was named top hollywordie of 2007 in the annual survey by the global language monitor . chigurh was named no . 26 in entertainment weekly magazine 's 2008 '' 50 most vile villains in movie history '' list . 50 most vile movie villains part 2 , entertainment weekly . retrieved 26 may 2008 . bardem 's life 's work was honored at the 2007 gotham awards , produced by independent feature project . francis ford coppola singled out bardem as an heir to , and even improvement on , al pacino , jack nicholson and robert de niro , referring to bardem as ambitious , hungry , unwilling to rest on his laurels and always '' excited to do something good . '' bardem was attached to play the role of tetro 's mentor in coppola 's film tetro , but the director felt the character should be female , so he was replaced by fellow spaniard carmen maura . bardem was originally cast to play fictional filmmaker guido contini in the film adaptation of the broadway musical nine , but dropped out due to exhaustion . the part eventually went to daniel day-lewis . broadwayworld.com '' daniel day-lewis signed for nine film ; rehearsals to start in july ; shooting september '' 2008-6-1 . retrieved 16 february 2009 . he went on to star alongside penélope cruz and scarlett johansson in woody allen 's vicky cristina barcelona ( 2008 ) . in 2010 , he was awarded best actor at the cannes film festival for his performance in biutiful directed by alejandro gonzález iñárritu , who specifically wrote the film with bardem in mind . after being overlooked by the globes and sag , bardem was the unexpected oscar nominee on 25 january 2011 , becoming the first all spanish-language best actor nominee ever . he won his 5th goya award , this time for best actor in biutiful , dedicating the win to his wife , penélope cruz , and newborn son . around this same time he was offered the lead role of '' gunslinger '' roland deschain in ron howard 's adaptation of stephen king 's dark tower novels . if he had signed , he would have starred in the tv series as well . then eon productions offered him a role as villain raoul silva in the james bond film , skyfall . . with universal deciding not to go forward with the ultra-ambitious adaptation of the stephen king 7-novel series , and to end months of speculation , bardem officially confirmed his role in skyfall during an interview with christiane amanpour for abc 's nightline . bardem received the 2,484th star of the hollywood walk of fame on 8 november 2012 . the star is located outside the el capitan theatre . with his movie sons of the clouds : the last colony ( 2012 ) , he demonstrated the suffering of the sahrawi people in refugee camps . he publicly denounced the un as unwilling to definitively resolve the human crisis there . bardem portrayed the main antagonist , armando salazar , in 2017 's pirates of the caribbean : dead men tell no tales , the fifth film in the series . in september 2017 , bardem starred with jennifer lawrence , michelle pfeiffer , and ed harris in the horror film mother ! from director darren aronofsky , which focuses on a couple whose lives are disrupted by the arrival of unexpected guests . in 2018 , bardem appeared on screen together with his spouse penélope cruz in asghar farhadi new feature film everybody knows . bardem was set to play frankenstein 's monster in the 2019 remake of the bride of frankenstein , directed by bill condon . in february 2019 , bardem was cast as stilgar in the upcoming denis villeneuve film dune . he is set to play king triton in disney 's disney remakes , the little mermaid . in january 2021 , bardem and nicole kidman entered negotiations to star in amazon studios and aaron sorkin 's being the ricardos , where they will play desi arnez and lucille ball . . personal life . bardem 's native language is spanish and he is also fluent in english . he is a fan of heavy metal music , and credits the band ac/dc for helping him learn to speak english , in some respects . bardem prefers not to drive , only getting behind the wheel for film roles , and he consistently refers to himself as a '' worker '' , and not an actor . although bardem was raised as a catholic , he is now agnostic . following the legalization of same-sex marriage in spain in 2005 , bardem stated that if he were gay , he would get married '' right away tomorrow , just to fuck with the church '' ( mañana mismo , sólo para joder a la iglesia ) . he has later said that while he does not believe strongly in the supernatural , he does not deny it . '' we are just this little tiny spot in the whole universe , so of course there must be other things , other people , other creatures , other lives and other dimensions . sure , i believe in it '' . in the same interview , bardem stated that he thinks science and belief '' should go together '' . '' pirates of the caribbean 5 '' – '' salazars rache '' – interview : javier bardem youtube , 18 april 2017 . retrieved 24 june 2017 despite the villainous characters he has played throughout his acting career , bardem has a self-confessed “ hatred ” of violence which stems from a fight in a nightclub in his early twenties which left him with a broken nose . in may 2011 bardem teamed up with the enough project 's co-founder john prendergast to raise awareness about conflict minerals in eastern congo . in 2007 , bardem began dating penélope cruz , his co-star in vicky cristina barcelona . bardem and cruz have maintained a low public profile , refusing to discuss their personal lives . the couple married in july 2010 in the bahamas . they have two children : a son , named leo encinas cruz , born on 23 january 2011 , ; . webcitation archive ; in los angeles ; and a daughter , named luna encinas cruz , born on 22 july 2013 , in madrid . during the 2014 israel–gaza conflict , bardem and cruz signed an open letter denouncing israel 's actions as a genocide . in september 2018 , at the toronto film festival premiere of everybody knows , javier bardem told ikon london magazine about acting together with his spouse : '' i find it very easy . in a sense that we play what we are supposed to play and then we go back to our daily life which is way more interesting than any fiction . and it is real . '' in july 2019 , bardem signed a manifesto promoting psoe and podemos parties to reach an agreement to form government after the april 2019 elections in spain . in madrid , in november 2019 during march for climate , bardem gave a speech on stage where he called both the mayor of madrid josé luis martínez-almeida , and the us president , stupid . he later apologized , declaring that the insult illegitimates any speech and conversation . . filmography . awards .