Reactionary

history and usage . the french revolution gave the english language three politically descriptive words denoting anti-progressive politics : '' reactionary '' , '' conservative '' and '' right '' . '' reactionary '' derives from the french word réactionnaire ( a late 18th century coinage based on the word réaction , '' reaction '' ) and '' conservatism '' from conservateur , identifying monarchist parliamentarians opposed to the revolution . the governments of europe , frederic austin ogg , rev . ed . , the macmillan co . , 1922 , p . 485 . in this french usage , reactionary denotes '' a movement towards the reversal of an existing tendency or state '' and a '' return to a previous condition of affairs '' . the oxford english dictionary cites the first english language usage in 1799 in a translation of lazare carnot 's letter on the coup of 18 fructidor . during the french revolution , conservative forces ( especially within the catholic church ) organized opposition to the progressive sociopolitical and economic changes brought by the revolution ; and they fought to restore the temporal authority of the church and crown . in 19th century european politics , the reactionary class included the catholic church 's hierarchy and the aristocracy , royal family , and royalists . they believed that national government was the sole domain of the church and the state . in france , supporters of traditional rule by direct heirs of the house of bourbon dynasty were labelled the legitimist reaction . in the third republic , the monarchists were the reactionary faction , later renamed conservative . in the 19th century , reactionary denoted people who idealized feudalism and the pre-modern era—before the industrial revolution and the french revolution—when economies were mostly agrarian , a landed aristocracy dominated society , a hereditary king ruled and the catholic church was society 's moral centre . those labelled as '' reactionary '' favoured the aristocracy instead of the middle class and the working class . reactionaries opposed democracy and parliamentarism . thermidorian reaction . the thermidorian reaction was a movement within the french revolution against perceived excesses of the jacobins . on 27 july 1794 ( 9 thermidor year ii in the french republican calendar ) , maximilien robespierre 's reign of terror was brought to an end . the overthrow of robespierre signalled the reassertion of the french national convention over the committee of public safety . the jacobins were suppressed , the prisons were emptied and the committee was shorn of its powers . after the execution of some 104 robespierre supporters , the thermidorian reaction stopped the use of the guillotine against alleged counterrevolutionaries , set a middle course between the monarchists and the radicals and ushered in a time of relative exuberance and its accompanying corruption . restoration of the french monarchy . with the congress of vienna , inspired by tsar alexander i of russia , the monarchs of russia , prussia and austria formed the holy alliance , a form of collective security against revolution and bonapartism . this instance of reaction was surpassed by a movement that developed in france when , after the second fall of napoleon , the bourbon restoration or reinstatement of the bourbon dynasty , ensued . this time it was to be a constitutional monarchy , with an elected lower house of parliament , the chamber of deputies . the franchise was restricted to men over the age of forty , which indicated that for the first fifteen years of their lives they had lived under the ancien régime . nevertheless , king louis xviii was worried that he would still suffer an intractable parliament . he was delighted with the ultra-royalists , or ultras , whom the election returned , declaring that he had found a chambre introuvable , literally , an '' unfindable house '' . it was the declaration of saint-ouen that prepared the way for the restoration . before the french revolution , which radically and bloodily overthrew most aspects of french society 's organisation , the only way constitutional change could be instituted was by extracting it from old legal documents that could be interpreted as agreeing with the proposal . everything new had to be expressed as a righteous revival of something old that had lapsed and had been forgotten . this was also the means used for diminished aristocrats to get themselves a bigger piece of the pie . in the 18th century , those gentry whose fortunes and prestige had diminished to the level of peasants would search diligently for every ancient feudal statute that might give them something . the '' ban , '' for example , meant that all peasants had to grind their grain in their lord 's mill . therefore , these gentry came to the french states-general of 1789 fully prepared to press for the expansion of such practices in all provinces , to the legal limit . they were horrified when , for example , the french revolution permitted common citizens to go hunting , one of the few perquisites that they had always enjoyed everywhere . thus with the bourbons restoration , the chambre introuvable set about reverting every law to return society to conditions prior the absolute monarchy of louis xiv , when the power of the second estate was at its zenith . it is this which clearly distinguishes a '' reactionary '' from a '' conservative . '' the conservative would have accepted many improvements brought about by the revolution , and simply refused a program of wholesale reversion . use of the word '' reactionary '' in later days as a political slur is thus often rhetorical , since there is nothing directly comparable with the chambre introuvable in the history of other countries . clerical philosophers . in the revolution 's aftermath , france was continually wracked with the quarrels between the right-wing legitimists and left-wing revolutionaries . herein arose the clerical philosophers—joseph de maistre , louis de bonald , françois-rené de chateaubriand—whose answer was restoring the house of bourbon and reinstalling the catholic church as the established church . since then , france 's political spectrum has featured similar divisions . ( see action française ) . the ideas of the clerical philosophers were buttressed by the teachings of the 19th century popes . metternich and containment . during the period of 1815-1848 , prince metternich , the foreign minister of the austrian empire , stepped in to organise cordon sanitaire ( politics ) through international alliances meant to prevent the spread of revolutionary fervour . at the congress of vienna , he was very influential in establishing the new order , the concert of europe , after the defeat of napoleon . after the congress , prince metternich worked hard bolstering and stabilising the conservative regime of the restoration period . he worked furiously to prevent russia 's tsar alexander i ( who aided the liberal forces in germany , italy and france ) from gaining influence in europe . the church was his principal ally , promoting it as a conservative principle of order while opposing nationalist and liberal tendencies within the church . his basic philosophy was based on edmund burke , who championed the need for old roots and an orderly development of society . he opposed democracy and parliamentary institutions but favoured modernising existing structures by gradual reform . despite metternich 's efforts a series of 1848 revolutions . 20th century . in the 20th century , proponents of socialism and communism used the term reactionary polemically to label their enemies , such as the white armies , who fought in the russian civil war against the bolsheviks after the october revolution . in marxism terminology , reactionary is a pejorative adjective denoting people whose ideas might appear to be socialist , but , in their opinion , contain elements of feudalism , capitalism , nationalism , fascism or other characteristics of the ruling class , including usage between conflicting factions of marxist movements . non-socialists did also use the label reactionary , with british diplomat sir john jordan nicknaming the chinese royalist party the '' reactionary party '' for supporting the qing dynasty and opposing republicanism during the xinhai revolution in 1912 . reactionary is also used to denote supporters of authoritarian anti-communism régimes such as vichy france , spain under franco , and portugal under salazar . one example of this took place after boris pasternak was awarded the nobel prize for literature . on 26 october 1958 , the day following the nobel committee 's announcement , moscow 's literary gazette ran a polemical article by david zaslavski entitled , reactionary propaganda uproar over a literary weed . olga ivinskaya , a captive of time : my years with pasternak , doubleday , 1978 . page 224 . reactionary feelings were often coupled with a hostility to modern , industrial means of production and a nostalgia for a more rural society . the vichy regime in france , franco 's regime , the salazar regime in portugal and maurras 's action française political movements are examples of such traditional reactionary feelings , in favour of authoritarian regimes with strong unelected leaders and with catholicism as a state religion . the motto of vichy france was '' travail , famille , patrie '' ( '' work , family , homeland '' ) , and its leader , marshal philippe pétain , declared that '' la terre , elle ne ment pas '' ( '' the earth , it does not lie '' ) in an indication of his belief that the truest life is rural and agrarian . the italian fascism showed a desire to bring about a new social order based on the ancient feudal principle of delegation ( though without serfdom ) in their enthusiasm for the corporate state . benito mussolini said that '' fascism is reaction '' and that '' fascism , which did not fear to call itself reactionary . has not today any impediment against declaring itself illiberal and anti-liberal . '' gerarchia , march , 1923 quoted in george seldes , facts and fascism , eighth edition , new york : in fact , 1943 , p . 277 . however , giovanni gentile and mussolini also attacked certain reactionary policies , particularly monarchism and—more veiled—some aspects of italian conservative catholicism . they wrote , '' history does n't travel backwards . the fascist doctrine has not taken de maistre as its prophet . monarchical absolutism is of the past , and so is ecclesiolatry . '' they further elaborated in the political doctrine that fascism '' is not reactionary in the old way but revolutionary . '' conversely , they also explained that fascism was of the right , not of the left . fascism was certainly not simply a return to tradition as it carried the centralised state beyond even what had been seen in absolute monarchy . fascist one-party states were as centralised as most communist states , and fascism 's intense nationalism was not found in the period prior to the french revolution . although the nazism did not publicly consider themselves fascists or reactionaries , and at least on the surface condemned the traditional german forces of reaction ( prussian monarchists , junker , roman catholic clergy ) as being among their enemies , next to their red front enemies in the nazi party march die fahne hoch , in practice the nazis supported these factions and virulently opposed revolutionary leftism . the fact that the nazis called their 1933 rise to power the national revolution did show that like the italian fascists they supported some form of revolution , however the nazis idealised tradition , folklore , and the tenets of classical thought and leadership ( as exemplified by frederick the great ) . however they did also reject the weimar republic under the weimar constitution , which had succeeded the monarchy in 1918 , despite it also being capitalist/classical in nature . although claiming to be separate from reactionism , the nazis rejection of weimar was based on ostensibly reactionary principles , as the nazis claimed that the parliamentary system was simply the first step towards bolshevism , and instead idealized more reactionary parts of germany ’ s past . they referred to the german reich informally as the nazi germany ( '' third realm '' ) , a reference to past reactionary german entities : the holy roman empire ( '' first realm '' ) and the german empire ( '' second realm '' ) . ( see also reactionary modernism . ) clericalism movements , sometimes labelled as clerical fascism by their critics , can be considered reactionaries in terms of the 19th century , since they share some elements of fascism , while at the same time promote a return to the pre-revolutionary model of social relations , with a strong role for the church . their utmost philosopher was nicolás gómez dávila . political scientist corey robin argues that modern american conservatism is fundamentally reactionary in his book the reactionary mind : conservatism from edmund burke to sarah palin . . 21st century . '' neo-reactionary '' is a term applied to , and sometimes a self-description of , an informal group of online political theorists who have been active since the 2000s . the phrase '' neo-reactionary '' was coined by '' mencius moldbug '' ( the pseudonym of curtis yarvin , a computer programmer ) in 2008 . ( george orwell used it in a different context in 1943 – arnold kling used it in 2010 to describe '' moldbug '' and the subculture quickly adopted it . proponents of the '' neo-reactionary '' movement ( also called the '' dark enlightenment '' movement ) include philosopher nick land , among others .