Japanese people

language . the japanese language is a japonic language that is related to the ryukyuan languages and was treated as a language isolate in the past . the earliest attested form of the language , old japanese , dates to the 8th century . japanese phonology is characterized by a relatively small number of vowels , frequent gemination and a distinctive pitch accent system . the modern japanese language has a tripartite writing system using hiragana , katakana and kanji . the language includes native japanese words and a large number of sino-japanese vocabulary . in japan the adult literacy rate in the japanese language exceeds 99 % . dozens of japanese dialects are spoken in regions of japan . religion . japanese religion has traditionally been syncretic in nature , combining elements of buddhism and shinto ( shinbutsu-shūgō ) . shinto , a polytheistic religion with no book of religious canon , is japan 's native religion . shinto was one of the traditional grounds for the right to the throne of the japanese imperial family and was codified as the state religion in 1868 ( state shinto ) , but was abolished by the occupation of japan in 1945 . mahayana came to japan in the sixth century and evolved into many different sects . today , the largest form of buddhism among japanese people is the jōdo shinshū sect founded by shinran . a large majority of japanese people profess to believe in both shinto and buddhism . japanese people 's religion functions mostly as a foundation for mythology , traditions and neighborhood activities , rather than as the single source of moral guidelines for one 's life . according to the annual statistical research on religion in 2018 by the agency for culture affairs , government of japan , about two million or slightly 1.5 % of japan 's population are christians . a larger proportion of members of the japanese diaspora practice christianity ; about 60 % of japanese brazilians and 90 % of japanese mexicans are catholic church , while about 37 % of japanese americans are christians ( 33 % protestant and 4 % catholic ) . . literature . certain genres of writing originated in and are often associated with japanese society . these include the haiku , tanka , and i novel , although modern writers generally avoid these writing styles . historically , many works have sought to capture or codify traditional japanese cultural values and aesthetics . some of the most famous of these include murasaki shikibu 's the tale of genji ( 1021 ) , about heian court culture ; miyamoto musashi 's the book of five rings ( 1645 ) , concerning military strategy ; matsuo bashō 's oku no hosomichi ( 1691 ) , a travelogue ; and jun'ichirō tanizaki 's essay '' in praise of shadows '' ( 1933 ) , which contrasts eastern and western cultures . following the black ships to the west in 1854 , some works of this style were written in english by natives of japan ; they include bushido : the soul of japan by nitobe inazō ( 1900 ) , concerning samurai ethics , and the book of tea by okakura kakuzō ( 1906 ) , which deals with the philosophical implications of the japanese tea ceremony . western observers have often attempted to evaluate japanese society as well , to varying degrees of success ; one of the most well-known and controversial works resulting from this is ruth benedict 's the chrysanthemum and the sword ( 1946 ) . twentieth-century japanese writers recorded changes in japanese society through their works . some of the most notable authors included natsume sōseki , jun'ichirō tanizaki , osamu dazai , fumiko enchi , akiko yosano , yukio mishima , and ryōtarō shiba . popular contemporary authors such as ryū murakami , haruki murakami , and banana yoshimoto have been translated into many languages and enjoy international followings , and yasunari kawabata and kenzaburō ōe were awarded the nobel prize in literature . arts . decorative arts in japan date back to prehistoric times . jōmon pottery includes examples with elaborate ornamentation . in the yayoi period , artisans produced mirrors , spears , and ceremonial bells known as dōtaku . later burial mounds , or kofun , preserve characteristic clay haniwa , as well as wall paintings . beginning in the nara period , painting , calligraphy , and sculpture flourished under strong confucian and buddhist influences from china . among the architectural achievements of this period are the hōryū-ji and the yakushi-ji , two buddhism temples in nara prefecture . after the cessation of official relations with the tang dynasty in the ninth century , japanese art and architecture gradually became less influenced by china . extravagant art and clothing was commissioned by nobles to decorate their court , and although the aristocracy was quite limited in size and power , many of these pieces are still extant . after the tōdai-ji was attacked and burned during the genpei war , a special office of restoration was founded , and the tōdai-ji became an important artistic center . the leading masters of the time were unkei and kaikei . painting advanced in the muromachi period in the form of ink wash painting under the influence of zen buddhism as practiced by such masters as sesshū tōyō . zen buddhist tenets were also elaborated into the tea ceremony during the sengoku period . during the edo period , the polychrome painting screens of the kanō school were made influential thanks to their powerful patrons ( including the tokugawas ) . popular artists created ukiyo-e , woodblock prints for sale to commoners in the flourishing cities . pottery such as imari ware was highly valued as far away as europe . in theater , noh is a traditional , spare dramatic form that developed in tandem with kyōgen farce . in stark contrast to the restrained refinement of noh , kabuki , an '' explosion of color '' , uses every possible stage trick for dramatic effect . plays include sensational events such as suicides , and many such works were performed in both kabuki and bunraku puppet theaters . since the meiji restoration , japan has absorbed elements of western culture and has given them a '' japanese '' feel or modification into it . its modern decorative , practical and performing arts works span a spectrum ranging from the traditions of japan to purely western modes . products of popular culture , including j-pop , j-rock , manga and anime have found audiences and fans around the world . history . theories of origins . archeology evidence indicates that stone age people lived in the japanese archipelago during the paleolithic period between 39,000 and 21,000 years ago . global archaeological evidence for proboscidean overkill in pnas online ; page 3 ( page no.6233 ) , table 1 . the known global sample of proboscidean kill/scavenge sites : lake nojiri japan 33-39 ka ( ka : thousand years ) . japan was then connected to mainland asia by at least one land bridge , and nomadic hunter-gatherers crossed to japan . flint tools and bony implements of this era have been excavated in japan . in the 18th century , arai hakuseki suggested that the ancient stone tools in japan were left behind by the mishihase . later , philipp franz von siebold argued that the ainu people were indigenous to northern japan . iha fuyū suggested that japanese and ryukyuan people have the same ethnic origin , based on his 1906 research on the ryukyuan languages . in the taishō period , torii ryūzō claimed that yamato people used yayoi pottery and ainu used jōmon pottery . after world war ii , kotondo hasebe and hisashi suzuki claimed that the origin of japanese people was not newcomers in the yayoi period ( 300 bce – 300 ce ) but the people in the jōmon period . however , kazuro hanihara announced a new racial admixture theory in 1984 and a '' dual structure model '' in 1991 . according to hanihara , modern japanese lineages began with jōmon people , who moved into the japanese archipelago during paleolithic times , followed by a second wave of immigration , from east asia to japan during the yayoi period ( 300 bc ) . following a population expansion in neolithic times , these newcomers then found their way to the japanese archipelago sometime during the yayoi period . as a result , replacement of the hunter gatherers was common in the island regions of kyūshū , shikoku , and southern honshū , but did not prevail in the outlying islands of okinawa and hokkaidō , and the ryukyuan and ainu people show mixed characteristics . mark j . hudson claims that the main ethnic image of japanese people was biologically and linguistically formed from 400 bce to 1,200 ce . currently , the most well-regarded theory is that present-day japanese people formed from both the yayoi rice-agriculturalists and the various jōmon period ethnicities . a study by lee and hasegawa of the waseda university , concluded that the '' dual structure theory '' regarding the population history of japan must be revised and that the jōmon people had more ethnic diversity than originally suggested . . jōmon period . some of the world 's oldest known pottery pieces were developed by the jōmon people in the upper paleolithic period , dating back as far as 16,000 years . the name '' jōmon '' ( 縄文 jōmon ) means '' cord-impressed pattern '' , and comes from the characteristic markings found on the pottery . the jōmon people were mesolithic hunter-gatherers , though at least one middle to late jōmon site , ca . 1200–1000 bc ) had a primitive rice-growing agriculture . they relied primarily on fish for protein . the ethnic roots of the jōmon period population are heterogeneous and can be traced back partially to the tibetan plateau , siberia and southeast asia ( taiwan ) respectively . a study , published in the cambridge university press in 2020 , suggests that the jōmon people were rather heterogeneous , and that there was also an pre-yayoi migration during the jōmon period , which may be linked to the arrival of the japonic languages , meaning that japonic is one of the jōmon languages . this migration is suggested to have happend before 6000bc , thus before the actual yayoi migration . another study by lee and hasegawa of the waseda university , similarly concluded that the jōmon period population was heterogeneous and consisted of several distinct ethno-linguistic groups . they also presented evidence that the ainu language originated from a northeast asian/okhotsk population , which established themselves in northern hokkaido and southern sakhalin and expanded from their into all of hokkaido , the kurils and likely parts of northern honshu . . yayoi period . beginning around 300 bc , the yayoi people from the korean peninsula entered the japanese islands and displaced or intermingled with the jōmon . the yayoi brought paddy field and advanced bronze and iron technology to japan . the more productive paddy field systems allowed the communities to support larger populations and spread over time , in turn becoming the basis for more advanced institutions and heralding the new civilization of the succeeding kofun period . the estimated population of japan in the late jōmon period was about one hundred thousand , compared to about three million by the nara period . taking the growth rates of hunting and agricultural societies into account , it is calculated that about one and half million immigrants moved to japan in the period . according to ann kumar , the yayoi created the '' japanese-hierarchical society '' . . colonialism . during the empire of japan of 1895 to 1945 , the phrase '' japanese people '' was used to refer not only to residents of the japanese archipelago , but also to people from colonies who held japanese citizenship , such as taiwanese people and koreans . the official term used to refer to ethnic japanese during this period was . such linguistic distinctions facilitated forced assimilation of colonized ethnic identities into a single imperial japanese identity . after the end of world war ii , many nivkh people and orok people from southern sakhalin , who held japanese citizenship in karafuto prefecture , were forced to repatriate to hokkaidō by the soviet union as a part of the japanese people . on the other hand , many sakhalin koreans who had held japanese citizenship until the end of the war were left stateless by the soviet occupation . . citizenship . article 10 of the constitution of japan defines the term '' japanese '' based upon japanese nationality . 日本国憲法 the concept of '' ethnic groups '' in japanese census statistics differs from the concept applied in many other countries . for example , the united kingdom census queries the respondent 's '' ethnic or racial background '' , regardless of nationality . the japanese statistics bureau , however , asks only about nationality in the census . the government of japan regards all naturalized japanese citizens and native-born japanese nationals with multi-ethnic background as japanese . there is no distinction based on ethnicity . there 's no official ethnicity census data . because the census equates nationality with ethnicity , its figures erroneously assume that naturalized japanese citizens and japanese nationals with multi-ethnic backgrounds are ethnically japanese . john lie , eiji oguma , and other scholars problematize the widespread belief that japan is ethnically homogeneous , arguing that it is more accurate to describe japan as a multiethnic society , john lie multiethnic japan ( cambridge , massachusetts : harvard university press , 2001 ) oguma eiji , a genealogy of 'japanese ' self-images ( melbourne : trans pacific press , 2002 ) although such claims have long been rejected by conservative elements of japanese society such as former japanese prime minister tarō asō , who once described japan as being a nation of '' one race , one civilization , one language and one culture '' . '' aso says japan is nation of 'one race ' '' . the japan times . october 18 , 2005 . there is an increase of hāfu ( half japanese ) people , but the amount is relatively small . studies from e.g . 2015 estimate that 1 in 30 children born in japan are born to interracial couples . . diaspora . the term is used to refer to japanese people who emigrated from japan and their descendants . emigration from japan was recorded as early as the 15th century to the philippines and borneo , and in the 16th and 17th centuries , thousands of traders from japan also migrated to the philippines and assimilated into the local population . however , migration of japanese people did not become a mass phenomenon until the meiji era , when japanese people began to go to canada , the united states , the philippines , china , brazil , and peru . there was also significant emigration to the territories of the empire of japan during the colonial period , but most of these emigrants and settlers repatriated to japan after the end of world war ii in asia . according to the association of nikkei and japanese abroad , there are about 2.5 million nikkeijin living in their adopted countries . the largest of these foreign communities are in the brazilian states of são paulo and paraná . ibge . resistência e integração : 100 anos de imigração japonesa no brasil apud made in japan . ibge traça o perfil dos imigrantes ; 21 de junho de 2008 accessed september 4 , 2008 . there are also significant cohesive japanese communities in the philippines , east malaysia , peru , buenos aires , córdoba and misiones in argentina , the u.s . states of hawaii , california , and washington , and the canada cities of vancouver and toronto . separately , the number of japanese citizens living abroad is over one million according to the ministry of foreign affairs . see also . ethnic groups of japan ethnic issues in japan foreign-born japanese japantown list of japanese people nihonjinron demographics of japan ainu people burakumin dekasegi ryukyuan people yamato people , the dominant majority hāfu , half japanese people azumi people , an ancient group of peoples who inhabited parts of northern kyushu emishi , a group of people who lived in the northeastern tōhoku region of japan kuzu , an ancient people of japan believed to have lived along the yoshino river . references . external links . cia the world fact book 2006 the association of nikkei & japanese abroad discover nikkei- information on japanese emigrants and their descendants jun-nissei literature and culture in brazil the ministry of foreign affairs of japan the national museum of japanese history japanese society and culture dekasegi and their issues living in japan ( japanese/portuguese )