John Curtin

homefront policies . curtin made very heavy use of newspapers and broadcast media , especially through press conferences , speeches , and newsreels . australians gained a sense it was a people 's war in which they were full participants . in terms of social policy , the curtin government enacted a wide range of progressive social reforms during its time in office . pensions were introduced for deserted wives and widows , while the establishment of the women 's employment board led to increased wages for some women during the war . aboriginal australians were provided with significantly increased entitlement to welfare benefits , while maternity allowances were extended . in addition , pensions for the elderly and infirm were increased . in 1942 , temporary public employees became eligible to apply to join the commonwealth superannuation scheme if they had been employed for no less than five years and were certified as having indefinite future employment , while the commonwealth employees ' furlough act of 1943 provided long service leave for all temporary commonwealth employees . in 1943 , the universities commission was established to exempt students from war service to undertake or continue university studies and to assist those students by exempting them from fees and , subject to a means test , by providing them with living allowances . '' asiatics '' who were subjects of australia became eligible for a pension in 1941 , and eligibility was extended the following year to pacific islanders known as '' kanakas '' , and from that july that year '' aboriginal natives '' of australia became eligible for pensions if they were not subject to a state law '' relating to the control of aboriginal natives '' or if they lived in a state where they could not be exempt from such laws but were of eligible for pension on the grounds of '' character , standard of intelligence and development '' . that same year , pension became exempt from income tax . in 1943 , funeral benefits were introduced , together with a wife 's allowance for wives of incapacitated age pensioners '' where she lived with him , was his legal wife and did not receive a pension in her own right '' . from june 1942 , widows ' pension class b was paid to widows without dependent children who were aged 50 and over . the term '' widow '' included de facto widows who had lived with the deceased spouse for at least three years prior to his death and had been maintained by him . eligibility was also extended to deserted de jure wives who had been deserted for at least six months , divorced women who had not remarried and women whose husbands were in hospitals for those considered to be insane . from july that year , widows ' pension class b ( wpb ) was exempted from income tax . in 1942 , eligibility for maternity allowances was extended to aboriginal women who were exempted from state laws relating to the control of aboriginal natives and who were considered suitable to receive the benefits . from 1943 , the income test for maternity allowances was abolished and the rate of the allowance was increased to 15 pounds where there were no other children under the age of 14 years , 16 pounds where there were one or two other children , and 17 pounds 10 shillings in cases of three or more children . these amounts included an additional allowance of 25 shillings per week in respect of the period four weeks before and four weeks after the birth , to be paid after the birth of the child . that same year , eligibility for child endowment was extended to children in government institutions , to aboriginal children who lived for six months per year on a mission station , and to children who were maintained from a deceased estate . the child 's allowance was introduced in 1943 , payable at the rate of five shillings per week for a first for an unendowed child under 16 years dependent on an invalid or permanently incapacitated old-age pensioner . from july 1945 onwards , additional benefit for children of five shillings per week became payable in respect of the first child to any person qualified to receive unemployment or sickness benefit having the custody , care and control of one or more children under the age of 16 . . 1943 re-election . curtin went into the 1943 election in a very strong position . even allowing for the advantages that an incumbent government has in wartime , fadden and hughes had been unable to get the better of curtin , and the coalition had become almost moribund . in the election , curtin led labor to its greatest-ever victory , winning two-thirds of the seats in the house of representatives on a two-party preferred vote of 58.2 % and a 17-seat swing . the coalition was reduced to only 19 seats nationwide , including only one west of broken hill . fadden 's country party took a particularly severe beating , winning only seven seats . labor also won the primary vote in all states in the senate , and thus all 19 seats , to hold a majority of 22 out of 36 seats . buoyed by this success , curtin called a referendum which would give the government control of the economy and resources for five years after the war was over . the 1944 australian referendum contained one referendum question : '' do you approve of the proposed law for the alteration of the constitution entitled 'constitution alteration ( post-war reconstruction and democratic rights ) 1944 ' ? '' constitution alteration ( post-war reconstruction and democratic rights ) 1944 was known as the 14 powers , or 14 points referendum . it sought to give the government power , over a period of five years , to legislate on monopolies , corporations , trusts , national health , family allowances , freedom of speech , religion , ex-servicemen rehabilitation , the ability to legislate for indigenous australians , and safeguards against the abuse of legislative power . the referendum was defeated , receiving a majority only in western australia and south australia . nationally overall , 54 percent voted against the question in the referendum . death . by 1944 , a time when he was travelling to and from london and washington for meetings with churchill , roosevelt and other allied leaders , curtin had already developed heart disease . he had a heart attack in november 1944 , and did not return to work until january 1945 . with the end of the war in sight , his health began to deteriorate seriously and at a rapid pace . on 5 july 1945 , curtin died at the lodge at the age of 60 . he was the second australian prime minister to die in office within six years . a catholic priest called at the lodge as curtin lay dying , but he was turned away . curtin had refused to so much as set foot inside a catholic church throughout his adult life , not even to attend the weddings of friends . his body was returned to perth on a raaf dakota escorted by a flight of nine fighter aircraft . after lying in state , he was buried at karrakatta cemetery in perth ; the service was attended by over 30,000 at the cemetery with many more lining the streets . curtin was initially succeeded as prime minister by his deputy , frank forde ; seven days later a party ballot installed ben chifley as labor leader and therefore prime minister . many of curtin 's post-war reconstruction plans were implemented by his successor chifley , who in 1946 led the alp to consecutive victories for the first time . curtin 's 9 years and 277 days as leader of the federal alp would remain a record until it was surpassed by gough whitlam in 1976 . . personal life . curtin was introduced to elsie curtin on a visit to tasmania in april 1912 . fred katz , an acquaintance from the victorian socialist party , had taken curtin to visit elsie 's father abraham needham , a candidate in the 1912 tasmanian state election . curtin proposed to her in melbourne in 1915 , and they were married in perth on 21 april 1917 . their first child , a daughter also named elsie , was born at the end of that year . their second child , a son named john , was born in 1921 . . legacy . macarthur said of curtin that '' he was one of the greatest of wartime statesmen , and the preservation of australia from invasion will be his immemorial monument '' . curtin is credited with leading the labor party to its best federal election success in history , with a record 55.1 percent of the primary half-senate vote , winning all seats , and a two party preferred lower house estimate of 58.2 percent at the 1943 election , winning two-thirds of seats . one legacy of curtin was the significant expansion of social services under his leadership . in 1942 , uniform taxation was imposed on the various states , which enabled the curtin government to set up a far-reaching , federally administered range of social services . these included a widows ' pension ( 1942 ) , maternity benefits for indigenous australians ( 1942 ) , funeral benefits ( 1943 ) , a second form of maternity benefit ( 1943 ) , a wife 's allowance ( 1943 ) , additional allowances for the children of pensioners ( 1943 ) , unemployment , sickness and special benefits ( 1945 ) , and pharmaceutical benefits ( 1945 ) . substantial improvements to pensions were made , with invalidity and old-age pensions increased , the qualifying period of residence for age pensions halved , and the means test liberalised . other social security benefits were significantly increased , while child endowment was liberalised , a scheme of vocational training for invalid pensioners was set up , and pensions extended to cover aborigines . the expansion of social security under john curtin was of such significance that , as summed up by one historian : curtin defended the white australia policy in a speech in which he stated : '' this country shall remain forever the home of the descendants of those people who came here in peace in order to establish in the south seas an outpost of the british race . '' the curtin government 's october 1942 enactment of the statute of westminster adoption act 1942 , reversing the stance of four previous governments , marked the moment of australia 's legal independence . this law , along with the constitution of australia and the australia act 1986 , is one of the key components of australia 's modern constitutional framework . his early death and the sentiments it aroused have given curtin a unique place in australian political history . successive labor leaders , particularly bob hawke and kim beazley , have sought to build on the curtin tradition of '' patriotic laborism '' . even some political conservatives pay at least formal homage to the curtin legend . immediately after his death the parliament agreed to pay john curtin 's wife elsie a £1,000 per annum pension until legislation was passed and enacted to pay a pension to a past prime minister or their widow after their death . curtin is commemorated by the division of curtin , the canberra suburb of curtin , curtin university in perth , john curtin college of the arts in fremantle , the john curtin school of medical research in canberra , the john curtin prime ministerial library , curtin springs in the northern territory , john curtin house , the former headquarters of the australian labor party , curtin house in swanston street , melbourne , and many other buildings , roads , parks and structures throughout australia . in 1975 curtin was honoured on a postage stamp bearing his portrait issued by australia post . on 14 august 2005 , the 60th anniversary of v-p day , a bronze statue of curtin in front of fremantle town hall was unveiled by premier of western australia geoff gallop . . in popular culture . john curtin appears in the paradox interactive game hearts of iron iv as the default leader of australia ( although the game starts in 1936 and curtin did not take up the office of prime minister in real life until 1941 ) . depending on the player 's choices ( or randomly if historical focuses are not selected ) , john curtin can stay in power throughout the campaign , or be removed by boosting popularity in non-democratic parties . john curtin appears as the leader of the australian civilization in firaxis games title civilization vi . his unique ability is to boost australia 's production by 100 % if in the past 20 turns ( 10 if the player has the gathering storm expansion ) , australia has either liberated a city , or has been declared war on by another player . michael blakemore portrayed curtin in the television mini-series the last bastion ( 1984 ) . terence donovan portrayed curtin in the film death of a soldier ( 1986 ) . william mcinnes portrayed curtin in the telemovie curtin ( 2007 ) . see also . curtin government first curtin ministry second curtin ministry military history of australia during world war ii residence of john curtin . footnotes . notes . references . ; biographies ; other works byrne , liam . becoming john curtin and james scullin : the making of the modern labor party ( melbourne university publishing , 2020 ) . external links . david day , chapter 7 . john curtin : taking his childhood seriously , australian political lives : chronicling political careers and administrative histories john curtin prime ministerial library / curtin university of technology , western australia john curtin 's australian journalists association badge – english and media literacy , australian biography – prime ministers ' natural treasures listen to john curtin declaring that australia is at war with japan in 1941 on australianscreen online the recording 'curtin speech : japan enters second world war , 1941 ' was added to the national film and sound archive 's sounds of australia registry in 2010