Kerch Strait

history . image : map of colchis , iberia , albania , and the neighbouring countries ca 1770.jpg thumb 250px left the '' cimmerian bosphorus '' of antiquity , shown on a map printed in london , . the straits are about long and are wide at the narrowest and separate an eastern extension of crimea from taman , the westernmost extension of the caucasus mountains . in antiquity , there seem to have been a group of islands intersected by arms of the kuban river ( hypanis ) and various sounds which have since silted up . the romans knew the strait as the cimmerian bosporus from its greek name , the cimmerian strait , kimmérios bosporos ) , which honored the cimmerians , nearby steppe nomads . anthon , charles ( 1872 ) '' cimmerii '' a classical dictionary : containing an account of the principal proper names mentioned in ancient authors ( 4th ed . ) pp . 349–350 . in ancient times the low-lying land near the strait was known as the maeotic swamp . during the second world war , the kerch peninsula became the scene of much desperate combat between forces of the soviet red army and nazi germany . fighting frequency intensified in the coldest months of year when the strait froze over , allowing the movement of troops over the ice . command magazine , hitler 's army : the evolution and structure of german forces , da capo press ( 2003 ) , , , p . 264 after the eastern front stabilized in early 1943 , hitler ordered the construction of a road-and-rail bridge across the strait of kerch in the spring of 1943 to support his desire for a renewed offensive to the caucasus . the cable railway ( aerial tramway ) , which went into operation on 14 june 1943 with a daily capacity of one thousand tons , was only adequate for the defensive needs of the seventeenth army in the kuban bridgehead . because of frequent earth tremors , this bridge would have required vast quantities of extra-strength steel girders , and their transport would have curtailed shipments of military material to the crimea . the bridge was never completed , and the wehrmacht finished evacuating the kuban bridgehead in september 1943 . inside the third reich by albert speer , chapter 19 , pg . 270 ( 1969 , english translation 1970 ) in 1944 the soviets built a '' provisional '' railway bridge ( kerch railway bridge ) across the strait . construction made use of supplies captured from the germans . the bridge went into operation in november 1944 , but moving ice floes destroyed it in february 1945 ; reconstruction was not attempted . a territorial dispute between russia and ukraine in 2003 centred on tuzla island in the strait of kerch . ukraine and russia agreed to treat the strait and the azov sea as shared internal waters . . storm of november 2007 . on sunday 11 november 2007 news agencies reported a very strong storm on the black sea . four ships sank , six ran aground on a sandbank , and two tankers were damaged , resulting in a major oil spill and the death of 23 sailors . marée noire : plus de 33.000 t de déchets pétroliers ramassés sur les plages du détroit de kertch , 28 november 2007 the russian-flagged oil tanker volgoneft-139 encountered trouble in the kerch strait where it sought shelter from the above storm . during the storm the tanker split in half , releasing more than 2000 tonnes of fuel oil . four other boats sank in the storm , resulting in the release of sulphur cargo . the storm hampered efforts to rescue crew members . another victim of the storm , the russian cargo ship volnogorsk , loaded with sulfur , sank at port kavkaz on the same day . в порту '' кавказ '' затонул сухогруз c серой , lenta.ru ( 11 november 2007 ) thumb . ferry and bridge transportation . after the war , ferry transportation across the strait was established in 1954 , connecting crimea and the krasnodar krai ( port krym – port kavkaz line ) . originally there were four train ferry ships ; later three car-ferry ships were added . train transportation continued for almost 40 years . the aging train-ferries became obsolete in the late 1980s and were removed from service . in the autumn of 2004 , new ships were delivered as replacements and train transportation was re-established . the ferry line stopped operations in late 2020 . moscow mayor yuri luzhkov campaigned for a highway bridge to be constructed across the strait . since 1944 , various bridge projects to span the strait have been proposed or attempted , always hampered by the difficult geologic and geographic configuration of the area . construction of an approach was actually started in 2003 with the -long dam , provoking the 2003 tuzla island conflict . the columbia encyclopedia , sixth edition after the 2014 russian annexation of crimea the government of russia decided to build a bridge across the kerch strait . the 19-kilometre crimean bridge opened to road traffic in 2018 and the rail section opened in 2019 . russian state-backed media claims that construction of the bridge caused increases in nutrients and planktons in the waters , attracting large numbers of fish and more than 1,000 of endangered black sea bottlenose dolphins . goldman e . 2017 . crimean bridge construction boosts dolphin population in kerch strait . the russia beyond the headlines . retrieved on 10 march 2017 however , ukraine claims that the acoustic noise and pollution from both the bridge construction and military exercises may actually be killing black sea dolphins . in november 2018 the strait became a site of the kerch strait incident , in which the russian navy claimed that three ukrainian vessels entered russian territorial waters . russian forces seized the vessels and arrested their crew . during this time passage through the strait under the bridge was blocked by a large cargo ship , placed under the bridge to prevent passage of other craft . . kerch–yenikale canal . image : kerch aivazovsky.jpg thumb view across the strait in 1839 , by ivan aivazovsky in order to improve navigational capabilities of the strait of kerch , which is quite shallow in its narrowest point , the kerch–yenikale canal was dredged through the strait . the main channel can accommodate vessels up to 215 meters long with a draft of up to 8 meters with a compulsory pilot assistance . the canal is not straight and its geometry further complicates safe navigation . the narrowness , limited depth , and turns of the main channel together with the often unpredictable effects of wind and visibility ( fog ) there are strict procedures regulating strait transit . transit of large vessels occurs on a one-way ( alternating ) group convoy basis . transit procedures have remained unchanged , whether under soviet , ukrainian , or russian jurisdiction . the vessel traffic control post in kerch controls and oversees all traffic . fishing . several fish-processing plants are located on the crimean coast of the strait . the fishing season begins in late autumn and lasts for 2 to 3 months , when many seiners put out into the strait to fish . the taman bay is a major fishing ground , with many fishing villages scattered along the coast . see also . kerch strait incident ( 2019 ) kerch strait incident . references . external links .