Martin Luther King Jr. Day

history . proposals . the idea of martin luther king jr . day as a holiday was promoted by trade union in contract negotiations . after king 's death , u.s . representative john conyers ( a democrat from michigan ) and u.s . senator edward brooke ( a republican from massachusetts ) introduced a bill in congress to make king 's birthday a national holiday . the bill first came to a vote in the u.s . house of representatives in 1979 . however , it fell five votes short of the number needed for passage . two of the main arguments mentioned by opponents were that a paid holiday for federal employees would be too expensive and that a holiday to honor a private citizen would be contrary to longstanding tradition ( king had never held public office ) . only two other figures have national holidays in the u.s . honoring them : george washington and christopher columbus . soon after , the king center turned to support from the corporate community and the general public . the success of this strategy was cemented when musician stevie wonder released the single '' happy birthday '' to popularize the campaign in 1980 and hosted the rally for peace press conference in 1981 . six million signatures were collected for a petition to congress to pass the law , termed by a 2006 article in the nation as '' the largest petition in favor of an issue in u.s . history '' . senators jesse helms and john porter east ( both north carolina republicans ) led the opposition to the holiday and questioned whether king was important enough to receive such an honor . helms criticized king 's opposition to the vietnam war and accused him of espousing '' action-oriented marxism '' . helms led a filibuster against the bill and on october 3 , 1983 , submitted a 300-page document to the senate alleging that king had associations with communism . democratic new york senator daniel patrick moynihan declared the document a '' packet of filth '' , threw it on the senate floor and stomped on it . . federal passage . ronald reagan originally opposed the holiday , citing cost concerns . when asked to comment on helms ' accusations that king was a communist , the president said '' we 'll know in thirty-five years , wo n't we ? '' , referring to the eventual release of fbi surveillance tapes that had previously been sealed . but on november 2 , 1983 , reagan signed a bill into law , proposed by katie hall ( politician ) of indiana , to create a federal holiday honoring king . the final vote in the house of representatives on august 2 , 1983 was 338–90 ( 242–4 in the house democratic caucus and 89–77 in the house republican conference ) with 5 members voting present or abstaining , while the final vote in the senate on october 19 , 1983 was 78–22 ( 41–4 in the senate democratic caucus and 37–18 in the senate republican conference ) , both veto-proof margins . the holiday was observed for the first time on january 20 , 1986 . it is observed on the third monday of january . the bill also established the martin luther king jr . federal holiday commission to oversee observance of the holiday , and coretta scott king , king 's wife , was made a member of this commission for life by george h . w . bush in may 1989 . . state-level passage . although the federal holiday honoring king was signed into law in 1983 and took effect three years later , not every u.s . state chose to observe the january holiday at the state level until 1991 , when the new hampshire legislature created '' civil rights day '' and abolished its april '' fast day '' . in 1999 , new hampshire became the last state to name a holiday after king , which they first celebrated in january 2000the first nation-wide celebration of the day with this name . in 1986 , arizona governor bruce babbitt , a democrat , created a paid state mlk holiday in arizona by executive order just before he left office , but in 1987 , his republican successor evan mecham , citing an attorney general 's opinion that babbitt 's order was illegal , reversed babbitt 's decision days after taking office . later that year , mecham proclaimed the third sunday in january to be '' martin luther king jr./civil rights day '' in arizona , albeit as an unpaid holiday . in 1990 , arizona voters were given the opportunity to vote on giving state employees a paid mlk holiday . that same year , the national football league threatened to move super bowl xxvii , which was planned for arizona in 1993 , if the mlk holiday was voted down . in the november election , the voters were offered two king day options : proposition 301 , which replaced columbus day on the list of paid state holidays , and proposition 302 , which merged lincoln 's and washington 's birthdays into one paid holiday to make room for mlk day . both measures failed to pass , with only 49 % of voters approving prop 302 , the more popular of the two options ; although some who voted '' no '' on 302 voted '' yes '' on prop 301 . consequently , the state lost the chance to host super bowl xxvii , which was subsequently held at the rose bowl in pasadena , california . in a 1992 referendum , the voters , this time given only one option for a paid king day , approved state-level recognition of the holiday . on may 2 , 2000 , south carolina governor jim hodges signed a bill to make king 's birthday an official state holiday . south carolina was the last state to recognize the day as a paid holiday for all state employees . before the bill , employees could choose between celebrating martin luther king jr . day or one of three confederate holidays . the history of martin luther king day , infoplease . alternative names . while all states now observe the holiday , some did not name the day after king . for example , in new hampshire , the holiday was known as '' civil rights day '' until 1999 , when the state legislature voted to change the name of the holiday to martin luther king day . several additional states have chosen to combine commemorations of king 's birthday with other observances : in alabama : '' robert e . lee/martin luther king birthday '' . in arizona : '' martin luther king jr./civil rights day '' . in arkansas : it was known as '' dr . martin luther king , jr . 's birthday and robert e . lee day '' from 1985 to 2017 . legislation in march 2017 changed the name of the state holiday to '' dr . martin luther king , jr . 's birthday '' and moved the commemoration of lee to october . in idaho : '' martin luther king jr.–idaho human rights day '' . in mississippi : '' martin luther king 's and robert e . lee 's birthdays '' . in new hampshire : '' martin luther king jr . civil rights day '' . in virginia : it was known as lee–jackson–king day , combining king 's birthday with the established lee–jackson day . in 2000 , lee–jackson day was moved to the friday before martin luther king jr . day , establishing martin luther king jr . day as a holiday in its own right . lee-jackson day was eliminated in 2020 . in wyoming : it is known as '' martin luther king jr./wyoming equality day '' . liz byrd , the first black woman in wyoming legislature , introduced a bill in 1991 for wyoming to recognize mlk day as a paid state holiday ; however , she compromised on the name because her peers would not pass it otherwise . . see also . blue monday ( date ) , which generally coincides with martin luther king jr . day general holidays list of holidays by country list of holidays commemorating individuals list of multinational festivals and holidays public holidays in the united states volunteer day events global youth service day good deeds day international volunteer day international year of volunteers mitzvah day national philanthropy day ( u.s . and canada ) random acts of kindness day sewa day education and sharing day make a difference day world kindness day . references . further reading . weiss , jana ( 2017 ) . '' remember , celebrate , and forget ? the martin luther king day and the pitfalls of civil religion '' , journal of american studies , remember , celebrate , and forget ? the martin luther king day and the pitfalls of civil religion . external links . martin luther king jr . federal holiday commission at the federal register martin luther king jr . day of service official government site king holiday and service act of 1994 at thomas remarks on signing the king holiday and service act of 1994 , president william j . clinton , the american presidency project , august 23 , 1994 the king center for nonviolent social change