Gennett Records

history . gennett records was founded in richmond , indiana , by the starr piano company . it released its first records in october 1917 . the company took its name from its top managers : harry , fred and clarence gennett . earlier , the company had produced recordings under the starr records label . the early issues were vertically cut in the gramophone record grooves , using the hill-and-dale method of a u-shaped groove and sapphire ball stylus , but they switched to the more popular lateral cut method in april 1919 . gennett set up recording studios in new york city and later , in 1921 , set up a second studio on the grounds of the piano factory in richmond under the supervision of ezra c.a . wickemeyer . gennett is best remembered for the wealth of early jazz talent recorded on the label , including sessions by jelly roll morton , bix beiderbecke , the new orleans rhythm kings , king oliver 's band with the young louis armstrong , lois deppe 's serenaders with the young earl hines , tom lord 's the jazz discography says hines ' first recording was here with deppe on 13 oct 1923 hoagy carmichael , duke ellington , the red onion jazz babies , the state street ramblers , zack whyte and his chocolate beau brummels , alphonse trent and his orchestra and many others . gennett also recorded early blues and gospel music artists such as thomas a . dorsey , sam collins , jaybird coleman , as well as early hillbilly or country music performers such as vernon dalhart , bradley kincaid , ernest stoneman , fiddlin ' doc roberts , and gene autry . many early religious recordings were made by homer rodeheaver , early shape note singers and others . in the early 1920s , the studio was long and wide with a control room separated by a double pane of glass . for sound proofing , a mohawk rug was placed on the floor and drapes and towels were hung on the wall . gennett issued a few early electrically recorded masters recorded in the autograph studios of chicago in 1925 . these recordings were exceptionally crude , and like many other autograph issues are easily mistaken for acoustic masters by the casual listener . gennett began serious electrical recording in march 1926 , using a process licensed from general electric . this process was found to be unsatisfactory , for although the quality of the recordings taken by the general electric process was quite good , there were many customer complaints about the wear characteristics of the electric process records . the composition of the gennett biscuit ( record material ) was of insufficient hardness to withstand the increased wear that resulted when the new recordings with their greatly increased frequency range were played on obsolete phonographs with mica diaphragm reproducers . the company discontinued recording by this process in august 1926 , and did not return to electric recording until february 1927 , after signing a new agreement to license the rca photophone recording process . at this time the company also introduced an improved record biscuit which was adequate to the demands imposed by the electric recording process . the improved records were identified by a newly designed black label touting the '' new electrobeam '' process . from 1925 to 1934 , gennett released recordings by hundreds of '' old-time music '' artists , precursors to country music , including such artists as doc roberts and gene autry . by the late 1920s , gennett was pressing records for more than 25 labels worldwide , including budget disks for the sears catalog . in 1926 , fred gennett created champion records as a budget label for tunes previously released on gennett . the gennett company was hit severely by the great depression in 1930 . it cut back on record recording and production until it was halted altogether in 1934 . at this time the only product gennett records produced under its own name was a series of recorded sound effects for use by radio stations . in 1935 the starr piano company sold some gennett masters , and the gennett and champion trademarks to decca records . jack kapp of decca was primarily interested in some jazz , blues and old time music items in the gennett catalog which he thought would add depth to the selections offered by the newly organized decca company . kapp also attempted to revive the gennett and champion labels between 1935 and 1937 as specialists in bargain pressings of race and old-time music with but little success . the starr record plant soldiered on under the supervision of harry gennett through the remainder of the decade by offering contract pressing services . for a time the starr piano company was the principal manufacturer of decca records , but much of this business dried up after decca purchased its own pressing plant in 1938 ( the newaygo , michigan , plant that formerly had pressed brunswick and vocalion records ) . in the years remaining before world war ii , gennett did contract pressing for a number of new york-based jazz and folk music labels , including joe davis , keynote and asch . with the coming of the second world war , the war production board in march 1942 declared shellac a rationed commodity , limiting all record manufacturers to 70 % of their 1939 shellac usage . newly organized record labels were forced to purchase their shellac allocations from existing companies . joe davis purchased the gennett shellac allocation , some of which he used for his own labels , and some of which he sold to the newly organized capitol records . harry gennett intended to use the funds from the sale of his shellac ration to modernize this pressing plant after victory , but there is no indication that he did so , gennett sold decreasing numbers of special purpose records ( mostly sound effects , skating rink , and church tower chimes ) until 1947 or 1948 , and the business then seemed to just fade away . brunswick records acquired the old gennett pressing plant for decca . after decca opened a new pressing plant in pinckneyville , illinois , in 1956 , the old gennett plant in richmond , indiana , was sold to mercury records in 1958 . mercury operated the historic plant until 1969 when it moved to a nearby modern plant later operated by cinram . located at 1600 rich road , cinram closed the plant in 2009 . the gennett company produced the gennett , starr , champion , superior , and van speaking labels , and also produced some supertone , silvertone , and challenge records under contract . the firm pressed most autograph , rainbow , hitch , kkk , our song , and vaughn records under contract . gennett walk of fame . in september 2007 , the starr-gennett foundation began to recognize the most important gennett artists on a hall of fame near the site of gennett 's richmond , indiana , recording studio . the gennett walk of fame is located along south 1st street in richmond at the site of the starr piano company and embedded in the whitewater gorge trail , which connects to the longer cardinal greenway trail . both trails are part of the american discovery trail , the only coast-to-coast , non-motorized recreational trail . the foundation convened its national advisory board for the first time in january , 2006 , to select the first 10 inductees for the gennett records walk of fame . the advisory board selects inductees from these categories : classic jazz , old-time country , blues , gospel ( african-american and southern ) , american popular song , ethnic , historic/spoken , and classical , giving preference to classic jazz , old-time country , blues , gospel , and american popular song . the advisory board 's consensus selection for the first inductee in the gennett walk of fame was louis armstrong . the following is a list of the first ten inductees : louis armstrong bix beiderbecke jelly roll morton hoagy carmichael gene autry vernon dalhart big bill broonzy georgia tom king oliver lawrence welk a second set of ten nominees was inducted in 2008 : homer rodeheaver fats waller duke ellington uncle dave macon coleman hawkins charley patton sidney bechet blind lemon jefferson fletcher henderson guy lombardo 2009 inductees : artie shaw wendell hall bradley kincaid ernest stoneman and hattie frost stoneman new orleans rhythm kings 2010 inductees : alberta hunter lonnie johnson pace jubilee singers 2011 inductees : roosevelt sykes bailey 's lucky seven 2012 inductees : scrapper blackwell jelly roll morton 2013 inductee : william jennings bryan 2014 inductee : doc roberts & asa martin 2016 inductee : jimmy durante . references . external links . the starr-gennett foundation 2012 pbs history detectives episode '' fiery cross '' regarding klan records recorded at gennett gennett records on the internet archive 's great 78 project