The Hanging Garden (film)

plot . the film 's central character is sweet william , played by chris leavins as an adult and troy veinotte as a teenager . its plot hinges on a fateful incident from his teenage years , when his grandmother ( joan orenstein ) caught him attempting to have sex with his bisexual friend fletcher ( joel keller ) , involuntarily outing him to his dysfunctional family as gay . as a consequence of the ensuing rejection , particularly by his alcoholic father whiskey mac ( peter macneill ) , sweet william faced the difficult decision of whether to run away to live in a big city far away from his family , or to commit suicide by hanging himself from a tree in the family garden . the film 's themes about the duality of life and death , and the way seemingly very different choices in life can lead to similar outcomes , are portrayed through magic realism in the film 's depiction of a complex merged reality in which he appears to have successfully made both choices at the same time . '' magical garden : thom fitzgerald used creative thinking to nurture debut feature that opens perspective canada series '' . toronto star , september 5 , 1997 . the film is told as a triptych . in the first segment , set in the present , the adult sweet william has returned home to rural nova scotia for the first time since leaving ten years earlier , to attend the wedding of his sister rosemary ( kerry fox ) to fletcher . however , upon his return , he makes two unexpected discoveries : he can still see his younger selves still living there and walking around the house , and he also has a new young pre-teen sister named violet ( christine dunsworth ) whom he has never met because she was born after he left . the second segment , set in the past , tells the story of sweet william 's teenage years leading up to the critical decision , including his bond with rosemary ( played by sarah polley as a teenager ) and their mother iris ' ( seana mckenna ) struggles to protect her children from whiskey mac 's abuse , as well as revealing the truth of violet 's origins , before ending with sweet william 's suicide . returning to the present , the final segment features both the living adult and dead teenage sweet william present in the same reality — and the dead body is n't just his imagination , because the rest of his family can also see it still hanging from the tree . '' the hanging garden '' . variety , september 12 , 1997 . according to fitzgerald , '' to every event in the film there are two interpretations . he left home and now he 's back and his memory is haunting them . or he did commit suicide when young and his homecoming is a fantasy ? '' '' filmmaker 's money problems may end with new movie '' . canadian press , september 7 , 1997 . . cast . chris leavins as adult sweet william troy veinotte as young sweet william kerry fox as rosemary sarah polley as teenage rosemary joel keller as fletcher peter macneill as whiskey mac seana mckenna as iris christine dunsworth as violet joan orenstein heather rankin ashley macisaac as basil , the wedding musician . critical reaction . roger ebert favourably reviewed the film , writing that '' it may be magic realism , but is n't it also the simple truth ? do n't the ghosts of our former selves attend family events right along with our current manifestations ? do n't parents still sometimes relate to us as if we were children , do n't siblings still carry old resentments , are n't old friends still stuck on who we used to be ? and do n't we sometimes resurrect old personas and dust them off for a return engagement ? are n't all of those selves stored away inside somewhere ? '' roger ebert , the hanging garden . rogerebert.com , may 29 , 1998 . for variety , brendan kelly wrote that '' 'the hanging garden ' is often in danger of seeming overly pretentious , but fitzgerald wisely undercuts the formal artiness with strong , emotional storytelling . in many ways , this is a simple yarn of a son dealing with the usual family demons and , on that level , is an affecting piece of filmmaking . beyond that , the mix of film-school formalism and down-to-earth drama makes the pic a unique offering . '' . awards . the film premiered at the 1997 toronto international film festival , '' festival gets maritimes perspective nova scotia director thom fitzgerald 's first feature kicks off toronto film event 's special series '' . the globe and mail , july 30 , 1997 . where it won the people 's choice award and was cowinner with atom egoyan 's the sweet hereafter of the juried award for best canadian film . '' hanging garden wins two awards '' . the globe and mail , september 15 , 1997 . it was only the second film in the history of the festival , following denys arcand 's the decline of the american empire in 1986 , to win both awards . it subsequently screened at the atlantic film festival , '' garden lives up to the buzz : fitzgerald 's film brave story of love , redemption , rescue '' . halifax daily news , september 19 , 1997 . where it won the audience award , the best canadian film award , the best atlantic film award , best writing and best direction nods for fitzgerald , best actor for veinotte and best actress for orenstein . '' hanging garden tops at awards '' . waterloo region record , september 30 , 1997 . it also won the awards for best canadian film at the cinéfest sudbury international film festival and the vancouver international film festival . '' the hanging garden provocative , realistic and darkly comic '' . waterloo region record , november 13 , 1997 . the film received 11 genie award nominations at the 18th genie awards , for best picture , best director ( fitzgerald ) , best supporting actor ( macneill ) , best supporting actress ( 3 : mckenna , fox , orenstein ) , best screenplay ( fitzgerald ) , best art direction/production design ( taavo soodor and darlene shiels ) , best costume design ( james a . worthen ) , best overall sound ( peter harper , phillipe espantoso , george hannan ) and best editing ( susan shanks ) . '' egoyan film leads nominations '' . victoria times-colonist , november 5 , 2017 . macneill and mckenna won the awards for supporting actor and actress ; fitzgerald won for best screenplay , as well as winning the juried claude jutra award for best first feature film . '' sweet hereafter wins 8 genies '' . waterloo region record , december 15 , 1997 . the film was runner-up for the rogers best canadian film award at the toronto film critics association awards 1997 . it premiered in the united states at the 1998 sundance film festival , '' hanging gardens director off to sundance : four years ago , thom fitzgerald quit his day job and began to write a screenplay . next week , his acclaimed feature film opens at north america 's premiere indie film festival '' . montreal gazette , january 17 , 1998 . before going into wider theatrical release . it received a glaad media award nomination for outstanding film - limited release in 1999 . '' glaad bows media noms '' . variety , january 19 , 1999 . . soundtrack . a soundtrack album was released in 1997 on virgin music canada . '' album captures spirit of award-winning film '' . halifax daily news , november 14 , 1997 . ani difranco , '' the million you never made '' ashley macisaac , '' ashley 's reels '' mae moore , '' deep water '' spirit of the west , '' kiss and tell '' jane siberry , '' when spring comes '' holly cole , '' petals in a stream '' the rankin family , '' sir james baird '' meryn cadell and mary margaret o'hara , '' wash down '' mary jane lamond , '' ba ba mo leanabh '' lori yates , '' the future is here '' deb montgomery , '' the tale '' aether , '' half light '' laurel macdonald , '' oran na h'eala '' john roby , '' theme from the hanging garden '' leahy , '' colm quigley '' wyrd sisters , '' if it ai n't here '' . references . external links .