Overclocking

overview . the purpose of overclocking is to increase the operating speed of a given component . normally , on modern systems , the target of overclocking is increasing the performance of a major chip or subsystem , such as the main processor or graphics controller , but other components , such as system memory ( ram ) or system buses ( generally on the motherboard ) , are commonly involved . the trade-offs are an increase in power consumption ( heat ) , fan noise ( cooling ) , and shortened lifespan for the targeted components . most components are designed with a margin of safety to deal with operating conditions outside of a manufacturer 's control ; examples are ambient temperature and fluctuations in operating voltage . overclocking techniques in general aim to trade this safety margin by setting the device to run in the higher end of the margin , with the understanding that temperature and voltage must be more strictly monitored and controlled by the user . examples are that operating temperature would need to be more strictly controlled with increased cooling , as the part will be less tolerant of increased temperatures at the higher speeds . also base operating voltage may be increased to compensate for unexpected voltage drops and to strengthen signalling and timing signals , as low-voltage excursions are more likely to cause malfunctions at higher operating speeds . while most modern devices are fairly tolerant of overclocking , all devices have finite limits . generally for any given voltage most parts will have a maximum '' stable '' speed where they still operate correctly . past this speed the device starts giving incorrect results , which can cause malfunctions and sporadic behavior in any system depending on it . while in a pc context the usual result is a system crash , more subtle errors can go undetected , which over a long enough time can give unpleasant surprises such as data corruption ( incorrectly calculated results , or worse writing to storage incorrectly ) or the system failing only during certain specific tasks ( general usage such as internet browsing and word processing appear fine , but any application wanting advanced graphics crashes the system ) . at this point an increase in operating voltage of a part may allow more headroom for further increases in clock speed , but the increased voltage can also significantly increase heat output , as well as shorten the lifespan further . at some point there will be a limit imposed by the ability to supply the device with sufficient power , the user 's ability to cool the part , and the device 's own maximum voltage tolerance before it achieves destructive failure . overzealous use of voltage and/or inadequate cooling can rapidly degrade a device 's performance to the point of failure , or in extreme cases outright destroy it . the speed gained by overclocking depends largely upon the applications and workloads being run on the system , and what components are being overclocked by the user ; benchmarks for different purposes are published . underclocking . conversely , the primary goal of underclocking is to reduce power consumption and the resultant heat generation of a device , with the trade-offs being lower clock speeds and reductions in performance . reducing the cooling requirements needed to keep hardware at a given operational temperature has knock-on benefits such as lowering the number and speed of fans to allow quiet pc , and in mobile devices increase the length of battery life per charge . some manufacturers underclock components of battery-powered equipment to improve battery life , or implement systems that detect when a device is operating under battery power and reduce clock frequency underclocking and undervolting would be attempted on a desktop system to have it operate silently ( such as for a home entertainment center ) while potentially offering higher performance than currently offered by low-voltage processor offerings . this would use a '' standard-voltage '' part and attempt to run with lower voltages ( while attempting to keep the desktop speeds ) to meet an acceptable performance/noise target for the build . this was also attractive as using a '' standard voltage '' processor in a '' low voltage '' application avoided paying the traditional price premium for an officially certified low voltage version . however again like overclocking there is no guarantee of success , and the builder 's time researching given system/processor combinations and especially the time and tedium of performing many iterations of stability testing need to be considered . the usefulness of underclocking ( again like overclocking ) is determined by what processor offerings , prices , and availability are at the specific time of the build . underclocking is also sometimes used when troubleshooting . enthusiast culture . overclocking has become more accessible with motherboard makers offering overclocking as a marketing feature on their mainstream product lines . however , the practice is embraced more by enthusiasts than professional users , as overclocking carries a risk of reduced reliability , accuracy and damage to data and equipment . additionally , most manufacturer warranties and service agreements do not cover overclocked components nor any incidental damages caused by their use . while overclocking can still be an option for increasing personal computing capacity , and thus workflow productivity for professional users , the importance of stability testing components thoroughly before employing them into a production environment can not be overstated . overclocking offers several draws for overclocking enthusiasts . overclocking allows testing of components at speeds not currently offered by the manufacturer , or at speeds only officially offered on specialized , higher-priced versions of the product . a general trend in the computing industry is that new technologies tend to debut in the high-end market first , then later trickle down to the performance and mainstream market . if the high-end part only differs by an increased clock speed , an enthusiast can attempt to overclock a mainstream part to simulate the high-end offering . this can give insight on how over-the-horizon technologies will perform before they are officially available on the mainstream market , which can be especially helpful for other users considering if they should plan ahead to purchase or upgrade to the new feature when it is officially released . some hobbyists enjoy building , tuning , and '' hot-rodding '' their systems in competitive benchmarking competitions , competing with other like-minded users for high scores in standardized computer benchmark suites . others will purchase a low-cost model of a component in a given product line , and attempt to overclock that part to match a more expensive model 's stock performance . another approach is overclocking older components to attempt to keep pace with increasing system requirements and extend the useful service life of the older part or at least delay a purchase of new hardware solely for performance reasons . another rationale for overclocking older equipment is even if overclocking stresses equipment to the point of failure earlier , little is lost as it is already depreciated , and would have needed to be replaced in any case . . components . technically any component that uses a timer ( or clock ) to synchronize its internal operations can be overclocked . most efforts for computer components however focus on specific components , such as , processors ( a.k.a . cpu ) , video cards , motherboard chipsets , and ram . most modern processors derive their effective operating speeds by multiplying a base clock ( processor bus speed ) by an internal multiplier within the processor ( the cpu multiplier ) to attain their final speed . computer processors generally are overclocked by manipulating the cpu multiplier if that option is available , but the processor and other components can also be overclocked by increasing the base speed of the bus clock . some systems allow additional tuning of other clocks ( such as a clock rate ) that influence the bus clock speed that , again is multiplied by the processor to allow for finer adjustments of the final processor speed . most oem systems do not expose to the user the adjustments needed to change processor clock speed or voltage in the bios of the oem 's motherboard , which precludes overclocking ( for warranty and support reasons ) . the same processor installed on a different motherboard offering adjustments will allow the user to change them . any given component will ultimately stop operating reliably past a certain clock speed . components will generally show some sort of malfunctioning behavior or other indication of compromised stability that alerts the user that a given speed is not stable , but there is always a possibility that a component will permanently fail without warning , even if voltages are kept within some pre-determined safe values . the maximum speed is determined by overclocking to the point of first instability , then accepting the last stable slower setting . components are only guaranteed to operate correctly up to their rated values ; beyond that different samples may have different overclocking potential . the end-point of a given overclock is determined by parameters such as available cpu multipliers , bus dividers , voltages ; the user 's ability to manage thermal loads , cooling techniques ; and several other factors of the individual devices themselves such as semiconductor clock and thermal tolerances , interaction with other components and the rest of the system . considerations . there are several things to be considered when overclocking . first is to ensure that the component is supplied with adequate power at a voltage sufficient to operate at the new clock rate . supplying the power with improper settings or applying excessive voltage can permanently damage a component . in a professional production environment , overclocking is only likely to be used where the increase in speed justifies the cost of the expert support required , the possibly reduced reliability , the consequent effect on maintenance contracts and warranties , and the higher power consumption . if faster speed is required it is often cheaper when all costs are considered to buy faster hardware . cooling . image : copper heat sink with pipes.jpg thumb high quality heat sinks are often made of copper . all electrical network produce heat generated by the movement of electric current . as clock frequencies in digital circuits and voltage applied increase , the heat generated by components running at the higher performance levels also increases . the relationship between clock frequencies and thermal design power ( tdp ) are linear . however , there is a limit to the maximum frequency which is called a '' wall '' . to overcome this issue , overclockers raise the chip voltage to increase the overclocking potential . voltage increases power consumption and consequently heat generation significantly ( proportionally to the square of the voltage in a linear circuit , for example ) ; this requires more cooling to avoid damaging the hardware by overheating . in addition , some digital circuits slow down at high temperatures due to changes in mosfet device characteristics . conversely , the overclocker may decide to decrease the chip voltage while overclocking ( a process known as undervolting ) , to reduce heat emissions while performance remains optimal . stock cooling systems are designed for the amount of power produced during non-overclocked use ; overclocked circuits can require more cooling , such as by powerful fans , larger heat sinks , heat pipes and water cooling . mass , shape , and material all influence the ability of a heatsink to dissipate heat . efficient heatsinks are often made entirely of copper , which has high thermal conductivity , but is expensive . aluminium is more widely used ; it has good thermal characteristics , though not as good as copper , and is significantly cheaper . cheaper materials such as steel do not have good thermal characteristics . heat pipes can be used to improve conductivity . many heatsinks combine two or more materials to achieve a balance between performance and cost . water cooling carries waste heat to a radiator . thermoelectric cooling devices which actually refrigerate using the peltier effect can help with high thermal design power ( tdp ) processors made by intel and amd in the early twenty-first century . thermoelectric cooling devices create temperature differences between two plates by running an electric current through the plates . this method of cooling is highly effective , but itself generates significant heat elsewhere which must be carried away , often by a convection-based heatsink or a water cooling system . image:2007taipeiitmonth inteloclivetest overclocking-6.jpg right thumb liquid nitrogen may be used for cooling an overclocked system , when an extreme measure of cooling is needed . other cooling methods are forced convection and phase transition cooling which is used in refrigerators and can be adapted for computer use . liquid nitrogen , liquid helium , and dry ice are used as coolants in extreme cases , such as record-setting attempts or one-off experiments rather than cooling an everyday system . in june 2006 , ibm and georgia institute of technology jointly announced a new record in silicon-based chip clock rate ( the rate a transistor can be switched at , not the cpu clock rate ) above 500 & nbsp ; ghz , which was done by cooling the chip to using liquid helium . cpu frequency world record is 8.794 & nbsp ; ghz as of november 2012 . these extreme methods are generally impractical in the long term , as they require refilling reservoirs of vaporizing coolant , and condensation can form on chilled components . moreover , silicon-based junction gate field-effect transistors ( jfet ) will degrade below temperatures of roughly and eventually cease to function or '' freeze out '' at since the silicon ceases to be semiconducting , so using extremely cold coolants may cause devices to fail . submersion cooling , used by the cray-2 supercomputer , involves sinking a part of computer system directly into a chilled liquid that is thermally conductive but has low electrical conductivity . the advantage of this technique is that no condensation can form on components . a good submersion liquid is fluorinert made by 3m , which is expensive . another option is mineral oil , but impurities such as those in water might cause it to conduct electricity . amateur overclocking enthusiasts have used a mixture of dry ice and a solvent with a low freezing point , such as acetone or isopropyl alcohol . this cooling bath , often used in laboratories , achieves a temperature of −78 °c . cooling baths – chemwiki . chemwiki.ucdavis.edu . retrieved on 2013-06-17 . however , this practice is discouraged due to its safety risks ; the solvents are flammable and volatile , and dry ice can cause frostbite ( through contact with exposed skin ) and suffocation ( due to the large volume of carbon dioxide generated when it sublimes ) . stability and functional correctness . as an overclocked component operates outside of the manufacturer 's recommended operating conditions , it may function incorrectly , leading to system instability . another risk is silent data corruption by undetected errors . such failures might never be correctly diagnosed and may instead be incorrectly attributed to software bugs in applications , device drivers , or the operating system . overclocked use may permanently damage components enough to cause them to misbehave ( even under normal operating conditions ) without becoming totally unusable . a large-scale 2011 field study of hardware faults causing a system crash for consumer pcs and laptops showed a four to 20 times increase ( depending on cpu manufacturer ) in system crashes due to cpu failure for overclocked computers over an eight-month period . in general , overclockers claim that testing can ensure that an overclocked system is stable and functioning correctly . although software tools are available for testing hardware stability , it is generally impossible for any private individual to thoroughly test the functionality of a processor . achieving good fault coverage requires immense engineering effort ; even with all of the resources dedicated to validation by manufacturers , faulty components and even design faults are not always detected . a particular '' stress test '' can verify only the functionality of the specific instruction sequence used in combination with the data and may not detect faults in those operations . for example , an arithmetic operation may produce the correct result but incorrect flags ; if the flags are not checked , the error will go undetected . to further complicate matters , in process technologies such as silicon on insulator ( soi ) , devices display hysteresis & mdash ; a circuit 's performance is affected by the events of the past , so without carefully targeted tests it is possible for a particular sequence of state changes to work at overclocked rates in one situation but not another even if the voltage and temperature are the same . often , an overclocked system which passes stress tests experiences instabilities in other programs . in overclocking circles , '' stress tests '' or '' torture tests '' are used to check for correct operation of a component . these workloads are selected as they put a very high load on the component of interest ( e.g . a graphically intensive application for testing video cards , or different math-intensive applications for testing general cpus ) . popular stress tests include prime95 , lavalys , superpi , occt , aida64 , linpack ( via the linx and intelburntest guis ) , sisoft sandra , boinc , intel thermal analysis tool and memtest86 . the hope is that any functional-correctness issues with the overclocked component will show up during these tests , and if no errors are detected during the test , the component is then deemed '' stable '' . since fault coverage is important in software testing , the tests are often run for long periods of time , hours or even days . an overclocked computer is sometimes described using the number of hours and the stability program used , such as '' prime 12 hours stable '' . factors allowing overclocking . overclockability arises in part due to the economics of the manufacturing processes of cpus and other components . in many cases components are manufactured by the same process , and tested after manufacture to determine their actual maximum ratings . components are then marked with a rating chosen by the market needs of the semiconductor manufacturer . if manufacturing yield is high , more higher-rated components than required may be produced , and the manufacturer may mark and sell higher-performing components as lower-rated for marketing reasons . in some cases , the true maximum rating of the component may exceed even the highest rated component sold . many devices sold with a lower rating may behave in all ways as higher-rated ones , while in the worst case operation at the higher rating may be more problematical . notably , higher clocks must always mean greater waste heat generation , as semiconductors set to high must dump to ground more often . in some cases , this means that the chief drawback of the overclocked part is far more heat dissipated than the maximums published by the manufacturer . pentium architect bob colwell calls overclocking an '' uncontrolled experiment in better-than-worst-case system operation '' . . measuring effects of overclocking . benchmarks are used to evaluate performance , and they can become a kind of '' sport '' in which users compete for the highest scores . as discussed above , stability and functional correctness may be compromised when overclocking , and meaningful benchmark results depend on the correct execution of the benchmark . because of this , benchmark scores may be qualified with stability and correctness notes ( e.g . an overclocker may report a score , noting that the benchmark only runs to completion 1 in 5 times , or that signs of incorrect execution such as display corruption are visible while running the benchmark ) . a widely used test of stability is prime95 , which has built-in error checking that fails if the computer is unstable . using only the benchmark scores , it may be difficult to judge the difference overclocking makes to the overall performance of a computer . for example , some benchmarks test only one aspect of the system , such as memory bandwidth , without taking into consideration how higher clock rates in this aspect will improve the system performance as a whole . apart from demanding applications such as video encoding , high-demand databases and scientific computing , memory bandwidth is typically not a bottleneck , so a great increase in memory bandwidth may be unnoticeable to a user depending on the applications used . other benchmarks , such as 3dmark , attempt to replicate game conditions . manufacturer and vendor overclocking . commercial system builders or component resellers sometimes overclock to sell items at higher profit margins . the seller makes more money by overclocking lower-priced components which are found to operate correctly and selling equipment at prices appropriate for higher-rated components . while the equipment will normally operate correctly , this practice may be considered fraudulent if the buyer is unaware of it . overclocking is sometimes offered as a legitimate service or feature for consumers , in which a manufacturer or retailer tests the overclocking capability of processors , memory , video cards , and other hardware products . several video card manufactures now offer factory-overclocked versions of their graphics accelerators , complete with a warranty , usually at a price intermediate between that of the standard product and a non-overclocked product of higher performance . it is speculated that manufacturers implement overclocking prevention mechanisms such as cpu locking to prevent users from buying lower-priced items and overclocking them . these measures are sometimes marketed as a consumer protection benefit , but are often criticized by buyers . many motherboards are sold , and advertised , with extensive facilities for overclocking implemented in hardware and controlled by bios settings . web page for a typical motherboard claiming overclocking support . cpu multiplier locking . cpu multiplier locking is the process of permanently setting a cpu 's clock multiplier . amd cpus are unlocked in early editions of a model and locked in later editions , but nearly all intel cpus are locked and recent models are very resistant to unlocking to prevent overclocking by users . amd ships unlocked cpus with their opteron , fx , ryzen and black series line-up , while intel uses the monikers of '' extreme edition '' and '' k-series . '' intel usually has one or two extreme edition cpus on the market as well as x series and k series cpus analogous to amd 's black edition . amd has the majority of their desktop range in a black edition . users usually unlock cpus to allow overclocking , but sometimes to allow for underclocking in order to maintain the front side bus speed ( on older cpus ) compatibility with certain motherboards . unlocking generally invalidates the manufacturer 's warranty , and mistakes can cripple or destroy a cpu . locking a chip 's clock multiplier does not necessarily prevent users from overclocking , as the speed of the front-side bus or pci multiplier ( on newer cpus ) may still be changed to provide a performance increase . amd athlon and athlon xp cpus are generally unlocked by connecting bridges ( jumper-like points ) on the top of the cpu with conductive paint or graphite . other cpu models may require different procedures . increasing front-side bus and/or northbridge/pci clocks can overclock locked cpus , but this throws many system frequencies out of sync , since the ram and pci frequencies are modified as well . one of the easiest ways to unlock older amd athlon xp cpus was called the pin mod method , because it was possible to unlock the cpu without permanently modifying bridges . a user could simply put one wire ( or some more for a new multiplier/vcore ) into the socket to unlock the cpu . more recently however , notably with intel 's skylake architecture , intel had a bug with the skylake ( 6th gen core ) processors where the base clock could be increased past 102.7 mhz , however functionality of certain features would not work . intel intended to block base clock ( bclk ) overclocking of locked processors when designing the skylake architecture to prevent consumers from purchasing cheaper components and overclocking to previously-unseen heights ( since the cpu 's bclk was no longer tied to the pci buses ) , however for lga1151 , the 6th generation '' skylake '' processors were able to be overclocked past 102.7 mhz ( which was the intended limit by intel , and was later mandated through later bios updates ) . all other unlocked processors from lga1151 and v2 ( including 7th , 8th , and 9th generation ) and bga1440 allow for bclk overclocking ( as long as the oem allows it ) , while all other locked processors from 7th , 8th , and 9th gen were not able to go past 102.7 mhz on the bclk . advantages . higher performance in games , en-/decoding , video editing and system tasks at no additional direct monetary expense , but with increased electrical consumption and thermal output . system optimization : some systems have '' bottlenecks '' , where small overclocking of one component can help realize the full potential of another component to a greater percentage than when just the limiting hardware itself is overclocked . for instance : many motherboards with athlon 64 processors limit the clock rate of four units of ram to 333 mhz . however , the memory performance is computed by dividing the processor clock rate ( which is a base number times a cpu multiplier , for instance 1.8 & nbsp ; ghz is most likely 9×200 & nbsp ; mhz ) by a fixed integer such that , at a stock clock rate , the ram would run at a clock rate near 333 & nbsp ; mhz . manipulating elements of how the processor clock rate is set ( usually adjusting the multiplier ) , it is often possible to overclock the processor a small amount , around 5-10 % , and gain a small increase in ram clock rate and/or reduction in ram latency timings . it can be cheaper to purchase a lower performance component and overclock it to the clock rate of a more expensive component . extending life on older equipment ( through underclocking/undervolting ) . disadvantages . general . higher clock rates and voltages increase power consumption , also increasing electricity cost and heat production . the additional heat increases the ambient air temperature within the system case , which may affect other components . the hot air blown out of the case heats the room it 's in . fan noise : high-performance fans running at maximum speed used for the required degree of cooling of an overclocked machine can be noisy , some producing 50 & nbsp ; db or more of noise . when maximum cooling is not required , in any equipment , fan speeds can be reduced below the maximum : fan noise has been found to be roughly proportional to the fifth power of fan speed ; halving speed reduces noise by about 15 & nbsp ; db . uk health and safety executive : top 10 noise control techniques fan noise can be reduced by design improvements , e.g . with aerodynamically optimized blades for smoother airflow , reducing noise to around 20 & nbsp ; db at approximately 1 metre or larger fans rotating more slowly , which produce less noise than smaller , faster fans with the same airflow . acoustical insulation inside the case e.g . acoustic foam can reduce noise . additional cooling methods which do not use fans can be used , such as liquid and phase-change cooling . an overclocked computer may become unreliable . for example : microsoft windows may appear to work with no problems , but when it is re-installed or upgraded , error messages may be received such as a '' file copy error '' during windows setup . article id : 310064 – last review : may 7 , 2007 – revision : 6.2 how to troubleshoot problems during installation when you upgrade from windows 98 or windows millennium edition to windows xp microsoft says this of errors in upgrading to windows xp : '' your computer may be over-clocked . '' because installing windows is very memory-intensive , decoding errors may occur when files are extracted from the windows xp cd-rom the lifespan of semiconductor components may be reduced by increased voltages and heat . warranties may be voided by overclocking . risks of overclocking . increasing the operation frequency of a component will usually increase its thermal output in a linear fashion , while an increase in voltage usually causes thermal power to increase quadratically . microprocessor 3 : core concepts - hardware aspects . philippe darche . john wiley & sons , 2020 - 240 pages . p.128 . excessive voltages or improper cooling may cause chip temperatures to rise to dangerous levels , causing the chip to be damaged or destroyed . exotic cooling methods used to facilitate overclocking such as water cooling are more likely to cause damage if they malfunction . sub-ambient cooling methods such as phase-change cooling or liquid nitrogen will cause water condensation , which will cause electrical damage unless controlled ; some methods include using kneaded erasers or shop towels to catch the condensation . limitations . overclocking components can only be of noticeable benefit if the component is on the critical path for a process , if it is a bottleneck . if disk access or the speed of an internet connection limit the speed of a process , a 20 % increase in processor speed is unlikely to be noticed , however there are some scenarios where increasing the clock speed of a processor actually allows an ssd to be read and written to faster . overclocking a cpu will not noticeably benefit a game when a graphics card 's performance is the '' bottleneck '' of the game . graphics cards . graphics cards can also be overclocked . there are utilities to achieve this , such as evga 's precision , rivatuner , amd overdrive ( on amd cards only ) , msi afterburner , zotac firestorm , and the peg link mode on asus motherboards . overclocking a gpu will often yield a marked increase in performance in synthetic benchmarks , usually reflected in game performance . alt+esc gtx 780 overclocking guide it is sometimes possible to see that a graphics card is being pushed beyond its limits before any permanent damage is done by observing on-screen artifacts or unexpected system crashes . it is common to run into one of those problems when overclocking graphics cards ; both symptoms at the same time usually means that the card is severely pushed beyond its heat , clock rate , and/or voltage limits , however if seen when not overclocked , they indicate a faulty card . after a reboot , video settings are reset to standard values stored in the graphics card firmware , and the maximum clock rate of that specific card is now deducted . some overclockers apply a potentiometer to the graphics card to manually adjust the voltage ( which usually invalidates the warranty ) . this allows for finer adjustments , as overclocking software for graphics cards can only go so far . excessive voltage increases may damage or destroy components on the graphics card or the entire graphics card itself ( practically speaking ) . alternatives . flashing and unlocking can be used to improve the performance of a video card , without technically overclocking ( but is much riskier than overclocking just through software ) . flashing refers to using the firmware of a different card with the same ( or sometimes similar ) core and compatible firmware , effectively making it a higher model card ; it can be difficult , and may be irreversible . sometimes computer software to modify the firmware files can be found , e.g . nibitor ( geforce 6/7 series are well regarded in this aspect ) , without using firmware for a better model video card . for example , video cards with 3d accelerators ( most , have two voltage and clock rate settings , one for 2d and one for 3d , but were designed to operate with three voltage stages , the third being somewhere between the aforementioned two , serving as a fallback when the card overheats or as a middle-stage when going from 2d to 3d operation mode . therefore , it could be wise to set this middle-stage prior to '' serious '' overclocking , specifically because of this fallback ability ; the card can drop down to this clock rate , reducing by a few ( or sometimes a few dozen , depending on the setting ) percent of its efficiency and cool down , without dropping out of 3d mode ( and afterwards return to the desired high performance clock and voltage settings ) . some cards have abilities not directly connected with overclocking . for example , nvidia 's geforce ( agp flavor ) has a temperature monitor used internally by the card , invisible to the user if standard firmware is used . modifying the firmware can display a 'temperature ' tab . unlocking refers to enabling extra pipelines or pixel shaders . the 6800le , the 6800gs and 6800 ( agp models only ) were some of the first cards to benefit from unlocking . while these models have either 8 or 12 pipes enabled , they share the same 16x6 gpu core as a 6800gt or ultra , but pipelines and shaders beyond those specified are disabled ; the gpu may be fully functional , or may have been found to have faults which do not affect operation at the lower specification . gpus found to be fully functional can be unlocked successfully , although it is not possible to be sure that there are undiscovered faults ; in the worst case the card may become brick ( electronics ) . history . overclocked processors first became commercially available in 1983 , when amd sold an overclocked version of the intel 8088 cpu . in 1984 , some consumers were overclocking ibm 's version of the intel 80286 cpu by replacing the clock crystal .