Süleyman Demirel

1960s and 70s . on 22 march 1963 , the imprisoned former president celal bayar was released on parole , causing protests in front of justice party headquarters . demirel , who was on the executive board of justice party , then resigned from his position , claiming that '' there would n't be democracy in this country turkey for another 50 years '' . he remained inactive until the death of ragıp gümüşpala , when , in june 1964 , he re-entered politics as a candidate for chairman of the party . however , demirel faced strong opposition . his biggest rival was sadettin bilgiç , nicknamed '' koca reis '' ( '' big captain '' in english ) . bilgiç supporters accused demirel of being a freemason ; however , demirel averted the crisis with a clever stratagem . instead of writing to his own lodge , demirel petitioned a separate freemason 's lodge asking whether he was a member or not . as expected , the lodge chairman answered negatively . this turned the tide in demirel 's favor , and he received enough votes to become the chairman of the party . demirel was elected chairman at the second grand party convention on 28 november 1964 . he facilitated the formation of a caretaker government that ruled between february and october 1965 under the premiership of suat hayri ürgüplü , in which he served as deputy prime minister . under his leadership , the ap won an unprecedented majority of the votes in the 1965 general election and formed a majority government . demirel thus became the youngest-ever prime minister in turkish history at the age of 40 . as deputy from isparta , demirel became turkey 's 14th prime minister . in the next elections on 10 october 1969 , his party was the sole winner by a landslide once again . demirel presided over the laying the foundations of the keban dam , the bosphorus bridge and an oil pipeline between batman and i̇skenderun . despite his economic reforms which stabilised inflation , he resigned as prime minister after his budget was blocked by parliament , but formed his third government shortly after . he resigned after the 1971 turkish coup d'état , which had been caused by a disagreement between the government and military over the cyprus dispute , an escalation of tensions with greece and growing political violence . he was also accused of deviating from the kemalism of mustafa kemal atatürk , which he denied . demirel was the leader of the opposition from 1971 to march 1975 before forming a four-party government known as the first nationalist front , which collapsed in june 1977 . he formed the second nationalist front cabinet in july 1977 with two other parties ( msp and mhp ) , which collapsed in january 1978 . a rise in global petrol prices contributed to a surge in inflation and an economic crisis and demirel 's government responded with economic liberalisation , though these reforms were rejected by other parties . this led to a spate of political violence and strikes , during which 42 people were killed in the taksim square massacre . demirel 's minority government in 1979 was unable to elect a president in 1980 , leading to the 1980 turkish coup d'état which banned demirel from politics . . 1980s . following the 1980 turkish coup d'état , headed by kenan evren , he was banned from involvement in active politics for ten years . in 1986 , however , demirel launched a national campaign for the lifting of the ban and initiated a national referendum on the issue . the 1987 constitutional referendum allowed him to return to active politics . only 18 days later , demirel was elected chairman at the extraordinary convention of the true path party ( dyp ) , a replacement for the justice party . he was re-elected deputy of isparta at the elections of 29 november 1987 . . 1990s and 2000s . following the 1991 general election , demirel became prime minister once again in a coalition government with the social democratic populist party . after the sudden death of president turgut özal , he became the ninth president on 16 may 1993 , elected by the grand national assembly of turkey . he served as president until 16 may 2000 for the constitutional term of seven years . his overall tenure as prime minister was shorter than only ismet inönü 's and recep tayyip erdogan 's . later life and death . following retirement from politics , demirel was frequently a panelist and speaker at several places mostly in universities within turkey . he died on 17 june 2015 at the guven hospital in ankara where he had been undergoing treatment for a respiratory tract infection . he was buried few days later in atabey . . legacy . the süleyman demirel airport and süleyman demirel university , both of which are in isparta are named after him . so are the süleyman demirel stadium in antalya , the süleyman demirel medical centre of the atatürk university in erzurum and suleyman demirel university in kazakhstan . there are also two important main streets named after him : one in istanbul and the other in muğla . on 26 october 2014 süleyman demirel democracy and development museum was opened in isparta . . awards . demirel was awarded with the istiglal order for his contributions to development of azerbaijan–turkey relations , his constructive position on the nagorno-karabakh conflict , and his support for unity among turkic states by president of azerbaijan heydar aliyev on 12 june 1999 . he is also a collar of the estonian order of the cross of terra mariana , a recipient of the polish order of the white eagle ( 1993 ) , order of the golden fleece ( georgia ) and a knight grand cross of the croatian grand order of king tomislav . . in popular culture . demirel was often nicknamed baba ( the father ) or çoban sülü ( sülü the shepherd ) and humorously spartacus , after his native city of isparta . his fedora was a famous part of his image . although demirel had retired , whenever there was political distress , turkish media or his followers ( humorously or otherwise ) called on him with the words '' kurtar bizi baba '' ( '' father , save us '' ) . he is well known for uttering phrases such as '' dün dündür , bugün bugündür '' ( '' yesterday is yesterday , today is today '' ) , usually said when he has changed his stand on a subject . another example is '' benzin vardı da biz mi içtik ? '' ( '' did we drink the gasoline , as if there were any ? '' ) , said when defending his actions during the 1970s energy crisis . when the question of criminalizing sex work came to question by the increased popularity of conservative movements , he responded '' genelevleri kapatalım da millet bizi mi siksin ? '' ( '' should we close the brothels so people can fuck us ? '' ) . . references . external links . official website of the presidents of the republic of turkey