Bartolomé Esteban Murillo

childhood . murillo was born to gaspar esteban and maría pérez . he may have been born in seville or in pilas , a smaller andalusian town . it is clear that he was baptized in seville in 1618 , the youngest son in a family of fourteen . his father was a barber and surgeon . after his parents died in 1627 and 1628 , he became a ward of his sister 's husband , juan agustín lagares . murillo seldom used his father 's surname , and instead took his surname from his maternal grandmother , elvira murillo . . career . murillo began his art studies in seville under juan del castillo , who was a relative of his mother ( murillo 's uncle , antonio pérez , was also a painter ) . his first works were influenced by francisco de zurbarán , jusepe de ribera and alonso cano , and he shared their strongly realist approach . the great commercial importance of seville at the time ensured that he was subject to artistic influences from other regions . he became familiar with flemish painting and the '' treatise on sacred images '' of molanus ( ian van der meulen or molano ) . as his painting developed , his more important works evolved towards the polished style that suited the bourgeois and aristocratic tastes of the time , demonstrated especially in his roman catholic religious works . in 1642 , at the age of 26 , he moved to madrid , where he most likely became familiar with the work of velázquez , and would have seen the work of venetian and flemish masters in the royal collections ; the rich colors and softly modeled forms of his subsequent work suggest these influences . in 1645 he returned to seville and married beatriz cabrera y villalobos , with whom he eventually had eleven children . in that year , he painted eleven canvases for the convent of st . francisco el grande in seville . these works depicting the miracles of franciscan saints vary between the zurbaránesque tenebrism of the ecstasy of st francis and a softly luminous style ( as in death of st clare ) that became typical of murillo 's mature work . according to the art historian manuela b . mena marqués , '' in . the levitation of st giles ( usually known as the '' angel ’ s kitchen '' , paris , louvre ) and the death of st clare ( dresden , gemäldegal . alte meister ) , the characteristic elements of murillo ’ s work are already evident : the elegance and beauty of the female figures and the angels , the realism of the still-life details and the fusion of reality with the spiritual world , which is extraordinarily well developed in some of the compositions . '' also completed c . 1645 was the first of murillo 's many paintings of children , the young beggar ( musée du louvre ) , in which the influence of velázquez is apparent . following the completion of a pair of pictures for the seville cathedral , he began to specialize in the themes that brought him his greatest successes : the virgin and child and the immaculate conception . the center medallion of the badge of the spanish order of charles iii is clearly modeled on murillo 's unique manner of representing the immaculate conception . after another period in madrid , from 1658 to 1660 , he returned to seville . here he was one of the founders of the academia de bellas artes ( academy of art ) , sharing its direction , in 1660 , with the architect francisco herrera the younger . this was his period of greatest activity , and he received numerous important commissions , among them the altarpieces for the augustinian monastery , the paintings for santa maría la blanca santa maría la blanca ( completed in 1665 ) , and others . he died in seville in 1682 , a few months after he fell from a scaffold while working on a fresco at the church of the capuchines in cádiz . . legacy . murillo had many pupils and followers . the prolific imitation of his paintings ensured his reputation in spain and fame throughout europe , and prior to the 19th century his work was more widely known than that of any other spanish artist . artists influenced by his style included gainsborough and greuze . marqués , manuela b . mena . '' murillo , bartolomé esteban . '' grove art online . oxford art online . oxford university press . google marked the 400 years since murillo 's birth with a doodle on 29 november 2018 . . public collections . the museo del prado in madrid ; hermitage museum in saint petersburg , russia ( such as boy with a dog ) ; and the wallace collection in london are among the museums holding works by murillo . his painting “ the coronation in heaven of the mother of god ” is on display at the basilica of st . joseph proto-cathedralin bardstown , kentucky his painting christ on the cross is at the timken museum of art in san diego . christ after the flagellation is at the krannert art museum , champaign , illinois . his work is also found at the mabee-gerrer museum of art in shawnee , oklahoma , and at the meadows museum at southern methodist university in dallas , texas . . selected works . file : bartolome esteban perez murillo 012.jpg joseph and potiphar 's wife , c . 1640–1645 , gemäldegalerie alte meister file : personificación del verano.jpg young man with a basket of fruit or personification of summer , c . 1640–1650 file : la gallega de la moneda.jpg the girl with a coin or girl of galicia , c . 1645–1650 file : bartolomé esteban murillo - the young beggar.jpg the young beggar , c . 1645 , musée du louvre , paris , france file : bartolomé esteban perez murillo - trauben- und melonenesser.jpg boys eating grapes and melon , c . 1645–46 , alte pinakothek file : san jerónimo leyendo ( murillo ) . jpg st . jerome , c . 1650–1652 file : bartolomé esteban murillo - saint peter in tears - google art project.jpg st . peter in tears , c . 1650–1655 file : bartolomé esteban perez murillo 020.jpg the virgin of the rosary , c . 1650–1655 , museo del prado file : isidor von sevilla.jpeg st . isidore of sevilla , 1654 , cathedral of seville , spain file : bartolomé esteban perez murillo 023.jpg annunciation , c . 1655–1660 , hermitage museum , russia file : bartolomé esteban murillo - adoration of the magi - google art project.jpg adoration of the magi , c . 1660 file : bartolome murillo-san ildefonso.jpg apparition of the virgin to ildefonsus , c . 1660 file : murillo , bartolomé estéban - three boys - google art project.jpg three boys , c . 1660 file : bartolomé esteban perez murillo 021.jpg the immaculate conception of el escorial , c . 1660-1665 file : murillo santa justa.jpg st . justa , c . 1665 file : santarufinamurillo.jpg st . rufina , c . 1665 file : curacion del paralitico murillo 1670.jpg christ healing the paralytic at the pool of bethesda , 1670 file : bartolomé esteban murillo - saint rose of lima - google art project.jpg saint rose of lima , c . 1670 . lázaro galdiano museum , madrid . file : bartolomé esteban murillo - la inmaculada concepción del espejo.jpg the immaculate conception of the blessed virgin mary , 1678 file : saint raphael.jpg raphael the archangel with bishop domonte , c . 1680 , pushkin museum file : the barber institute of fine arts - bartolomé esteban murillo - the marriage feast at cana.jpg the marriage feast at cana , c . 1672 , the barber institute of fine arts file : the return of the holy family from egypt ( bartolomé esteban murillo ) - nationalmuseum - 21281.tif the return of the holy family from egypt , nationalmuseum , stockholm file : bartolomé esteban perez murillo - virgin and child with st rosalina of palermo - wga16389.jpg virgin and child with saint rose of viterbo . thyssen-bornemisza museum , madrid . file : murillo descanso en la huida a egipto.jpg rest on the flight into egypt , c . 1665 hermitage museum , moscow . references . further reading . murillo 's painting the spanish page is the subject of an ekphrastic poem by letitia elizabeth landon in fisher 's drawing room scrap book , 1837 . see . external links . paintings in museums and public art galleries worldwide murillo biography , style and critical reception murillo gallery at museumsyndicate murillo at artrenewalcenter