Wikipedia:Reference Desk archive 2

i have a question about np-complete problems . ( there are a couple of small articles on this , but their names seem to be rapidly mobile lately , try searching . ) ok , so 3-sat is np-complete . that 's where you have to satisfy clauses that are the or of three different variables , each possibly negated . how about if the clauses are the xor of three variables . how about if the clauses are majority function of three variables , each possibly negated . ( that is 2 or 3 out of 3 must be true ) . how about if exactly one must be true , etc . added august 20 . this problem is left as an exercise by the reader : ) seriously , most of them are probably np-complete , some are n't . to prove a particular problem as np-complete , you need to prove it 's in np ( which should be trivial as they are restricted instances of sat and thus in np ) , and then transform another np-complete problem into that problem ( so , for instance , show that you can transform any instance of or 3-sat into xor 3-sat ) . -- user : robert merkel -- -- what are the largest moons in the solar system ? a few are larger than mercury , no ? ( posted sept . 4 . ) -- see moon for a list of those bigger than pluto . -- -- what exactly is going on on the floor of the new york stock exchange ? stock exchange and new york stock exchange do not yet contain an answer . ( posted sept . 17 . ) today , a lot of moaning , gnashing of teeth , and beating of breasts . does n't that happen every day ? i 've added a little more of a description of the trading floor to new york stock exchange . it 'd be nice if someone could clarify some other things , though , e.g : 1 ) what powers the nyse employee has over the stock she 's managing , and 2 ) how the traders actually on the nyse floor connect back to people that invest without physically going to nyse . -- ryguasu 08:56 dec 26 , 2002 ( utc ) -- -- i would like to know what kind of work the prisonsers in auschwitz ii birkenau ( those that were not gassed on arrival ) had to do on a daily basis . axelboldt 11:54 sep 2 , 2002 ( pdt ) axel , i can recommend that you read primo levi 's first hand accounts in the truce ( published in the us as survival in auschwitz ) . user : sjc -- -- 20020912 i would like the history behind the canadian expression '' canuck '' . i 'm also interesed in the etymology behind the word itself , cheers , lars . : the ultimate origin of the word is disputed , but some of the more likely possibilities are explained on this web page : having read several web pages on the subject , i chose this one as being the most convincing . -- heron -- -- here 's a question that any encyclopedia worth its salt must answer : why do dogs eat other dogs ' poop ? this has been bothering me for a long time . as an exercise to the reader ( writer ! ) : you must find an appropriate place to answer this question in the encyclopedia . cuisine ? most people do n't consider dog poop cuisine , though some dogs might . dog ? too general . dog cuisine ? too easily confused with certain east asian dishes . perhaps canine ethology , but i do n't even know if that is regarded as a field . so ! creativity and research are needed ! ( posted jan . 11 , 2001 . ) because dogs are morons . next question ? ( indeed ! : - ) but what explains this moronic behavior ? ) the real answer is apparently '' several possible reasons , including copying their mother , copying their owner , or just because they like the taste '' . full study of the issue at coprophagia in the canine was n't coprophagia an album by the who ? i found the study , now someone else can write the damned article ! : ) ( grand , so now we know where to put the article : coprophagia ! ) because some dog owners like to let their dogs lick their face ! -- -- what is potential difference ? all i remember from school is something about electricity being compared to the height of rivers & speed of water flow , which ( as i recall ) left everyone more confused than ever . -- tarquin 01:36 aug 27 , 2002 ( pdt ) potential difference is a pedantic term for what normal people call a voltage . since a voltage can only be measured across two points , the statement that '' the voltage of point x is y volts '' is meaningless unless you know what point the measurement was relative to . as an engineer i was taught that it is better to say '' the potential difference between point x and point z is y volts '' . in normal parlance , people say things like '' the mains voltage in the uk is ( nominally ) 240 volts '' , which everybody understands to mean that , if you put an ac voltmeter across the live and neutral wires , the meter will read ( nominally ) 240 volts . the context makes it clear that points x and z are the live and neutral wires . another reason to distinguish '' potential difference '' from '' voltage '' is that the latter term implies that we are using the si unit of volts . if somebody one day replaced the si system with another , then the volt would become obsolete , and '' potential difference '' would be measured in fnuts or whatever . a similar contrast exists between '' current '' and '' amperage '' . physicists and pedants prefer the term '' current '' because it 's general , but engineers and real people sometimes talk about '' amperage '' because amperes are what appear on most current-measuring instruments . if amperes were one day replaced by gzorts then ammeters would have to be renamed gzortmeters , but the word '' current '' could still be used . if this is n't clear then please complain , and i 'll have another go . -- user : heron i agree , with you , heron . i prefer the sino-japanese term for voltage , which , i believe literally means '' electricity pressure '' . -- user : juuitchan : thank you : - ) i 'd better rephrase the question : why is voltage / pd or fnuttage ; - ) measured across two points ? what does voltage actually measure , in real terms ? : :it 's the energy per electron . if you have a battery which gives you a higher voltage , then every electron moving between the poles of the battery will be able to do more work ( like giving you a brighter lamp ) . if you multiply the number of electrons per second that flow ( that is the current amperage ) with the voltage ( energy per electron ) , you get the energy per second , which we call power or wattage . : :if you think of electric circuits as flowing water , then voltage is akin to the pressure difference between two points . in the case of a water circuit , you could measure it by connecting the two points with a pipe which has an elastic membrane in its middle , so that no water can actually flow through . the extend to which the membrane is stretched by the water is a measure for the '' voltage '' . axelboldt 11:53 sep 2 , 2002 ( pdt ) : thank you axel . i did n't know the amount of work per electron could change . -- tarquin : another electricity question for the voltage page : when a battery runs down , which measurable quantities decrease ? does a household battery which is labelled , say 5 volts actually produce less once it has been used -- tarquin : :a battery can be modelled as a perfect voltage source ( i.e . one that can supply infinite current ) in series with a resistor . the voltage source depends on the chemistry of the battery , not on whether it is empty or full . when a battery runs down , the value of the fictional resistor , called the internal resistance , increases ( ask a chemist why : it 's something to do with electrolysis ) . when the battery is connected to a load ( e.g . a light bulb ) , which has its own resistance , the resulting voltage across the load depends on the ratio of the battery 's internal resistance to the resistance of the load . when the battery is fresh , its internal resistance is low , so the voltage across the load is almost equal to that of the battery 's internal voltage source . as the battery runs down and its internal resistance increases , the proportion of its internal voltage that gets through the internal resistance to appear at the load gets smaller , so the battery 's ability to deliver power to the load decreases . eventually , the battery 's resistance gets higher than even the very high resistance of a voltmeter , so the meter reads a voltage lower than the battery 's internal voltage . : :to answer your question , the directly measurable quantity that decreases is the voltage across a given load . if you connect a fixed load , say a 100 ohm resistor , across a battery , then you can calculate , using ratios , the internal resistance of the battery . you could then compare this with the internal resistance of a fresh battery . measuring the voltage of a battery with no load ( called its open-circuit voltage ) tells you very little about its state of charge . if your household battery is labelled 5v , then when new it should produce 5v whether on-load or open-circuit . as it runs down , its on-load voltage will decrease , but its open-circuit voltage will stay at 5v until the battery is completely knackered . at this point the voltage will appear to drop suddenly , because the battery is no longer able to drive the tiny current that your voltmeter needs to make its measurement . : :by the way , would n't this be more appropriate to the '' battery '' article than the '' voltage '' article ? : : -- heron : : : probably better on battery , yes . thank you . -- tarquin