Wikipedia:Reference Desk archive 1

2001-11-07 : if you look at a chart of the international phonetic alphabet ( see under pulmonary consonants , there are several combinations of features not given ipa symbols , but not marked as impossible either . why ? could a language use those consonants ? e.g . bilabial tap and approximant , labiodental plosive , trill and tap , retroflex trill and lateral fricative , etc . -- user : sjk 2002-03-17 : as i understand it & trade ; , these were omitted from the chart because at the time of publishing , they had not been documented as phonemes in human languages , or at least are extremely rare . however , some of this is now out of date - for example , there are some documented adamawan and ubangan languages that have a phonemeic labiodental flap , as well as several sudanic languages that have a nonphonemic labiodental flap . ( check out the sil international 's web page for more information on this , and other research in the area of linguistics . ) pgdudda -- -- what is the best way to view the upcoming leonids meteor shower ? will everyone be able to see it ? might it be a dud ? ( posted nov . 16 . ) : it 's too late now , but the best way to view it was simply go somewhere outdoors , not cloudy , and dark , at the right time , and bring a motas : ) i had the first four , but not the last , and it was still pretty spectacular . -- robert merkel -- -- what is the cause of halos around the moon ? i found an answer here : this is a nasa page . so a follow-up question : can we use that content here on wikipedia , or not ? ( anyone want to do the research ? ) ( posted nov . 2 , 2001 . ) -- nasa photos are pd unless listed as copyrighted . this one of the halo is listed as c . by juan carlos casado ( jccasado skylook.net ) . allows informational and educational use of photos , links to nasa , & screenshots of pages but it says nothing about the actual text of the pages . the best person to contact appears to be brian dunbar , internet services manager , nasa office of public affairs . sorry , no e-mail address but you can snail mail via nasa headquarters - washington , dc 20546 -- -- what are the chances of human colonization of the moon and mars ? are there any active plans for this ? what are some of the prerequisites ? ( posted october 24 , 2001 . ) -- there are no plans for this by any current spacefaring organizations , but see mars direct for a feasable near-term idea . in the extreme long-term , see terraforming . i ca n't find any good entries for medium-term colonization methods offhand ( space habitats , etc . ) . at the moment , colonization plans are really just speculation . read '' entering space '' by robert zubrin for an accessible , and plausible , view of this kind of thing . -- -- what does the scroll lock do ? user : eean ( oct 8 2001 ) -- not much in today 's software ; see scroll lock . -- -- i heard on the news shortly after 9/11 that they may have secret military tribunals in the us . did anything come of this ? ( oct 6 2001 ) -- ( i do n't think so , but maybe you are thinking of the secret foreign intelligence surveillance court ) . -- -- who was thomas reid and what did he have to do with the scottish school of common sense ? ( posted june 26 . ) -- see thomas reid and common sense . -- -- in '' a study in scarlet '' by arthur conan doyle , an account is given of the early history of the mormons , in which they are made out to be grossly intolerant , extremely brutal to dissenters , and in which leaders are portrayed as all being polygamy . in what details is doyle 's story correct , and in what details is it exaggerated ? ( posted june 26 . ) ( see mormons -- i added what i know ) -- -- what is the history of finno-ugric people and language ( i 'm not sure what to call the relevant article ) ? how did it come to be that people who speak closely-related languages live in such relatively far-flung places as finland , hungary , and the middle of russia ( udmurtia ) ? ( posted june 26 . ) 2002-03-17 : ( pgdudda again . ) for an indirect answer , see the article on uralic languages , to which finnish and hungarian belong . the short answer is that the two languages mentioned are the endpoints of a backwards-c-shaped archipelago of related languages , with the '' spine '' of the '' c '' running along the ural mountains . presumably , at some point in history , the days on which the weekend or shabbat is held were made consistent around the world . presumably , they were n't always the same day . so when did that happen , and was there any resistance ? for example , when did japan start observing weekends at the same time as europe ? ( posted june 26 . ) hmm . for a book-length answer , see eviatar zerubavel , the seven day circle : the history and meaning of the week . -- -- why do joint pop ? why do knuckles and backs crack ? is it dangerous to constantly crack knuckles or backs ? ( not sure what article this would be answered in.one called '' joint '' ? maybe not ? ) ( posted june 26 . ) -- i 'd put it under cracking knuckles , since that seems to be the most common joint-cracking habit as far as i can see . have created a stubby article answering why the sound is generated under cracking knuckles , looking for info on the consequences of doing this . -- -- what are the main practical applications of mathematics ? ( not sure what article would have this answer . ) ( posted june 26 . ) well , poker of course ! more seriously , i ca n't think of any major practical field offhand that is n't dependant on mathematics . physics , engineering , telecommunications , architecture , aeronautics , computer science , accounting all come to mind as biggies . -- -- what is the deepest lake in the world ? what lake has the greatest volume of water ? what lake has the greatest surface area ? how do geologists define the word '' lake '' ? ( posted june 26 . ) ( first and third questions answered - july 16 ) -- -- -- -- how do the different parts of a computer ( processor , memory , etc . ) work together with software to create a functioning desktop computer ? i imagine this should be answered on computer , which now has a paltry line , '' programmable machine that processes data , '' and a link to computing , which page consists just of a list of links . even computer hardware consists of a list of links . all i wan na know is how a computer works . : - ) : have a look at the computer article now . ( posted june 29 . ) -- -- is interstellar space travel possible ? ( posted july 13 . ) see interstellar travel . -- -- why is n't there powdered alcohol ? ( would n't that be great ? '' just add water . '' ) ( posted july 16 . ) : answer , 16 july : such powders only work with things that are actually suspensions of very fine-grained solids in water , such as milk . alcohol is a fluid on its own , and does not contain water , thus you can not 'take the water out ' . still , pure alcohol comes quite close to what you describe ( actually , it 's rarely pure , more like 95-98 % ) - however , it 's a fluid , not a powder . : would you belive there is such a thing . sort of . i belive they bind the alcohol to something . add water and . there 's a company i found on google that sells it for food use . : you 'd divide the contents of this answer into such articles as alcohol , suspension , and even powdered drink . -- -- playing with a magnifying glass and a piece of paper on a sunny day , i had the brilliant idea of making a really , really big magnifying glass , in arizona , and using it to make electricity ? c'mon , tell me why this is n't the next big thing in alternative energy circles ! ! ( july 16 . ) : answer , 16 july : you would still need some apparatus to turn the energy that is focused by your magnifying glass into a usable form of energy , like electricity . once you have found a way to do that , you will probably realise that you get at least as much energy , with less difficulties and less space use , with an array of solar collectors the size of your original magnifying glass . : this one you would put in a ( probably very long ) article about alternative energy , or about magnifying glasses , or power generation ( or should that be electrical generation ) . : :note - you should see what they have in barstow , ca , it is a tower with a lot of mirrors pointing at a central mass that gets very hot to produce steam and electricity . -- mike dill : :this would fit under solar power . using mirrors to concentrate sunlight has hte same effect as using lenses , but it 's much easier and cheaper to build . -- -- why is arsenic poisonous ? -- partial answer at arsenic .