Wikipedia:Guide for Everything2 noders

cultural differences . wikipedia is entirely focused on making an encyclopedia . unlike e2 , there 's not a lot of unrelated socializing ; almost all of wikipedia 's chat is about improving specific articles or the project as a whole . wikipedia does n't have song lyrics , poetry , or fiction either ; it 's not a primary-source repository . ( but see wikisource for published sources . ) anyone can edit any article here . everybody 's a content editor . your contributions will be edited , rearranged , re-worded and expanded , and you should n't be shy about doing the same to other people 's work . be bold in updating pages ! wikipedia is self-moderated and relatively anarchic , rather than having moderation imposed upon it . see wikipedia : power structure for details . most wikipedians try to avoid personal attacks and to spread wikilove wherever they go : - ) . if you say something you regret , just apologize and delete it . if someone offends you , we have some advice on staying cool when the editing gets hot . we do n't have a voting system or experience measure & mdash ; be assured that wikipedia : wikipediholic without it . the relative advantages of e2 and wikipedia are summarized in an exchange on e2 's editor logs . in december 2003 , ( former ) e2 editor gn0sis cited reasons for '' why i 'm moving to wikipedia '' . in response , lucy-s defended the virtues of e2 . moving content from e2 to wikipedia . please copy your good encyclopedic content from e2 to wikipedia ! do n't forget to search for related wikipedia content first & mdash ; like e2 , wikipedia has full-text search , and if wikipedia already has an article on the subject , just merge your own content into it : be bold ! . legal issues . you can move any of your own e2 writeups to wikipedia . mention on the wikipedia article 's talk page ( click '' discuss this page '' ) that you originally wrote the material for e2 and link to your e2 homenode ( like this : yerricde ) , so that nobody thinks you 're committing plagiarism . you can even do this if your node has been improved by an e2 content editor . for other noders ' writeups , you will need the permission of all major contributors ( see wikipedia : copyright ) . any contributions you make to wikipedia are released under the gnu free documentation license . however , you retain the copyright to your own work and are free to modify and redistribute it in any way you wish . changes to make . content needs to be converted from e2 markup to wiki markup . for the most part , wiki markup resembles that of e2 's auto-formatting tool , but there are a few differences . generally it 's easiest to copy and paste the text and add markup rather than copying the e2 markup . wikipedia titles are generally shorter , so phrases like '' how to '' should be removed , and most titles should only have lower-case letters . see the naming conventions for all the details . wikipedia also has some technical features that e2 lacks . for instance , wikipedia allows links to external web pages . because you can special : upload , you do not need to convert images to ascii art . you do n't need to use markup to generate tables ; you can use standard html markup instead , as well as wikipedia 's concise table markup . though you can use html entity escapes for '' , '' , ' ' , you do n't need to ; wikipedia has the wi ki > tag to suppress interpretation of control characters as markup . in fact , wikipedia has tags that can be used to enclose a fragment of a computer program . wikipedia has a different manual of style from e2 . however , if your article does n't match that style , someone will change it so it does , so do n't worry too much . it 's easy to link something by putting it in square brackets , and target work here too , but remember that two pairs of brackets surround a link in wikipedia . do n't forget to add links from other articles to yours , where it 's appropriate ; wikipedia has no '' soft link '' functionality . on the other hand , e2 articles tend to be somewhat more heavily linked , and e2 noders often put links around phrases to emphasize them . this is uncommon here : links should be only created around words and phrases where encyclopedia articles exist or can realistically be written . wikipedia articles usually try to cover a subject in depth instead of concentrating on a single aspect thereof . what may be a perfectly acceptable write-up on e2 may well be a stub on wikipedia that can only be fixed by merging it into a larger article . on e2 , noders will often quote from private messages sent by other noders in response to a writeup . on wikipedia we try to quote opinions from people who are influential , or have some special expertise , and the best people for that generally wo n't be wikipedians . we have a policy called the neutral point of view ( npov ) . it is similar to e2 's deprecation of '' getting to know you '' nodes , subjective list nodes , and bullshit ( called patent nonsense here ) , but there are subtle differences in the two policies . wikipedia 's policy is stronger ; when expressing opinions ( such as in sonny bono copyright term extension act ) , we turn them into facts by stating that a group holds such opinions . similarly , an article should at any time look like an encyclopedia text , even if it is only a very short one . comments should be put on discussion pages , or if absolutely necessary , within the text , enclosed as html comments . it may take you a little time to get used to the wikipedia approach , but do n't worry too much about it . anyone can fix your mistakes while you 're getting the hang of things . but always keep in mind that wikipedia is an encyclopedia & mdash ; if you want to keep an online diary or write down your personal opinions , e2 and other wikis are probably a better place . of course , we would like to encourage you to post encyclopedic material here , and non-encyclopedic material elsewhere . some e2 users do n't like long writeups and show their displeasure . on wikipedia , we tend to aim for larger articles , on average , though we still have many stubs . see wikipedia : page size for some rough guidelines . moving content from wikipedia to e2 . moving articles from wikipedia to e2 is very easy . all you have to do is reformat the content appropriately ( e2 's text formatter makes it easy ) and follow the gnu free documentation license . damian yerrick ( yerricde on e2 ) has provided an example of how to do this in his writeup in bullshit , which was derived from wikipedia 's article on bullshit . whatever wikipedia 's policies for disseminating its content may be , e2 discourages the posting of material not substantially authored by the user posting it ( regardless of the impression that a perusal of some of e2 's older content may give ) . e2 does not have formal policy , but one popular view holds that a writeup without attribution to another source carries an implicit claim that the user who posted the writeup is its author . the fact that wikipedia articles are edited collaboratively makes their posting on e2 problematical . at some point in the past , a few users created the everyone e2 account to upload content without taking personal credit for it . the everyone account still exists on e2 and may occasionally be useful for adding wikipedia content , especially if it is content you are not substantially responsible for . for access to the everyone account , contact dann . the user who wishes to move wikipedia content to e2 has three other alternatives : 1 . some e2 usergroups have control of anonymous accounts for the posting of general interest writeups . if you are an e2 user who is a member of such a usergroup , you may be able to convince the group to allow you to copy wikipedia material to that account . 2 . with editorial permission , post the content under your own name . 3 . create a new account and post a clear claim on its homenode that it is used to post content not authored by its owner . do not use this account to node your own material or to influence the e2 database by voting or using other features that one gains as one rises in level . whatever you do , you must attribute the material to wikipedia , and link to the gnu free documentation license as well . an italicized paragraph at the top stating this article/writeup is released under the gnu free documentation license , and is a verbatim copy/modified version of an article from wikipedia at as of mm/dd/yyyy , as allowed by that license should satisfy e2 policy on the matter . ( do n't accept this as authoritative until i get concurrence from dem bones - casu marzu ) . final words . we hope you find working on wikipedia to be fun and rewarding . if you have questions that you ca n't find the answers to , drop by the village pump and ask away . chances are a friendly wikipedian or three will have some answers for you . this article was originally based on an analogous guide for h2g2 researchers .