Satellite modem

satellite link . a satellite modem is not the only device needed to establish a communication channel . other equipment that are essential for creating a satellite link include satellite antennas and frequency converters . data to be transmitted are transferred to a modem from data terminal equipment ( e.g . a computer ) . the modem usually has intermediate frequency ( if ) output ( that is , 50-200 & nbsp ; mhz ) , however , sometimes the signal is modulated directly to l-band . in most cases frequency has to be converted using an upconverter before amplification and transmission . a modulated signal is a sequence of symbols , pieces of data represented by a corresponding signal state , e.g . a bit or a few bits , depending upon the modulation scheme being used . recovering a symbol clock ( making a local symbol clock generator synchronous with the remote one ) is one of the most important tasks of a demodulator . similarly , a signal received from a satellite is firstly downconverter ( this is done by a low-noise block converter - lnb ) , then demodulated by a modem , and at last handled by data terminal equipment . the lnb is usually powered by the modem through the signal cable with 13 or 18 v dc . features . the main functions of a satellite modem are modulation and demodulation . satellite communication standards also define error correction codes and framing formats . popular modulation types being used for satellite communications : binary phase shift keying ( bpsk ) ; quadrature phase shift keying ( qpsk ) ; offset quadrature phase shift keying ( oqpsk ) ; 8psk ; quadrature amplitude modulation ( qam ) , especially 16qam . the popular satellite error correction codes include : convolutional codes : with constraint length less than 10 , usually decoded using a viterbi algorithm ( see viterbi decoder ) ; with constraint length more than 10 , usually decoded using a fano algorithm ( see sequential decoder ) ; reed-solomon codes usually concatenated with convolutional codes with an interleaving ; new modems support superior error correction codes ( turbo codes and ldpc codes ) . frame formats that are supported by various satellite modems include : intelsat business service ( ibs ) framing intermediate data rate ( idr ) framing mpeg-2 transport framing ( used in dvb ) e1 and t1 framing high-end modems also incorporate some additional features : multiple data interfaces ( like rs-232 , rs-422 , v.35 , g.703 , lvds , ethernet ) ; embedded distant-end monitor and control ( edmac ) , allowing to control the distant-end modem ; automatic uplink power control ( aupc ) , that is , adjusting the output power to maintain a constant signal to noise ratio at the remote end ; drop and insert feature for a multiplexed stream , allowing to replace some channels in it . internal structure . probably the best way of understanding modem 's work is to look at its internal structure . a block diagram of a generic satellite modem is shown on the image . almost all parts are optional . analog tract . after a digital to analog converter in the transmitter the signal passes through a reconstruction filter . then its frequency is converted if needed . the purpose of the analog tract in the receiver is to convert signal 's frequency , to adjust its power via an automatic gain control circuit and to get its complex envelope components . the input signal for the analog tract is at the intermediate frequency or in the l-band , in the second case it must be firstly converted to if . then the signal is either sampled or processed by the four-quadrant multiplier which produces the complex envelope components ( i , q ) through multiplying it by the heterodyne frequency . see superheterodyne receiver . at last the signal passes through an anti-aliasing filter and sampled ( digitized ) . modulator and demodulator . a digital modulator transforms a digital stream into a radio signal on intermediate frequency ( if ) . a modulator is generally a much simpler device than a demodulator , because it does n't have to recover symbol and carrier frequencies . a demodulator is one of the most important parts of the receiver . the exact structure of the demodulator is defined by a modulation type . however , the fundamental concepts are similar . moreover , it is possible to develop a demodulator which can process signals with different modulation types . digital demodulation implies that a symbol clock ( and , in most cases , an intermediate frequency generator ) at the receiving side have to be synchronous with those at the transmitting side . this is achieved by the following two circuits : timing recovery circuit , determining the borders of symbols ; carrier recovery circuit , which determines the actual meaning of each symbol . there are modulation types ( like frequency shift keying ) that can be demodulated without carrier recovery ( noncoherent demodulation ) but this method is generally worse . there are also additional components in the demodulator such as the intersymbol interference equalizer . if the analog signal was digitized without a four-quadrant multiplier , the complex envelope has to be calculated by a digital complex mixer . sometimes a digital automatic gain control circuit is implemented in the demodulator . fec coding . error correction techniques are essential for satellite communications , because , due to satellite 's limited power a signal to noise ratio at the receiver is usually rather poor . error correction works by adding an artificial redundancy to a data stream at the transmitting side , and using this redundancy to correct errors caused by noise and interference . a fec encoder applies an error correction code to the digital stream , adding redundancy . a fec decoder decodes the forward error correction code that is used in the specific signal . for example , the digital video broadcasting standard defines a concatenated code consisting of inner convolutional ( standard nasa code , punctured , with rates 1/2 , 2/3 , 3/4 , 5/6 , 7/8 ) , interleaving and outer reed-solomon code ( block length : 204 bytes , information block : 188 bytes , can correct up to 8 bytes in the block ) . differential coding . there are several modulation types ( such as psk and qam ) that have a phase ambiguity , that is , a carrier can be restored in different ways . differential coding is used to resolve this ambiguity . when differential coding is used , the data are deliberately made to depend not only on the current symbol , but also on the previous one . scrambling . scrambling is a technique used to randomize a data stream to eliminate long ' 0'-only and ' 1'-only sequences and to assure energy dispersal . long ' 0'-only and ' 1'-only sequences create difficulties for timing recovery circuit . scramblers and descramblers are usually based on linear-feedback shift registers . a scrambler randomizes the data stream to be transmitted . a descrambler restores the original stream from the scrambled one . scrambling should n't be confused with encryption , since it does n't protect information from intruders . multiplexing . a multiplexer transforms several digital streams into one stream . this is often referred to as 'muxing . ' generally , a demultiplexer is a device which transforms one multiplexed data stream to several streams which it consists of . satellite modem does n't have so many outputs , so a demultiplexer here performs a drop operation , allowing to choose channels that will be transferred to output . a demultiplexer achieves this goal by maintaining frame synchronization . applications . satellite modems are often used for home internet access . there are two different types , both employing the digital video broadcasting ( dvb ) standard as their basis : one-way satmodems ( dvb-ip modems ) use a return channel not based on communication with the satellite , such as telephone or cable . two-way satmodems ( dvb-rcs modems , also called astromodems ) employ a satellite-based return channel as well ; they do not need another connection . dvb-rcs is etsi standard en 301 790 . there are also industrial satellite modems intended to provide a permanent link . they are used , for example , in the steel shankar network .