Wikipedia:Reference Desk archive unanswered

autonomous data acquisition . how about this area of technology ? what 's the current breakthroughs and limitations ? i can imagine little devices say , collecting data on the environment , sending it to the internet when there 's a problem , and having someone inspect the location based on the analysis of this data . what other developments are there right now ? -- happycamper 04:51 , 26 july 2005 ( utc ) : it depends on what kind of data you want to collect and when you want to set off the alarm , and the actual implementation depends on what program you use with what sensor . any more details would help ben ( talk ) 17:04 , 3 july 2008 ( utc ) : :see smart dust . wnt ( talk ) 15:53 , 14 august 2010 ( utc ) : : : wireless sensor network may be along the lines of the op . -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 04:39 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) . can you provide me with any info about the glass portrait made after general moltke the elder ? . beertables . thumb hi all , does somebody know who has invented '' beertables '' and when ? i 'm not sure about the correct translation , but you could simply take a look at w : de : biergarnitur . you could also answer into the diskussion page at the article in english . greets -- 84.154.161.166 20:29 , 2 august 2005 ( utc ) : um.cave men , most likely . possibly primates or some other smart nonhuman . & brvbar ; reisio 20:37 , 2005 august 2 ( utc ) : :um . this was n't a joke , somebody must have invented it , even if it was in ancient times . -- 84.154.160.62 07:28 , 3 august 2005 ( utc ) : : : i do n't understand & mdash ; it looks like an ordinary picnic table to me . what 's the difference between a beertable and a simple table with benches ? i do n't know what the earliest recorded usage of a table is , but i expect they go back before recorded history . hence reiso 's comment . & mdash ; asbestos user talk : asbestos 10:17 , 3 august 2005 ( utc ) : : : :a beertable is much easier to store and transport , because you can fold the tablelegs . and the table legs are made of metal , so perhapps they were n't invented so early . -- 84.154.160.62 10:21 , 3 august 2005 ( utc ) : : : : : ah , a foldable table . i doubt you 'll be able to find out who invented a foldable table , either , but if you get much more specific and ask something like '' who was the first person to mass-produce a foldable table of these relative dimensions ? '' or want patent information or something , maybe that can be found . & brvbar ; reisio 10:57 , 2005 august 3 ( utc ) : : : : : :this could all be useful , too . it would be very nice , if you could provide some informations . such tables also used at the oktoberfest , like this i think these '' beertables '' are a bit special foldable tables also used in beergardens . -- 84.154.160.62 11:31 , 3 august 2005 ( utc ) : : : : : : : note : the same discussion is taking place in german at : de : wikipedia : auskunft festzeltgarnitur with some links and more chances for success . & mdash ; sebastian ( talk ) 17:58 , august 3 , 2005 ( utc ) : : : : : :the german talk is not as useful as this talk : - ( i hoped somebody here could help . -- 84.154.160.62 20:51 , 3 august 2005 ( utc ) : : : : : could somebody help ? -- 84.154.166.197 22:02 , 4 august 2005 ( utc ) : i would bet on the romans . they developed quite a bit of portable equipment for camp use , such as the cot similar to the one now used by the us army . gadget850 22:28 , 19 september 2005 ( utc ) : : it seems the egyptians had them far before the romans . -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 04:44 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) . the stadium used by real santa barbara . does anyone out there know the stadium that was used by real santa barbara of the usl first division in 1990 ? i want to say that they used harder stadium , but i 'm not sure . thank you . -- fpo 15:56 , august 3 , 2005 ( utc ) : la playa stadium . -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 04:52 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) . information on artist jeane c clover . last name may be claver . any information about this artist would be greatly appreciated . thank you . sabrina scholten : jean claverie ( born 1946 ) ? -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 04:58 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) . how do you convert theora video to wmv , avi , or mpg using mplayer on windows ? . relevant forum thread : -- pile0nades talk contribs 00:09 , 8 august 2005 ( utc ) best take your question to one of the best forums for video , forum.doom9.net . but first try the faq ! at www.doom9.net , www.videohelp.com : comparison of video converters , but i do n't think the list is complete . i do n't think mplayer can convert . -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 05:04 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) . roster of barons and montgomery climbers on aug . 18 , 1910 . i have the names of ed greminger , jimmy hart , arch persons and ike rockenfeld that played for montogmery in 1909-11 i also have thier tobbaco cards from the dates of that first team game racincollectible aol.com jason we believe that a friend of ours who has passed away played in the first game , his name was jud dailey , if the data is available please e-mail a copy to our address wlhudson mindspring.com : you could try an email to the barons , baronsatbarons.com ( replace at with ) they may have the roster or know where you can go to find it . -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 05:59 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) . microsoft jet . need some help on microsoft jet database engine : i have tried quite hard to see what locking mechanism this used . i need to know if it uses read and write locks , and whether it uses strict two-phase locking ( was asked on fac ) . - ta bu shi da yu 05:22 , 3 august 2005 ( utc ) . michael cohl . does anyone have any contact information for toronto concert promoter michael cohl or his company ? mwalcoff 19:56 , 11 august 2005 ( utc ) . relationships . i am looking for information on couples in sexual relationships who both have the hiv virus and how they are dealing with it . how it has changed them and how it has changed their outlooks towards each other and their lives . : there was a bbc article recently on a dating agency in india for hiv+ singles to meet each other . trollderella 15:57 , 15 august 2005 ( utc ) their relation would largely colored by whether one partner gave the disease to the other , or they met after contracting the disease . pronunciation of '' kanesema '' . hello . i would very much like to know the correct pronunciation of the burmese term for second washing : kanesema . i have been studying about gem mining . thank you so much for your help . alison watt : fyi , i 've made mention of your question on the burmese language talk page . & brvbar ; reisio 01:40 , 2005 august 12 ( utc ) thank you . i will wait and see if they answer . alison watt . artist 's oil colors over shellac . have an ornate mirror frame ( see enclosure ) , with inner border for future painting . the frame is basswood , gesso ( whiting & rabbit skin glue ) approx 4 coats , then water gilded . the ( not gilded ) inner border is gesso that has been sanded smooth , then a coat of 1 1/2 shellac , sanded smooth , then another coat of same shellac.then sanded smooth once again . the remaining shellac layers are quite thin . note : the '' shellac '' product used was actually zinsser seal coat properly thinned to reach 1 1/2 cut . specific info rel . the zinsser product is at : any particular caution or further suggestion ( s ) you might provide in order to use any ( professional ) artist oil paints . over the gesso/shellac inner border area ? ed mckamey fyi i contacted 11 other possible sources of an answer to above question . should you be interested in the consensus , '' it is ok to use artist 's oil colors over dewaxed type of shellac , and assure that the shellac surface is clean & sanded dull ( eg . 220 grit ) , to allow oil paint to adher . enough said ! . college life statistics . does anyone have a good source for reliable college polling statistics and rankings like those at princeton review ? ie , different categories for ranking less quantitative stats . i know us news and world report used to have a pretty good page of quality of life polls for us universities that i cited a few years ago , but now pr is the only good one i can find . leppy 05:44 , 11 august 2005 ( utc ) . belacan . could someone familiar with south-east asian cuisine please take a look at the article and my questions at talk : belacan ? thank you . lupo 10:51 , august 11 , 2005 ( utc ) . ipa symbols for leintwardine . i have added leintwardine to list of names in english with non-intuitive pronunciations , but i do n't know how to write the ipa symbols . can someone help out ? it 's pronounced like the words lent+word+dine , as against the more obvious line-t-ward-dean . user : philhibbs & mdash ; philhibbs talk 15:10 , 11 august 2005 ( utc ) : done . -- angr/ 22:27 , 1 september 2005 ( utc ) . advanced dungeons and dragons 2002 halflings . i was wondering if anyone knew what the character names are for this set . it is a dungeons and dragons advanced 1980 edition . 2002 halflings . thank you : character names are both personal and arbitrary , but a few guide lines exist as to the choice of names for charcter names for this race . the guides suggest that they be single names that are neither ordinary and not common words . dungeons and dragaons advanced 1980 edition is usually referred to as ad & d 2ed . copies of the player handbook can be had for as little as 50 cents at used bookstores . character naming . baseball . who hit the most pop-flies in the 2002 major league baseball season ? -- benbrill all three online mlb statistic sources struck out . major league baseball statistics and history statistics - the official site of major league baseball baseball stats 101 by baseball almanac . windows xp & ir control . does anyone know where i can find a program for windows xp which can receive the infrared commands sent to my infrared port ( by a tv remote , for example ) , store them , and later on output them ? like control my tv with my laptop ? there 's many for the palm/pocket pc but not for windows xp ( most of the ones i find are for outdated win95 systems ) . -- logan these devices are quite common and cheap since xp media center came out . the software for it may work on plain xp . there is also the device at www.irtrans.com . as for using the built in irda , i do n't know of any software for it , but i believe it is unlikely . irda can send/receive up to 4 million bits per second , with each bit being an even shorter pulse of light . a normal ir remote sends a few hundred bits per second . they also use different methods of communication . boot into your bios however , under integrated peripherals , check uart emulation , see if there is a setting for hp/ask ir or some such , it is a more compatible setting for remotes , and there is a greater chance of software being possible . also check to see if there 's a plugin for irda at www.irassistant.com . gun maker w.h . brown . looking for information on a flintlock gun maker named w.h . brown . he may have lived in eastern tn , or some where across the appalachian area of the us . would like to know when and where he lived , and basic information about the guns he made . any information will be greatly appreciated . thanks : the gun history here may help . more history here where it say its use on both side of the atlantic ocean in the 18th century . on ebay they sold an american one that dated back in 1806 . : known w . h . brown on find a grave are ( though none is a gunmaker ) : : : william h . brown . : : william harry brown . : : william henry browne . : :or look at the choices of brown 's in this search w . h . brown . though none fits the description . 24.201.116.26 17:43 , 14 march 2006 ( utc ) . hydro-cracker . i would like to find out how many hydro-crackers are at present in operation around the world ? jo hi , maybe this can help you : . greek in the koran . do you happen to know if any greek words are in the koran and if they are in what suras might they be found ? also , you might concider making an article concerning foreign words in the koran . major vivion de valera . the rank of major does not exist in the irish army , where the equivalent rank in commandant . so where did vivion de valera get the rank of major ? i understand he was in the irish army during the emergencey ( ww2 ) . incidentally , it is interesting to note that he was always referred to as major rather than doctor ( as in phd ) . he probably is refered as major because the rank does not existent in most countries , for a reader to understand his milary service it is help full his rank . the rank of comadant would confuse most not familar with irish rank structure , since combdant can reffer to any possiton of authorty , for all the reader knows he could be a nco ir a general . by translating his rank to major , it is easier for reader to understand his military . babe ruth or honus wanger . did either babe ruth or honus wagner ever play ball for the town of bulger pa . ? i do not belive babe ruth did , he played for the oreos the sox and the yankees . european cup & champions leauge . could you please clarify , if possible , the following questions ! how many republic of ireland players have won a european cup or champions league meadal ? who are they ? and if a team wins the champions league how many medals are awarded and what is the criteria for the allocation ? . alchemy . i would like to have some information about the house of alchimist , located in valdenogher , belluno , italy tankyou emilio la casa museo si trova a valdenogher di tambre.e ' possibile prenotare la visita al n . tel 3208565344 ( oriana ) . lapping proces possible on aluminium extrusions ? . i will like to know how effectively one can do lapping / diamond polishing etc . like smooth surface finish ( to obtain mirror finish to the extruded aluminium slab / surface ) process on aluminium extrusions / ingots . the surface may not be perfectly parallel and still we want to do surface finishing process on one side.we want to achieve 10 to 20 nm finish on the surface . kindly inform me a process to achieve this much surface roughness . here is an aluminum polishing kit . and a article on aluminum polishing : i suggest you look for a powdered coatings shop in your area . -- artoftransformation 11:42 , 12 november 2005 ( utc ) . citytv edmonton through the internet . i am interested in getting ckec through the internet , because i live in another province and my cable provider does n't have rights to that channel . i do n't have money to invest in a satelite dish , which is the only way i could get the channel on tv . can anyone guide me with regards to how to obtain access through the internet , and which website i should visit to set it up ? salouah : most tv stations avoid online feeds . they are in a legal battle in cannada now to keep isps from having the right to 'stream ' them . many radio stations have online feeds , but i have never seen a tv one . most tv websites to have video files you can watch , mostly news though . -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 06:43 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) . phrase history : '' you are here '' -- - > . dear wikipedia folks , on which map was the phrase '' you are here '' first used and who created it ? i have seen that phrase , usually with a little arrow pointing to a spot , placed on everything from a photo of a spiral galaxy to a timeline of dinosaurs . i can remember it as far back as the early 1980 's . also , is it at all related to the much earlier phrase '' we are here , we are here , we are here ! '' yelled by the character 's in dr seuss ' horton hears a who ? thank you , tanja : i 've always had the impression it started on actual maps . when you go to a big mall , or a theme park , they 'll often provide you with a map , or mount several on boards throughout . that is n't much use if you do n't know where you are in the first place , so they show you . that has , for as long as i 've been alive ( born in 1987 ) always been a you are here arrow . that 's the only practical use i 've ever seen them put to , so i always assumed that was their original purpose . 70.243.46.200 17:23 , 2 january 2006 ( utc ) : :i 've got nothing better . i recall seeing the usage in the late 1970 's , but have no documentation . a patient person might consult a newspaper comics historian for the first reference to '' you are here '' in a gag to set a boundary for when it first showed up . ~~ : : : you could try the emails on this site . they may have the answer or be curiuos about it if they do n't . -- canoe1967 ( talk ) 06:28 , 23 march 2012 ( utc ) the magazine skiing in its jan 1974 issue on page 98 mentions '' …complete maps at each intersection , each with a 'you are here ' designation . '' this in reference parc du mont ste.-anne and station forestiere de duchesnay . need info on french artist : henri cheriot ( spelling ? ) . i am a real estate agent in orlando , florida . i have a client whose house was built in 1923 on lake gatlin . a french artist named henri cheriot or chariot , lived there at some point . there a sculptures by him used as architectural detail throughout the house ( chimney , small unicorn on wall ) . his initials are engraved on the fireplace . any help would be greatly appreciated . jeannie clarke : if it is a contemporary artist you are looking for then it may be henri chariot . i can find little information about him on the web , though he is listed here ( second entry . ) : :there seems to be only one henry chariot in new york so you might want to give that a try . my friend henri chariot is most probably the person you 're looking for . he is an artist , painted and sculpted everywhere he lived . he easily would have decorated a house with sculptures . he has learned a living for years as a carpenter . i do n't know how old your query is . i 'm answering it in december 2010 . henri currently lives in brooklyn , though i have n't talked to him in a couple of years . military rank insignias request . good afternoon , my name is richard ruotolo and i am a freelance graphic artist working out of upstate new york . i am working on a project with jim slavin , coordinator of military projects for excelsior college in albany , ny 12203 , phone 518-464-8650 . i am in search of military insignia in vector format ( illustrator files if possible , eps or ai files ) or high res tiff images for 4 military groups 1 ) army 2 ) navy 3 ) airforce 4 ) marines i was given this site by jim slavin . i noticed you have a few gif and png files , but am in need of these symbols/insignias in vector format to be used for a background image on a printed recruitment/informative publication . this is what was requested of jim slavin . could you help send me these files and or point to a page where i may access these or assist me in any other way possible ? also at this time , do you have access to any hi-res military photography as well . to my understanding , excelsior college is having a hard time tracking down hi-res updated usable photography for printed recruitment publications . i 'm hoping we can work together on this one . thank you . note : email file size can not exceed 4mb have a great day ! i am new at this . if you go to this web-site , they list and show the pictures of military insigna for all four branches . the site is : hope this helps . -- person who wants to help . book list about omni for ft.w.mus . of sci . sharon murray is in charge of creating a new display about out museum 's omni theater . i have technical info . are their any books available on this wonderful technology : history , future plans ; anything . . chinese hair locket . what do you know about chinese artifacts , about 100 or so years old and a little newer and a little older , with taoist and confucian motifs , that are receptacles for the hair of loved ones ( perhaps living , perhaps dead—i 'm not sure which ) ? the examples i have are sometimes anthropomorphic and sometimes vases . they are made of pot metal , silver alloys , or enameled pot metal . thank you . suzy parker & highland park , nj . having very much admired the late actress and model suzy parker , i was rather surprised to read in the entry under her name that she was raised and educated in highland park , new jersey . i am from highland park and would have been in school about ten years after her . i should be very pleased to think that she was living there at the same time as i , but i should very much like to know whether there was , in fact , any connection between my old home town and this wonderful actress . thank you . harold taylor . university of georgia traditions . does the university of georgia have any traditions ? the article on uga does not really go in depth on student life or student/faculty/alumni traditions . : a number of those related to fall sports are mentioned here , including '' uga '' , the redcoat band , '' silver britches '' , and the ringing of the chapel bell . filibusters in canada . what is the longest filibuster recorded in canadian history by a single speaker ? -- happycamper 01:05 , 5 september 2005 ( utc ) : i believe it would have occured during the great flag debate , during pearsons pm , and john diefenbaker as the oppostion leader . ( '' diefenbaker and his traditionalist lieutenants mounted a filibuster . '' ) : from what i remember my parents said , both canadian citizens , diefenbaker carried on for days himself , and they took turns for months . my great great grand uncle , was an mp during mckenzie king era , told stroies to my grandfather about long debates , but nothing close to what went on during the great flag debate . : i will be able to find out how long his filibuster lasted , and report it here . cha cha . is there somebody who was famous for performing the cha cha ? also , what do people wear when performing this dance ? —preceding unsigned comment added by 202.7.190.131 ( talk • contribs ) 2005-09-07 04:14:03 pdt '' the english dance teacher pierre lavelle visited cuba in 1952 and found a form of rumba being performed with extra steps : the slow step of the basic pattern is replaced with the triple step ( cha-cha-cha chasse ) . he taught these steps as a separate dance which came to be known as cha-cha-cha , or the cha-cha . '' -- artoftransformation 11:49 , 12 november 2005 ( utc ) off the top of my head , i would say the most famous cha-cha artist was tito puente . list of other backward casts excluding sc/st . sir can u please tell me the list of other backward casts excluding sc/st or please tell me where to refer . mail me back : address removed —preceding unsigned comment added by 61.2.69.181 ( talk • contribs ) 2005-09-07 04:29:47 pdt . conversion of winamp skins . is there a way to convert winamp skins to windows media player skins ? i 've tried using the wa2wmp.exe program ( in the windows media bonus pack ) , which supposedly converts wsz files , but i have n't had any luck with it . -- dynamite eleven 03:32 , 6 september 2005 ( utc ) . reaction effects of strong base to aqueous gyloxal ( ethandial ) . gyloxal ( ethanedial ) -c2h2o2- as 40 % in water is listed as acidic ( ph 2.1-2.7 ) from the jt baker msds . why is this aldehyde acidic in aqueous solution ? ? what chemical changes would occur by neutralizing the solution to ph 6.0-8.0 with naoh ? ? would it become a carboxylate , sodium salt ? ? 64.154.26.251 22:33 , 7 september 2005 ( utc ) . wp : vp . why is wikipedia : village pump called wikipedia : village pump ? borisblue 14:44 , 11 september 2005 ( utc ) because it is a virtual watering hole , like a drinking fountain to gather around . ( and the picture of the place , is a well/watering hole ) -- artoftransformation 11:45 , 12 november 2005 ( utc ) . chemical reaction of sodium carbonate dissolving oil stain . i would appreciate if someone with a chemistry background could help me . i plan to do a science fair project where i will dissolve just sodium carbonate ( washing soda ) in hot water to remove an olive oil stain from cotton fabric . no other detergents or laundry boosters will be added and the water is soft and the sodium carbonate will not have to worry with '' neutralizing '' the magnesium and calcium deposits , etc . i plan to use different amounts of the sodium carbonate to see if a larger amount will dissolve the stain faster . my dilemna is that per my research via the internet , science dictionaries and even '' wikipedia 's '' archives , i could not get an explanaation on the chemical process . i do not have access to university libraries and the public library is limited in their science/chemistry information . either none was offered or advanced for my purposes . i have had some chemistry , but will not have a complete chemistry unit until next year in 10th grade . per my research , several scenarios should occur : 1 ) the sodium carbonate should create an emulsion that will list the stain from the fabric ; 2 ) this process is the result of hydrolysis ; and 3 ) a mild saponification could occur and convert the stain into '' soap . '' your input and help would be greatly appreciated . thank you . -- scott : first thing , i 'm just a student studying chemistry , but anyway here is the outline of the chemical process involved . : the order in your list is wrong , actually it is 2,3,1 ( or 3,2,1 ? not sure on the hydrolysis ) . : firstly , sodium carbonate dissolve in water to give alkaline solution \mbox^- , because of prescence of na + and oh - ions . : then , when given extra energy ( e.g . by heating or using hot water as in your case ) , saponification occurs , in which the triester is changed into glycerol and soap . : finally , the soap emulsify the oil left . the hydrocarbon chain dissolve in the oil well , while the ion part dissolve in the water . water molecules attract the ion part and thus the oil stain is lifted off the surface . then the droplets ca n't come together again due to repulsion between ions of the soap . : -- lemontea 15:09 , 23 february 2006 ( utc ) . single phase and three phase compressors . can you convert a three phase compressor to a single phase ? or what size compressor would you need to run a cooler that is 17 x 11 feet ? the term '' single phase '' and '' three phase '' refer to the windings of the motors themselves . a three phase motor relies on all three phases of the windings to rotate the motor armature one complete revoluton . so in answer to your first question , no you can not convert a three phase compressor into a single phase compressor unless it is a semi-hermetic ( bolted together ) compressor . however in order to change a three phase semi-hermetic you would have to replace the motor windings and armature into a single phase and this is not cost effective . and for your other question , a 17 x 11 ft cooler would need at least a one ton cooling unit ( that is if it is a cooler not a freezer ) and that determination is climate sensative in colder climates where the cooler walls are outside will probably need less cooling . this calculation is best to be left to a professional that can bid your specific situation and determine amount of btu 's needed and heat gain for the space . -- snoopy612 p.s . here 's a article that may assist in understanding single to three phase . as for your other question search -refrigeration . xvid dvd player help . i bought a divx-certified dvd player that says it supports mp4 + xvid , but when i try to play any of my videos , they get really jittery and pixellated -- at some points it runs at about 1/1000th speed and the screen consists of 10 big coloured pixels . i burnt them onto high-quality ( magmedia , verbatim ) dvd+rs at 2x . they are unscratched , and play fine on my pc ; but they had similar errors on the other xvid player i tried . what can i do to make them watchable ? -- - probably , when you make the videos ensure that you do n't use gmc , or packed video . you can fix the packed video problem easily , but gmc can only be fixed with a reencode . another solution is sometimes , a special keypress on the player . look up the player at www.videohelp.com , check out the special keypresses and compatibility ratings . if there 's no info , use the divxtest cd version 2 , it has videos you try to play and if one does n't play then you know what the problem is . then you have to find a software which lets you control that feature and turn it off . a good list at www.videohelp.com/tools , under encoding or converters or transcoding , or all in one or backup etc . capri sun info . hello my name is maile all and i was just wondering how i can contact capri sun . you can contact me at ( email removed ) thank you for your time , maile try eight hundred dash two two seven dash seven four seven eight . thank you for your time , maile : capri sun is a product of kraft foods . contact them here . hapkido . who knows , which variants of hapkido exist and where are the differences ? -- rhingdrache 17:04 , 13 january 2006 ( utc ) . picture help . during the 1991 gulf war the battleship uss wisconsin launched an rq-2 pioneer unmanned aerial vehicle over faylaka island . the iraqi troops heard the drones aproach and surrendered to it , choosing to be pows over kias . given that the event was widely reported i would have expected to find a picture online , but i have n't found anything . anyone out there have any ideas on where else i might be able to find such a photo ? tomstar81 00:19 , 11 january 2006 ( utc ) . power electronics . hi , i would like to know about power diodes . how they differ from conventional diode , basic structure of power diode & also it 's i-v characteristics . thanks , 61.1.81.71 13:24 , 29 january 2006 ( utc ) -- i suspect you will find a very good answer in the whitepapers section of a diode manufacturer , like www.diodes.com , it may be a little technical . in general , a diode is formed by the interface of a p and n type material . a power diode probably includes a heatsink , and materials that work well under heat , but the basic process is the same . the library duh . controller configuration code for unreal tournament 2004 . i am looking to find a controller configuration code for unreal tournament 2004 . ive searched all the atari and unreal forum pages and tried just about everything they have to offer . ive changed the user ( type : configuration settings ) file like 4 times and nothing seems to work . what is happening is that i have a playstation 2 controller hooked up through the usb port on my computer . and the left joystick works but the right one does not . the right joystick is '' suppose to '' look left right up and down . the left one moves your charecter . and in order to play that particular game i need to be able to look around . so i am wondering what line of code on the joystick part of the user file i am leaving out or adding in the wrong place . please help me ! ! ! thank you , boggled gamer . did germany make use any shotguns during wwii ? . i think the question explains it 's self fine deuxhero 00:29 , 10 october 2006 ( utc ) is that , . germany make use of.germany make or use.germany make and use.70.187.219.134 21:43 , 5 april 2007 ( utc )