George Vertue

life . vertue was born in 1684 in st martin-in-the-fields , london , his father , perhaps a tailor , and mother are noted as 'roman catholic ' . at the age of 13 , he was apprenticed to a prominent heraldic engraver of french origin who became bankrupt and returned to france . vertue worked seven years under michael vandergucht , before operating independently . he was amongst the first members of godfrey kneller 's london academy of painting , who had employed him to engrave portraits . citing : walpole 's anecdotes of painting ; nichols 's literary anecdotes , ii . 246 ; chester 's westminster abbey reg . ; dodd 's manuscript hist . of english engravers in brit . mus . ( addit . ms . 33406 ) . it was there that he became a pupil of thomas gibson , a leading portrait painter . vertue had a deep interest in antiquarian research , and much of his labour was given to this subject . from 1713 on , vertue was a keen researcher on details of the history of british art , accumulating about forty volumes of notebooks . he was a member of the rose and crown club , with william hogarth , peter tillemans and other artists and connoisseurs , and kept some records of it . his travels to sites across england , with enthusiasts such as edward harley ( earl of oxford ) , lord coleraine and others , were recorded in vertue 's highly detailed drawings and notes . in 1717 he was appointed official engraver to the society of antiquaries , the same year as its formal foundation , and the only engraver to be made a fellow of the society . most of the illustrations in vetusta monumenta , up to his date of death , are his work . after the death of the earl of oxford in 1741 , vertue was patronised by the duchess of portland and others . the duke of norfolk commissioned a work after van dyck of the earl of arundel and his family . he produced a catalogue detailing the collections of the royal family , at the request of frederick , prince of wales , an avid buyer of the engraver 's work . a portrait of vertue was painted in 1715 by gibson , his widow donated this to the society of antiquaries ; vertue had produced an engraving of this . a later painting , of the artist aged around 50 , by jonathan richardson was acquired by the national portrait gallery , a plate of this by thomas chambers was engraved for walpole 's anecdotes . an 1849 edition of walpole 's book contained an engraving , by george thomas doo , of a self-portrait—sitting in a library—that shows him displaying a portrait of the earl of oxford ; this was previously published in 1821 as a lithograph . another self-portrait , with his wife on their wedding-day , was etched by william humphrey . richardson also drew the profile used in james basire 's plate in nichols 's literary anecdotes . vertue died in london on 24 july 1756 and was buried in westminster abbey . vertue 's brother james ( d . 1765 ) was an artist in bath who produced the interior view of the abbey that was engraved by him . the second of his three brothers , peter , was a dancing master of chelmsford . . works . approximately five hundred portraits are attributed to vertue , a similar number of published plates were devoted to antiquarian subjects . many of the portraits were printed as frontispieces , most are regarded as accurate representations of the subject and many are not without artistic merit . vertue 's works of portraiture include : a portrait of archbishop tillotson , after kneller , commissioned by john somers , 1st baron somers the head of george i of great britain , produced on his accession to the throne , a work that established his reputation . twelve heads of poets , set of plates issued 1730 rapin 's history of england , knapton brothers edition , 1736 . a task that took three years . the same publisher commissioned plates for thomas birch 's heads of illustrious persons , though his contribution is submerged by the popularity of houbraken 's '' brilliant but less truthful productions '' . as official engraver to the society of antiquaries , with works relating to this field of natural history , vertue was prolific : richard ii at westminster ; a view of waltham cross ; the shrine of edward the confessor ; are notable mentions from his works in vetusta monumenta he executed a series of nine historic prints in 1740 , imitations of works from the tudor period , these included visit of queen elizabeth to blackfriars ( miscalled the procession to hunsdon house ) ; henry vii and his queen , with henry viii and jane seymour ; the cenotaph of lord darnley ; and edward vi granting a charter to bridewell hospital . the copperplates of these were acquired by the society of antiquaries , and reprinted in 1776 . his publications include a description of the works of wenceslaus hollar , 1745 ( reprinted 1759 ) ; and medals , coins , great seals , impressions from the works of thomas simon , 1753 ( reprinted 1780 ) . vertue was also involved with the pre-production of surveys of royal collections , vanderdoort 's catalogue of the collection of charles i , chiffinch 's james ii collection and his on that of queen caroline at kensington ; these saw print after his death , prefaced by walpole . horace walpole purchased vertue 's notebooks after his death . although disorderly and mainly unreflective , walpole based his anecdotes of painting in england ( 5 vols . , 1762–1771 ) on these notes . the original wording of the manuscripts was only published in the 20th century by the walpole society . the dictionary of national biography , 1900 , makes special note of one reproduction by vertue , in the article on ralph agas , in 1737 george vertue , the engraver and antiquary , published a pretended copy of agas 's map of london the '' woodcut '' map , stating that it was executed in 1560 , and that it gave a true representation of the metropolis as it existed at the beginning of queen elizabeth 's reign . vertue crowned his pretended copy with the date 1560 in roman numerals , made palpable alterations and omissions in order that he might retain the delusive date , and took other unwarrantable liberties with the object of disguising the fraud . the unhappy result of this tinkering of the original design was that numerous subsequent antiquaries were victims of the deception . mr . overall is of opinion that vertue , having become possessed of the parts of a copy of the map made by some unknown dutch engraver in the reign of william iii , caused them to be '' tinkered , '' probably for the purpose of deceiving his antiquarian friends . of course the numerous copies of the spurious map issued by vertue are of little or no value ; … . notes . references . george vertue , '' notebooks '' , the volume of the walpole society , xviii ( 1929–1930 ) , xx ( 1931–1932 ) , xxii ( 1933–1934 ) , xxiv ( 1935–1936 ) , xxvi ( 1937–1938 ) , xxiv ( 1947 ; index ) , xxx ( 1951–1952 ; index ) . ilaria bignamini , '' george vertue , art historian , '' the volume of the walpole society , 54 ( 1988 ) , 2–18 . . external links . images of works