Postage stamp separation

early years . in the early years , from 1840 until 1850 , all stamps were issued imperforate , and had to be cut from the sheet with scissors or knife . this was time-consuming and error-prone ( as mangled stamps of the era attest ) . once reliable separation equipment became available , nations switched rapidly . imperforate stamps have been issued occasionally since then , either because separation equipment was temporarily unavailable ( in newborn nations for instance ) , to makers of automatic stamp vending equipment ( the united states did this in the 1900s and 1910s ) , as novelties for stamp collecting ( particularly when stamps are issued in souvenir sheets ) , or as errors . henry archer . in 1847 , henry archer constructed the first ( rouletting ) machine , the '' archer roulette '' , to separate stamps . his plan , submitted to the postmaster general on 1 october 1847 , was referred to the departments of the general post office and the inland revenue . two such machines were built . after experimentation both machines proved to be failures . from one machine a few stamps from plates 70 and 71 have survived . this machine consisted of lancet-shaped blades working on a fly-press principle and piercing the paper with a series of cuts . archer then abandoned this approach in favour of perforation , a process which used rows of small round pins to punch out the holes . in 1848 archer patented his perforation machine which worked on the '' stroke '' principle . the arrangement of the pins enabled the top and sides of each stamp across the row to be perforated in a single operation , and this became known as '' comb '' perforation . perforation trials were conducted in 1849 and 1850 under the auspices of the british government and stamps from these trials were first issued towards the end of 1850 . the archer machine proved the viability of the process but never entered service . archer 's patent for his perforating machine ( no . 12,340 of 1848 , dated may 23 , 1849 ) was purchased for £4,000 in june 1853 . new machines based on archer 's principles were constructed by david napier and son ltd ; these were initially used in october 1853 for revenue stamps and from january 1854 for postage stamps . '' stamp perforation : the somerset house years 1848 to 1880 ( ray simpson and peter sargent ) . the rotary process . also in 1854 a '' rotary process '' was patented by william bemrose and henry howe bemrose . the bemrose machine was designed as a rouletting machine . as such , it proved impracticable for stamp separation but in 1856 was successfully converted to a perforating machine by george c . howard of toppan carpenter , stamp printers for the american government . '' the bemrose perforating machine '' , the london philatelist , february 2009 ( ray simpson ) both the stroke and rotary processes have been refined since then , but are basically still the ones in use in the 21st century . the key decision for the perforator is the spacing of the holes ; if too far apart , the stamps will not separate easily , and the stamps are likely to tear , but if too close , the stamps will tend to come apart in normal handling . in a few cases the size of the holes has been a factor . in the case of certain stamps produced by australia for sale in rolls rather than sheets ( coil stamps ) a pattern can be seen on the stamp 's short side of two small , ten large and two small holes . measurement and variations . the standard for describing perforation is the number of holes ( or the '' teeth '' or perfs of an individual stamp ) in a 2-centimeter span . the finest gauge ever used is 18 on stamps of the malay states in the early 1950s , and the coarsest is 2 , seen on the 1891 stamps of bhopal . modern stamp perforations tend to range from 11 to 14 . stamps that are perforated on one pair of opposite sides and imperforate on the other have most often been produced in coils instead of sheets , but they can sometimes come from booklet panes . booklet panes can be associated with any combination of one , two or three imperforate sides . sheet edges can produce any one imperforate side or two adjacent imperforate sides when the stamp comes from the corner of the sheet . variations include syncopated perforations which are uneven , either skipping a hole or by making some holes larger . in the 1990s , great britain began adding large elliptical holes to the perforations on each side , as an anti-counterfeiting measure . rouletting . rouletting uses small cuts in the paper instead of holes . it was used by a number of countries , but was rarely if ever seen on modern stamps until the die-cut serpentine roulette self-adhesive varieties appeared . varieties , often described by philatelists in french terms , include straight cuts ( percée en lignes , and percée en lignes colorées with inked cutting bar ) , arc ( percée en arc ) , sewing-machine ( perce en points ) , sawtooth and the serpentine roulettes ( perce en serpentin ) used by the early stamps of finland . because self-adhesive stamps contain a sticky layer , it is far easier to roulette the separations , than to actually puch out the holes for perforations . a few types of stamps have combined rouletting and perforation , for instance south africa in 1942 . . self-adhesive stamps . the first self-adhesive stamp was issued by sierra leone in 1964 , and by the 1990s these stamps came into wide use . these are inevitably diecut , meaning that the stamps themselves are cut entirely apart , held together only by the backing paper . at first the backing paper was itself solid , but in a repeat of history , is now slightly rouletted so as to facilitate tearing off blocks of stamps without having to remove them from the backing . since the diecut goes all the way through the stamp , any shape will work , and the original self-adhesives were straight-edged . however , the tradition of perforation is so strong that more recent self-adhesives have a wavy diecut simulating the perforation . it can be recognized by studying the edge of the stamp closely ; true perforations will have torn paper fibers on each tooth , while simulated perforations are smooth . from 2012 to 2016 the united states also sold small numbers of the stamps issued during this period in sheets without die cuts , thus creating imperforated varieties of them . their issuance was very controversial . usps press sheets : more questions than answers . collecting . for the stamp collector , perforations matter , not only as a way to distinguish different stamps ( a perf 10 may be rarer and more valuable than a perf 11 of the same design ) , but also as part of the condition of stamps . short or '' nibbed '' perfs are undesirable and reduce value , as are bent or creased perfs . although the collector could count the number of holes using a ruler , the usual practice is to use a perforation gauge , which has preprinted patterns of holes in a selection of common perforations , requiring one merely to line up the stamp 's perforations with the closest match . errors . as is inevitable for a mechanical process like perforation , many things can go wrong . blind perfs are common , occurring when a hole is not completely punched out , as are off-center perfs that cut into the design of the stamp , sometimes very badly . occasionally pairs or larger groups of stamps may be imperforate between meaning that they are not separated on all sides . although it is very common to have different gauges of perforation horizontally and vertically , in rare circumstances a stamp may have different perforations on opposite sides ; in the case of us stamps only a handful of these are known to exist . the various types of perforation errors are collectively known as misperfs . see also . errors , freaks , and oddities perfin – stamps perforated across the middle with letters or a pattern or monogram . references and sources . ; notes ; sources l.n . williams , fundamentals of philately ( american philatelic society , 1990 ) chap . 15 . further reading . felix , ervin j . the stamp collector 's guidebook of worldwide watermarks and perforations , from 1840 to date . racine , wi . : whitman publishing co . , 1966 256p . johnson , r.a . stamp perforations with particular emphasis on canadian stamps . ottawa : british north america philatelic society , 2009 100p . williams , l.n . and m . centenary of perforation . in : gibbons stamp monthly , march 1954 , vol . xxcii , no . 7 . 3p . external links . images of different types of perforations , misperforations and errors .