Eco-gastronomy

term . the latin term 'eco ' refers to how organisms relate to their environment , while 'gastronomy ' , according to food philosopher jean anthelme brillat-savarin , is the intelligent knowledge of whatever concerns man ’ s nourishment . the fusion of these two words creates the concept of eco-gastronomy . the prefix eco , therefore , is useful to highlight the connections between '' the art and appreciation of food '' and every issue related to the process of food production and consumption , from the environmental care to the social and ethical concerns . ecogastronomy , indeed , '' links food and humans , while bringing attention to the responsibility that all people have for the health and well-being of our food ways '' . context . the concept of eco-gastronomy belongs to the field of food consumption that is rather criticized and contested as it involves a series of ethical issues , such as immediate versus delayed gratification , nature versus culture , necessity versus luxury , body versus mind , etc . in this context there are a series of forms of critical consumerism , associated by their critiques ( generally deriving from the homogenization of capitalist mode of production ) and their proposals of alternative lifestyles . a cohesive movement of alternative consumption does n't exist , since every form of alternative consumption differs in its target and scope . what these phenomena have in common is the belief that consumers can , and should , use their power of choice to modify market relations , in order to make them fairer and more conducive to a good life for all . more than a simple form of alternative consumption , eco-gastronomy is an approach that can be adopted in this context . the same attention is given both to the individual and to the community/nature side . regarding the scope , the eco-gastronomic approach tries to find alternative forms of integration in the capitalist culture , based on the attention given to the quality of food and on the relations between humans and their impact on the environment . connections with the slow food movement . the concept indeed is strictly related to that one of slow food . in fact , the term eco-gastronomy was coined by the non-profit organization 's founder , carlo petrini . while the latter can be defined as a movement , eco-gastronomy has broader and wider connotations : rather than a simple movement , it is an approach that can be adopted in order to fulfill some form of alternative consumption . the slow food movement is a perfect example of a form of critical consumption that has adopted , throughout the years , an eco-gastronomic approach . indeed , while in the early stages , the concept of sustainability , that is crucial to eco-gastronomy , was not greatly contemplated by the slow food movement , in the last years sf seems to have shifted focus from the safeguard of typical foods to the safeguard of their cultural and environmental premises . the emphasis has been especially put on biodiversity , sustainable agriculture and responsible consumption . in 2005 , carlo petrini provided a theoretical perspective of eco-gastronomy stating that '' agriculture and ecology are part of gastronomy because they help us understand where our food comes from and produce it in the best possible way – by simultaneously observing the principles of taste , respect for the environment and biodiversity '' nowadays , slow food is no more only about paying attention to the quality of food and the pleasure of eating . food thus must be produced according to ecological methods , free from pesticides and artificial fertilizer . clean is an essential quality in the food people eat , but the concept is also concerned in the landscape where the food is produced . as petrini continues : '' if you love food but are n't environmentally aware you 're at best naïve , and at worst , stupid . but an ecologist who is not a gourmet is . well , he 's just boring '' ( petrini 2007 : 68 ) . projects and applications . in a context made of a growing spread of movements , ideologies and approaches which promote critical consumption , the concept of eco-gastronomy has prepared the ground to a variety of projects . starting from single actions and choices of everyone ’ s daily life , these projects aim to create an always larger network of people who share a sustainable life style . as shown below , the key players are not only consumers and producers , but also , at a lower level , students , families and researchers . the eco-gastronomy initiative . inspired by obesity epidemic , green movement and slow food , the ecogastronomy initiative was born in 2006 from a sue muncaster ’ s idea as a response to the negative consequences that industrialization caused on territories and environment . this initiative is based on the concept that there is a direct link between food ’ s production and consumption and the main dilemmas of the contemporary world . the main purpose of eco-gastronomy initiative is to incentive people towards principles that will create a healthier and gastronomically richer world . rather than promoting a utopian model , eco-gastronomy initiative focuses on the idea that every single action in life is important for a more sustainable future . indeed , one of the main scope of this initiative is to show that the promoted life style can be applied by every one using the limited time and resources . dual major in eco-gastronomy by the university of new hampshire . in 2006 , the university of new hampshire signed the slow food agreements of intentions and collaborations in order to create a worldwide network of universities and research institutions to promote protection and agricultural biodiversity , support of the rights of people to self-determination with regard to food and educate civilized society and train workers in the food and agricultural sector . in 2008 the university of new hampshire , in collaboration with other institutions , approved with the board of trustees the dual major in eco-gastronomy . the mission of this unique dual major is to provide students with the necessary skills and knowledge in order to work in an evolving food community integrating sustainable agriculture , food and nutrition following the principles of the eco-gastronomic approach . . the eco-gastronomy project by the university of gastronomic sciences . the university of gastronomic sciences unisg was founded in italy in 2004 by slow food international . the eco-gastronomy project was launched in november 2015 by this university . it ’ s a multi-year initiative to create an international exchange of knowledge about food and food systems . the mission of the project is to build an international network of food visionaries , building innovation , flexibility , and justice into global food systems . indeed , this project is developed in fourteen different countries around the world where local partners collaborate on the development of an ecological-philosophical approach of food .