Paul Jordan-Smith

life and ministry . paul jordan smith ( his name was not hyphenated until later in life ; see below ) was born in wytheville , virginia . his father , john wesley smith , was a southern methodist minister who dreamed of starting a college and invested in land in dade county , georgia , outside chattanooga , tennessee . his wife ( the former lucy jordan ) and son joined him there in 1891 , but the venture failed and the family returned to virginia . while a student at emory and henry college , paul jordan smith secretly married ethel sloan park in september 1904 . their daughter lucille isabella ( isabel jordan ) smith was born in august 1905 . park family network . he graduated from u.s . grant university in chattanooga , tennessee in 1906 . a local unitarian minister recommended that he study for the ministry , and although admitted to harvard divinity school he enrolled in the more affordable ryder divinity school of the universalist lombard college in galesburg , where he received a bachelor of divinity degree in 1908 . he served briefly as a minister at universalist churches in unionville , missouri , and kansas city and developed a reputation as an outstanding lecturer on science and religion . he moved to chicago in 1910 , where he worked at the independent religious society and later got a job as a minister and ran a settlement house . he also enrolled part-time in graduate classes at the university of chicago and developed a broad acquaintance among both literary and social activist circles , including lawyer clarence darrow , activist emma goldman , novelist john cowper powys , editor and publisher margaret anderson , writer floyd dell , chicago little theatre founder maurice browne , and bookseller george millard . in the process , he became a passionate book collector and decided on a career in literature . jordan smith also developed an interest in art through visits to the art institute of chicago . crosse , john . '' the schindlers and westons and the walt whitman school and connections to sarah bixby smith and paul jordan-smith '' . southern california architectural history website . in 1913 his wife ethel divorced him and his mother died . after a few months in the south , he traveled to berkeley , california with letters of introduction , filled in for a minister in eureka in the summer of 1914 , and enrolled as a doctoral student and teaching fellow in the english department at the university of california , berkeley . he was hired as a substitute minister of the first unitarian church of berkeley after arthur maxson smith resigned when his wife , the heiress sarah bixby smith , caught him having an affair and sued for divorce . paul jordan-smith became romantically involved with sarah , a writer , and their involvement became public , to their dismay , before the divorce was final . it was around this time that paul assumed the hyphenated jordan-smith as his last name , in part to disguise his liaison with sarah , which he feared might damage his academic career . despite this precaution , the english department—then headed by charles mills gayley—voted not to renew his fellowship , putting an end to his plans for an academic career . jordan-smith married sarah on march 30 , 1916 , immediately after her divorce came through . '' divorced wife of pastor weds successor in pulpit . '' los angeles times , may 31 , 1916 , p . ii-8 the couple then moved with sarah 's children to her former home in claremont , california , which had been rented to a school for boys . in 1917 , the school 's lease ended and they began renovating the house back into a private residence , which they named erewhon after the samuel butler novel . around this time , they met and subsequently became friends with one of sarah 's cousins , the photographer edward weston , who made several photographic portraits of jordan-smith . eventually , the couple moved to a mansion on los feliz boulevard in los angeles , where jordan-smith had a detached library and writing studio on the property . starr , kevin . material dreams : southern california through the 1920s . oxford university press , 1990 . though jordan-smith did not have to work ( thanks to sarah 's inherited wealth ) , he lectured around southern california , at women 's clubs such as the friday morning club ( of which sarah was later president ) , at the ebell club , and elsewhere . he also taught courses on english and american literature at the new university of california extension program in los angeles . encouraged by some of the philanthropists who attended his talks , he took on leadership of the recently formed people 's council of america for peace and democracy , an antiwar organization . the group did well until its leaders came under attack when the u.s . government began to crack down on antiwar opposition through the espionage act of 1917 . to avoid prosecution , jordan-smith was obliged to give up making antiwar speeches and to swear that he did not have any german affiliations or friends . jordan-smith served for a time as the educational director of the walt whitman school , a progressive secondary school founded in east los angeles in 1919 . jordan-smith eventually left sarah for his cousin dorothy and the couple divorced . he died on june 17 , 1971 . '' sarah bixby smith : author 's work included a book on americanization '' , the new york times , september 14 , 1935 . '' ex-times book editor paul jordan-smith dies '' , los angeles times , june 18 , 1971 . jordan-smith had three children . his son wilbur jordan smith was head of ucla library 's department of special collections from 1951 to 1971 , and wilbur 's son paul jordan-smith helped d.m . dooling found parabola magazine and served as its epicycle editor . literary career . jordan-smith was a great admirer of the 17th-century british author and scholar robert burton . he co-edited the first all-english translation ( having himself translated all of the latin quotes ) of burton 's magnum opus , the anatomy of melancholy , following it up with bibliographica burtoniana , which included both a study of burton and a scholarly key to the sources burton used in the anatomy of melancholy . he collected books relating to burton , and after sarah died , he gave the core of his collection to the claremont colleges library in her memory . the robert burton collection , as it is called , includes copies of the first six editions of burton 's anatomy of melancholy , a copy of the 1927 edition edited by smith and floyd dell , and editions of various renaissance latin authors and others cited by burton . robert burton collection at the claremont colleges library jordan-smith also wrote one of the first books on james joyce , a key to the ulysses of james joyce . he dedicated this book to powys , who had persuaded him in 1922 to buy a then-rare and expensive first edition of ulysses during one of powys 's stays at erewhon , which they then read together . in the spirit of powys : new essays by denis lane . associated university presses , 1990 , p . 40 . inspired by sarah 's ideas , jordan-smith collaborated with her on a feminist manifesto entitled the soul of woman : an interpretation of the philosophy of feminism . it was published under his name in 1916 . “ his place is doubly taken . ” los angeles times , march 31 , 1916 , p . ii-8 . he also served for a time in the 1940s and 1950s as the literary critic for the los angeles times . and as such was seen on the cinema screen in 1949 introducing the trailer for the new mgm motion picture the secret garden , under the headline '' great books make great pictures . '' his autobiography , the road i came , was published in 1960 . his papers are housed in the ucla library special collections . disumbrationism . jordan-smith may be best known today for a hoax that he initiated in 1924 , in part out of a dislike of modern art that was evident as far back as 1913 , when he saw ( and largely rejected ) the traveling version of the notorious armory show at the art institute of chicago . giving himself the russian-sounding pseudonym pavel jerdanowitch , jordan-smith painted a small group of crudely postimpressionist canvases that he then entered in art exhibitions around the country as exemplars of a new art movement known as disumbrationism ( i.e . painting without shadows ) . his canvases were well received on the whole until he got tired of sustaining the role and outed himself to a los angeles times reporter in 1927 . whitaker , alma . '' international art hoax bared by los angeles writer . '' august 14 , 1927 . '' pictures painted to 'show up ' the critics bring fame to mythical modernistic artist '' , lawrence journal-world , january 27 , 1931 . . books . ( as editor , with floyd dell ) the anatomy of melancholy by robert burton . new york : farrar & rinehart , 1927 . ( english translation of the original latin text . ) burton 's anatomy of melancholy and burtoniana . oxford university press , 1959 . ( a catalogue . ) a key to the ulysses of james joyce . 1927 . republished in 1968 by haskell house , new york . bibliographia burtoniana : a study of robert burton 's '' the anatomy of melancholy '' with a bibliography of burton 's writings . oxford university press and stanford university press , 1931 . cables of cobweb . new york : lieber & lewis , 1923 ( novel ) . for the love of books : the adventures of an impecunious collector . oxford university press , 1934 . nomad . minton , balch , 1925 ( novel , dedicated to james branch cabell ) . on strange altars : a book of enthusiasms . 1923 . republished by gordon press publishers , 1972 . the road i came : some recollections and reflections concerning changes in american life and manners since 1890 . caldwell , idaho : caxton printers , 1960 . the soul of woman : an interpretation of the philosophy of feminism . san francisco : paul elder company , 1916 . references . external links .