The Member of the Wedding

plot . the novel takes place over a few days in late august . it tells the story of 12-year-old tomboy frankie addams , who feels disconnected from the world ; in her words , an '' unjoined person . '' frankie 's mother died when she was born , and her father is a distant , uncomprehending figure . her closest companions are the family 's african american maid , berenice sadie brown , and her six-year-old cousin , john henry west . she has no friends in her small southern town and dreams of going away with her brother and his bride-to-be on their honeymoon in the alaskan wilderness . the novel explores the psychology of the three main characters and is more concerned with evocative settings than with incident . frankie does , however , have a brief and troubling encounter with a soldier . her hopes of going away are disappointed and , her fantasy destroyed , a short coda reveals how her personality has changed . it also recounts the fate of john henry west , and berenice sadie brown 's future plans . critical interpretations . the member of the wedding is told from the point of view of frankie , who is a troubled adolescent . but some critics think it is a mistake to view the member of the wedding as simply a bildungsroman—a '' sweet momentary illumination of adolescence before the disillusion of adulthood , '' ali smith , introduction to the member of the wedding , london , 2004 . as it is sometimes regarded , or as patricia yaeger puts it , '' an economical way of learning about the pangs of growing up . '' patricia yaeger , dirt and desire : reconstructing southern women ’ s writing , chicago , 2000 . for yaeger and the scots novelist critic ali smith , this is to sentimentalize the work . they suggest that such a reading misses much of its profundity , darkness , and what smith calls its '' political heft . '' ali smith , introduction to the member of the wedding it should be seen , according to smith , as a '' very funny , very dark novel '' and a '' combination of hope , hopelessness and callousness . '' its theme , says smith , is '' why people exclude others and what happens when they do . '' other critics , including mckay jenkins , mckay jenkins the south in black and white , chapel hill , 1999 have highlighted the importance of themes of racial and sexual identity . frankie wishes people could '' change back and forth from boys to girls . '' john henry wants them to be '' half boy and half girl . '' berenice would like there to be '' no separate colored people in the world , but all human beings would be light brown color with blue eyes and black hair . '' for them , jenkins suggests , the ideal world would be '' a place where identity . is fluid , changeable , amorphous . '' another critic , margaret b . mcdowell , has also stressed the role of berenice sadie brown ( and to a lesser extent john henry west ) in counter-pointing frankie ’ s story . jack halberstam , in his book female masculinity , uses the character of frankie to illustrate the pressures on girls to '' outgrow '' their tomboyishness , arguing that masculinity is tolerated in girls only as long as they ultimately conform to gender expectations in adulthood . in the example of frankie , he argues , we can see that '' the image of the tomboy can be tolerated only within a narrative of blossoming womanhood ; within such a narrative , tomboyism represents a resistance to adulthood itself rather than to adult femininity . '' halberstam , judith , female masculinity , durham : duke university press , 1998 , p . 6 . & 0822322439 . critics such as elizabeth freeman freeman , elizabeth . the wedding complex : forms of belonging in modern american culture . duke university press , 2002 . and nicole seymour view the novel as '' queer '' —as challenging gender and sexual norms . in her article on the novel , seymour argues that mccullers queers the human developmental schema ( childhood-adolescence-adulthood ) through various narrative methods . these methods include the novel 's tripartite structure , its depiction of personal difficulties with narrativizing , and '' the refusal of dynamism , and the use of the literary devices of repetition and analepsis . '' seymour concludes that '' the novel allows us to imagine an adolescent body in synchronic rather than diachronic terms—thereby challenging the ideals of sexuality , gender , and race that normally accrue to such bodies . '' seymour , nicole , '' somatic syntax : replotting the developmental narrative in carson mccullers 's the member of the wedding . '' studies in the novel 41.3 ( fall 2009 ) : 293-313 . . adaptations . the book has been adapted for the stage , motion pictures , and television . mccullers herself adapted the novel for a broadway production directed by harold clurman . it opened on january 5 , 1950 at the empire theatre , where it ran for 501 performances . the cast included ethel waters , julie harris , and debuted brandon dewilde , a seven-year-old second-grader at the time . waters , harris , and dewilde reprised their stage roles , with arthur franz , nancy gates , and dickie moore joining the cast , for the 1952 film version the member of the wedding . the screenplay was adapted by edna and edward anhalt and directed by fred zinnemann . it was nominated for the academy award for best actress for julie harris , in her debut screen appearance . a stage musical version , f . jasmine addams , was produced off-broadway in 1971 . theodore mann ( 2007 ) journeys in the night : creating a new american theatre with circle in the square : a memoir , hal leonard corporation f . jasmine addams ( 1971 ) . music & lyrics by g . wood ; book by carson mccullers , g . wood and theodore mann ; based on carson mccullers ’ the member of the wedding . another unauthorized musical adaptation was written by hugh martin and ralph blane and produced by the university of alabama at birmingham 's '' town and gown theater '' in 1987 . a 1982 television adaptation , directed by delbert mann , starred pearl bailey , dana hill , and howard rollins . howard rosenberg : '' something old , new in 'wedding ' '' ( december 22 , 1982 ) , los angeles times . a 1989 broadway revival production with roundabout theatre ( directed by harold scott , set design by thomas cariello ) starred esther rolle as berenice , amelia campbell as frankie , and calvin lennon armitage as young john henry . mel gussow , '' theatre review : frankie is still searching for togetherness '' ( april 1 , 1989 ) , new york times . the 1997 film version , adapted by david w . rintels and directed by fielder cook , starred anna paquin , alfre woodard , corey dunn , and enrico colantoni . rintels used the original novel rather than the play as his source material . the young vic theatre in london produced the stage version of the member of the wedding in 2007 , directed by matthew dunster . frankie addams was played by flora spencer-longhurst and berenice sadie brown by portia , a member of philip seymour hoffman 's labyrinth theater company . '' brook gives young vic season a more international flavour '' ( may 23 , 2007 ) , evening standard . '' the guide : theatre : a member of the wedding london '' ( september 1 , 2007 ) the guardian . . references in popular culture . text from the member of the wedding was used by jarvis cocker on his debut album , jarvis . it forms the introduction to the 11th song on the album , '' big julie '' , and consists of his re-writing of the opening lines of the book . in the original these are : it happened that green and crazy summer when frankie was twelve years old . this was the summer when for a long time she had not been a member . she belonged to no club and was a member of nothing in the world . frankie had become an unjoined person who hung around in doorways , and she was afraid . the poet sylvia plath was known to admire mccullers ' work , and the unusual phrase '' silver and exact '' , used by mccullers to describe a set of train tracks in the novel , is the first line of plath 's poem '' mirror '' . references . external links . the member of the wedding first edition dustjacket at nypl digital gallery