Unifying theories in mathematics

historical perspective . the process of unification might be seen as helping to define what constitutes mathematics as a discipline . for example , mechanics and mathematical analysis were commonly combined into one subject during the 18th century , united by the differential equation concept ; while algebra and geometry were considered largely distinct . now we consider analysis , algebra , and geometry , but not mechanics , as parts of mathematics because they are primarily deductive formal sciences , while mechanics like physics must proceed from observation . there is no major loss of content , with analytical mechanics in the old sense now expressed in terms of symplectic topology , based on the newer theory of manifolds . mathematical theories . the term theory is used informally within mathematics to mean a self-consistent body of definitions , axioms , theorems , examples , and so on . ( examples include group theory , galois theory , control theory , and k-theory . ) in particular there is no connotation of hypothetical . thus the term unifying theory is more like a sociological term used to study the actions of mathematicians . it may assume nothing conjectural that would be analogous to an undiscovered scientific link . there is really no cognate within mathematics to such concepts as proto-world in linguistics or the gaia hypothesis . nonetheless there have been several episodes within the history of mathematics in which sets of individual theorems were found to be special cases of a single unifying result , or in which a single perspective about how to proceed when developing an area of mathematics could be applied fruitfully to multiple branches of the subject . geometrical theories . a well-known example was the development of analytic geometry , which in the hands of mathematicians such as descartes and fermat showed that many theorems about curves and surfaces of special types could be stated in algebraic language ( then new ) , each of which could then be proved using the same techniques . that is , the theorems were very similar algebraically , even if the geometrical interpretations were distinct . in 1859 arthur cayley initiated a unification of metric geometry through use of the cayley-klein metrics . later felix klein used such metrics to provide a foundation for non-euclidean geometry . in 1872 , felix klein noted that the many branches of geometry which had been developed during the 19th century ( affine geometry , projective geometry , hyperbolic geometry , etc . ) could all be treated in a uniform way . he did this by considering the groups under which the geometric objects were invariant . this unification of geometry goes by the name of the erlangen programme . through axiomatisation . early in the 20th century , many parts of mathematics began to be treated by delineating useful sets of axioms and then studying their consequences . thus , for example , the studies of '' hypercomplex numbers '' , such as considered by the quaternion society , were put onto an axiomatic footing as branches of ring theory ( in this case , with the specific meaning of associative algebras over the field of complex numbers ) . in this context , the quotient ring concept is one of the most powerful unifiers . this was a general change of methodology , since the needs of applications had up until then meant that much of mathematics was taught by means of algorithms ( or processes close to being algorithmic ) . arithmetic is still taught that way . it was a parallel to the development of mathematical logic as a stand-alone branch of mathematics . by the 1930s symbolic logic itself was adequately included within mathematics . in most cases , mathematical objects under study can be defined ( albeit non-canonically ) as sets or , more informally , as sets with additional structure such as an addition operation . set theory now serves as a lingua franca for the development of mathematical themes . bourbaki . the cause of axiomatic development was taken up in earnest by the bourbaki group of mathematicians . taken to its extreme , this attitude was thought to demand mathematics developed in its greatest generality . one started from the most general axioms , and then specialized , for example , by introducing modules over commutative rings , and limiting to vector spaces over the real numbers only when absolutely necessary . the story proceeded in this fashion , even when the specializations were the theorems of primary interest . in particular , this perspective placed little value on fields of mathematics ( such as combinatorics ) whose objects of study are very often special , or found in situations which can only superficially be related to more axiomatic branches of the subject . category theory as a rival . category theory is a unifying theory of mathematics that was initially developed in the second half of the 20th century . in this respect it is an alternative and complement to set theory . a key theme from the '' categorical '' point of view is that mathematics requires not only certain kinds of objects ( lie groups , banach spaces , etc . ) but also mappings between them that preserve their structure . in particular , this clarifies exactly what it means for mathematical objects to be considered to be the same . ( for example , are all equilateral triangles the same , or does size matter ? ) saunders mac lane proposed that any concept with enough 'ubiquity ' ( occurring in various branches of mathematics ) deserved isolating and studying in its own right . category theory is arguably better adapted to that end than any other current approach . the disadvantages of relying on so-called abstract nonsense are a certain blandness and abstraction in the sense of breaking away from the roots in concrete problems . nevertheless , the methods of category theory have steadily advanced in acceptance , in numerous areas ( from d-modules to categorical logic ) . uniting theories . on a less grand scale , similarities between sets of results in two different branches of mathematics raise the question of whether a unifying framework exists that could explain the parallels . we have already noted the example of analytic geometry , and more generally the field of algebraic geometry thoroughly develops the connections between geometric objects ( algebraic varieties , or more generally schemes ) and algebraic ones ( ideals ) ; the touchstone result here is hilbert 's nullstellensatz which roughly speaking shows that there is a natural one-to-one correspondence between the two types of objects . one may view other theorems in the same light . for example , the fundamental theorem of galois theory asserts that there is a one-to-one correspondence between extensions of a field and subgroups of the field 's galois group . the taniyama–shimura conjecture for elliptic curves ( now proven ) establishes a one-to-one correspondence between curves defined as modular forms and elliptic curves defined over the rational numbers . a research area sometimes nicknamed monstrous moonshine developed connections between modular forms and the finite simple group known as the monster , starting solely with the surprise observation that in each of them the rather unusual number 196884 would arise very naturally . another field , known as the langlands program , likewise starts with apparently haphazard similarities ( in this case , between number-theoretical results and representations of certain groups ) and looks for constructions from which both sets of results would be corollaries . reference list of major unifying concepts . a short list of these theories might include : . recent developments in relation with modular theory . a well-known example is the taniyama–shimura conjecture , now the modularity theorem , which proposed that each elliptic curve over the rational numbers can be translated into a modular form ( in such a way as to preserve the associated l-function ) . there are difficulties in identifying this with an isomorphism , in any strict sense of the word . certain curves had been known to be both elliptic curves ( of genus 1 ) and modular curves , before the conjecture was formulated ( about 1955 ) . the surprising part of the conjecture was the extension to factors of jacobians of modular curves of genus > 1 . it had probably not seemed plausible that there would be 'enough ' such rational factors , before the conjecture was enunciated ; and in fact the numerical evidence was slight until around 1970 , when tables began to confirm it . the case of elliptic curves with complex multiplication was proved by shimura in 1964 . this conjecture stood for decades before being proved in generality . in fact the langlands program ( or philosophy ) is much more like a web of unifying conjectures ; it really does postulate that the general theory of automorphic forms is regulated by the l-groups introduced by robert langlands . his principle of functoriality with respect to the l-group has a very large explanatory value with respect to known types of lifting of automorphic forms ( now more broadly studied as automorphic representations ) . while this theory is in one sense closely linked with the taniyama–shimura conjecture , it should be understood that the conjecture actually operates in the opposite direction . it requires the existence of an automorphic form , starting with an object that ( very abstractly ) lies in a category of motives . another significant related point is that the langlands approach stands apart from the whole development triggered by monstrous moonshine ( connections between elliptic modular functions as fourier series , and the group representations of the monster group and other sporadic groups ) . the langlands philosophy neither foreshadowed nor was able to include this line of research . isomorphism conjectures in k-theory . another case , which so far is less well-developed but covers a wide range of mathematics , is the conjectural basis of some parts of k-theory . the baum–connes conjecture , now a long-standing problem , has been joined by others in a group known as the isomorphism conjectures in k-theory . these include the farrell–jones conjecture and bost conjecture . see also . philosophy of mathematics foundations of mathematics