Type metal

history . although the knowledge of casting soft metals in moulds was well established before johannes gutenberg 's time , his discovery of an alloy that was hard , durable , and would take a clear impression from the mould ( because it did not shrink as much as lead alone when cooled ) represents a fundamental aspect of his solution to the problem of printing with movable type . ( his other contributions were the creation of inks that would adhere to metal type and a method of softening handmade printing paper so that it would take the impression well . ) . required characteristics . cheap , plentifully available as galena and easily workable , lead has many of the ideal characteristics , but on its own it lacks the necessary hardness and does not make castings with sharp details because molten lead shrinks and sags when it cools to a solid . after much experimentation it was found that adding pewterer 's tin , obtained from cassiterite , improved the ability of the cast type to withstand the wear and tear of the printing process , making it tougher but not more brittle . despite patiently trying different proportions of both metals , solving the second part of the type metal problem proved very difficult without the addition of yet a third metal , antimony . alchemy had shown that when stibnite , an antimony sulfide ore , was heated with scrap iron , metallic antimony was produced . the typefounder would typically introduce powdered stibnite and horseshoe nails into his crucible to melt lead , tin and antimony into type metal . both the iron and the sulfides would be rejected in the process . the addition of antimony conferred the much needed improvements in the properties of hardness , wear resistance and especially , the sharpness of reproduction of the type design , given that it has the curious property of diminishing the shrinkage of the alloy upon solidification . composition of type metal . type metal is an alloy of lead , tin and antimony in different proportions depending on the application , be it individual character mechanical casting for hand setting , mechanical line casting or individual character mechanical typesetting and stereo plate casting . the proportions used are in the range : lead 50‒86 % , antimony 11‒30 % and tin 3‒20 % . the basic characteristics of these metals are as follows : . lead . type metal is an alloy of lead . pure lead is a relatively cheap metal , is soft thus easy to work , and it is easy to cast since it melts at . however , it shrinks when it solidifies making letters that are not sharp enough for printing . in addition pure lead letters will quickly deform during use ; a direct result of the easy workability of lead . lead is exceptionally soft , malleable , and ductile but with little tensile strength . lead is a poison , that primarily damages brain function . tin . tin ( sn ) it promotes the fluidity of the molten alloy and makes the type tough , giving the alloy resistance to wear . it is harder , stiffer and tougher than lead . antimony . antimony ( sb ) is a metalloid element , which melts at . antimony has a crystalline appearance while being both brittle and fusible . fry 's metal foundries , printing metals , great britain , revised edition 1966 when alloyed with lead to produce type metal , antimony gives it the hardness it needs to resist deformation during printing , and gives it sharper castings from the mould to produce clear , easily read printed text on the page . typical type metal proportions . the actual compositions differed over time , different machines were adjusted to different alloys depending on the intended uses of the type . printers had sometimes their own preferences about the quality of particular alloys . the lanston monotype corporation in the united kingdom had a whole range of alloys listed in their manuals . dross . regeneration-metal was melted into the crucible to replace lost tin and antimony through the dross . every time type metal is remelted , tin and antimony oxidise . these oxides form on the surface of the crucible and must be removed . after stirring the molten metal , grey powder forms on the surface , the dross , needing to be skimmed . dross contains recoverable amounts of tin and antimony . dross must be processed at specialized companies , in order to extract the pure metals in conditions that would prevent environmental pollution and remain economically feasible . general requirements for type-metal . type metal should produce a true and sharp cast , and reproduce the matrix in all detail . the dimensions and form should be correct after cooling down . type metal should be strong and lasting , to endure wear and pressure while printing . type metal should be easy to cast , this means : a reasonable low melting point , iron should not dissolve in the molten metal , mould and nozzles should stay clean and easy to maintain . the molten metal should be clean , while molten it should give as little dross as possible , to prevent loss of tin and antimony . the economics have to be taken in account too : keeping the costs down would mean : keeping the content of tin and antimony as low as possible , and maintaining a high quality of the type produced . type metal should not adhere to the copper of the matrix . behaviour of bipolar alloys . pure metal melts and solidifies in a simple manner at a specific temperature . this is not the case with alloys . there we find a range of temperatures with all kinds of different events . the melting temperature of all mixtures is considerably lower than the pure components . antimony/lead mixture examples . the addition of a small amount of antimony ( 5 % to 6 % ) to lead will significantly alter the alloy 's behavior compared to pure lead : although the melting point of pure antimony is 630 & nbsp ; °c , this mixture will be completely molten and a homogeneous fluid even at temperatures as low as 371 & nbsp ; °c . letting this mixture cool the alloy will remain liquid even through 355 & nbsp ; °c , the melting point of pure lead . once the temperature reaches 291 & nbsp ; °c , lead crystals will start to form , increasing the cohesion of the liquid alloy . at 252 & nbsp ; °c , the mixture will start to fully solidify , during which the temperature will remain constant . only when the mixture has fully solidified will the temperature start to decrease again . using a 10 % antimony , 90 % lead mixture delays lead crystal formation until approximately 260 & nbsp ; °c . using a 12 % antimony , 88 % lead mixture prevents crystal formation entirely , becoming a eutectic . this alloy has a clear melting point , at 252 & nbsp ; °c . increasing the antimony content beyond 12 % will lead to predominantly antimony crystallization . tri-polar mixtures . adding tin to this bipolar-system complicates the behaviour even further . some tin enters into the eutectic . a mixture of 4 % tin , 12 % antimony , and 84 % lead solidifies at 240 & nbsp ; °c . depending from the metals in excess , compared with the eutectic , crystals are formed , depleting the liquid , until the eutectic 4/12 mixture is formed once more . the 12/20 alloy contains many mixed crystals of tin and antimony , these crystals constitute the hardness of the alloy and the resistance against wear . raising the content of antimony can not be done without adding some tin too . because the fluidity of the mixture will dramatically diminish when the temperature goes down somewhere in the channels of the machine . nozzles can be blocked by antimony crystals . metals used on typecasting machines . eutectic alloys are used on linotype-machines and ludlow-casters to prevent blockage of the mould and to ensure continuous trouble-free casting . alloys used on monotype machines tend to contain higher contents of tin , to obtain tougher character . all characters should be able to resist the pressure during printing . this meant an extra investment , but monotype was an expensive system all the way . present usage of type metal . the fierce competition between the different mechanical typecasting systems like linotype and monotype has given rise to some lasting fairy tales about typemetal . linotype users looked down on monotype and vice versa . monotype machines however can utilize a wide range of different alloys ; maintaining a constant and a high production meant a strict standardization of the typemetal in the company , so as to reduce by all means any interruption of the production . repeated assays were done at regular intervals to monitor the alloy used , since every time the metal is recycled , roughly half a per cent of tin content is lost through oxidation . these oxides are removed with the dross while cleaning the surface of the molten metal . nowadays this '' battle '' has lost its importance , at least for monotype . the quality of the produced type is far more important . alloys with a high-content of antimony , and subsequently a high content of tin , can be cast at a higher temperature , and at a lower speed and with more cooling at a monotype composition or supercaster . although care was taken to avoid mixing different types of type metal in shops with different type casting systems , in actual practice this often occurred . since a monotype composition caster can cope with a variety of different metal alloys , occasional mixing of linotype alloy with discarded typefounders alloy has proven its usefulness . mechanical linecasting equipment use alloys that are close to eutectic . contamination of type metals . copper . copper has been used for hardening type metal ; this metal easily forms mixed crystals with tin when the alloy cools down . these crystals will grow just below the exit opening of the nozzle in monotype machines , resulting in a total blockage after some time . these nozzles are very difficult to clean , because the hard crystals will resist drilling . zinc . brass spaces contain zinc , which is extremely counterproductive in type metal . even a tiny amount — & nbsp ; less than 1 % & nbsp ; — will form a dusty surface on the molten metal surface that is difficult to remove . characters cast from contaminated type metal such as this are of inferior quality , the solution being to discard and replace with fresh alloy . brass and zinc should therefore be removed before remelting . the same applies to aluminium , although this metal will float on top of the melt , and will be easily discovered and removed , before it is dissolved into the lead . magnesium . magnesium plates are very dangerous in molten lead , because this metal can easily burn and will ignite in the molten lead . iron . iron is hardly dissolved into type metal , although the molten metal is always in contact with the cast iron surface of the melting pot . historic references to type metals . joseph moxon , in his mechanick exercises , mentions a mix of equal amounts of '' antimony '' and iron nails . joseph moxon , mechanick exercises , page 164 , sect . xviii , reprint of the 1896-edition , thoemmes press , bristol , uk . the '' antimony '' here was in fact stibnite , antimony-sulfide ( sb 2 s 3 ) . the iron was burned away in this process , reducing the antimony and at the same time removing the unwanted sulfur . in this way ferro-sulfide was formed , that would evaporate with all the fumes . the mixture of stibnite and nails was heated red hot in an open-air furnace , until all is molten and finished . the resulting metal can contain up to 9 % of iron . further purification can be done by mixing the hot melt with kitchen-salt , nacl . after this red hot lead from another melting pot is added and stirred thoroughly . the typecasters , ellic howe in : the monotype-recorder , vol . xli , summer 1957 , nr.1 some tin was added to the alloy for casting small characters and narrow spaces , to better fill narrow areas of the mould . the good properties of tin were well known . the use of tin was sometime minimized to save expenses . much of this toxic work was done by child labour , a labor force that includes children . joseph moxon , mechanick exercises , page 167 , sect . xviii , reprint of the 1896-edition , thoemmes press , bristol , uk . as a supposed antidote to the inhaled toxic metal fumes , the workers were given a mixture of red wine and salad oil : joseph moxon , mechanick exercises , page 168 , sect . xviii , reprint of the 1896-edition , thoemmes press , bristol , uk .