Logistics engineering

overview . logistics is generally concerned with cost centre service activities , but provides value via improved efficiency and customer satisfaction . it can quickly lose that value if the customer becomes dissatisfied . the end customer can include another process or work center inside of the manufacturing facility , a warehouse where items are stocked or the final customer who will use the product . another approach which has appeared in recent years is the supply chain management . the supply chain also looks at an efficient chaining of the supply / purchase and distribution sides of an organization . while logistics looks at single echelons with the immediate supply and distribution linked up , supply chain looks at multiple echelons/stages , right from procurement of the raw materials to the final distribution of finished goods up to the customer . it is based on the basic premise that the supply and distribution activities if integrated with the manufacturing / logistic activities , can result in better profitability for the organization . the local minimum of total cost of the manufacturing operation is getting replaced by the global minimum of total cost of the whole chain , resulting in better profitability for the chain members and hence lower costs for the products . logistics engineering as a discipline is a very important aspect of systems engineering that also includes reliability engineering . it is the science and process whereby reliability , maintainability , and availability are designed into products or systems . it includes the supply and physical distribution considerations above as well as more fundamental engineering considerations . logistics engineers work with complex mathematical models that consider elements such as mean time between failures ( mtbf ) , mean time to failure ( mttf ) , mean time to repair ( mttr ) , failure mode and effects analysis ( fmea ) , statistical distributions , queueing theory , and a host of other considerations . for example , if we want to produce a system that is 95 % reliable ( or improve a system to achieve 95 % reliability ) , a logistics engineer understands that total system reliability can be no greater than the least reliable subsystem or component . therefore our logistics engineer must consider the reliability of all subcomponents or subsystems and modify system design accordingly . if a subsystem is only 50 % reliable , one can concentrate on improving the reliability of that subsystem , design in multiple subsystems in parallel ( 5 in this case would achieve approximately 97 % reliability of that subsystem ) , purchase and store spare subsystems for rapid change out , establish repair capability that would get a failed subsystem back in operation in the required amount of time , and/or choose any combination of those approaches to achieve the optimal cost vs . reliability solution . then the engineer moves onto the next subsystem . terminology . there are few differences between the terms business logistics and logistics engineering . logistics engineering is more focused on the mathematical or scientific application of logistics . g . don taylor , logistics engineering handbook , crc press 2007 . fields and topics . the various fields and topics that logistics engineers are involved with include : customer service : provision of services to customers before , during and after a purchase purchasing : acquiring goods or services to accomplish its goals sourcing : procurement practices , aimed at finding , evaluating and engaging suppliers for acquiring goods and services demand forecasting : the art and science of forecasting customer demand to drive holistic execution of such demand by corporate supply chain and business management facility location : the optimal placement of facilities to minimize transportation costs while considering factors like avoiding placing hazardous materials near housing , and competitors ' facilities layout design inventory control : the activity of checking a shop ’ s stock material handling : short-distance movement within the confines of a building or between a building and a transportation vehicle warehousing distribution system design reliability engineering : sub-discipline of systems engineering that emphasizes dependability in the lifecycle management of a product reverse logistics : the process of moving goods from their typical final destination for the purpose of capturing value , or proper disposal green logistics : attempts to measure and minimize the ecological impact of logistics activities intermodal transport supportability analysis . performance metrics . different performance metrics ( measures of performance ) are used to examine the efficiency of an organization 's logistics . the most popular and widely used performance metric is the landed cost . the landed cost is the total cost of purchasing , transporting , warehousing and distributing raw materials , semi-finished and finished goods . another performance metric equally important is the end customer fill rate . it is the percentage of customer demand which is satisfied immediately off-the-shelf ( from on-site inventory ) . an alternative to fill rate , is system availability . in recent years , the united states department of defense ( dod ) has advocated the use of performance-based logistics ( pbl ) contracts to manage costs for support of weapon systems . education . many top universities offer logistics engineering programs at undergraduate and graduate levels . these programs generally combine strategy , operations , facility design , technology and management . the following institutions provide logistics engineering programs around the world : florida international university - master of science in logistics engineering aston university – bsc logistics with supply chain management aston bsc logistics with supply chain management breda university of applied sciences – bachelor of science in international logistics engineering beijing jiaotong university – bachelor of engineering in logistic engineering ohio state university – master of business logistics engineering fisher college of business mble program university of hong kong – bachelor of engineering in logistics engineering and supply chain management hong kong logistics programs hong kong polytechnic university – bachelor of science in logistics engineering and management university of science and technology beijing – bachelors , masters and ph.d programs in logistics engineering dalian maritime university – masters program in logistics engineering & management shanghai maritime university – bachelors & doctoral programs in logistics engineering south china university of technology – masters and ph.d . programs in logistics engineering and management hong kong university of science and technology – bachelor of engineering in logistics management and engineering korea aerospace university - bachelor of science , masters & ph.d programs in logistics széchenyi istván university – masters and ph.d . programs in logistics engineering and management jamk university of applied sciences – bachelor of engineering in logistics engineering logistics engineering – jamk taiyuan university of science and technology – bachelor of engineering in logistics engineering university of east sarajevo – faculty of transport and traffic engineering doboj - bachelor of engineering in transport and traffic - 240 ects - logistics columbus state community college – associates in logistics engineering technology universitas internasional semen indonesia - bachelor of logistics engineering universidad de las américas puebla – offers logistics engineering pertamina university – faculty of industrial technology - logistics engineering university of duisburg-essen – master of science in logistics engineering university of belgrade-faculty of transport and traffic engineering-logistics engineering telkom university – faculty of industrial and systems engineering - logistics engineering . see also . ; associations . references . further reading . g . don taylor ( 2008 ) , logistics engineering handbook , crc press benjamin s . blanchard ( 2014 ) , logistics engineering and management , pearson new international edition . external links . the council of logistics engineering professionals sole & ndash ; international society of logistics definition of landed cost by 3ce