Memnoch the Devil

plot . after stalking and killing roger , a ruthless but passionate mobster , lestat is approached by roger 's ghost . roger asks him to take care of his daughter dora , a devout and popular televangelist , whom he wants to spare from embarrassment . at the same time , lestat has become increasingly paranoid that he 's being stalked by a powerful force . eventually , lestat meets the devil , who calls himself memnoch . he takes lestat on a whirlwind tour of heaven and hell , and retells the entirety of history from his own point of view in an effort to convince lestat to join him as god 's adversary . in his journey , memnoch claims he is not evil , but merely working for god by ushering lost souls into heaven . lestat is left in confusion , unable to decide whether or not to cast his lot with the devil . after the tour , lestat believes himself to have had a major revelation . among other things , he believes that he has seen christ 's crucifixion and has received veil of veronica . even though lestat suspects the entire experience was some kind of deception , he tells his story to armand , david talbot and dora , who have joined him in new york city . when lestat produces the veil as proof of his experience , dora and armand are deeply moved upon seeing it . dora reveals the veil to the world , triggering a religious movement . armand goes into the sunlight and immolates himself in order to convince people that a miracle has occurred . at the end of the novel , lestat and david go to new orleans . there , maharet returns an eye lestat lost in hell , along with a note from memnoch that reveals he may have been manipulating lestat to serve his own agenda . lestat then loses control of himself and maharet is forced to chain him in the basement of a vampire-controlled convent so that he will not hurt himself or others . although the novel fits into the storyline of the vampire chronicles , the vast majority of it consists of memnoch 's account of cosmology and theology . the novel follows up on claims made by david in the tale of the body thief that god and the devil are on better terms than most christians believe . it also reinterprets bible stories to create a complete history of earth , heaven and hell that fit neatly with the history of vampires given in the queen of the damned . characters . lestat de lioncourt – the main character of the story and the past four books , lestat was created by a powerful vampire named magnus , who promptly cremated himself after creating his heir . lestat is a relatively '' good '' vampire , only feeding on those he deems evil after reading their minds . in previous books , lestat made the man named david talbot a vampire by force , an action that went against vampire law . theodora , nicknamed '' dora '' – a devout christian who has a cable tv show . she is very beautiful and charismatic . she is waiting for a miracle to inspire her . dora is the daughter of roger . she wo n't take anything from roger because he is a mobster . lestat becomes obsessed with her in the process of hunting her father . despite the warnings of his vampire kin , he reveals himself to her and she takes it as the miracle she 's been awaiting . when lestat brings her veronica 's veil , dora starts her own religion . roger – dora 's father . a mobster who runs a successful drug ring selling cocaine . when dora 's mother tried to take full custody over her , roger killed her . after his death , he haunts lestat , describing his own life and commanding lestat to watch over dora from then on . god – creator and ruler of the universe and all angels . according to memnoch , he does not know how he came to be and therefore created the universe and life in an attempt to better understand himself . in telling his account of creation , memnoch characterizes god as aloof and uncaring . memnoch the devil – the fallen angel of legend also known as satan or lucifer . he has long defied god in asking why humans should suffer and not immediately be placed in heaven . because of these questions and other actions that he makes , he alleges that he is put in charge of preparing the souls for their ascent into heaven . memnoch 's domain thus serves as a place of punishment that will eventually earn access to heaven . he may have sinister ulterior motives . in the novel prince lestat and the realms of atlantis , it is alluded to that memnoch may have been an inhuman spirit that dwelled in the place between the physical realm and heaven . cosmology . the universe as revealed to lestat by the devil follows the following cosmology : god is a powerful and immortal being worshiped by angels , his first creation , since before the existence of matter and time . the earth was his creation . because of this , angels spent much time admiring his handiwork and singing his praises . however , god does not appear to be omniscient or even entirely omnibenevolent . despite assurances , memnoch , an archangel , claims to have changed god 's opinion on the importance and supernatural quality of humanity . through evolution , creatures on the earth developed into the image of god and angels and a '' flame '' of life which allowed pain and death . eventually , humans developed their own souls , invisible and incorporeal spiritual essences similar to god and the angels . this shocks and horrifies many of the angels . these souls collect in confusion around the world in an airy realm that the angels describe as '' sheol '' or the gloom , attempting to come to terms with their existence . some dissipate into nothing , some do not realize or do not accept they are dead . some take comfort and strength from their living descendants , becoming patron ancestors . such interventions cause the tales of spirits , reincarnation and the first vampires . the addle-brained spirits ( mentioned in the queen of the damned and the witching hour ) are of two types . the first are angels who fell in love with certain parts of nature and became spirits of rocks , mountains , and trees ; they did not return to heaven . the '' invisible ones '' are incorporeal human souls who never interacted with the angels , forgot they were ever human , and became demons—spirits or lesser gods whom the living worship . memnoch becomes impatient with god 's constant assurances that all is well , despite the pain and suffering of life and death . memnoch vehemently criticizes god 's plan , accusing god of lacking vision and benevolence . memnoch decides to collect evidence to persuade god that humanity is outside of nature by creating physical form . when , as part of this , he experiences sex , god bans memnoch from heaven ; memnoch spends the next three months imparting his vast knowledge of science to humanity , thus inadvertently founding civilization , during which time memnoch realizes that the characteristic that sets humans apart is their ability to love and feel passionate . when god invites memnoch to heaven to explain his disturbance of the natural order of creation , memnoch persuades god to allow him to find souls who are suitable for heaven . after thousands of years wandering sheol , memnoch discovers an especially powerful group of souls who have forgiven god for his indifference and absence and appreciate the grandness of all creation . god accepts these souls into heaven , permanently changing it forever . god is highly pleased with the new composition of heaven , but memnoch continues to accuse god of not showing concern for the other souls of sheol . memnoch finally loses trust in god and demands that he should take human form to understand passion and , in fury , god banishes memnoch from heaven . while memnoch is in exile , god takes on a human form , jesus . god believes that by appearing in human form , performing miracles , suffering and dying , he will create a religion that will allow more humans to attain the love of god by suffering and sacrifice . this is in sharp contrast to memnoch 's approach of attaining purity through love and experience of the wonders of creation . the two confront each other in the desert . god continuously argues that man is a creature of nature and ruled by its laws ; only through suffering and death can man evolve and eventually be worthy of heaven . memnoch continuously argues that suffering and death has no value , and man needlessly suffers in life and in sheol while already worthy of god 's light yet deprived of knowing him . memnoch is awed and shocked by god 's sacrifice . nevertheless , he argues that god did not put himself through enough . unlike a regular human , when god died on the cross he knew that he would survive and thus could never have known the true suffering of man : the fear of death . man does not know his immortal soul will survive for all eternity , and thus suffers from fear of the unknown . god knew he would survive death and could not truly know what it was to be a human . for god , this complaint is the last straw : he declares memnoch to be his adversary , and commands him to rule sheol and earth in a devilish form , preparing souls for heaven in his own fashion . as human history progresses , god 's religion only exacerbates the suffering of man instead of alleviating it . acts of hate—war , persecution , genocide—are carried out in his name . working in sheol , memnoch creates a form of hell , a place where people who have been bad in life , will be punished until their souls are able to forgive all ( themselves , each other , and god ) for the suffering and ignorance they endured in order to understand the joy of creation and the light of god enough to be ready for heaven . memnoch does n't like this work and is constantly asking god to appoint someone else to the job ( as david talbot witnesses in the tale of the body thief ) . reception . maryanne booth reviewed memnoch : the devil for arcane magazine , rating it a 4 out of 10 overall . booth comments that '' if this is the last of the vampire chronicles , it 's a dismal conclusion to an inspiring series of books that won anne rice many admirers . '' . references .