Wikipedia:Free or semi-free non-Public-Domain information resources

environment . envirowiki australian environment wiki . licensed under creative commons . greenlivingpedia australian environment wiki . licensed under creative commons . tip the planet environmental tips wiki . licensed under creative commons . general . the wonderlusters free high-resolution travel photographs under creative commons . texturegen free quality high resolution textures . alegri photos good quality images under creative commons licence . download free images a collection of high quality stock photographs under creative commons licence . freeres.info a comprehensive listing of sites offering free stock photos , vectors , textures and other design resources photogen high-resolution stock photos free for commercial and personal use andamooka.org opencontent.org ( officially close on june 30 , 2003 ) connected : an internet encyclopedia was last updated in 1997 . here is their license : '' copying and redistribution of connected : an internet encyclopedia is freely permitted , as is the creation , copying , and distribution of derivative works . the requests for comments ( rfcs ) are covered by a separate copyright , included below . '' i think we should contact the editor before importing anything into wikipedia . : : i guess it was updated since , though the main page was n't : have a look at free images , liberal license but check it anyway . not compatible with gfdl : '' you must not redistribute the images in anyway designed for reuse '' . webmuseum - their license agreement is based on the creative commons license attribution-sharealike 1.0 license ; however , it explicitly allows ( under point 7 ) copying under the gnu fdl . contains information about art styles and painters , and images of artworks . note : the webmusum article on hiroshige is identical to encarta 's . the uk public records office publishes documents that are crown copyright this allows '' accurate '' reproduction with an acknowledgment for some materials - not images for example . gnu miscfiles project shutterglow.com - website not working as of july 2016 . wayback machine still allows access . a collection of high resolution free photos under cc 3.0 attribution license free stock photos from cepolina photos we now have otrs permission for all the images from www.cepolina.com . please use this image as reference for license and otrs ticket . ( in japanese ) . has extensive information on the spanish civil war , albeit from a left political pov . their webmaster tomas capdevila says , '' i explicitly allow anyone to copy the text content on la cucaracha the spanish civil war web site and reuse it , unchanged or changed , with or without mentioning the source , partially or as a whole , with the exception of text being marked as belonging to another author ( like quotations ) or mirrored web pages . please notice that some of the photography 's could be copyrighted in your country . '' dmoz a community created directory of websites licensed under the open directory license university of wisconsin digital collections a large database of images and sound files ( recently passed the 1 & nbsp ; million file mark ) , many of which explicitly allow fair use rights , many other images published before 1923 ( see the individual file 's page in the collection for specific rights ) . the boletín oficial del estado ( spanish state official paper ) has set up a web site with scanned images of all of its content from 1875 up to 1967 . it 's part of a more general site . it makes available all laws and decrees of the spanish government ( including both sides during the spanish civil war ) and many other petty official documents . laws should generally be public domain , and some other documents will be old enough to be public domain . someone may want to look into the legal status of these materials , it 's possible that the bulk of the site is public domain , in which case someone may want to move this item to wikipedia : public domain . religion . christianity . wikia : christianity licensed under creative commons wikichristian licensed under creative commons apologetics wiki christian apologetics - licensed under creative commons wikia : leftbehind licensed under creative commons orthodoxwiki eastern christianity - licensed under creative commons and gfdl reformed word licensed under creative commons salvation army wiki licensed under creative commons theopedia theology - licensed under creative commons . social and arts . flags of the world 12,900 pages about flags and view more than 23,000 images of flags ( be careful in referring to them , as many of them , minor flags specially and by jaume ollé , seem completely invented - verify with other sources too ) . free music ! ( dead link ) recordings of works of classical music in the public domain , released under the eff 's open audio license copyleft . internet history sourcebooks a collection of public domain and '' copy permitted '' ( whatever that means ) historical source documents collected by paul halsall at fordham -- note : he claims copyright on some forms of these documents . soil and health library : a collection of books on holistic agriculture , holistic health , self-sufficient living , and personal development . some books are in the public domain , others are not . dict.org : collection of dictionary databases in the public domain or under other free or semi-free licenses including gfdl consist of several public domain and semi-free dictionary resources . open music registry - works under open audio license . musicbrainz - musicbrainz content about recorded music is public domain and open audio license . uncg libraries , archives and manuscripts department - finding aids for manuscript collections documenting historical figures and organizations . abstracted information about the subject/collection may be shared freely , content of the collections themselves may be protected under copyright . lgbt history uk project online encyclopedia of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender life in the united kingdom throughout history . licensed under creative commons . societies , communities and cultures . community portal for bhavsar kshatriya samaj bhavsar kshatriya samaj , as name suggests is a community of kshatriyas ( the warriors ) . it is an ancient community originating from the north western part of india , stretching all the way towards the south indian territories . however this community isn ’ t enclosed by the indian border , rather its members have been successfully flourishing over the boundaries of seven seas . the website www.bhavsarsamaj.com is enriched with social , cultural , rituals and other details about this ancient community . science and technology . body1 , inc./the body1 network . a targeted patient education portal online . uranium information centre ( australia ) ( closed in 2008 ) has educational info on nuclear and uranium industries - bottom of page states that most material on the uic web site ( specific exceptions listed ) may be used or reproduced freely , with acknowledgment . lessons in electric circuits by tony r . kuphaldt : a series of six textbooks about electronics , under the design science license . javapedia , a wiki encyclopedia for java related topics , published under the creative commons license ( attribution license v1.0 ) . the connexions project , a project held by rice university , features dozens of complete courses mostly in mathematics and electrical engineering . all content is covered by the creative commons license ( atrribution license v1.0 ) . can be copied/adopted to wikipedia with a proper attribution . from their site : connexions is a collaborative , community-driven approach to authoring , teaching , and learning that seeks to provide a cohesive body of high-quality educational content to anyone in the world , for free . infosecpedia is a wiki encyclopedia and handbook for information security related topics , published under the creative commons license ( attribution license v1.0 ) . encyclopedia of laser physics and technology by dr . rüdiger paschotta , published online by rp photonics consulting gmbh ; it focuses on laser technology , as well as fiber-optic technology , nonlinear optics and various supplementary topics . direct copying of text and illustrations requires asking for permission . life science . a vast number of biomedical images licensed under the creative commons attribution licence blaikiewell animal sanctuary has free photographs of animals , plants , fungus , frost , etc . all can be tagged as . canadian wildlife service '' hinterland who 's who '' . useful material on various birds and mammals . the california bureau of land management provides a large number of photographs and images ( particularly of wildlife and natural locations ) . it requests photo credit , and its copyright release states that '' photographs and images may be used free of charge for print and electronic publications . photos and images may not be used to show , by implication or otherwise , that the u.s . department of the interior or blm endorses any product , service or political view . '' plos biology is a peer-reviewed journal licensed under a creative commons attribution license . plos medicine is a peer-reviewed journal licensed under a creative commons attribution license ( and similarly for the growing family of journals beginning with plos . ) encyclopedia of life . creative commons licenses that vary by article . useful searches . everystockphoto.com - searching over 2.2 million free photos , including a variety of non-pd licenses . free user accounts allow drag and drop collections , rating , tagging , and advanced search . picfindr.com - searches hand picked free stock photo- , public domain- , and photo community sites . includes the ability to search by rights ! ( whether you need to give credit , ask permission or not ) creative commons images on flickr : search for content licensed under the creative commons license , note : this search will return more than 100,000 results , however , the vast majority of these are not gfdl compatible , look for content that have either : no restriction . only the '' attribution '' and/or '' share-alike '' restrictions . ( please provide appropriate attribution when copying from such content ) ; see also : wikipedia : creative commons licenses wikipedia : public domain resources wikipedia : granting work into the public domain