Charles W. Morris

early life and education . a son of charles william and laura ( campbell ) morris , charles william morris was born on may 23 , 1901 , in denver , colorado . morris briefly attended the university of wisconsin , and later studied engineering and psychology at northwestern university , where he graduated with a b.s . in 1922 . that same year , he entered the university of chicago where he became a doctoral student in philosophy under the direction of george herbert mead . morris completed his dissertation on a symbolic theory of mind and received a ph.d . from the university of chicago in 1925 . career . after his graduation , morris turned to teaching , first at rice university , and later at the university of chicago . in 1958 he became research professor at the university of florida . his students included semiotician thomas a . sebeok . in 1937 morris presided over the western division of the american philosophical association , and was fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences . morris was an instructor of philosophy for six years from 1925 to 1931 at rice university in houston , texas . reisch , george a . “ morris , charles william ( 1901-79 ) ” . dictionary of modern american philosophers vol . 3 . ed . shook . england . thoemmes . 2005 . after leaving rice , he was associate professor of philosophy at the university of chicago from 1931 to 1947 . morris became a lecturing professor at chicago in 1948 , occupying the position until 1958 when he received an offer for a special appointment as a research professor at the university of florida , where he remained until his death . during his time at rice university , morris wrote and defended his philosophical perspective known as neo-pragmatism . he also worked on and published six theories of mind . reisch , george a . guide to the charles w . morris collection at the peirce edition project , iupui . created for the indiana scholarly editions consortium . unpublished manuscript . 2001 . at the end of his term at rice , morris returned to the university of chicago . in the early 1930s , the university of chicago 's philosophy department was unstable , but in the midst of change and difficult economic times , morris felt that philosophy would serve as a torch that would light the way to saving world civilization . morris had hoped to create an institute of philosophy at the university of chicago , but his efforts to convince the university president of such a venture were unsuccessful . semiotics . morris 's development of a behavioral theory of signs—i.e . , semiotics—is partly due to his desire to unify logical positivism with behavioral empiricism and pragmatism . posner , roland . “ charles morris and the behavioral foundations of semiotics . ” classics of semiotics . ed . krampen . plemun press . new york : 1987 . pp . 25 . morris 's union of these three philosophical perspectives eventuated in his claim that symbols have three types of relations : to objects , to persons , and to other symbols . he later called these relations '' semantics '' , '' pragmatics '' , and '' syntactics '' . viewing semiotics as a way to bridge philosophical outlooks , morris grounded his sign theory in mead 's social behaviorism . in fact , morris 's interpretation of an interpretant , a term used in the semiotics of charles sanders peirce , has been understood to be strictly psychological . dewey , john . “ peirce 's theory of linguistic signs , thought , and meaning . ” the journal of philosophy , vol . 43 , no . 4 ( feb . 14 , 1946 ) , pp.85-95 . morris 's system of signs emphasizes the role of stimulus and response in the orientation , manipulation , and consummation phases of action . his mature semiotic theory is traced out in signs , language , and behavior ( 1946 ) . morris , charles w . : signs , language and behavior . new york : prentice-hall , 1946 . reprinted , new york : george braziller , 1955 . reprinted in charles morris , writings on the general theory of signs ( the hague : mouton , 1971 ) , pp . 73–397 . morris 's semiotic is concerned with explaining the tri-relation between syntactics , semantics , and pragmatics in a dyadic way , which is very different from the semiotics of c . s . peirce . this caused some to argue that morris misinterpreted peirce by converting the interpretant into a logically existent thing . . institute for american thought . toward the end of his life in 1976 , morris sent two instalments of his work to the institute for american thought ( iat ) at indiana university purdue university indianapolis ( iupui ) . three years later in 1979 , morris 's daughter , sally petrilli , arranged to have additional installments of his work sent to iupui . in 1984 italian philosopher ferruccio rossi-landi added to the morris collection at iupui by sending his correspondence with charles w . morris . among the vast morris collection at the iat are 381 titles of books and journal articles regarding pragmatism , logical empiricism , poetry , ethics , and asian studies . personal life . in 1925 , morris married gertrude e . thompson , with whom he had a daughter , sally morris petrilli . in 1951 , he married his second wife , ellen ruth allen , a psychologist . charles william morris died on january 15 , 1979 in gainesville , florida . unity of science movement . while on sabbatical from the university of chicago in 1934 , morris traveled abroad , visiting europe and meeting working philosophers such as bertrand russell and members of the vienna circle , like rudolf carnap , otto neurath , and moritz schlick . morris was greatly impressed with the logical positivist ( logical empiricist ) movement . while presenting a paper in prague at the eighth international congress of philosophy , he discussed his hopes for a union of pragmatism and positivism . sympathetic to the positivist 's philosophical project , morris became the most vocal advocate in the united states for otto neurath 's '' unity of science movement '' . during the 1930s , morris helped several german and austrian philosophers emigrate to the united states , including rudolf carnap in 1936 . as a part of the '' unity of science movement '' , morris worked closely with neurath and carnap to produce the international encyclopedia of unified science . as co-editor of the encyclopedia , morris procured publication in america from the university of chicago press . his involvement with the encyclopedia spanned for ten years when the project lost momentum in 1943 . both morris and carnap found it difficult to keep the encyclopedia alive due to insufficient funds . in the latter part of the 1940s , morris was finally able to secure funding that allowed the project to last until its final publication in the 1970s . selected publications . charles w . morris ( 1925 ) . symbolism and reality : a study in the nature of mind . dissertation , university of chicago . reprinted , amsterdam : john benjamins , 1993 . translated into german , symbolik und realitat , with an introduction by a . eschbach . frankfurt : suhrkamp , 1981 . charles w . morris ( 1932 ) . six theories of mind . chicago : university of chicago . reprinted , 1966 . charles w . morris ( 1937 ) . logical positivism , pragmatism and scientific empiricism . paris : hermann et cie . reprinted , new york : ams press , 1979 . charles w . morris ( 1942 ) . paths of life : preface to a world religion . new york : harper and brothers . charles w . morris ( 1946 ) . signs , language and behavior . new york : prentice-hall , 1946 . reprinted , new york : george braziller , 1955 . reprinted in charles morris , writings on the general theory of signs ( the hague : mouton , 1971 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 73–397 . translated into italian , segni , linguaggio e comportamento , by s . ceccato . milan . translated into german , zeichen , sprache und verhalten , by a . eschbach and g . kopsch . düsseldorf : schwann , 1973 . charles w . morris ( 1948 ) . the open self . new york : prentice-hall ; translated into swedish , öppna er själv by ann bouleau . stockholm : 1949 . charles w . morris ( 1956 ) . varieties of human value . chicago : university of chicago press . reprinted , 1973 . charles w . morris ( 1964 ) . signification and significance : a study of the relations of signs and values . cambridge , mass . : mit press . chap . 1 , '' signs and the act , '' is reprinted in charles morris , writings on the general theory of signs ( the hague : mouton , 1971 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 401–414 . charles w . morris ( 1970 ) . the pragmatic movement in american philosophy . new york : george braziller . charles w . morris ( 1971 ) . writings on the general theory of signs . den haag : mouton . charles w . morris ( 1973 ) . cycles . gainesville : university of florida press . charles w . morris ( 1975 ) . zeichen wert äesthetik . mit einer einleitung hg . u . übers . v . a . eschbach . frankfurt : suhrkamp . charles w . morris ( 1976 ) . image . new york : vantage press . charles w . morris ( 1977 ) . pragmatische semiotik und handlungstheorie . mit einer einleitung hg . und übers . v . a . eschbach . frankfurt : suhrkamp . see also . american philosophy list of american philosophers . references . external links . charles morris collection at the institute for american thought