Sauerland

etymology . the name sauerland is first mentioned as suderland in an official document from 1266 . westfälisches urkundenbuch vii , nr . 1243 after 1400 the letter 'd ' started to disappear . therefore , sauerland southern country is the most convincing meaning , opposed to the theory that sauer is from the german word sauer meaning sour ( poor '' sour '' soil ) . linguistically , '' suder- “ is similar to the old saxon sûðar ( southbound ) . history . before 1800 the western part of the sauerland was part of the mark ( county ) based in altena ; the eastern part adhered to the county of arnsberg , later became known as the duchy of westphalia and was owned by the archbishops and electorate of cologne . the duchy of limburg covered a very small area in the lower lenne river valley . after the napoleonic wars the area became part of prussia and was integrated into the new province of westphalia . after world war ii , westphalia was merged with the new federal state of north rhine-westphalia . today , the sauerland consists of the districts märkischer kreis , olpe and hochsauerland . the western part of the hesse district waldeck-frankenberg is also attributed to the sauerland because of its geomorphology , as well as its sociocultural similarity , and the stark contrast to the rest of the adjoining hessian landscape . geography . image : olpekreis-biggesee1-asio.jpg thumb left biggesee between olpe and attendorn image : sundern-amecke , germany.jpg thumb left sorpe reservoir in the hochsauerland to the west the hills continue into the bergisches land , to the south into the siegerland , and to the north-east into the teutoburg forest . the major rivers of the sauerland are the ruhr and the lenne . several artificial lakes were created on the smaller rivers by building dams to store water for the nearby ruhr area , the biggest reservoirs being the möhne and bigge . although the highest elevation of the sauerland is the langenberg ( 843 & nbsp ; m ) near olsberg , the much more renowned summit , which is well known for the nearby skiing facilities , its weather station and observation tower , is the slightly lower kahler asten ( 842 & nbsp ; m ) near winterberg . both langenberg and kahler asten are peaks in the rothaargebirge mountains . dams and reservoirs ( lakes ) . the sauerland has six reservoir lakes . sorpesee biggesee hennesee listertalsperre diemelsee möhnesee . geology . the sauerland is part of the rhine massif ( rheinisches schiefergebirge ) including 'bergisches land ' , westerwald , siegerland , and , separated by the rhine valley , the eifel , hohes venn and hunsrück . the rheinisches schiefergebirge was subjected to folding and faulting in the variscan orogeny in carboniferous times and eroded to a peneplain in the permian . the tectonic uplift to the present-day low mountain range began approximately 500,000 years ago and is still going on . walter , roland et al . : geologie von mitteleuropa . 5 . auflage , schweizerbarth ’ sche verlagsbuchhandlung , stuttgart 1992 . most of the bedrock underneath the sauerland originates from a middle and upper devonian period , when it was under a marginal and shallow sea . this has meant that slates , sandstones and greywackes are the most abundant rock types in the sauerland . in some areas limestones from an ancient reef fringe prevail and are karstified . the sauerland has several caves , especially in the northern part , the biggest caves being in attendorn and balve . in some areas of the sauerland the occurrence of lead-zinc-silver-ores lead to the development of a considerable mining industry , the center of which was the town of meggen . mining in this area lasted until the late second half of the 20th century , today there is no active mining in the sauerland . the sandstones , greywackes and quartzites of the sauerland as well as , to a minor extent , the limestones are still exploited in numerous quarries . some of these caves are now becoming modest attractions to tourists . towns and municipalities . image : balve , 20070915.jpg thumb town centre of balve in 2007 image : altena burg 20051030.jpg thumb castle and lenne in altena in 2005 image : schmallenberg innenstadt und unterstadt.jpg thumb town centre of schmallenberg in 2010 the largest town of the sauerland is iserlohn ; other larger towns are lüdenscheid and arnsberg . meschede is the home of an abbey . another abbey is placed at bestwig . hochsauerlandkreis . . waldeck-frankenberg . upland . economy . parts of the sauerland , especially the major valleys in the northwest , represent an old industrial region . the availability of iron ore and the abundance of wood and water allowed iron production long before the ruhr area industrialisation and the mining of its coal took place . today there are only a few remains of this early heavy industry ; wire production is still important in altena and a number of small factories still occupy the old industrial areas . warsteiner is germany 's largest privately owned brewery . tourism . sauerland has become a popular tourist area , attracting many visitors from the ruhr area and relatively close netherlands . the forests and picturesque small towns are attractive for hikers and outdoor sports . there are more than 30,000 & nbsp ; km of tagged hiking trails in sauerland region maintained by sauerland hiking association ( sgv ) . hiking map sauerland some of the towns have the title bad ( spa ) because of their good air quality and stimulating climate . winter sports are popular in the sauerland . the bob sleigh track in winterberg is widely known in germany , as well as the ski jumping in willingen . sauerland also has a successful theme park called fort fun . balve cave is one of the biggest prehistorical caves of europe and is situated in balve . the largest accessible limestone cave outside the alps is in attendorn . transport . the sauerland can be reached by car or train . the drive either via the bab 4 from cologne or via the bab 45 and bab 46 from dortmund , takes about one hour ; from kassel or frankfurt-rhine-main ( via the sauerlandlinie ) the journey takes about two hours . the closest commercial airport is dortmund airport . bundesautobahn 4 bundesautobahn 44 bundesautobahn 45 ( sauerlandlinie ) bundesautobahn 46 in the region , railways were once the most important means of transportation , but between 1950 and 1990 many smaller branch lines were closed and rail travel is now only present in the major valleys . the most important lines are : ruhr-sieg-strecke : hagen – iserlohn-letmathe – werdohl – finnentrop – lennestadt – siegen ( 2 trains per hour , abellio rail nrw ) ruhrtalbahn : hagen – arnsberg – bestwig – brilon – meschede – warburg ( 1-2 trains per hour , db regio nrw ) volmetalbahn : hagen – lüdenscheid-brügge – meinerzhagen – overath – köln ( one train per hour , db regio nrw )