System administrator

related fields . many organizations staff offer jobs related to system administration . in a larger company , these may all be separate positions within a computer support or information services ( is ) department . in a smaller group they may be shared by a few sysadmins , or even a single person . a database administrator ( dba ) maintains a database system , and is responsible for the integrity of the data and the efficiency and performance of the system . a network administrator maintains network infrastructure such as switches and routers , and diagnoses problems with these or with the behavior of network-attached computers . a computer security is a specialist in computer and network security , including the administration of security devices such as firewalls , as well as consulting on general security measures . a web administrator maintains web server services ( such as apache or iis ) that allow for internal or external access to web sites . tasks include managing multiple sites , administering security , and configuring necessary components and software . responsibilities may also include software change management . a computer operator performs routine maintenance and upkeep , such as changing backup tapes or replacing failed drives in a raid ( raid ) . such tasks usually require physical presence in the room with the computer , and while less skilled than sysadmin tasks , may require a similar level of trust , since the operator has access to possibly sensitive data . an sre site reliability engineer - takes a software engineering or programmatic approach to managing systems . training . most employers require a bachelor 's degree in a related field , such as computer science , information technology , electronics engineering , or computer engineering . some schools also offer undergraduate degrees and graduate programs in system administration . b.s . information technology computer science . cs.unh.edu . retrieved on 2013-07-17 . nssa.rit.edu ( 2013-01-04 ) . retrieved on 2013-07-17 . mtu.edu . retrieved on 2014-10-21 , fsu computer science - masters degree computer network and system administration . cs.fsu.edu . retrieved on 2013-07-17 . in addition , because of the practical nature of system administration and the easy availability of open-source server software , many system administrators enter the field self-taught . generally , a prospective employee will be required to have some experience with the computer system they are expected to manage . in some cases , candidates are expected to possess industry certifications such as the microsoft mcsa , mcse , mcitp , red hat rhce , novell cna , cne , cisco ccna or comptia 's a+ or network+ , sun certified scna , linux professional institute , linux foundation certified engineer or linux foundation certified system administrator , among others . sometimes , almost exclusively in smaller sites , the role of system administrator may be given to a skilled user in addition to or in replacement of his or her duties . skills . the subject matter of system administration includes computer systems and the ways people use them in an organization . this entails a knowledge of operating systems and applications , as well as hardware and software troubleshooting , but also knowledge of the purposes for which people in the organization use the computers . perhaps the most important skill for a system administrator is problem solving—frequently under various sorts of constraints and stress . the sysadmin is on call when a computer system goes down or malfunctions , and must be able to quickly and correctly diagnose what is wrong and how best to fix it . they may also need to have teamwork and communication skills ; as well as being able to install and configure hardware and software . sysadmins must understand the behavior of software in order to deploy it and to troubleshoot problems , and generally know several programming languages used for scripting or automation of routine tasks . a typical sysadmin 's role is not to design or write new application software but when they are responsible for automating system or application configuration with various configuration management tools , the lines somewhat blur . depending on the sysadmin 's role and skillset they may be expected to understand equivalent key/core concepts a software engineer understands . that said , system administrators are not software engineers or developers , in the job title sense . particularly when dealing with internet-facing or business-critical systems , a sysadmin must have a strong grasp of computer security . this includes not merely deploying software patches , but also preventing break-ins and other security problems with preventive measures . in some organizations , computer security administration is a separate role responsible for overall security and the upkeep of firewalls and intrusion detection systems , but all sysadmins are generally responsible for the security of computer systems . duties . a system administrator 's responsibilities might include : analyzing system logs and identifying potential issues with computer systems . applying operating system updates , patches , and configuration changes . installing and configuring new hardware and software . adding , removing , or updating user account information , resetting passwords , etc . answering technical queries and assisting users . responsibility for security . responsibility for documenting the configuration of the system . troubleshooting any reported problems . system performance tuning . ensuring that the network infrastructure is up and running . configuring , adding , and deleting file systems . ensuring parity between dev , test and production environments . training users plan and manage the machine room environment in larger organizations , some of the tasks above may be divided among different system administrators or members of different organizational groups . for example , a dedicated individual ( s ) may apply all system upgrades , a quality control team may perform testing and validation , and one or more technical writers may be responsible for all technical documentation written for a company . system administrators , in larger organizations , tend not to be systems architects , systems engineers , or systems designers . in smaller organizations , the system administrator might also act as technical support , database administrator , network administrator , storage ( san ) administrator or application analyst . see also . application service management bastard operator from hell ( bofh ) devops forum administrator information technology operations large installation system administration conference league of professional system administrators lisa ( organization ) professional certification ( computer technology ) superuser sysop system administrator appreciation day . references . further reading . essential linux administration : a comprehensive guide for beginners , by chuck easttom ( cengage press , 2011 ) essential system administration ( o'reilly ) , 3rd edition , 2001 , by æleen frisch the practice of system and network administration ( addison-wesley ) , 2nd edition jul . 5 , 2007 , by tom limoncelli , christine hogan and strata r . chalup the practice of system and network administration volume 1 : devops and other best practices for enterprise it ( addison-wesley ) , 3rd edition . nov . 4 , 2016 , by tom limoncelli , christine hogan , strata r . chalup the practice of cloud system administration : designing and operating large distributed systems , volume 2 ( addison-wesley ) , sep . 2 , 2014 , by thomas a . limoncelli , christine hogan , strata r . chalup principles of network and system administration ( j . wiley & sons ) , 2000 , 2003 ( 2nd ed . ) , by mark burgess time management for system administrators ( o'reilly ) , 2005 , by tom limoncelli unix and linux system administration handbook ( prentice hall ) , 5th edition , aug . 8 , 2017 , by trent r . hein , ben whaley , dan mackin , sandeep negi '' the blue collar workers of the 21st century '' , minnesota public radio , january 27 , 2004 . external links . communication workers of america