Leipzig Declaration

versions . the 1995 declaration . the 1995 declaration asserts : '' there does not exist today a general scientific consensus about the importance of greenhouse warming from rising levels of carbon dioxide . on the contrary , most scientists now accept the fact that actual observations from earth satellites show no climate warming whatsoever . '' the latter statement was broadly accurate at the time , but with additional data and correction of errors , all analyses of satellite temperature measurements now show statistically significant warming . the declaration also criticised the united nations framework convention on climate change , saying : '' energy is essential for all economic growth , and fossil fuels provide today 's principal global energy source . in a world in which poverty is the greatest social pollutant , any restriction on energy use that inhibits economic growth should be viewed with caution . for this reason , we consider 'carbon taxes ' and other drastic control policies . to be ill-advised , premature , wrought with economic danger , and likely to be counterproductive . '' . signatures . according to the sepp website , there were 79 signatures to the 1995 declaration , including frederick seitz : the current sepp chair . perhaps the most prominent signatory to the declaration was dr . robert e . stevenson , a former research scientist for nasa and the scripps institution of oceanography . the signature list was last updated on july 16 , 1996 . of these 79 , 33 failed to respond when sepp asked them to sign the 1997 declaration . sepp calls the signatories '' nearly 100 climate experts '' . the signatures to the 1995 declaration were disputed by david olinger of the st . petersburg times . in an article on july 29 , 1996 , he revealed that many signers , including chauncey starr , robert balling , and patrick michaels , have received funding from the oil industry , while others had no scientific training or could not be identified . ( paywall ) the 1995 declarations begins : '' as scientists , we are intensely interested in the possibility that human activities may affect the global climate '' . however , those identified as scientists and climate experts include at least ten weather presenters , including dick groeber of dick 's weather service in springfield , ohio . groeber , who had not completed a university degree , labelled himself a scientist by virtue of his thirty to forty years of self-study . in any case , it is difficult to accurately evaluate the list of signatures of the 1995 declaration , as the sepp website provides no additional details about them except for their university , if they are professors . the 1997 declaration . the 1997 declaration updated the 1995 declaration in a number of ways . the most obvious difference was its focus on the kyoto protocol , as the kyoto conference was in the process of being finalised . the declaration says : : '' we believe the kyoto protocol -- to curtail carbon dioxide emissions from only part of the world community -- is dangerously simplistic , quite ineffective , and economically destructive to jobs and standards-of-living . we consider the drastic emission control policies deriving from the kyoto conference -- lacking credible support from the underlying science -- to be ill-advised and premature . '' the 1997 declaration also updated its citations of evidence that appeared to run contrary to the consensus on global warming . for example , the 1995 declaration cites '' observations from earth satellites , '' where the 1997 declaration cites '' observations from both weather satellites and balloon-borne radiosondes . '' as with satellite data , subsequent analysis of radiosondes has shown a statistically significant warming trend . signatures . the declaration begins : '' as independent scientists concerned with atmospheric and climate problems , we . '' . as with the 1995 declaration , questions have been raised about the scientific background of the signers , and others have questioned the degree to which they can be deemed to be independent . because many of those who signed the 1997 declaration also signed the 1995 declaration , the concerns raised by david olinger and others after the 1995 declaration are still relevant . the signers are generally described by fred singer and his supporters as climate scientists , although the current signers also include 25 weather presenters . one key report opposing the scientific credentials of the signers was a danish broadcasting company tv special by øjvind hesselager . hesselager attempted to contact the declaration 's 33 european signers and found that four of them could not be located , twelve denied ever having signed , and some had not even heard of the leipzig declaration . those who verified signing included a medical doctor , a nuclear scientist , and an entomologist . after discounting the signers whose credentials were inflated , irrelevant , false , or unverifiable , hesselager claimed that only 20 of the names on the list had any scientific connection with the study of climate change , and some of those names were known to have obtained grants from the oil and fuel industry , including the german coal industry and the government of kuwait ( a major oil exporter ) . as a result of hesselager 's report , singer removed some , but not all , of the discredited signatures . the number of signatures on the document , according to sepp 's own press releases , has declined from 140 ( according to a december 1997 press release ) to 105 . sepp 's position is that '' a few of the original signers did not have the 'proper ' academic credentials - even though they understand the scientific climate issues quite well . to avoid this kind of smear , we want to restrict the leipzig declaration to signers with impeccable qualifications . '' to address the signer credibility issue , sepp has provided considerably more information about each signer on their website and lists the weather presenters separately from the other signers . 2005 , revised . as of 2010 , singer 's sepp website listed the '' 2005 , revised '' declaration ( which still spoke of the 1997 kyoto conference as a future event ) . this version included the claim : '' in fact , many climate specialists now agree that actual observations from weather satellites show no global warming whatsoever '' . use of the declarations . image : satellite temperatures.png thumb right comparison of ground-based ( blue ) and satellite-based ( red : uah ; green : rss ) records of temperature variations since 1979 . trends plotted since january 1982 . ( source : publicly available data , figure by robert a . rohde ) the declarations have been widely cited by some in the '' sound science '' movement . it has been cited by fred singer in editorial columns appearing in hundreds of websites and major publications , including the wall street journal , miami herald , detroit news , chicago tribune , the plain dealer , memphis commercial appeal , the seattle times , and the orange county register . jeff jacoby , a columnist with the boston globe , described the signers of the leipzig declaration as '' climate scientists '' that '' include prominent scholars . '' think tanks such as the heritage foundation , the heartland institute , and australia 's institute of public affairs called them '' noted scientists . '' both the leipzig declaration and frederick seitz 's oregon petition have been quoted as authoritative sources during deliberations in the u.s . senate and house of representatives . although the key data on which the leipzig declaration relied ( such as satellite temperature measurements ) has been invalidated by subsequent research , and much new evidence has accumulated , the declaration continues to be cited , along with the oregon petition , as evidence of the current views of scientists on climate change . moreover , the organizers have not changed their stated position of rejecting global warming with human activity as primary driver . original texts . 1995 declaration : 1997 declaration : 2005 declaration ( revised ) :