Kan Kikuchi

early career . in 1904-1905 after the russo-japanese war , literature in japan grew more modern . french realism was one of the first influences that immersed into japan 's literature . building from the famous and classic works from the west , which include diaries and autobiographies , japanese writers formulated a style of fictional writing that is eventually called shinkyo-shosetsu . other major influences from western countries in europe in addition to works from india and china contributed to the creation of modern literature in japan . in comparison to literature in european countries , new japanese literature did not achieve as much popularity ; few works of japanese playwrights were translated into european languages . kikuchi kan saw the language barrier and inaccuracy of translation as part of the central cause for this . . irish influences . in 1924 , shortly after kaoru osanai opened tsukiji little theatre , kikuchi kan was the most celebrated playwright in japan . kan was widely claimed as '' a playwright who transformed irish plays into a japanese context , '' including john millington synge 's deirdre of the sorrows . when studying at the university of kyoto , kikuchi kan had a great interest in modern drama , particularly irish modern drama . dramatists kan studied included j.m . synge and edward plunkett , 18th baron of dunsany . after graduating from the university of kyoto , kan wrote detailed articles on synge and irish plays for teikoku-bungaku ( 帝国文学 imperial literature ) and new current of thought . in 1925 , kan also published a book with shuji yamamoto , eikoku airan kindaigeki seizui ( quintessence of modern plays in england and ireland ) . kan 's interests in irish drama and j.s . synge were also inspirations to his future works . in his han-jijo-den ( 半自叙伝 semi-autobiography ) , kan writes about his great interest in irish drama . . writing style . though kikuchi kan recognized distinct characteristics between western and japanese cultures , he used his japanese roots as the foundation of many of his works . this , in turn , resulted in kikuchi kan creating his style of writing in japanese drama . one of his early works , kayano yane ( 茅の屋根 thatched cottage ) , represents one of kikuchi kan 's portrayal of societal issues during his time , which increased his popularity in modern japanese literature . other themes include issues of morality , money , class , and gender . kikuchi kan believes the nature of modern theatre is to shed light upon the wrongs of modern society and liberate japan from those customs . the heavy influence of common issues in kikuchi kan 's works gained accolades from critics and dramatists . elements of drama kikuchi kan considered to be the most effective are the one-act play and the use of a minimal number of characters . '' the one-act play '' he wrote , '' is different from long plays - three-acts or five-acts . it should extract the most dramatic elements from all and has to effectively treat it within a limited time . '' with this short amount of time , kikuchi kan 's portrays his message in a core event with meticulous use of exposition . one important element in his perspective is knowing the difference between writing stories as opposed to writing plays . in that limited time , the play must have the power to '' physically bind the audience to the theatre seat , '' as opposed to stories that '' the reader can put into his pocket . '' from 1914 to 1924 , kan wrote one-act plays for the leading coterie magazine at that time , new tides of thought ( shinshichō ) . new tides of thought magazine also contributed to the popularity of taishō drama . in kan 's one-act plays , he focused on a single dramatic event and had the characters ' actions revolve around that event to produce the most tension and most '' dramatic force , '' for one-act plays '' should extract the most dramatic elements.within a limited time . '' . father returns . one of his most famous works , chichi kaeru ( father returns ) , is a one-act play that mainly portrays the struggles of a father-son relationship . father returns opened in 1920 , after being published in the journal new tides of thought in 1917 . the story revolves around a conflict between a father and son . the eldest son , ken'ichirō , despises his father , sōtarō , for his cruel treatment of the family and for deserting them . as the play progresses , the audience learns that ken'ichirō 's hatred towards his father fueled his determination of surpassing his father by providing better support for his family in his absence . after sōtarō returns one night , the family welcomes him but ken'ichirō 's confrontation with him ultimately drives sōtarō to leave . the play concludes with ken'ichirō 's sudden change of heart towards sōtarō and accepting him into the family . after shinjirō , a younger brother , goes to bring sōtarō back , the curtain closes before sōtarō is found . the ending drove takeda and ennosuke to alter it to avoid ambiguity , but was changed back to the original to preserve the main message of the play . . madame pearl . shinju fujin ( 真珠夫人 madame pearl ) brought kikuchi kan to fame . this drama takes place in japan and focuses on the theme of gender in society . the main character , a woman named karasawa ruriko 唐沢瑠璃子 is a baron 's daughter who is forced into an arranged marriage with the rich shōda katsuhei 荘田勝平 to save the family from bankruptcy . before and after ruriko 's arranged marriage to katsuhei , she remained faithful to her feelings for sugino naoya 杉野直也 , her first love , and decided to preserve her virginity . due to ruriko 's choosing to be sexually pure , katsuhei attempted to rape ruriko but died from a sudden heart attack . from then on , she wanted to overcome the male dominance in the society she lived in . for a period of time ruriko tricked men and played with their emotions , which lead many of them to violent deaths . however , ruriko eventually was killed by one of her suitors . the name shinju fujin symbolizes ruriko 's purity and preservation of chastity throughout her encounters with different men . she remained pure in body , mind , and soul like a pearl while she gradually rose in power over men . as the story unravels , it encourages the audience to think about ruriko 's motivation to carry out her actions and find the '' truth '' behind her thinking . according to michiko suzuki , this play became popular among female audiences because it gave them strength and the opportunity fulfill '' the fantasy of female liberation '' . suzuki further argues that many audience members believed that ruriko was inspired by yanagihara byakuren 柳原白蓮 , who was widely known for her beauty , her talent in poetry , her relation to the emperor , and her marriage to coalmine magnate itō den'emon 伊藤傳右衞門 . according to suzuki , byakuren herself asked kikuchi kan whether she played a role in creating ruriko in shinju fujin and kikuchi confirmed that there was a connection . suzuki also connects ruriko to nemesis , the goddess of revenge . suzuki argues that , like the goddess of revenge , ruriko wanted to avenge the women who have fallen victim to the '' violence and self-centered desires of men . '' . naoki and akutagawa prizes . kikuchi kan dedicated the akutagawa prize to ryūnosuke akutagawa ( 芥川 龍之介 ) after his death in 1927 . the akutagawa prize committee was composed of the close friends of bungei shunjusha . the akutagawa prize was given every six months to rising authors of original literature ( sōsaku ) that were published in any newspaper or magazine . the akutagawa prizes were published in bungeishunjū issues . the prize included both a watch and a cash award of five hundred japanese yen ( ¥ ) . the naoki prize was created by kikuchi kan as tribute to literary author sanjugo naoki ( 直木 三十五 ) after his death in february 1934 . the naoki prize was given to rising authors of popular literature . the naoki prizes were published in oru yomimono ( オール讀物 ) issues . the process of choosing recipients of the two prizes is for the committees to select already published manuscripts in coterie and commercial magazines and newspapers . after producing the two prizes , kikuchi kan initially decided on having the prizes reflect the kenshō shōsetsu type of award , in which submitted and unpublished manuscripts were selected by a committee . in brief , the kenshō shōsetsu , the '' prize-winning novels '' are selected pieces of fiction novels published in newspapers and magazines that received considerable amounts of praise . the akutagawa prize committee in 1934 consisted of the members : bungei shunjusha , yamamoto yuzu , haruo satō , jun'ichirō tanizaki , murō saisei , kōsaku takii , riichi yokomitsu and yasunari kawabata . kikuchi kan , masao kume and masajirō kojima were in both akutagawa and naoki prize committees . . kikuchi kan prize . in 1938 , the kikuchi kan prize ( 菊池寛賞 kikuchi kan shō ) was created by kikuchi kan himself that recognizes authors ' achievements . however , unlike the naoki and akutagawa prizes , the kikuchi kan prize is given to senior authors over age 45 . the prize includes an award of one million yen and a table clock . this award was sponsored by the association for the promotion of japanese literature for six years before the cancellation of the prize . after kikuchi kan 's death , the prize was brought back and is currently open to art , literature , film , and other genres . recipients of this prize include hakuchō masamune and yasushi inoue . selected work . kan kikuchi 's published writings encompass 512 works in 683 publications in 7 languages and 2,341 library holdings . worldcat identities : 菊池寬 1888-1948 or madman on the roof or beyond the pale of vengeance film adaptations : tōjūrō no koi ( 1938 film ) and tōjūrō no koi ( 1955 film ) . see also . kikuchi kan prize japanese literature list of japanese authors akutagawa prize naoki prize . notes . references . asai kiyoshi . ( 1994 ) . tokyo : shinchōsha . ; oclc 31486196 . external links . author 's entry at aozora bunko hiroshi kikuchi 's grave shinkyo shosetsu madman on the roof