Grokster

a summary of the piracy argument . it has been estimated that 90 % of files shared on grokster were downloaded illegally . whether such downloads have substantially affected the retail sales of music , videos , and other works protected by copyright and the intellectual property laws is a matter of debate . grokster claimed they did not violate any copyright laws because no files passed through their computers . they assigned certain user computers as '' root supernodes '' that acted as music hubs for their company . thus they were not responsible for controlling any specific file downloads . the key issue in the copyright infringement case was the so-called '' sony safe-harbor '' principle that was set by the supreme court over 21 years previously in sony v . universal studios 464 u.s . 417 ( 1984 ) . the ruling stated that , '' . the sale of copying equipment , like the sale of other articles of commerce , does not constitute contributory infringement if the product is widely used for legitimate , unobjectionable purposes . indeed , it need merely be capable of substantial non-infringing uses '' ( sony 464 u.s . at 442 ) . this case challenged the legality of using vtrs to copy content using betamax tapes . grokster argued that proof of reasonable , actual or potential , non-infringing use , is sufficient to fulfill the '' substantiality '' requirement . the riaa and mpaa argued that sony safe-harbor requires proof that the non-infringing use is the primary one ; an incidental non-infringing use is not enough . among the amicus curiae briefs : the u.s . government proposed that a manufacturer of a technological device will be protected by sony safe-harbor only if the non-infringing uses are commercially significant compared to the infringing uses . a group of law and economic professors ( among them professors kenneth j . arrow , and william m . landes ) argue that the test whether the non-infringing use is substantial , requires an examination of all the existing legal mechanisms for accomplishing the same task . the example given is the distribution of the bible . this is lawfully available through peer-to-peer file sharing software and is therefore a non-infringing use . but many religious websites offer a free copy . thus , since downloading the bible through peer-to-peer file sharing software is an addition to the list of well-established legitimate methods for obtaining a free bible , the benefits of this addition are not substantial and the overall use of p2p software should not be considered a non-infringing use . the cost-benefit analysis , first introduced by judge posner from the 7th circuit court of appeals in the aimster case , holds that a manufacturer of technological device will enjoy the sony safe-harbor only if '' . it would have been disproportionately costly for him to eliminate or at least reduce substantially the infringing uses . '' the creative commons organization presented a strong argument for non-infringing use in the form of the creative commons licence , despite the fact that the architecture of the software did not allow for the licence information to be transferred . notable emerging technology companies with the support of the electronic frontier foundation ( among them kaleidescape ( ceo michael malcolm ) , sling media , inc . ( founder raghu tarra ) , time trax technologies corp . ( ceo elliott frutkin ) argued unwarranted alteration of the test set forth in sony corp . v . universal city studios , 464 u.s . 417 ( 1984 ) , that would have profound negative consequences for emerging technology companies . determining a product ’ s '' primary uses '' necessarily requires evaluating how the product is actually used . this ex post , or after-the-fact , test for contributory infringement would greatly increase the legal uncertainty surrounding the decision to pursue commercialization of a new technology . emerging technology companies can not necessarily predict the '' primary uses '' to which their new technology will be put , much less whether those uses would be held by the courts to be infringing uses . the history of the case in the u.s . courts . in april 2003 , los angeles federal judge stephen wilson ruled in favor of grokster and streamcast ( providers of morpheus p2p software ) against the recording industry association of america and the motion picture association of america and held that their file sharing software was not illegal . on 20 august 2003 , the decision was appealed by the riaa and the mpaa . on 17 august 2004 , the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit issued a partial ruling supporting grokster , holding this appeal presents the question of whether distributors of peer-to-peer file-sharing networking software may be held contributorily or vicariously liable for copyright infringements by users . under the circumstances presented by this case , we conclude that the defendants are not liable for contributory and vicarious copyright infringement and affirm the district court 's partial grant of summary judgment . in december 2004 , the supreme court agreed to hear the case . on 25 march 2005 , billionaire and former broadcast.com owner mark cuban announced he would finance grokster 's fight in the supreme court . oral arguments were held for mgm v . grokster on 29 march 2005 , and in june 2005 , the court unanimously held that grokster could indeed be sued for infringement for their activities prior to the date of this judgment . but the future impact of the case may only be to require software companies to more carefully advertise their packages to discourage illegal downloading ( see also inducement rule ) . grokster settled with plaintiffs shortly after the supreme court 's decision . on 14 february 2006 , the plaintiffs filed motions for summary judgment as to the liability of the remaining defendants , streamcast and sharman . defendant sharman networks reached a tentative settlement agreement in august 2006 . on 27 september 2006 , judge steven wilson of the united states district court for the central district of california granted summary judgment to the plaintiffs as to streamcast 's liability . the court rejected streamcast 's argument that the plaintiff needs to show specific instances of infringement resulting from streamcast 's acts , holding that '' plaintiff need prove only that streamcast distributed the product with the intent to encourage infringement . '' 2006 u.s . dist . lexis 73714 at 58 . supreme court decision leads to shutdown . grokster closed its site on november 7 , 2005 . a note on its home page cited a united states supreme court ruling that copying copyrighted material using '' unauthorized peer-to-peer services is illegal '' and while legal download services exist , '' this service is not one of them . '' the website is now threatening visitors that their actions can get them caught , displaying the visitor 's ip address . the screen text reads as follows : . impact of legal threats and fallout from grokster ’ s demise . in the aftermath of the grokster warning , many users became alarmed that their ip addresses were being stored . prosecution of such individuals relies upon what has commonly been referred to as a process of doe subpoena in which prosecutors are required to gain a series of subpoenas in order to find out the identity of the user behind the ip address in question . following the shutdown of grokster , blogs became inundated with concerned users fearful of the warning ; however , there have been no reports of the use of doe subpoenas in this case . research into the effects of warnings such as the one left on grokster ’ s website has shown that while these warnings can result in a substantial reduction in online file sharing of individuals , the overall availability of downloadable content did not diminish . furthermore , researchers can not account for how much of this reduction in individual file sharing is simply shifted to other file sharing programs . in cases where the riaa has issued threats , the users who conduct the most file sharing usually reduced their daily transactions to levels below the level of prosecution . in effect , these warnings have only caused only a brief reduction in overall online file sharing . . in popular culture . weird al yankovic mentions grokster in '' do n't download this song '' . see also . comparison of file sharing applications . references . external links . mgm v . grokster case documents the legality of file sharing - mgm vs grokster mgm v . grokster ninth circuit oral argument transcript mgm v . grokster : day 1 - march 30 , 2005 mp3 newswire recap of first day of trial legally speaking : did mgm really win the grokster case ? pamela samuelson technical background of grokster decision - philip larson 's blog legal background of grokster decision - philip larson 's blog summary of supreme court decision - philip larson 's blog advanced peer-based technology business models . shuman ghosemajumder . mit sloan school of management , 2002 . music downloads : pirates- or customers ? . silverthorne , sean . harvard business school , 2004 . metro–goldwyn–mayer studios ( mgm ) v . grokster , 545 u.s . ( 2005 ) - civil liberties