Petroleum geology

sedimentary basin analysis . petroleum geology is principally concerned with the evaluation of seven key elements in sedimentary basins : thumb source reservoir seal trap timing maturation migration in general , all these elements must be assessed via a limited 'window ' into the subsurface world , provided by one ( or possibly more ) exploration wells . these wells present only a 1-dimensional segment through the earth and the skill of inferring 3-dimensional characteristics from them is one of the most fundamental in petroleum geology . recently , the availability of inexpensive , high quality 3d seismic data ( from reflection seismology ) and data from various electromagnetic geophysical techniques ( such as magnetotellurics ) has greatly aided the accuracy of such interpretation . the following section discusses these elements in brief . for a more in-depth treatise , see the second half of this article below . evaluation of the source uses the methods of geochemistry to quantify the nature of organic-rich rocks which contain the precursors to hydrocarbons , such that the type and quality of expelled hydrocarbon can be assessed . the reservoir is a porous and permeable lithological unit or set of units that holds the hydrocarbon reserves . analysis of reservoirs at the simplest level requires an assessment of their porosity ( to calculate the volume of in situ hydrocarbons ) and their permeability ( to calculate how easily hydrocarbons will flow out of them ) . some of the key disciplines used in reservoir analysis are the fields of references , stratigraphy , sedimentology , and reservoir engineering . the seal , or cap rock , is a unit with low permeability that impedes the escape of hydrocarbons from the reservoir rock . common seals include evaporites , chalks and shales . analysis of seals involves assessment of their thickness and extent , such that their effectiveness can be quantified . the petroleum trap is the stratigraphic or structural feature that ensures the juxtaposition of reservoir and seal such that hydrocarbons remain trapped in the subsurface , rather than escaping ( due to their natural buoyancy ) and being lost . analysis of maturation involves assessing the thermal history of the source rock in order to make predictions of the amount and timing of hydrocarbon generation and expulsion . finally , careful studies of migration reveal information on how hydrocarbons move from source to reservoir and help quantify the source ( or kitchen ) of hydrocarbons in a particular area . image : mudlogging.jpg thumb mud log in process , a common way to study the lithology when drilling oil wells . major subdisciplines in petroleum geology . several major subdisciplines exist in petroleum geology specifically to study the seven key elements discussed above . source rock analysis . in terms of source rock analysis , several facts need to be established . firstly , the question of whether there actually is any source rock in the area must be answered . delineation and identification of potential source rocks depends on studies of the local stratigraphy , palaeogeography and sedimentology to determine the likelihood of organic-rich sediments having been deposited in the past . if the likelihood of there being a source rock is thought to be high , the next matter to address is the state of thermal maturity of the source , and the timing of maturation . maturation of source rocks ( see diagenesis and fossil fuels ) depends strongly on temperature , such that the majority of oil generation occurs in the 60° to 120 & nbsp ; °c range . gas generation starts at similar temperatures , but may continue up beyond this range , perhaps as high as 200 & nbsp ; °c . in order to determine the likelihood of oil/gas generation , therefore , the thermal history of the source rock must be calculated . this is performed with a combination of geochemical analysis of the source rock ( to determine the type of kerogens present and their maturation characteristics ) and basin modelling methods , such as back-stripping , to model the temperature in the sedimentary column . basin analysis . a full scale basin analysis is usually carried out prior to defining leads and prospects for future drilling . this study tackles the petroleum system and studies source rock ( presence and quality ) ; burial history ; maturation ( timing and volumes ) ; migration and focus ; and potential regional seals and major reservoir units ( that define carrier beds ) . all these elements are used to investigate where potential hydrocarbons might migrate towards . traps and potential leads and prospects are then defined in the area that is likely to have received hydrocarbons . exploration stage . although a basin analysis is usually part of the first study a company conducts prior to moving into an area for future exploration , it is also sometimes conducted during the exploration phase . exploration geology comprises all the activities and studies necessary for finding new hydrocarbon occurrence . usually seismic ( or 3d seismic ) studies are shot , and old exploration data ( seismic lines , well logs , reports ) are used to expand upon the new studies . sometimes gravity and magnetic studies are conducted , and oil seeps and spills are mapped to find potential areas for hydrocarbon occurrences . as soon as a significant hydrocarbon occurrence is found by an exploration- or wildcat-well the appraisal stage starts . appraisal stage . the appraisal stage is used to delineate the extent of the discovery . hydrocarbon reservoir properties , connectivity , hydrocarbon type and gas-oil and oil-water contacts are determined to calculate potential recoverable volumes . this is usually done by drilling more appraisal wells around the initial exploration well . production tests may also give insight in reservoir pressures and connectivity . geochemical and petrophysical analysis gives information on the type ( viscosity , chemistry , api , carbon content , etc . ) of the hydrocarbon and the nature of the reservoir ( porosity , permeability , etc . ) . production stage . after a hydrocarbon occurrence has been discovered and appraisal has indicated it is a commercial find the production stage is initiated . this stage focuses on extracting the hydrocarbons in a controlled way ( without damaging the formation , within commercial favorable volumes , etc . ) . production wells are drilled and completed in strategic positions . 3d seismic is usually available by this stage to target wells precisely for optimal recovery . sometimes enhanced recovery ( steam injection , pumps , etc . ) is used to extract more hydrocarbons or to redevelop abandoned fields . reservoir analysis . the existence of a reservoir rock ( typically , sandstones and fractured limestones ) is determined through a combination of regional studies ( i.e . analysis of other wells in the area ) , stratigraphy and sedimentology ( to quantify the pattern and extent of sedimentation ) and seismic interpretation . once a possible hydrocarbon reservoir is identified , the key physical characteristics of a reservoir that are of interest to a hydrocarbon explorationist are its bulk rock volume , net-to-gross ratio , porosity and permeability . bulk rock volume , or the gross rock volume of rock above any hydrocarbon-water contact , is determined by mapping and correlating sedimentary packages . the net-to-gross ratio , typically estimated from analogues and wireline logs , is used to calculate the proportion of the sedimentary packages that contains reservoir rocks . the bulk rock volume multiplied by the net-to-gross ratio gives the net rock volume of the reservoir . the net rock volume multiplied by porosity gives the total hydrocarbon pore volume i.e . the volume within the sedimentary package that fluids ( importantly , hydrocarbons and water ) can occupy . the summation of these volumes ( see stoiip and giip ) for a given exploration prospect will allow explorers and commercial analysts to determine whether a prospect is financially viable . traditionally , porosity and permeability were determined through the study of drilling samples , analysis of cores obtained from the wellbore , examination of contiguous parts of the reservoir that outcrop at the surface ( see e.g . references , in references below ) and by the technique of formation evaluation using wireline tools passed down the well itself . modern advances in seismic data acquisition and processing have meant that seismic attributes of subsurface rocks are readily available and can be used to infer physical/sedimentary properties of the rocks themselves . see also . bituminous rocks controlled source electro-magnetic important publications in petroleum geology . references . . further reading . brian frehner . finding oil : the nature of petroleum geology , 1859–1920 ( university of nebraska press ; 2011 ) 232 pages . external links . petroleum geology — a forum dedicated to all aspects of petroleum geology from exploration to production oil on my shoes — web site devoted to the science and practical application of petroleum geology aapg — american association of petroleum geologists petroleumgeology.org — website about the history and technology of petroleum geology