Paul Tortelier

life and work . tortelier was born in paris , the son of a cabinet maker with breton roots . he was encouraged to play the cello by his father joseph and mother marguerite ( boura ) , and gifted at 12 he entered the conservatoire de paris . he studied the cello there with louis feuillard and then gérard hekking . he won the first prize in cello at the conservatoire when he was 16 , playing the elgar cello concerto , and then he studied harmony under jean gallon . his debut was with the orchestre lamoureux in 1931 at the age of 17 . he performed lalo 's cello concerto . in 1935 tortelier joined the monte-carlo philharmonic orchestra as first cellist and played with them until 1937 . he gave performances under bruno walter and arturo toscanini , and he also played the solo part in richard strauss ' don quixote under the composer . this is a piece which became closely associated with tortelier , as he gave many performances and recorded it . in 1937 he joined the boston symphony orchestra under serge koussevitsky , performing as first cellist through 1940 . in 1938 he began a solo career at boston 's town hall , accompanied by leonard shure . he was first cellist of the orchestre de la société des concerts du conservatoire , paris , 1946–47 . in 1947 he gave his british debut under beecham , again performing don quixote at the festival of richard strauss in london . '' my boy '' , beecham said , '' you will be successful in england because you have temperament '' . in 1950 tortelier was selected by pablo casals to play as the principal cellist in the prades festival orchestra . tortelier believed that of all the cellists , it was casals who influenced him the most . a french critic wrote of him : '' if casals is jupiter , then tortelier is apollo . '' tortelier performed for the peabody mason concert series in boston in 1952 . the christian science monitor , 19-nov-1952 , jules wolffers , '' paul tortelier cello recital in jordan hall '' , boston he was a music professor at the conservatoire de paris ( 1956–69 ) ; folkwang hochschule in essen ( 1969–1975 ) ; and the nice conservatory ( 1978–80 ) . he was also an honorary professor at the central conservatoire in beijing , china . despite being french , he advised his students to avoid french music and concentrate on beethoven and mozart - music the public more likely wanted to hear . although he was a catholic , tortelier was inspired by the ideals of the founders of the newly formed state of israel in 1948 , and in the years 1955–1956 spent some time living with his wife and two children in the kibbutz maabarot , near netanya . his compositions include a concerto for two cellos and orchestra ( 1950 ) , a solo cello suite in d , and two sonatas for cello and piano . he also wrote a set of variations for cello and orchestra ( 'may music save peace ' ) . he also wrote a symphony , the israel symphony , after his experience of living in the kibbutz . his edition of the bach cello suites was published by galliard in 1966 . he taught jacqueline du pré when she briefly attended his classes at the paris conservatoire , though he was not her main teacher ( that was william pleeth ) . other students included arto noras , nathan waks and raphaël sommer . in the 1970s he gave a series of master classes which were recorded and broadcast on tv by the bbc , which demonstrate his very dynamic style of playing . interests included bicycling and playing the flute . besides performing on the cello , he made appearances as a conductor when he grew older ( similar to mstislav rostropovich ) . although it is sometimes mistakenly thought to be rostropovich , tortelier is the inventor of the angled cello spike , enabling the instrument to lie more horizontally than vertically . tortelier was married twice . his first marriage , to madeleine gaston , ended in divorce in 1944 . his second marriage was to maud monique martin ( also a cellist ) . his son , yan pascal tortelier , is an internationally known conductor , and his daughter maria de la pau is a pianist . he died of a heart attack at the age of 76 in the domaine of villarceaux , yvelines , near paris . tortelier withdrew his children from formal education so that they could concentrate on music . he was asked about this during an interview with huw wheldon on british television , and when wheldon asked if there were not authorities in france that make you send your children to school , he replied , '' i do n't want to know anything about any authorities . i am a soloist and they will be soloists . '' wheldon queried , '' but what happens if they do n't become soloists ? '' and , in some surprise , tortelier said , '' well , if you start thinking about what will happen if you do n't succeed , you wo n't . '' . recordings . major recordings include the bach cello suites in 1960 ( paris ) and 1982 ( london ) , elgar 's cello concerto with the london philharmonic orchestra , adrian boult conducting in 1972 , and strauss 's don quixote with the royal philharmonic orchestra , thomas beecham conducting in 1947/48 and the staatskapelle dresden , rudolf kempe conducting in 1973 ( all for emi for whom he was under exclusive contract ) . quotes . '' bach in german means brook -- this brook runs to the river and that river runs to the sea . it 's a progression which begins delicately and poetically . if you add too much expression with excessive romanticism , the water stops flowing . if you want to do an abstract bach . then the water turns cold . that 's no longer a bach who glorifies god and nature , but one who glorifies the metronome . '' . references . further reading . anderson , robert '' total cellist '' the musical times , vol . 125 , no . 1698 ( aug . , 1984 ) , p . & nbsp ; 446 . baker 's biographical dictionary of musicians ( 2001 ) holland , bernard '' paul tortelier , a french cellist and political idealist , dies at 76 . '' the new york times , december 20 , 1990 . marquis who 's who . paul tortelier . a self-portrait in conversation with david blum . heineman , london , 1984 . '' saraband '' ( interview ) the economist , august 25 , 1990 , p . & nbsp ; 75 . external links . cellist.nl : paul tortelier biography , video , list of teachers and pupils cello.org : paul tortelier biography may music save peace cd