Jean Pierre Flourens

biography . he was born at maureilhan , near béziers , in the département of hérault . at fifteen he began studying medicine at montpellier , where in 1813 he received the degree of doctor . in the following year he went to paris , carrying an introduction from a . p . de candolle , the botanist , to georges cuvier , who received him kindly , and took an interest in him . at paris flourens engaged in physiology , occasionally contributing to publications ; and in 1821 , at the athénée , he gave a course of lectures on the physiological theory of the sensations , which attracted much attention amongst men of science . in 1815 , flourens pioneered the experimental method of carrying out localized lesions of the brain in living rabbits and pigeons and carefully observing their effects on motricity , sensibility and behavior . his intention was to investigate localisationism , i.e . , whether different parts of the brain had different functions , as the austrian physician franz joseph gall , the founder of phrenology , was proposing . the trouble was that gall did not use a proper scientific approach to his affirmations . flourens was able to demonstrate convincingly for the first time that the main divisions of the brain were indeed responsible for largely different functions . by removing the cerebral hemispheres , for instance , all perceptions , motricity , and judgment were abolished . the removal of the cerebellum affected the animal 's equilibrium and motor coordination , while the destruction of the brainstem ( medulla oblongata ) caused death . these experiments led flourens to the conclusion that the cerebral hemispheres are responsible for higher cognitive functions , that the cerebellum regulates and integrates movements , and that the medulla controls vital functions , such as circulation , respiration and general bodily stability . on the other hand , he was unable ( probably because his experimental subjects have relatively primitive cortex ) to find specific regions for memory and cognition , which led him to believe that they are represented in a diffuse form around the brain . so , different functions could indeed be ascribed to particular regions of the brain , but a finer localization was lacking . jean pierre flourens , by destroying the horizontal semicircular canal of pigeons , noted that they continue to fly in a circle , showing the purpose of the semicircular canals flourens was chosen by cuvier in 1828 to deliver a course of lectures on natural history at the collège de france , and in the same year became , in succession to lag bosc , a member of the institute , in the division '' economic rurale . '' in 1830 he became cuvier 's substitute as lecturer on human anatomy at the jardin du roi , and in 1832 was elected to the post of titular professor , which he vacated for the professorship of comparative anatomy created for him at the museum of the jardin the same year . in 1833 flourens , in accordance with the dying request of cuvier , was appointed a perpetual secretary of the academy of sciences ; and in 1838 he was returned as a deputy for the arrondissement of béziers . in 1840 he was elected , in preference to victor hugo , to succeed jean françois michaud at the french academy ; and in 1845 he was created a commander of the légion d'honneur , and in the next year a peer of france . in 1841 , he was elected a foreign member of the royal swedish academy of sciences . in march 1847 flourens drew the attention of the academy of sciences to the anesthesia effect of chloroform on animals . on the revolution of 1848 he withdrew completely from political life ; and in 1855 he accepted the professorship of natural history at the collège de france . he died at montgeron , near paris on 6 december 1867 . opposition to darwinism . flourens was an opponent of darwinism and criticized the idea of natural selection . in 1864 , he authored examen du livre du m . darwin sur l'origine des espèces . he refuted the arguments of spontaneous generation . henry , freeman g . ( 1999 ) . anti-darwinism in france : science and the myth of nation . nineteenth-century french studies 27 3/4 : 290-304 . he was a creationism and defended the fixity of species . clark , linda l . ( 1984 ) . social darwinism in france . university of alabama . p . 15 . simonton , dean keith . ( 2004 ) . creativity in science : chance , logic , genius , and zeitgeist . cambridge university press . p . 125 . flourens criticized charles darwin for personifying nature . he argued that natural selection is a contradictory term as nature does not select . huxley , thomas henry . ( 1880 ) . lay sermons , addresses , and reviews . london : macmillan & co . pp . 314-319 . flourens ' book was never translated into english and no reviewers attempted to refute his arguments in detail . however , thomas henry huxley took issue with his criticism of darwinism , noting that '' his objections to details are of the old sort , so battered and hackneyed on this side of the channel , that not even a quarterly reviewer could be induced to pick them up for the purpose of pelting mr . darwin over again . '' . bibliography . besides numerous shorter scientific memoirs , flourens published : essai sur quelques points de la doctrine de la revulsion et de la derivation ( montpellier , 1813 ) experiences sur le système nerveux ( paris , 1825 ) cours sur la génération , l'ovologie , et l'einhryologie ( 1836 ) analyse raisonnée des travaux de g . cuvier ( 1841 ) recherches sur le développement des os et des dents ( 1842 ) anatomie générale de la peau et des membranes muqueuses ( 1843 ) buffon , histoire de ses travaux et de ses idées ( 1844 ) fontenelle , ou de la philosophie moderne relativement aux sciences physiques ( 1847 ) théorie expérémentale de la formation des os ( 1847 ) œuvres complètes de buffon ( 1853 ) de la longévité humaine et de la quantité de vie sur le globe ( 1854 ) , numerous editions histoire de la découverte de la circulation du sang ( 1854 ) cours de physiologie comparée ( 1856 ) recuesi des lloges historiques ( 1856 ) de la vie et de l'intelligence ( 1858 ) de la raison , du genie , et de la folie ( 1861 ) ontologie naturelle ( 1861 ) examen du livre du m . darwin sur l'origine des espèces ( 1864 ) . he was one of the earliest and most pronounced opponents of darwinism . references . further reading . sabbatini , r.m.e . phrenology , the history of brain localization . brain & mind magazine , march 1997 . an excerpt was transcribed here by permission of the author .