Jim Palosaari

early life . palosaari was a first generation american whose finland father emigrated through ellis island , new york . born to john palosaari and sara bishop/laveck , in the upper peninsula of michigan , he grew up on a goat farm near oconomowoc , wisconsin , where he attended oconomowoc high school . jesus movement . palosaari became a christian in seattle , washington during the jesus movement of the late 1960s . trained in the faith by linda meissner , palosaari and his wife sue helped to form the nucleus of the jesus people army , establishing outposts in yakima and spokane , washington , boise , idaho , and vancouver b.c . with russell griggs . in milwaukee , the palosaaris began a coffeehouse , '' the jesus christ power house , '' sue started a newspaper , '' street level , '' jim developed a new band , '' sheep , '' and they began a communal school called '' jesus people discipleship training center '' which grew to 200 members . at this time meissner and griggs joined the jesus people army to the children of god ( later called the family international ) , although palosaari unsuccessfully tried to dissuade them . in 1972 , 60 members were sent to join bill lowery 's tent ministry , '' christ is the answer '' ( cita ) , and a team of 30 , including the band charity , were sent out , later to reemerge in chicago as jesus people usa and '' rez band '' . earlier revivals in racine , wisconsin , and duluth , minnesota , now became autonomous communes . the palosaaris and thirty members flew to sweden as guests of the full gospel business men , in order to provide a foil for the children of god in england . upon arrival , the group spent substantial time in finland , where palosaari preached in temppeliaukio church , the stone church in helsinki . sheep produced its first record , '' karitsat jeesus-rock '' , in helsinki , finland , sung partly in finnish . from there the group toured for the next six months through western europe , including germany and the netherlands . the jesus people entered great britain in the fall of 1972 to participate with russell griggs and david hoyt in an exposé of the children of god , at the invitation of financier kenneth frampton . with frampton 's backing palosaari , hoyt and the group now calling itself the '' jesus family '' , enlarged by half , created the rock musical , '' lonesome stone , '' a musical history of the early '' jesus freaks . '' the musical opened at london 's rainbow theatre , eventually touring american air force bases throughout germany , great britain , canada , and the american midwest , before closing four years later . while in england , palosaari , kenneth frampton and british national , james holloway , started what was for many years the largest christian music festival in the world , greenbelt . a year later , the palosaaris , owen and sandie brock , and paul and lydia jenkinson met to form another commune on vancouver island , b.c . , canada calling themselves '' highway missionary society . '' palosaari was the head elder of a council made up of men and women , developing their ideals of community , missionary work , and evangelism . the new group traveled constantly , and quickly formed a nucleus of followers . palosaari put together the rock band servant , which became the first christian rock band to use lasers and an extensive light show . servant produced six records and traveled throughout the u.s . , canada , and great britain , giving petra their start when petra opened for them . community work also involved extensive showing of the movie brother sun , sister moon , about the life of saint francis of assisi . eventually the now enlarged communal group settled in grants pass , oregon on land next to the applegate river , where their interest in christian community was supported through farming , work in town , and tree-planting . with sue 's effort , the community now formed a children 's school . hms sponsored vietnamese and laotian refugees coming into the country in the early 1980s . at this time palosaari began rooftop records , producing one servant album and sponsoring two other artists . other work . palosaari spent his early adult years in the chicago and the detroit theater , including the unstabled theater run by edith carroll canter and woodie king , jr . ( actress lily tomlin got her start in the same theater company the year jim joined ) . after leaving hms , the palosaaris left to study and work with ywam on the big island of hawaii , and oahu . jim palosaari went to work in texas with cita , which he would continue to return to periodically over the next decade . during this time he also promoted new christian rock groups , including newsboys , pid , and whitecross . in his later years palosaari worked extensively in charitable fundraising . he narrated the movie frisbee : the life and death of a hippie preacher , the story of one of the earliest and most well-known jesus freak leaders , lonnie frisbee , released in dvd form in january , 2007 . personal life . palosaari was married four times . he married joyce warner in detroit , in 1962 , and moved to new york ( long island ) with his wife and stepson , michael , about a year later . this union produced one son , kent . jim and joyce were divorced in 1967 . jim and jeanette palosaari ( not married ) met in wisconsin and became parents of a daughter , sonja , in 1967 . they moved together to southern california shortly after her birth . shortly after his arrival in southern california jim moved to northern california . in 1970 , jim married susan cowper , and had four children : jedidiah , seth , cody , and sophia . in 1981 jim and sue 's second oldest son , seth , died in an automobile accident with two other members of the community . the couple was divorced in 1992 . five years later , palosaari married susan mattson , who died in 2008 . in march 2011 palosaari married jo sappenfield . they lived in palosaari 's native state of wisconsin until his death on may 25 , 2011 . palosaari was a self-described democrat and socialist , committed less to party and politics than to the ideals of social justice , living in poverty , communal living , and a religious lifestyle in which everything is given up for god . he considered himself a christian primitivism , trying to live in the 20th century with the ideals of the 1st century christians . . references . sources . encyclopedia of evangelism jesus people usa notes history of the jesus movement , by david de sabatino the jesus people movement : an annotated bibliography and general resource by david de sabatino di sabatino , david , history of the jesus movement : mcmaster university , 1995 greenbelt history young , shawn david , hippies , jesus freaks , and music ( ann arbor : xanedu/copley original works , 2005 ) . external links . servant documentary of lonnie 's life