SMPTE timecode

basic concepts . thumb smpte timecode is presented in hour : minute : second : frame format and is typically represented in 32 bits using binary coded decimal . there are also drop-frame and color framing flags and three extra binary group flag bits used for defining the use of the user bits . the formats of other varieties of smpte timecode are derived from that of the linear timecode . more complex timecodes such as vertical interval timecode can also include extra information in a variety of encodings . sub-second timecode time values are expressed in terms of frames . common supported frame rates include : 24 frame/sec ( film , atsc , 2k , 4k , 6k ) 25 frame/sec ( pal ( europe , uruguay , argentina , australia ) , secam , dvb , atsc ) 29.97 ( 30 ÷ 1.001 ) frame/sec ( ntsc american system ( us , canada , mexico , colombia , etc . ) , atsc , pal-m ( brazil ) ) 30 frame/sec ( atsc ) in general , smpte timecode frame rate information is implicit , known from the rate of arrival of the timecode from the medium . it may also be specified in other metadata encoded in the medium . the interpretation of several bits , including the color framing and drop frame bits , depends on the underlying data rate . in particular , the drop frame bit is only valid for a nominal frame rate of 30 & nbsp ; frame/s . discontinuous timecode , and flywheel processing . timecodes are generated as a continuous stream of sequential data values . in some applications wall-clock time is used , in others the time encoded is a notional time with more arbitrary reference . after making a series of recordings , or after crude editing , recorded timecodes may consist of discontinuous segments . in general , it is not possible to know the linear timecode ( ltc ) of the current frame until the frame has already gone by , by which time it is too late to make an edit . practical systems watch the ascending sequence of the timecode and infer the time of the current frame from that . as timecodes in analog systems are prone to bit-errors and drop-outs , most timecode processing devices check for internal consistency in the sequence of timecode values and use simple error correction schemes to correct for short error bursts . thus , a boundary between discontinuous timecode ranges can not be determined exactly until several subsequent frames have passed . drop-frame timecode . drop-frame timecode originates from a compromise introduced when color ntsc video was invented . the ntsc designers wanted to retain compatibility with existing monochrome televisions . to minimize subcarrier visibility on a monochrome receiver it was necessary to make the color subcarrier an odd multiple of half the line scan frequency ; the multiple originally chosen was 495 . with a 30 & nbsp ; hz frame rate the line scan frequency is ( 30 & nbsp ; × 525 ) & nbsp ; 15750 & nbsp ; hz . so the subcarrier frequency would have been & nbsp ; × 15750 & nbsp ; 3.898125 & nbsp ; mhz . this was the subcarrier frequency originally chosen , but tests showed that on some monochrome receivers an interference pattern caused by the beat between the color subcarrier and the 4.5 & nbsp ; mhz sound intercarrier could be seen . the visibility of this pattern could be greatly reduced by lowering the subcarrier frequency multiple to 455 ( thus increasing the beat frequency from approx 600 & nbsp ; khz to approx 920 & nbsp ; khz ) and by making the beat frequency also equal to an odd multiple of half the line scan frequency . this latter change could have been achieved by raising the sound intercarrier by 0.1 % to 4.5045 & nbsp ; mhz , but the designers , concerned that this might cause problems with some existing receivers , decided instead to reduce the color subcarrier frequency , and thus both the line scan frequency and the frame rate , by 0.1 % instead . thus the ntsc color subcarrier ended up as 3.57954545 & nbsp ; mhz ( exactly & nbsp ; mhz ) , the line scan frequency as 15734.27 & nbsp ; hz ( exactly & nbsp ; mhz ) and the frame rate 29.97 & nbsp ; hz ( exactly & nbsp ; hz ) . '' color television standards - selected papers and records of the ntsc '' edited by donald fink , mcgraw hill 1955 the altered frame rate meant that an '' hour of timecode '' at a nominal frame rate of 30 & nbsp ; frame/s , when played back at 29.97 & nbsp ; frame/s was longer than an hour of wall-clock time by 3.6 seconds , leading to an error of almost a minute and a half over a day . to correct this , drop-frame smpte timecode was invented . in spite of what the name implies , no video frames are dropped or skipped when using drop-frame timecode . rather , some of the timecodes are dropped . in order to make an hour of timecode match an hour on the clock , drop-frame timecode skips frame numbers 0 and 1 of the first second of every minute , except when the number of minutes is divisible by ten . this causes timecode to skip 18 frames each ten minutes ( 18,000 & nbsp ; frames & nbsp ; 30 & nbsp ; frame/s ) and almost perfectly compensates for the difference in rate . for example , the sequence when frame counts are dropped : :01:08:59:28 :01:08:59:29 :01:09:00:02 :01:09:00:03 for each tenth minute :01:09:59:28 :01:09:59:29 :01:10:00:00 :01:10:00:01 while non-drop timecode is displayed with colons separating the digit pairs— '' hh : mm : ss : ff '' —drop-frame is usually represented with a semicolon ( ; ) or period ( . ) as the divider between all the digit pairs— '' hh ; mm ; ss ; ff '' , '' hh.mm.ss.ff '' —or just between the seconds and frames— '' hh : mm : ss ; ff '' or '' hh : mm : ss.ff '' . drop-frame timecode is typically abbreviated as df and non-drop as ndf . color framing and timecode . a color framing bit is often used to indicate field 1 of the color frame so that editing equipment can make sure to edit only on appropriate color frame sequence boundaries in order to prevent picture corruption . studio operations and master clocks . in television studio operations , longitudinal timecode is generated by the studio master sync generator and distributed from a central point . central sync generators usually derive their timing from an atomic clock , using either network time or gps . studios usually operate multiple clocks and automatically switch over if one fails . music production . longitudinal smpte timecode is widely used to synchronize music . a frame rate of 30 & nbsp ; frame/s is often used for audio in america , japan , and other countries that rely on a 60 & nbsp ; hz mains frequency and use the ntsc television standard . the european broadcasting union standard frame rate of 25 & nbsp ; frame/s is used throughout europe , australia and wherever the mains frequency is 50 & nbsp ; hz , and the pal or secam television standards are used . . variants . timecode may be attached to a recording media in a number of different ways . linear timecode , a.k.a . '' longitudinal timecode '' and '' ltc '' : suitable to be recorded on an audio channel , or carried by audio wires for distribution within a studio to synchronize recorders and cameras . to read ltc , the recording must be moving , meaning that ltc is useless when the recording is stationary or nearly stationary . this shortcoming led to the development of vitc . vertical interval timecode , ( vitc , pronounced '' vit-see '' ) : recorded into the vertical blanking interval of the video signal on each frame of video . the advantage of vitc is that , since it is a part of the playback video , it can be read when the tape is stationary . aes-ebu embedded timecode , smpte timecode embedded in an aes3 digital audio connection . control track longitudinal timecode ( ctl timecode ) : smpte timecode embedded in the control track of a video tape . visible time code , a.k.a . burnt-in timecode and bitc ( pronounced '' bit-see '' ) - the numbers are burnt into the video image so that humans can easily read the time code . videotapes that are duplicated with these time code numbers '' burnt-in '' to the video are known as window dubs . film labels , such as keykode . history . timecode was developed in 1967 by eeco , an electronics company that developed video recorders , and later video production systems . eeco assigned its intellectual property to permit public use . see also . burnt-in timecode field dominance irig timecode linear timecode midi timecode rewritable consumer timecode vertical interval timecode . notes . references . . external links . technical introduction to timecode by charles poynton article on timecode by chris pirazzi synchronisation and smpte timecodes . conversion between smpte hh : mm : ss : ff time code and frames with c source code by brooks harris