Robert Fitzhamon

parentage and ancestry . robert fitzhamon , probably born in the 1040s or 1050s , was the son of hamo dapifer the sheriff of kent and grandson of hamon dentatus ( 'the betoothed or toothy ' , i.e . , probably buck-toothed ) . his grandfather held the lordships of torigny , creully , mézy , and evrecy in normandy , but following his death at the battle of val-ès-dunes in 1047 , the family might have lost these lordships . he is said to have been a relative of william the conqueror , but the nature of the relationship is unknown . career in england and wales . few details of robert 's career prior to 1087 are available . robert probably did not fight at the battle of hastings in 1066 , and does not appear in the domesday book of 1086 , although some of his relatives are listed therein . he first comes to prominence in surviving records as a supporter of king william rufus ( 1087-1100 ) during the rebellion of 1088 . after the revolt was defeated he was granted as a reward by king william rufus the english feudal barony sanders , i.j . , english baronies , oxford , 1960 , p.6 , barony of gloucester consisting of over two hundred manors in gloucestershire and other counties . some of these had belonged to the late queen matilda , consort of william the conqueror and mother of william rufus , and had been seized by her from the great saxon thane brictric son of algar , apparently as a punishment for his having refused her romantic advances in his youth . according to the account by the continuator of wace and others , quoted in thorn , caroline & frank , ( eds . ) domesday book , ( morris , john , gen.ed . ) vol . 9 , devon , parts 1 & 2 , phillimore press , chichester , 1985 , part 2 ( notes ) , 24,21 , quoting '' freeman , e.a . , the history of the norman conquest of england , 6 vols . , oxford , 1867–1879 , vol . 4 , appendix , note 0 '' they had been destined as the inheritance of rufus 's younger brother henry ( the future king henry i ) ; nevertheless fitzhamon remained on good terms with henry . conquest of glamorgan . the chronology of robert 's conquest of glamorgan is uncertain , but it probably took place in the decades after he received the feudal barony of gloucester . one explanation is the legend of the twelve knights of glamorgan , which dates from the 16th century , in which the welsh prince iestyn ap gwrgan ( jestin ) , prince or lord of glamorgan , supposedly called in the assistance of robert fitzhamon . fitzhamon defeated the prince of south wales rhys ap tewdwr in battle in 1090 . with his norman knights as reward he then took possession of glamorgan , and '' the french came into dyfed and ceredigion , which they have still retained , and fortified the castles , and seized upon all the land of the britons . '' iestyn did not profit long by his involvement with the normans . he was soon defeated and his lands taken in 1091 . whether there is any truth in the legend or not robert fitzhamon seems to have seized control of the lowlands of glamorgan and gwynllwg sometime from around 1089 to 1094 . his key strongholds were cardiff castle , which already may have been built , on the site of an old roman fort , new castles at newport , and at kenfig . his descendants would inherit these castles and lands . founder of tewkesbury abbey ( 1092 ) . robert also refounded tewkesbury abbey in 1092 . the abbey 's dimensions are almost the same as westminster abbey . the first abbot was giraldus , abbot of cranborne ( d . 1110 ) who died before the abbey was consecrated in october 1121 . the abbey was apparently built under the influence of robert 's wife sybil de montgomery . said to be a beautiful and religious woman like her sisters . fitzhamon and his kings . legend has it that robert had ominous dreams in the days before rufus ' fatal hunting expedition , which postponed but did not prevent the outing . he was one of the first to gather in tears around rufus ' corpse , and he used his cloak to cover the late king 's body on its journey to be buried in winchester . how much of these stories are the invention of later days is unknown . in any case fitzhamon proved as loyal to henry i as he had been to his predecessor , remaining on henry 's side in the several open conflicts with henry 's brother robert curthose . he was one of the three barons who negotiated the 1101 truce between henry i and robert curthose . in 1105 he went to normandy and was captured while fighting near his ancestral estates near bayeux . this was one of the reasons henry crossed the channel with a substantial force later that year . fitzhamon was freed , and joined henry 's campaign , which proceeded to besiege falaise . there fitzhamon was severely injured in the head ; although he lived two more years he was never the same mentally . he was buried in the chapter house at tewkesbury abbey , which he had founded and considerably enriched during his lifetime . marriage and progeny . robert fitzhamon married sybil de montgomery around 1087 to 1090 , apparently the youngest daughter of roger of montgomery , 1st earl of shrewsbury by his first wife mabel talvas , daughter of william i talvas . she survived her husband and is said to have entered a convent with two of her daughters . by his wife he is said to have had four daughters including : mabel , eldest daughter , who inherited his great estates and in 1119 married robert , 1st earl of gloucester , a natural son of king henry i ( 1100-1135 ) . fitzhamon 's huge land-holdings in several counties formed the english feudal barony sanders , p.6 which was inherited by his son-in-law robert de caen , who in 1122 was created 1st earl of gloucester . sanders , p.6 robert fitzhamon 's great-granddaughter isabel of gloucester married king john ( 1199-1216 ) . isabella ( or hawisa ) , said to have married a count from brittany , but no further details exist . 1860 depiction at kilkhampton . a depiction of robert fitzhamon ( d . 1107 ) and richard i de grenville ( d . post 1142 ) is contained within one of the two granville windows by clayton and bell church guidebook , st james the great kilkhampton , 2012 , p.11 erected in 1860 by descendants of the latter within the granville chapel of the church of st james the great , kilkhampton , cornwall . the granvilles claimed in the 17th century to have been the heirs male of robert fitzhamon ( who left an only daughter as his actual ) to a non-existent earldom of corboil , a connection without historical foundation . j . horace round , family origins and other studies , london , 1930 , the granvilles and the monks , pp.130-169 the seat of the grenville family ( '' granville '' after 1661 when elevated to the earl of bath j . horace round , family origins and other studies , london , 1930 , the granvilles and the monks , pp.130-169 ) was stowe within the parish of kilkhampton . below the left-hand figure is inscribed : '' rob . fitzhamon earl of corboyle '' , with attributed arms under showing : azure , a lion rampant guardant or impaling azure , a lion rampant or a bordure of the last . the windows were erected in 1860 by the heirs of the grenville family . per brass plaque below easternmost window . references . c . warren hollister , henry i lynn nelson , the normans in south wales , 1070-1171 ( see especially pp . & nbsp ; 94–110 in chapter 5 ) norman invasion of south wales tour of the abbey lord of bristol refers to robert fitzhamon as lord of bristol , which town and castle became important to his son-in-law . robert of caen , son-in-law is said here to be grandson of a welsh prince but most other sources say that his mother was an unnamed woman of caen . ancestral roots of certain american colonists who came to america before 1700 by frederick lewis weis , lines : 63–26 , 124a-26 , 125–26 , 185–1 . notes .