Heinrich von Sybel

life . he was born in düsseldorf , where his father held important posts in the public service under both the france and the prussians ; in 1831 he was raised to the hereditary nobility . his home was one of the centres of the vigorous literary and artistic life for which düsseldorf was renowned at that time . sybel was educated at the local gymnasium , and then at the humboldt university , where he came under the influences of friedrich karl von savigny and leopold von ranke , whose most distinguished pupil he was to become . after taking his degree , he settled down in 1841 as a privatdozent in history at the university of bonn . he had already made himself known by critical studies on the history of the middle ages , of which the most important was his geschichte des ersten kreuzzuges ( history of the first crusade ) ( düsseldorf , 1841 ; new ed . , leipzig , 1881 ) , a work which , besides its merit as a valuable piece of historical investigation employing the critical methods he had learnt from ranke , was also of some significance as a protest against the vaguely enthusiastic attitude encouraged by the romanticism towards the middle ages . in 1861 lady duff-gordon published an english translation of a part of this book , to which were added lectures on the crusades delivered in munich in 1858 , under the title history and literature of the crusades . this was followed by a study of the growth of german kingship ( die entstehung des deutschen königtums , frankfurt , 1844 , and again 1881 ) , after which he was appointed professor . in the same year ( 1844 ) sybel became prominent as an opponent of the ultramontane party . the exhibition of the holy shroud at trier had attracted enormous numbers of pilgrims , and so , indignant at what appeared to him a fake , he assisted in publishing an investigation into the authenticity of the celebrated relic . from this time he began to take an active part in contemporary politics and in controversy as a strong but moderate liberal . in 1846 he was appointed professor at marburg , and though this small university offered little scope for his activities as a teacher , a seat in the hessian landtag gave him his first experience of politics . in 1848 he was present at frankfurt , but he did not succeed in winning a seat for the national assembly . his opposition to the extreme democratic and revolutionary party made him unpopular with the mob who broke his windows , and his liberalism made him suspect at court . he sat in the erfurt parliament of 1850 , and was attached to the gotha party , which hoped for the regeneration of germany through the leadership of prussia . during the period 1859–1866 , sybel was engaged in a literary controversy with the historian , julius von ficker , on the significance of the german empire . during the years that followed he was occupied with his major chronicle of the french revolution , geschichte der revolutionszeit 1789–1800 , for which he had made prolonged studies in the archives of paris and other countries . the later editions of the earlier volumes were enlarged and altered , and a new edition was published at stuttgart in 1882 . the first three volumes were translated into english by walter copland perry ( 1867–1869 ) . in this work he showed for the first time the connection between the internal and external history of france . by systematically studying the records , he was also the first to check and correct the traditional account of many episodes of france 's internal history . he demonstrated that letters attributed to marie antoinette were not genuine . he undermined the influential revolutionary legends , expounded by french writers . sybel was interested in edmund burke , on whom he had published two essays . the work was in fact the first attempt to substitute for the popular view of thiers and lamartine , a line which was later taken up by taine and albert sorel . in 1856 , on the recommendation of ranke , sybel accepted the post of professor at munich , where king maximilian ii of bavaria , a generous patron of learning , hoped to establish a school of history . here he found a fruitful field for his activity . besides continuing his work on the revolution and on the middle ages , he occupied himself fully with the historical seminar which he instituted ; with the historische zeitschrift which he founded - the original model of the numerous historical periodicals which now exist – and as secretary of the new historical commission . political differences soon interfered with his work ; as a supporter of prussia and a protestant , especially as a militant champion against the ultramontanes , he was from the first an object of suspicion to the clerical party . in the political excitement which followed the war of 1859 he found that he could not hope for the unreserved support of the king , and therefore in 1861 he accepted a professorship at bonn , which he held till 1875 . he was elected a member of the prussian lower house , and during the next three years was one of the most active members of that assembly . in several important debates he led the attack on the government , and opposed the policy of bismarck , not only on finances but also on poland and danish affairs , in particular the impending crisis with denmark over schleswig and holstein . in 1864 he did not stand for re-election , owing to an eye infection , but in 1866 he was one of the first to point out the way to a reconciliation between bismarck and his former opponents . he had a seat in the constituent assembly of 1867 , and while he joined the national liberals he distinguished himself by opposing the introduction of universal suffrage , sharing the distrust of many liberals over its effects . in 1874 he returned to the prussian parliament in order to support the government in its conflict with the clericals , and after 1878 with the socialisms . he explained and justified his position in two pamphlets that analysed the teaching of the socialists and traced clerical policy during the 19th century . in 1880 he retired , like so many other liberals , disheartened by the change in political life which he blamed on universal suffrage . in 1875 , bismarck appointed him to the post of director of the prussian archives . under his superintendence was begun the great series of publications , besides that of the correspondence of frederick the great , which he helped to edit . his last years were occupied with his great work , die begründung des deutschen reiches durch wilhelm i ( the founding of the german empire under william i ) ( munich , 1889–1894 ) , a work of great importance on german unification , for which he was allowed to use the prussian state papers and was therefore able to write a history of the greatest events of his own time with full access to highly secret sources of information . as a history of prussian policy from 1860 to 1866 it is of incomparable value . after the fall of bismarck permission to use the secret papers was withdrawn , and therefore vols . vi . and vii . , which deal with the years 1866 to 1870 , are of less importance . this work has been translated into english as the founding of the german empire , by m l perrin and g bradford ( new york , 1890–1891 ) . sybel did not live to write an account of the war with france , dying at marburg on 1 august 1895 . his other writings include die deutsche nation und das kaiserreich ( 1862 ) and a large number of historical articles . sybel left two sons , one of whom became an officer in the prussian army ; the other , ludwig von sybel ( b . 1846 ) , a professor of archaeology in the university of marburg , was the author of several works dealing with greek archaeology . some of sybel 's numerous historical and political essays have been collected in kleine historische schriften ( 3 vols , 1863 , 1869 , 1881 ; new ed . , 1897 ) ; vorträge und aufsätze ( berlin , 1874 ) ; and vorträge und abhandlungen , published after his death with a biographical introduction by conrad varrentrapp ( munich , 1897 ) .