Culture of Iraq

architecture . cinema . while iraq 's first film projection took place in 1909 , cinema was not truly regarded as a cultural activity or pastime until the 1920s . the first cinemas , like the famous al-zawra cinema on baghdad 's bustling thoroughfare al-rashid , played mostly american silent films for british citizens . in the 1940s under the rule of king faisal ii of iraq , a real iraqi cinema began . supported by british and french financiers , movie production companies established themselves in baghdad . the baghdad studio was established in 1948 , but soon came apart when tensions between the arab and jewish founders flared up . for the most part , the product was purely commercial , fluffy romances with plenty of singing and dancing often set in small villages . the world of arts ( dunyat alfann ) studio , which was founded by actors , reached for more serious fare . in 1955 , they produced haidar al-omar 's fitna wa hassan , an iraqi retelling of romeo and juliet , that received international attention . but for the most part , the strong-fist rule of the state discouraged any socially relevant films . in 1959 when king faisel ii 's government was overthrown , the cinema and theater general organization came into existence with the purpose of promoting the political goals of the new regime both in documentaries and features . typical were documentaries like the 1969 al maghishi project , which showcased the government 's irrigation campaigns and the 1967 a wedding in heaven , which celebrates the air force and their weapons system . the 1968 revolution that put the ba'ath party in power further solidified the government 's control of film material , and the state 's need to make all films validate its power . saddam hussein 's ascension to power in 1979 pushed the iraqi cinema in a slightly different direction . the drain on national resources from the 1980 iraq-iran war brought film production to a near halt . the few films put into production were mainly intent on glorifying a mythic iraqi history or celebrating hussein 's rule . in 1981 , the government commissioned egyptian filmmaker salah abouseif to make al-qadisiya , a period epic recounting the triumph of the arabs over the persians in 636 ad . likewise mohamed shukri jameel 's melodramatic the great question ( al-mas ' ala al-kubra ) cast british actor oliver reed as the vicious lt-col gerard leachman who is righteously killed in the 1920 iraqi revolution . in 1980 hussein promoted his own mythology with the autobiographical 6-hour epic the long days ( al-ayyam al-tawila ) , the saga of hussein 's participation in the 1958 failed assassination attempt on prime minister abd al-karim qasim , and his subsequent heroic escape back to tikrit . the film was edited and partially directed by terence young , the british director who made his name helming the early james bond films dr . no and thunderball ( film ) . hussein is played by saddam kamel , a cousin and son-in-law of hussein 's , who eventually ran afoul of the dictator and was murdered in 1996 . after iraq invaded kuwait , sanctions against iraq made filmmaking an impossibility in the country , although a new generation of filmmakers is coming alive in baghdad . literature . iraqi literature is , and has been , deeply marked by iraq 's political history . in the late 1970s , a period of economic upturn , prominent writers in iraq were provided with an apartment and car by saddam hussein 's government , and were guaranteed at least one publication per year . in exchange , literature was expected to express and galvanise support for the ruling ba'ath party . the iran–iraq war ( 1980-1988 ) fuelled a demand for patriotic literature , but also pushed a number of writers into opting for exile . according to najem wali , during this period , '' even those who chose to quit writing saw themselves forced to write something that did not rile the dictator , because even silence was considered a crime . '' from the late 1980s onwards , iraqi exile literature developed with writers whose '' rejection of dominant ideology and whose resistance to the wars in iraq compelled them to formulate a 'brutally raw realism ' characterized by a shocking sense of modernity '' ( n . wali ) . late 20th century iraqi literature has been marked by writers such as saadi youssef , fadhil al-azzawi , mushin al-ramli , salah al-hamdani , abdul rahman majeed al-rubaie and sherko fatah . music . sport . football is the most well known sport in iraq . the iraq national football team were the 2007 afc asian cup champions after defeating saudi arabia in the final , held in jakarta , indonesia . in 2006 , iraq reached the football final of the 2006 asian games in doha , qatar , after defeating former fifa world cup semi-finalists south korea and eventually finished as runners-up , winning silver . the football tournament at the 2004 summer olympics in athens , greece , saw iraq finish in fourth place , with the italy national football team claiming bronze from a single goal . the iraqi football association is the governing body of football in iraq , controlling the iraq national football team and the iraq super league ( also known as dawri al-nokba ) . it was founded in 1948 , and has been a member of fifa since 1950 , and the asian football confederation since 1971 . al-shorta ( police club ) are considered the biggest club in the history of iraq , having won the league in 2012–13 and 2013–14 and they also have an arab world club cup title to their name which they won in 1982 . other big clubs include al-quwa al-jawiya , al-zawraa , erbil sc , duhok sc , al talaba and najaf fc . basketball , swimming , weightlifting , bodybuilding , boxing , kickboxing , and tennis are also popular sports . the iraqi football association is the governing body of football in iraq , controlling the iraq national football team and the iraq super league ( also known as dawri al-nokba ) . it was founded in 1948 , and has been a member of fifa since 1950 , and the asian football confederation since 1971 . cuisine . iraqi cuisine or mesopotamian cuisine has a long history going back some 10,000 years – to the sumerians , babylonians , assyrians , and persian empire . foods of iraq : enshrined with a long history . habeeb salloum . tablets found in ancient ruins in iraq show recipes prepared in the temples during religious festivals - the first cookbooks in the world . ancient iraq , or mesopotamia , was home to a sophisticated and highly advanced civilization , in all fields of knowledge - including the culinary arts . however , it was in the islamic golden age when baghdad was the capital of the abbasid caliphate that the iraqi kitchen reached its zenith . today , the cuisine of iraq reflects this rich inheritance , as well as strong influences from the culinary traditions of neighbouring iran , turkey , and the syria region . . some popular dishes include kebab ( often marinated with garlic , lemon , and spices , then grilled ) , gauss ( grilled meat sandwich wrap , similar to döner kebab ) , bamia ( lamb , okra , and tomato stew ) , quzi ( lamb with rice , almonds , raisins , and spices ) , and salad in pita , kibbeh ( minced meat ground with bulgur , or rice and spices ) , masgûf ( grilled fish with pepper and tamarind ) , and maqluba ( a rice , lamb , tomato , and aubergine dish ) . stuffed vegetable dishes such as dolma and mahshi are also popular . kabsa is also a popular dish in the south and south east of iraq . contemporary iraq reflects the same natural division as ancient mesopotamia , which consisted of assyria in the arid northern uplands and babylonia in the southern alluvial plain . al-jazira ( the ancient assyria ) grows wheat and crops requiring winter chill such as apples and stone fruits . al-irāq ( iraq proper , the ancient babylonia ) grows rice and barley , citrus , and is responsible for iraq 's position as the world 's largest producer of dates . . modern culture . cultural heritage . iraq is a country of a wide and varied heritage , home to muslims . as such many have contributed to the wide spectrum of iraqi culture . traditional music consists of instruments such as ouds , flutes , violins , drums , and tambourines . now however , there are many young artists generating pop , rap , and wider types of musical genres . kulthum and fairouz are two woman singers renowned for their voices and especially loved in iraq . tea houses are scattered throughout iraq , and in the afternoon , it is a habit for shopkeepers to retreat into the back with close friends to sip tea over gossip , an iraqi '' siesta '' . arab rites of passage in iraq are primarily centered on children being educated to correctly read the quran . the quran is a difficult text to read properly for various reasons , among them : the depth of meaning and various uses of a large number of distinct and indistinct words , the various schools of thought concerning tajwid or what exactly makes a '' proper '' recitation , and the complex sounds arabic demands from human vocal cordss . a child ( or any person ) who has completely memorized the quran is called a '' hafiz '' , or '' guardian '' . there is usually a large celebration in the child 's honor if he has reached this level of excellence . cultural institutions . some important cultural institutions in the capital include the iraqi national orchestra ( rehearsals and performances were briefly interrupted during the occupation of iraq , but have since returned to normal ) and the national theater ( iraq ) ( the theatre was looted during the 2003 invasion of iraq , but efforts are underway to restore the theatre ) . the live theatre scene received a boost during the 1990s , when un sanctions limited the import of foreign films . as many as 30 movie theatres were reported to have been converted to live stages , producing a wide range of comedies and dramatic productions . institutions offering cultural education in baghdad include the academy of music , institute of fine arts , and the music and ballet school baghdad . baghdad also features a number of museums including the national museum of iraq - which houses the world 's largest and finest collection of artifacts and relics of ancient iraq civilizations ; some of which were stolen during the iraq war . see also . iraqi art mesopotamia . references . external links . iraq : cultural-historical zones