The Holy Books of Thelema

the books . liber al vel legis , also known as the book of the law , is the foundational text for thelema . it is the only holy book that aleister crowley claimed to have had no part in the authorship of . its primacy is indicated in chapter iii , verse 47 : this book shall be translated into all tongues : but always with the original in the writing of the beast ; for in the chance shape of the letters and their position to one another : in these are mysteries that no beast shall divine . the remaining texts were written between the years 1907 and 1911 . according to crowley , they were not so much written by him as through him , and are therefore referred to as inspired works . publication history . some of these works were originally published by crowley in 1909 under the title '' θελημα '' . in 1983 these original texts , together with a number of additional texts , were published under the new title the holy books of thelema by ordo templi orientis under the direction of hymenaeus alpha . original contents of θελημα . volume i liber lxi vel causæ—explains the actual history and origin of the present movement . this text , being in class d , is not technically a holy book , but was included in '' θελημα '' as an introduction , and is thus listed here . liber lxv : liber cordis cincti serpente—an account of the relations of the aspirant and his holy guardian angel . volume ii liber vii : liber liberi vel lapidis lazuli—these are the birth words of a master of the temple . its 7 chapters are referred to the 7 planets in the following order : mars , saturn , jupiter , sol , mercury , luna , venus . volume iii liber xxvii : liber trigrammaton sub figura xxvii—being a book of trigrams of the mutations of the tao with the yin and yang . an account of the cosmic process . liber ccxx : liber al vel legis sub figura ccxx : book of the law—among the holy books of thelema , the chief is the book of the law . every thelemite is expected to interpret the book , '' each for himself '' . liber dcccxiii vel ararita—an account of the hexagram and the method of reducing it to the unity and beyond . this book describes in magical language a very secret process of initiation . additional texts included in the holy books of thelema . liber i : liber b vel magi—an account of the grade of magus , the highest grade which it is even possible to manifest in any way whatsoever upon this plane . liber x : liber porta lucis—an account of the sending forth of the master therion by the a∴a∴ and an explanation of his mission . liber lxvi : liber stellae rubeae—sex magic veiled in symbolism . liber xc : liber tzaddi vel hamus hermeticus—an account of initiation , and an indication as to those who are suitable for the same . liber clvi : liber cheth vel vallum abiegni—sexual magick veiled in symbolism . liber ccxxxi : liber arcanorum—an account of the cosmic process so far as it is indicated by the major arcana . the sequence of the 22 trumps is explained as a formula of initiation . liber ccclxx : liber a'ash vel capricorni pneumatici—analyzes the nature of the creative magical force in man , explains how to awaken it , how to use it and indicates the general as well as the particular objects to be gained thereby . sexual magick veiled in symbolism . liber cd : liber tau vel kabbalae trium literarum—a graphic interpretation of the tarot on the plane of initiation . books listed by class . . class a . liber i : liber b vel magi sub figurâ 1 liber vii : liber liberi vel lapidis lazuli , adumbratio kabbalæ ægyptiorum sub figurâ vii liber x : liber porta lucis sub figureâ x liber xxvii : liber trigrammaton sub figurâ xxvii liber lxv : liber cordis cincti serpente sub figurâ lxv liber lxvi : liber stellæ rubeæ sub figurâ lxvi liber xc : liber tzaddi vel hamus hermeticus sub figurâ xc liber clvi : liber cheth vel vallum abiegni sub figurâ clvi liber ccxx : liber al vel legis sub figurâ ccxx ( the book of the law ) liber xxxi : liber al vel legis ( manuscript of the book of the law ) liber ccxxxi : liber arcanorum ιων atu ν tahuti quas vidit asar in amenti sub figurâ ccxxxi liber carcerorum ιων qliphoth cum suis geniis liber ccclxx : liber a'ash vel capricoroni pneumatici sub figuræ ccclxx liber cd : liber tau vel kabbalæ trium literarum sub figuræ cd liber dcccxiii : vel ararita sub figuræ dlxx . class b . liber ccccxviii : liber xxx ærum vel saeculi , being of the angels of the thirty aethyrs the vision and the voice . liber cdxv : opes lutetianum . class c . liber dcccclxii : θησαυρου ηιδωλων . class d . liber lxi : liber causae . notes on the list . liber i originally was a class b document , but was changed to class a in 1913 . liber lxi was originally class a , then changed to class b , then changed to class d . liber ccxx and liber xxxi are essentially the same . the latter is the handwritten original , ccxx was transcribed from the original and was given the number 220 because it is composed of 220 verses . liber ccccxviii has instructions in aethyr 8 and 18 which are to be regarded as class d . as it is a diary , it more properly belongs in class b , except for the parts that the angels dictated . parts which are not consistently and clearly demarcated . liber dcxv , more commonly known as the paris working is a magical diary . the class a material is so intertwined that segregating them apart is extremely difficult . liber dcccclxiii is class a for the introduction only . the rest of the text is class b . the stèle of revealing is not part of the holy books , despite it being a part of the gnostic mass ( liber xv ) that is performed by thelemites as part of their sacred rituals . the comment of ankh f n khonsu is sometimes considered to be part of liber al vel legis . at other times , it is considered to be a different document . in either instance , it has been understood by some to mean that no discussion of any of the holy books may take place , despite the fact that the comment , which was written after all of the holy books were written , only applies to the book of the law . according to this interpretation , which appears to be crowley 's as well , the purpose of the comment is to allow others to interpret liber al vel legis for themselves ; in other words , no one is to preach its contents or tell you their understanding of it is the one true understanding . however , the comment also prohibits the study of the book of the law ! the punishment for violating the comment is anathema ( shunning ) .