Twin Earth thought experiment

the thought experiment . putnam 's original formulation of the experiment was this : we begin by supposing that elsewhere in the universe there is a planet exactly like earth in virtually all aspects , which we refer to as '' twin earth '' . ( we should also suppose that the relevant surroundings are exactly the same as for earth ; it revolves around a star that appears to be exactly like our sun , and so on ) . on twin earth , there is a twin equivalent of every person and thing here on earth . the one difference between the two planets is that there is no water on twin earth . in its place there is a liquid that is superficially identical , but is chemically different , being composed not of h 2 o , but rather of some more complicated formula which we abbreviate as '' xyz '' . the twin earthlings who refer to their language as '' english '' call xyz '' water '' . finally , we set the date of our thought experiment to be several centuries ago , when the residents of earth and twin earth would have no means of knowing that the liquids they called '' water '' were h 2 o and xyz respectively . the experience of people on earth with water and that of those on twin earth with xyz would be identical . now the question arises : when an earthling ( or oscar for simplicity 's sake ) and his twin on twin earth say 'water ' do they mean the same thing ? ( the twin is also called 'oscar ' on his own planet , of course . indeed , the inhabitants of that planet call their own planet 'earth ' . for convenience , we refer to this putative planet as 'twin earth ' , and extend this naming convention to the objects and people that inhabit it , in this case referring to oscar 's twin as twin oscar . ) ex hypothesi , they are in identical psychological states , with the same thoughts , feelings , etc . yet , at least according to putnam , when oscar says 'water ' , the term refers to h 2 o , whereas when twin oscar says 'water ' it refers to xyz . the result of this is that the contents of a person 's brain are not sufficient to determine the reference of terms they use , as one must also examine the causal history that led to this individual acquiring the term . ( oscar , for instance , learned the word 'water ' in a world filled with h 2 o , whereas twin oscar learned 'water ' in a world filled with xyz . ) this is the essential thesis of semantic externalism . putnam famously summarized this conclusion with the statement that meanings ' just ai n't in the head . '' putnam 1975/1985 , p . & nbsp ; 227 . criticism . in his original article , putnam had claimed that the reference of the twins ' '' water '' varied even though their psychological states were the same . tyler burge subsequently argued in '' other bodies '' ( 1982 ) that the twins ' mental states are different : oscar has the concept h 2 o , while twin oscar has the concept xyz . putnam has since expressed agreement with burge 's interpretation of the thought experiment . ( see putnam 's introduction in pessin and goldberg 1996 , xxi . ) a number of philosophers have argued that '' water '' for both oscar and twin oscar refers to anything that is sufficiently water-like ( i.e . the term 's extension includes both h 2 o and xyz ) . they reject , therefore , the contention that '' water '' is a rigid designator referring to h 2 o . john searle , for example , argues ( intentionality : an essay in the philosophy of mind ) that , once we discover that our water is h 2 o , we have the choice of either redefining it as h 2 o ( a classical reduction redefinition ) or continuing to allow the term water to refer to anything with the basic properties of water ( transparency , wetness , etc . ) . searle suggests that in the twin-earth example , the second seems more plausible , since if twin earth does n't have water , then all its water-based products will also be different . twin ice cream , for example , will be constitutionally different , yet we will still be tempted to call it ice cream . searle , along with others , considers this sufficient argument to '' solve '' the thought experiment altogether ; others , such as donald davidson , feel that variations on the experiment can be used to draw some of the same conclusions . paul boghossian raised an objection to the class of twin-earth-style arguments for externalism in the form of an argument that aims to show that externalism is incompatible with privileged self-knowledge . here , privileged self-knowledge is taken to be the idea that one can know the content of one 's thoughts without having to investigate the external world ( for empirical evidence ) . although this type of argument does not directly disprove externalism , it is pressing because of the intuitive plausibility of privileged self-knowledge 's existence . boghossian ( 1998 ) : '' what the externalist can know a priori '' . some philosophers believe that such science-fiction thought experiments ( like the twin-earth ) should be examined carefully . they argue that when a thought experiment describes a state of affairs that is radically different from the actual one ( or what we think it to be ) , our intuitions can become unreliable , and hence the philosophical conclusions drawn from them may also be unreliable . daniel dennett calls twin earth and other experiments like it '' intuition pumps '' , as they are designed in such a way to allow the thinker to use their intuition to guide them through the problem . some philosophers take the twin-earth thought experiment/intuition pump to engage faulty intuitions , and hence lead to faulty conclusions . phil hutchinson , hutchinson ( 2008 ) : 'shame and philosophy ( chapter 1 , section 2 ) . for example , notes that a ) if one looks at putnam 's own later criticisms of others ( for example his criticisms of jaegwon kim in his book the threefold cord ) one finds that implicitly he criticises his own earlier self ; and b ) that the persuasive power of the twin earth thought experiment/intuition pump relies on our turning a blind eye to aspects of the experiment in order that it establish that which putnam claims it to . in short , the thought experiment is set up in such a way that one 's intuitions will be pumped in the desired direction . john mcdowell , in his paper '' putnam on mind and meaning '' , see john mcdowell ( 1998 ) : '' putnam on mind and meaning '' . in : id . , mind , meaning and reality . criticised putnam for still having in play a latent commitment to a picture of the mind as modelled on the brain and located in the head . putnam has since conceded the point and subscribes to mcdowell 's neo-wittgensteinian therapeutic invocation of the mind as a structured system of object involving abilities ( what putnam has since defended as a neo-aristotelian picture of mind see his papers '' changing aristotle 's mind '' and '' aristotle after wittgenstein '' , both reprinted in putnam ( 1994 ) : words and life . ) . phil hutchinson has since argued that this concession to mcdowell means that the distinction which putnam wishes to operationalize , between intension and extension , is now problematized . hutchinson ( 2008 ) : shame and philosophy ( chapter 1 ) . john dupré , in a number of papers and mainly in his paper '' natural kinds and biological taxa '' , reprinted in john dupre ( 2002 ) : humans and other animals . has demonstrated that the theory of natural kinds , which many have taken to be established and/or supported by putnam 's twin earth thought experiment does not find support in the practice of scientific classification . avrum stroll has produced probably the most comprehensive critique of the program of natural kind semantics ( both putnam 's and kripke 's ) in his book sketches of landscapes . avrum stroll ( 1998 ) : sketches of landscapes . putnam , who is well known for changing his philosophical positions on a variety of issues , criticized the experiment later in life because it is anti-functionalist . see also . swampman internalism and externalism externalism semantic externalism philosophy of language . footnotes .