Nectocaris

anatomy . nectocaris had a flattened , kite-shaped body with a fleshy fin running along the length of each side . the small head had two stalked eyes , a single pair of tentacles , and a flexible funnel opening out to the underside of the body . the funnel often gets wider away from the head . internally , a chamber runs along the body axis , containing a pair of gills ; the gills comprise blades emerging from a zig-zag axis . muscle blocks surrounded the axial cavity , and are now preserved as dark blocks in the lateral body . the fins also show dark blocks , with fine striations superimposed over them . these striations often stand in high relief above the rock surface itself . . diversity . although nectocaris is known from canada , china and australia , in rocks spanning some 20 & nbsp ; million years , there does not seem to be much diversity ; size excepted , all specimens are anatomically very similar . historically , three genera have been erected for nectocaridid taxa from different localities , but these 'species ' – petalilium latus and vetustovermis planus – likely belong to the same genus or even the same species as n . & nbsp ; pteryx . within n . & nbsp ; pteryx , there seem to be two discrete morphs , one large ( ~10 & nbsp ; cm in length ) , one small ( ~3 & nbsp ; cm long ) . these perhaps represent sexual dimorphism . . ecology . the unusual shape of the nectocaridid funnel has led to its interpretation as an eversible proboscis , but this is difficult to reconcile with the fossil evidence . instead , its fluid dynamics seem optimal for a role in jet propulsion , where it would have maintained an efficient slow flow of water over the large internal gills . the eyes of nectocaris would have had a similar visual acuity to modern nautilus ( if they lacked a lens ) or squid ( if they did not ) . . affinity . the affinity of nectocaris has been a controversial subject , and some scientists feel that it is still uncertain . the balance of evidence seems to suggest a relationship with the cephalopods , whether in an ancestral or derived position . the most pleasing interpretation – which is not without problems – is to interpret some of the features of nectocaris as shared with the earliest cephalopods . features that seem to be shared with the modern coleoids ( which evolved much later ) can then be attributed to convergence – but perhaps using the same underlying genetic machinery as modern coleoids do today . . history of study . nectocaris has a long and convoluted history of study . charles doolittle walcott , the discoverer of the burgess shale , had photographed the one specimen he had collected in the 1910s , but never had time to investigate it further . as such , it was not until 1976 that nectocaris was formally described , by simon conway morris . because the genus was originally known from a single , incomplete specimen and with no counterpart , conway morris was unable to deduce its affinity . it had some features which were reminiscent of arthropods , but these could well have been convergently derived . its fins were very unlike those of arthropods . working from photographs , the italian palaeontologist alberto simonetta believed he could classify nectocaris within the chordates . he focussed mainly on the tail and fin morphology , interpreting conway morris 's 'gut ' as a notochord – a distinctive chordate feature . the classification of nectocaris was revisited in 2010 , when martin smith and jean-bernard caron described 91 & nbsp ; additional specimens , many of them better preserved than the type . these allowed them to reinterpret nectocaris as a primitive cephalopod , with only 2 & nbsp ; tentacles instead of the 8 or 10 & nbsp ; limbs of modern cephalopods . the structure previous researchers had identified as an oval carapace or shield behind the eyes was suggested to be a soft funnel , similar to the ones used for propulsion by modern cephalopods . the interpretation would push back the origin of cephalopods by at least 30 & nbsp ; million years , much closer to the first appearance of complex animals , in the cambrian explosion , and implied that & ndash ; against the widespread expectation & ndash ; cephalopods evolved from non-mineralized ancestors . a later analysis claimed to undermine the cephalopod interpretation , stating that it did not square with the established theory of cephalopod evolution . according to these authors , nectocaris is best treated as a member incertae sedis of the arthropod group dinocaridida ( which includes the anomalocaridids ) , but they stopped short of formally changing the classification . however , it is straightforward to demonstrate that an anomalocaridid affinity is not supported . other studies have yet to put forward a more plausible affinity , and alternatives to the cephalopod affinity are fraught with difficulties . whether nectocaris represents a derived or basal cephalopod , and whether it belongs in the crown group , it is more parsimonious to interpret its distinctive features as homologues of their equivalent in cephalopods – even if the absence of a shell in nectocaris is an independent feature . . vetustovermis . vetustovermis ( from latin : '' very old worm '' ) is a soft-bodied middle cambrian animal , known from a single reported fossil specimen from the south australian emu bay shale . it is probably a junior synonym of nectocaris pteryx . the original description of vetustovermis hedged its bets regarding classification , but tentatively highlighted some similarities with the annelid worms . it was later considered an arthropod , and in 2010 smith and caron , agreeing that petalilium was at least a close relative of vetustovermis ( but that treating it as a synonym was premature , given the poor preservation of the vetustovermis type ) , placed it with nectocaris in the clade nectocarididae . early press reports misspelled the genus name as vetustodermis . petalilium . petalilium ( sometimes misspelled petalium ) is an enigmatic genus of cambrian organism known from the haikou area , from the maoshoiatan mudstone member of the chengjiang biota . the taxon is a junior synonym of nectocaris pteryx . fossils of petalilium show a dorsoventrally flattened body , usually 5 to 6 & nbsp ; centimetres , but ranging from 1.5 to 10 & nbsp ; cm . it has an ovate trunk region and a large muscle foot , and a head with stalked eyes and a pair of long tentacles . the trunk region possesses about 50 & nbsp ; soft , flexible , transverse bars , lateral serialised structures of unknown function . the upper part of the body , interpreted as a mantle , is covered with a random array of spines on the back , while gills project underneath . a complete , tubular gut runs the length of the body . whilst it was originally described as a phyllocarid , and a ctenophore affinity has been suggested , neither interpretation is supported by any compelling evidence . some of the characters observed in chen et al . 's ( 2005 ) study suggested that petalilium may be related to nectocaris . . see also . cambrian explosion chengjiang biota list of chengjiang biota species by phylum . footnotes . references . further reading . – 3d animations are available and a more detailed consideration of nectocaris – brian switek discusses the taxonomy and history of nectocaris in his blog – bbc news coverage of the smith & caron 's ( 2010 ) re-description – a blog article supporting mazurek & zatoń 's ( 2011 ) view . external links .