Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education

background . north carolina was one of the more moderate southern states , and its resistance to integration was much weaker than in most other areas of the south . after brown , it had ended segregation with a school assignment plan based on neighborhoods that was approved by the court . however , when charlotte consolidated school districts from the city itself with a surrounding area totaling , the majority of black students ( who lived in central charlotte ) still attended mostly black schools as compared with majority white schools further outside the city . legal proceedings . the naacp legal defense fund brought the swann case on behalf of six-year-old james swann and nine other families , with julius l . chambers presenting the case . swann was chosen because his father was a theology professor , and was thus unlikely to be economically burdened by local retaliation . in 1965 , judge j . braxton craven decided swann v . charlotte-mecklenburg board of education in favor of charlotte-mecklenburg , because there was no requirement in the constitution to act purposely to increase racial mixing . after the green ruling , the swann case was filed again , and this time taken by judge james b . mcmillan as his first important case on the federal bench . mcmillan had at one point been a public opponent of busing to integrate schools , but when the case was presented to him he said that the facts outweighed his feelings , and busing was the only way to fulfill the constitutional requirement of desegregation . experts from rhode island college were brought in for the plaintiff 's side to judge the effectiveness of the school board 's new plan . from april to november 1969 , mcmillan repeatedly ordered the board to revise the plan . the board eventually submitted a plan rezoning neighborhoods into pie-shaped wedges , where blacks living in the center of charlotte would be divided up and distributed to outlying , formerly white high schools . the school board 's plan required busing and would achieve a black population of 2-36 % in all ten of the high schools . due to the greater number of elementary schools , elaborate gerrymandering was required and would achieve greater integration , but would leave more than half of black elementary students at majority-black schools . the court rejected the board 's plan in favor of outsider dr . john finger 's plan . the finger plan required busing of an additional 300 black students , established '' satellite zones '' and required pairing and grouping techniques to achieve even greater integration . as a consequence , mcmillan became a local pariah . '' the charlotte mecklenburg story '' chambers ' home , office and car were bombed when he first took up the case . '' the charlotte mecklenburg story '' when the case was appealed to the u.s . court of appeals for the fourth circuit , the case was heard en banc by six of the seven judges sitting on the court . the seventh judge judge j . braxton craven , recused himself due to him being the original trial court judge . the opinion was 3-2-1 that the restructured busing orders should be affirmed for older students , but that it be remanded for those of elementary school age . two dissenters would have affirmed the whole decision , while one would reverse mcmillan 's ruling in its entirety . mcmillan decided to follow his original plan for elementary school students after the case was remanded to him . swann before the supreme court . justice douglas had previously been strongly opposed to busing . the court was urged to begin their term early to hear the case , but decided to wait until the first day of their new term to begin . despite his relative youth and inexperience , julius chambers argued the case , because of his intimate knowledge of the facts involved . erwin griswold , the solicitor general of the united states , represented the federal government , advocating nixon 's “ go-slow ” policy . though no official vote was taken , chief justice burger and justice black wanted to reverse mcmillan 's order , while justices douglas , harlan , brennan , and marshall wanted a strong affirmation of the order ; justices stewart , white , and blackmun did not express a strong feeling either way . douglas , brennan , and marshall were quite liberal , but harlan was usually conservative . when burger circulated his very grudging affirmation of mcmillan that limited future action and action in other areas by the court , he met strong resistance . douglas , harlan , brennan , and marshall all demanded revisions and circulated suggestions for alternate drafts . justice stewart also reacted strongly after carefully considering the facts of the case , and wrote a “ dissent ” that would have been the opinion of the court without revisions of burger 's drafts . burger revised the opinion five times , each time making a stronger affirmation of mcmillan and incorporating the language of harlan , brennan , stewart , and others into it . after the fifth draft , justice black threatened a dissent if the opinion was made any stronger an affirmation , and so a sixth and final draft was created that was close to what justice stewart had composed after the first conference . the final opinion was 9-0 affirming mcmillan 's order . the decision led to the widespread use of busing to end segregation by federal judges in the south . timeline of the case being overturned . when the courts mandated that busing should occur to desegregate the schools , they also noted that one day when the school system was thought to be unitary , busing would end and the school board would be able to come up with a new plan which would best suit the education of students in charlotte-mecklenburg . after busing was enforced in 1971 , throughout the 1970s and the 1980s , charlotte was known across the nation as the “ city that made desegregation work . ” it paved the way for many different school systems to use the busing plan to force integration in the school systems . godwin , r.k . , leland , s.m . , baxter , a.d . , and southworth , s . ( 2006 ) . sinking swann : public school choice and the resegregation of charlotte ’ s public schools . review of policy research , 23 ( 5 ) , 983-997 . however , due to the booming economy of the city in the late 1980s and early 1990s , charlotte experienced a rapid immigration from the northeast and the midwest , which resulted in a decline of the acceptance of busing . in 1992 , in response to these complaints , cms created a managed choice plan to reduce the number of students being bused . this new choice plan revolved around magnet schools , making one-third of the schools in charlotte-mecklenburg either magnets or partial magnets , and each magnet had a quota of black and white students that were allowed to attend . but this did n't please many white families who were denied entrance into magnet schools that had fulfilled their quotas . in 1997 , a parent , william capacchione , sued the school system when his daughter was denied entrance into a magnet school for the second time based on her race . marcus , d.l . ( 1999 ) . after the buses stop . us news & world report , 127 ( 23 ) , 38-39 while the school system opposed the end of busing , judge robert d . potter declared the mandate of a unitary system had been met and lifted the court order on mandatory busing by race or ethnicity . this ruling was upheld by the appeals court in richmond , virginia in 2000 and after the final appeal was declined to be heard by the u.s . supreme court , federal order of busing was ended in charlotte-mecklenburg and it was left in the hands of the city school board to decide how to redo the assignment policy for school attendance . walsh , m . ( 2002 ) . high court closes historic desegregation case . education week , 21 ( 32 ) , 31-33 . the new assignment policy which was adopted in the fall of 2002 was known as the “ school choice plan . ” this new choice plan divided the city into four large attendance zones based on neighborhoods . students were allowed to choose to stay at their neighborhood '' home school , '' or they could rank their top three choices of any other school in cms ; however they would only receive free transportation to their home school or any of the magnet schools in the district . if families chose their home school as their first choice , they were guaranteed that school ; otherwise they were entered into a lottery that gave available spaces in overenrolled schools . if people did not choose a school , they were immediately placed into their home school . after creating a variety of programs to inform families about the new plan , over 95 % of the families in the charlotte-mecklenburg school system submitted choices for the new school year .