I Remember Mama (film)

plot . the film begins with eldest daughter katrin completing the last lines of her autobiography novel . as she reminisces about her family life , there is a flashback to 1910 , where the first of a series of vignettes finds marta hanson preparing the weekly budget with her husband lars , daughters katrin , christine and dagmar , and son nels , who announces his desire to attend high school . each family member makes a financial sacrifice to contribute to the boy 's education . marta 's sister trina arrives , announces she is marrying undertaker peter thorkelson , and implores marta to break the news to their sisters sigrid and jenny . when marta threatens to reveal embarrassing anecdotes about them , the women accept their sister 's decision . when jonathan hyde , the hansons ' impoverished lodger , reads a tale of two cities aloud for the family , they are deeply moved by the story . later , the family is visited by marta 's gruff but soft-hearted uncle chris and his housekeeper jessie brown , who is secretly his wife . when chris discovers dagmar is ill with mastoiditis , he insists on taking her to the hospital . dagmar 's operation is a success , but marta is prohibited from seeing her . disguised as a member of the housekeeping staff , she sneaks into dagmar 's ward and softly sings to her . when dagmar returns home , she learns her cat , uncle elizabeth , had been mauled and seriously injured during its outside wanderings . despite dagmar 's belief in her mother 's healing powers , marta feels helpless to save the cat and sends nels to buy chloroform so she can euthanize it . the following morning , she is astonished when dagmar walks in with an apparently cured cat . instead of killing the cat , the dose of chloroform that marta had administered only provided the cat with the deep sleep it needed to aid its recovery . mr . hyde suddenly and quietly moves out , leaving his classic books and a check for his accumulated months of rent . the family 's initial joy of receiving the large rent payment quickly vanishes once they discover that the check has no value . sigrid and jenny are furious ; but as marta tears up the worthless piece of paper , she declares that hyde 's gift of literature is far more valuable than the money itself . katrin brags to christine that their mother is going to buy her the dresser set she has long admired as a graduation present . as she is about to leave to perform in the school 's production of the merchant of venice , katrin learns ( from a resentful christine ) that her mother traded her heirloom brooch for the gift . distraught , katrin performs badly in the play and later retrieves the brooch after trading back the dresser set . marta then gives the brooch to katrin as a graduation present . katrin 's father presents her with her first cup of coffee , which she had been told she could drink once she was a grown-up . after taking a few sips of the '' adult '' beverage , katrin is overcome with emotion by her parents ' gesture , and she rushes out of the room . marta learns uncle chris is near death , and she takes katrin to say goodbye . he reveals he has no money to leave his niece because he has been donating his income to help children with leg or foot problems walk again . after enjoying a final drink with his niece and jessie , uncle chris dies peacefully in bed . katrin is dejected when she receives her tenth literary rejection letter . marta then takes some of her stories to famed author and gourmand florence dana moorhead and convinces her to read them . marta returns home and advises her daughter that moorhead feels the girl should write about what she knows best . marta urges katrin to write about papa . when katrin 's story is accepted for publication , she is paid 500 . after announcing some of the money will go towards the purchase of the winter coat marta wants , katrin confesses her story is titled mama and the hospital . she begins to read it to her family , and the story 's introduction concludes and the film itself ends with the line '' but first and foremost , i remember mama '' . crowther , bosley ( 1948 ) . '' the screen ; irene dunne and oscar homolka head brilliant cast in rko ' i remember mama ' '' . the new york times movie review , march 12 , 1948 . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . brenner , paul . '' i remember mama synopsis '' . fandango , provided by rovi . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . demar , gary ( 2010 ) . '' i remember mama ( 1948 ) '' . the american vision , braselton , georgia ; august 30 , 2010 . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . '' but first and foremost , i remember mama '' . comet over hollywood , february 23 , 2013 . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . . production . stevens originally offered the role of mama to greta garbo , but she retired from films six years before and declined the role . he then cast irene dunne , whom he had directed in penny serenade in 1941 . although she was 50 years old , the actress had a youthful appearance and had to be aged with makeup to portray the family matriarch convincingly . '' i remember mama ( 1948 ) '' . overview with synopsis , cast and crew , additional details . turner classic movies ( tcm ) , atlanta , georgia . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . oscar homolka was the only member of the original broadway cast to reprise his role for the film . some scenes were filmed on rhode island street , on san francisco 's potrero hill , reginald , stephen ( 2011 ) . '' remembering irene dunne in ' i remember mama ' '' . classic movie man , december 20 , 2011 . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . nob hill , telegraph hill , russian hill , eureka valley , and market street . . cast . irene dunne as marta 'mama ' hanson barbara bel geddes as katrin hanson oscar homolka as uncle chris halvorsen philip dorn as lars 'papa ' hanson steve brown as nels hanson peggy mcintyre as christine hanson june hedin as dagmar hanson sir cedric hardwicke as mr . jonathan hyde ellen corby as aunt trina hope landin as aunt jenny edith evanson as aunt sigrid edgar bergen as peter thorkelson florence bates as florence dana moorhead barbara o'neil as jessie brown rudy vallee as dr . johnson tommy ivo as arne . release . the film premiered as the easter attraction at radio city music hall in new york city . critical reception . in his review in the new york times , bosley crowther said the film '' should prove irresistible '' and added , '' irene dunne does a beautiful job . handling with equal facility an accent and a troubled look , she has the strength and vitality , yet the softness , that the role requires . '' tv guide calls it '' a delicate charmer , sometimes precious , but nonetheless fine '' and '' meticulously directed . '' '' i remember mama '' , tv guide movie review , cbs interactive . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . the london-based magazine time out describes it as '' a charmer . directed and acted with real delicacy . '' review by '' tm '' . '' i remember mama '' . time out , london , united kingdom . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . it was named one of the year 's ten best by film daily . box office . despite receiving good reviews , it failed to turn a profit due to its high production costs . jewell , richard ( 1994 ) . '' rko film grosses : 1931-1951 '' , historical journal of film , radio and television quarterly ; volume 14 , number 1 , p . 46 . london ( united kingdom ) : routledge , 1994 . it recorded a loss of 1,040,000 . jewell , richard b . ( 2016 ) . slow fade to black : the decline of rko radio pictures . oakland , california : university of california press , 2016 . accolades . the film was nominated for academy awards for academy award for best actress ( dunne ) , best actor in a supporting role ( homolka ) , best actress in a supporting role ( bel geddes and corby ) and best cinematography , black-and-white ( musuraca ) . '' i remember mama ( 1948 ) full cast & crew '' . internet movie database ( imdb ) , an affiliate of amazon.com , seattle , washington . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . it was the second of four films to date—following my man godfrey ( 1936 ) and preceding othello ( 1965 ) and doubt ( 2008 ) —to receive four acting nominations without being nominated for best picture . corby won the golden globe award for best supporting actress . jackson , denny ; stephan , ed . '' ellen corby biography '' . imdb . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . the cast received a protestant motion picture council award , which was collected by dunne in 1949 . bodeen was nominated for three writers guild of america awards , for best written american comedy , best written american drama , and the robert meltzer award for the screenplay dealing most ably with problems of the american scene . mowis , i . s . '' dewitt bodeen biography '' . imdb . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . . additional adaptations . mama , a cbs television series starring peggy wood , ran from 1949 to 1957 . the popularity and high ratings of the series prompted a national re-release of i remember mama in 1956 . desjardins , mary . '' mama '' , a cbs television adaptation of i remember mama broadcast 1949-1957 . museum of broadcast communications , chicago , illinois . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . after the success of the film version of i remember mama , dunne , homolka and bel geddes reprised their roles in an abbreviated 44-minute broadcast of the story on lux radio theater in 1948 . '' i remember mama '' , the lux radio theatre , broadcast on columbia broadcasting system ( cbs ) , august 30 , 1948 . internet archive , where audio copy of 1948 program is available for review . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . there was also a british itv ( tv network ) production of i remember mama in 1961 . '' i remember mama '' , television adaptation of play aired by itv broadcasting limited , june 27 , 1961 . production of associated-rediffusion television , london , united kingdom . retrieved july 4 , 2017 . a musical stage adaptation , starring liv ullmann and george hearn , had a three-month run in the majestic theatre on broadway in 1979 . i remember mama . information about musical at the majestic theatre in new york , n.y . , may 31 , 1979—september 2 , 1979 . internet broadway database ( ibdb ) . retrieved march 24 , 2012 . . references . related reading . kathryn forbes ( 1968 ) mama 's bank account ( mariner books , division of houghton mifflin harcourt ) . external links . i remember mama on lux radio theater : august 30 , 1948 . missing the first eight minutes . program becomes audible at 1:09 of recording .