Fort Stotsenburg

origins . by october 1902 , american forces had established more or less permanent quarters near the angeles railroad station in an area of the town known as talimundoc ( now the barangay of lourdes sur ) . the rumor is that cavalry foragers had come across a fertile plain further to the north and that sweet grass was abundant in this area . the u.s . cavalry forces had encountered problems caused by the fact that their horses became sick and often died after eating philippine '' sawgrass . '' by the latter part of 1902 , plans were under consideration to relocate the american military reservation to this area near the barrio of sapang bato . the preliminary survey dates from 1902 . in the following year , president theodore roosevelt signed an executive order , establishing fort stotsenburg in the location later occupied by clark air base . facilities and structures . gateposts . thumbthe entrance pillars to fort stotsenburg were originally located on what is now known as dau highway . during the japanese occupation of clark air base from 1942 to 1945 , imperial forces used these pillars for fill material during their repairs to the base runway . they were unearthed intact in the vicinity of the old base operations building in 1965 . following their discovery , the original pillars were relocated near the consolidated base personnel office , which at that time served as the on-base american legion post . in 1984 , as part of an overall plan to highlight the base 's long history , the 13th air force history office received permission to move the gateposts once again . because putting them at their original site would have placed them in an area which possessed low visibility , it was decided to install them on the southern boundary of the parade ground instead . special crews and a giant crane rented from a company in manila moved the posts in what turned out to be an all-day affair . quite a number of onlookers viewed the move and cheered as the last post was dropped into its new position . parade ground west end , thirteenth air force area . thumbthe post flagpole has always been in its present location in front of building 2122 with the original flagstaff constructed on september 16 , 1906 at a cost of 220 . it was the location for reveille at 6 a.m . ; a cannon was fired at 5 p.m . for retreat ceremonies ; and taps was sounded at 10 p.m . in accordance with the provisions of the military bases agreement as revised in 1979 , the flagpole became the only one upon which the american flag could be displayed . in march 1984 , at major general kenneth d . burn 's request , the government of the philippines amended this provision to allow another u.s . flag to be flown at the site of the joint us/philippine cemetery , near the main gate of clark air base . camp gymnasium . the camp gymnasium was completed in 1912 and this building has been used for many purposes over the years , including post exchange and '' charlie corn 's canteen . '' it last housed the offices of the thirteenth air force chief of staff for operations and intelligence and the 6200th tactical fighter training group . parade ground , west end , building 2125 . this building , which last housed the thirteenth air force 's deputy chief of staff for operations and intelligence and the 6200th tactical fighter training group , responsible for cope thunder exercises , originally was completed in 1913 . in the early decades of fort stotsenburg 's history , it housed charlie corn 's canteen and restaurant in the basement , the post exchange on the first floor and the post theater on the second floor . following the american recapture of clark in february 1945 , it served as the fifth air force headquarters building . years of renovation and modification have all but disguised the original structure , which originally possessed an open portico . post commander 's office . thumbthe first building on this site was made of nipa and bamboo in 1902 and served as post headquarters . in 1906 , it was rebuilt of lumber and roofed with tarpaper . it was reconstructed of concrete in 1912 and , for a time , housed a bowling alley . throughout most of its history , this building served as the office of post commanders and their executive officers , even during the japanese occupation . parade ground , west end , building 2127 . constructed between 1912 and 1913 , building 2127 originally served as barracks for enlisted personnel from cavalry and field artillery units . its most famous occupants were the philippine scouts of the 26th cavalry , who lived there at the time of the outbreak of world war ii . this massive structure last housed the air force office of special investigation on the first floor , the central civilian personnel office on the second floor , and the deputy chief of staff for logistics along with the pacific air forces contracting center on the third floor . a similar barracks , constructed at the same time , preserves more of the original character of these buildings . it is located just down austin street and housed the base social actions function and the offices of the general educational institutions . telephone exchange ( building 2425 ) . directly across weston avenue from the old 26th cavalry barracks stands this small structure that was constructed in november 1914 at a cost of only 260 . during its long history , building 2425 sometimes served as a post office facility , but for most of its life has housed clark 's telephone operations office , as it last did . during the battle for clark in late january 1945 , this building sustained a number of hits . despite a number of renovations , these hits on the building have been left uncovered as testimony to the ferocity of the fighting . old railway station ( building 2697 ) . the manila-dagupan railway line was once the most efficient ways of traversing the island of luzon . this rail line passed right through what before 1979 was the clark air base military reservation , and for many years , the most efficient method of travel between fort stotsenburg and manila was by train . arrivals and departures were gala occasions , marked by the presence of crowds and bands at the fort stotsenburg terminal . after world war ii , this means of travel lessened significantly and the use of this facility as a passenger terminal was discontinued . it last housed the television studios of detachment 1 , air force pacific broadcasting squadron 's far east network-philippines . officers ' row . almost since the beginning , fort stotsenburg 's wirt davis avenue , which borders the parade ground to the north , has been known by this name . this avenue has been home to the quarters of the commander of the thirteenth air force since 1946 until the americans vacated the base in 1991 . a similar structure , but somewhat smaller , serves as the quarters for the clark air base command deputy commander . other concrete homes in this area served as the quarters for thirteenth 's vice commander and other key subordinate unit personnel . the balance of the homes along this row are '' barns . '' the concrete quarters were constructed around 1910 and 1913 and the trees also date from this period . the trees are acacia ( monkeypod ) and were over 25 years old in 1939 . u.s . facility commander 's residence . thumbthe original building , which was made of wood with corrugated iron roofing , was erected at the beginning of the 20th century . the present concrete structure was completed on november 26 , 1910 , at a cost of 10,901.25 . it was called field officers ' quarters , but some post commanders had an office on the first floor in addition to their offices in building 2121 . during the japanese occupation , japanese staff officers used the building for offices and housing . major general eugene l . eubank , thirteenth air force commander from july 1946 to october 1948 , was the first to occupy this building after its re-designation as the general 's family quarters in august 1946 . old houses along the parade ground . thumbalthough some were built as early as 1903 , all the houses along wirt davis avenue , originally called officers ' row , were completed by 1904 . the original cost per house was 1,309.90 . the distinctive construction allowed cooling breezes to pass under the raised floor and through the wide , screened verandas , while the steep , metal roofs dissipated trapped heat and allowed a rapid run-off of the heavy rains . all flooring was made from oregon pine , imported to the philippines . the huge trees shading the houses are acacia and were planted at the time of construction . similar houses were constructed as late as 1931 on the three parallel streets behind davis avenue . on the opposite side of the parade ground were large open areas surrounding troop barracks , blacksmith shops , house corrals and stables . taken as a whole , these buildings serve as one of the best preserved examples of u.s . military tropical construction still extant , and the thirteenth air force has decreed that these historic structures , especially the ones along davis avenue , must be preserved . these '' barns '' were once highly sought after for officer/civilian housing because of their size , coolness , and history . post commander 's residence . at the midpoint of davis avenue stands a '' barn '' that used to serve as the post commander 's residence prior to world war ii . this building was differentiated from the rest of the officers ' quarters along the parade ground by two red posts flanking the stairs . a persistent myth has it that each morning two horses would be hitched to these posts , so that the commander could select his mount for the day . the building 's central location was considered to be a position of prestige , a fact that was not lost on japanese troop commanders who also occupied this house during world war ii . recapture . the site , now mostly rubble , was recaptured by the 37th infantry division late on 31 january 1945 .