Sedimentology

sedimentary rock types . image : triassic utah.jpg thumb right middle triassic marginal marine sequence of siltstones and sandstones , southwestern utah . there are four primary types of sedimentary rocks : clastics , carbonates , evaporites , and chemical . clastic rocks are composed of particles derived from the weathering and erosion of precursor rocks and consist primarily of fragmental material . clastic rocks are classified according to their predominant grain size and their composition . in the past , the term '' clastic sedimentary rocks '' were used to describe silica-rich clastic sedimentary rocks , however there have been cases of clastic carbonate rocks . the more appropriate term is siliciclastic sedimentary rocks . organic sedimentary rocks are important deposits formed from the accumulation of biological detritus , and form coal and oil shale deposits , and are typically found within basins of clastic sedimentary rocks carbonates are composed of various carbonate minerals ( most often calcium carbonate ( caco 3 ) ) precipitated by a variety of organic and inorganic processes . typically , the majority of carbonate rocks are composed of reef material . evaporites are formed through the evaporation of water at the earth 's surface and most commonly include halite or gypsum . edward j . tarbuck , frederick k . lutgens , cameron j . tsujita , earth , an introduction to physical geology , national library of canada cataloguing in publication , 2005 , chemical sedimentary rocks , including some carbonates , are deposited by precipitation of minerals from aqueous solution . these include jaspilite and chert . importance of sedimentary rocks . sedimentary rocks provide a multitude of products which modern and ancient society has come to utilise . art : marble , although a metamorphosed limestone , is an example of the use of sedimentary rocks in the pursuit of aesthetics and art architectural uses : stone derived from sedimentary rocks is used for dimension stone and in architecture , notably slate , a meta-shale , for roofing , sandstone for load-bearing buttresses ceramics and industrial materials : clay for pottery and ceramics including bricks ; cement and lime derived from limestone . economic geology : sedimentary rocks host large deposits of sedex ore deposits of lead-zinc-silver , large deposits of copper , deposits of gold , tungsten , uranium , and many other precious minerals , gemstones and industrial minerals including heavy mineral sands ore deposits energy : petroleum geology relies on the capacity of sedimentary rocks to generate deposits of petroleum oils . coal and oil shale are found in sedimentary rocks . a large proportion of the world 's uranium energy resources are hosted within sedimentary successions . groundwater : sedimentary rocks contain a large proportion of the earth 's groundwater aquifers . our understanding of the extent of these aquifers and how much water can be withdrawn from them depends critically on our knowledge of the rocks that hold them ( the reservoir ) . basic principles . image : heavymineralsbeachsand.jpg thumb right heavy minerals ( dark ) deposited in a quartz beach sand ( chennai , india ) . the aim of sedimentology , studying sediments , is to derive information on the depositional conditions which acted to deposit the rock unit , and the relation of the individual rock units in a basin into a coherent understanding of the evolution of the sedimentary sequences and basins , and thus , the earth 's geological history as a whole . the scientific basis of this is the principle of uniformitarianism , which states that the sediments within ancient sedimentary rocks were deposited in the same way as sediments which are being deposited at the earth 's surface today . sedimentological conditions are recorded within the sediments as they are laid down ; the form of the sediments at present reflects the events of the past and all events which affect the sediments , from the source of the sedimentary material to the stresses enacted upon them after diagenesis are available for study . the law of superposition is critical to the interpretation of sedimentary sequences , and in older metamorphic terrains or fold and thrust belts where sediments are often intensely folded or deformed , recognising younging indicators or graded bedding is critical to interpretation of the sedimentary section and often the deformation and metamorphic structure of the region . folding in sediments is analysed with the principle of original horizontality , which states that sediments are deposited at their angle of repose which , for most types of sediment , is essentially horizontal . thus , when the younging direction is known , the rocks can be '' unfolded '' and interpreted according to the contained sedimentary information . the principle of lateral continuity states that layers of sediment initially extend laterally in all directions unless obstructed by a physical object or topography . the principle of cross-cutting relationships states that whatever cuts across or intrudes into the layers of strata is younger than the layers of strata . methodology . image : mudcrackscentripetal.jpg thumb centripetal desiccation cracks ( with a dinosaur footprint in the center ) in the lower jurassic moenave formation at the st . george dinosaur discovery site at johnson farm , southwestern utah . the methods employed by sedimentologists to gather data and evidence on the nature and depositional conditions of sedimentary rocks include ; measuring and describing the outcrop and distribution of the rock unit ; describing the rock formation , a formal process of documenting thickness , lithology , outcrop , distribution , contact relationships to other formations mapping the distribution of the rock unit , or units descriptions of rock core ( drilled and extracted from wells during hydrocarbon exploration ) sequence stratigraphy describes the progression of rock units within a basin describing the lithology of the rock ; petrology and petrography ; particularly measurement of texture , grain size , grain shape ( sphericity , rounding , etc . ) , sorting and composition of the sediment analysing the geochemistry of the rock isotope geochemistry , including use of radiometric dating , to determine the age of the rock , and its affinity to source regions . recent developments . the longstanding understanding of how some mudstones form has been challenged by geologists at indiana university ( bloomington ) and the massachusetts institute of technology . the research , which appears in the december 14th , 2007 , edition of science , counters the prevailing view of geologists that mud only settles when water is slow-moving or still , instead showing that '' muds will accumulate even when currents move swiftly . '' the research shows that some mudstones may have formed in fast-moving waters : '' mudstones can be deposited under more energetic conditions than widely assumed , requiring a reappraisal of many geologic records . '' juergen schieber , john southard , and kevin thaisen , '' accretion of mudstone beds from migrating floccule ripples , '' science , 14 december 2007 : 1760-1763 . see also '' as waters clear , scientists seek to end a muddy debate , '' at physorg.com ( accessed 27 december 2007 ) . macquaker and bohacs , in reviewing the research of schieber et al . , state that '' these results call for critical reappraisal of all mudstones previously interpreted as having been continuously deposited under still waters . such rocks are widely used to infer past climates , ocean conditions , and orbital variations . '' joe h . s . macquaker and kevin m . bohacs , '' geology : on the accumulation of mud , '' science , 14 december 2007 : 1734-1735 . considerable recent research into mudstones has been driven by the recent effort to commercially produce hydrocarbons from them , in both the shale gas and tight oil ( or light tight oil ) plays . robert g . loucks , robert m . reed , stephen c . ruppel , and daniel m . jarvie '' morphology , genesis , and distribution of nanometer-scale pores in siliceous mudstones of the mississippian barnett shale '' , journal of sedimentary research , 2009 , v . 79 , 848-861 .