William Wotton

life . early years . william wotton was the second son of the rev . henry wotton , rector of wrentham , suffolk . he was a child prodigy who could read verses from the bible in english , latin , greek and hebrew before he was six . in april 1676 , when he was not yet ten years old , he was sent to catharine hall , cambridge , and graduated in 1679 . by this time wotton had acquired arabic , syriac , and aramaic , as well as a knowledge of logic , philosophy , mathematics , geography , chronology , and history . his parents died whilst he was still at cambridge , and as a teenager he was taken into the household of gilbert burnet , later bishop of salisbury . he was awarded a fellowship at st john 's college , from where he obtained an m.a . in 1683 and a b.d . in 1691 . in 1686 he was appointed curate of brimpton in berkshire and the following year he was also elected a fellow of the royal society . in january 1689 he was appointed vicar of lacock in wiltshire , which he held until his resignation in 1693 . soon after ordination he was also appointed chaplain to daniel finch earl of nottingham , and tutor to his family . finch presented him with the rectory of milton keynes , buckinghamshire , in 1693 . educational controversy . wotton began his scholarly career as the translator of louis dupin 's a new history of ecclesiastical writers , ( 13 vols . 1692–99 ) . however , he is chiefly remembered for his share in the controversy about the respective merits of ancient and modern learning . in his reflections upon ancient and modern learning ( 1694 , and again 1697 ) he took the part of the moderns , although in a fair and judicial spirit . according to joseph levine , 'of all the works in the controversy that had yet appeared in english or french his was easily the most judicious . ' the battle of the books , p . 34 . he was attacked for pedantry by swift in the battle of the books and a tale of a tub , the battle of the books , pp . 112–122 . but his book proved that 'wotton was no mere pedant , but a wide-ranging intellect with a thorough command of learning , both ancient and modern . ' the battle of the books , p . 34 . wotton responded calling swift 's a tale '' one of the profanest banters upon the religion of jesus christ , as such , that ever yet appeared . '' warren montag the unthinkable swift p.113 he also began to write a biography of the chemist sir robert boyle , but his notes were lost and the work was never completed . wotton wrote a history of rome in ( 1701 ) at the request of bishop burnet , which was later used by the historian edward gibbon . in recognition , burnet appointed him as a prebend of salisbury from 1705 . in 1707 wotton was awarded a '' lambeth degree '' of doctor of divinity by archbishop thomas tenison in recognition of his writings in support of the established church of england against the deists . around 1713 wotton also developed ideas concerning the relationship between languages introducing the concept of an early proto-language by relating icelandic , the romance languages and greek . this pre-dated sir william jones ' famous lecture comparing sanskrit with the classical languages , by more than seventy years . archaeology and language ( 1999 ) . vol . 3 , pp . 6–9 . these theories were later published after wotton 's death , as a discourse concerning the confusion of languages at babel ( 1730 ) . '' a drunken whoring soul '' . throughout his adult life , wotton was known to be '' a most excellent preacher , but a drunken whoring soul '' . de la pryme ( 1870 ) , p . 28 . he was also very extravagant , transforming his rectory into a 32-roomed mansion . he was , however , able to borrow money against future expectations of ecclesiastical preferment as a result of his close friendship with william wake , then bishop of lincoln . stoker ( 2006 ) pp . 13–20 . between the summer of 1711 and the spring of 1712 , wotton appears to have experienced a mid-life crisis , and he scandalised the neighbourhood on many occasions by being found drunk in public , or else was known to have spent prolonged periods in local brothels . as a result , he was initially warned about his behaviour by wake , who later broke off their friendship and rescinded his promise of providing an additional living in buckinghamshire . as soon as it became known that the rector 's expectations had been dashed , local tradesmen began to press for the payment of their debts . in may 1714 , wotton was forced to abandon his rectory at milton keynes to avoid his creditors , and for seven years he lived at carmarthen in south-west wales under the assumed name of dr . william edwards . stoker ( 2006 ) pp . 20–25 . . studies in wales . whilst at carmarthen , wotton reformed his character and returned to his studies . he was also able to re-establish his friendship with wake , who had become archbishop of canterbury in december 1715 . wotton began to study welsh , and produced an important bilingual parallel text edition of the welsh and latin texts of the welsh law traditionally attributed to hywel dda at the request of his friend . to do this he had first to identify and obtain transcripts of a fifteen or so known manuscripts in either latin or mediaeval welsh , and establish a text , and then begin the difficult task of translating the mediaeval welsh terminology which appeared in both the latin and welsh versions , but the meaning of which had been lost by the 18th century . stoker ( 2006 ) p.48-50 . from 1721 wotton was assisted by the welsh scholar moses williams . wotton lived to complete the translation but was working on an accompanying glossary when he died . this was completed by williams , and the whole work was published in 1730 by his son-in-law william clarke in a large folio edition under the title leges wallicae . whilst at carmarthen he also conducted surveys of the cathedrals of st david 's and llandaff which were published by his friend browne willis in 1717 and 1718 . he published miscellaneous discourses relating to the traditions and usages of the scribes and pharisees which included a translation of part of the mishnah in ( 1718 ) . death . wotton had repaid his creditors and was able to return to bath in october 1721 and london in june 1722 but was in very poor health . he was still working on his leges wallicae , when he died of oedema at buxted , sussex , on 13 february 1727 . works . cyfreithjeu hywel dda ac eraill , seu leges wallicae ecclesiasticae et civiles hoeli boni et aliorum walliae principum ( london , 1730 ) miscellaneous discourses relating to the traditions and usages of the scribes and pharisees ( 1718 ) ( trans . ) , louis ellies dupin , a new history of ecclesiastical writers , ( 13 vols . 1692–99 ) reflections upon ancient and modern learning ( 1694 , 1697 ) . references . citations . . bibliography . charles ashton , hanes llenyddiaeth gymreig o 1650 i 1850 ( liverpool , 1891 ) joseph m . levine , the battle of the books ( ithaca , cornell university , 1994 ) . david stoker , '' william wotton 's exile and redemption : an account of the genesis and publication of leges wallicae '' y llyfr yng nghymru/welsh book studies , 7 ( 2006 ) , 7–106 . the diary of abraham de la pryme , the yorkshire antiquary , ed . charles jackson , surtees society v . 54 ( durham : surtees soc . , 1870 ) , p . & nbsp ; 29 . archaeology and language , edited by roger blench and matthew spriggs , 4 vols . ( london , 1999 ) . volume 3 , artefacts , languages and texts , p . & nbsp ; 6–9 .