Craig Breedlove

land vehicle speed records . in 1962 , he made his first attempt , in a freewheeling tricycle ( ignoring fia rules requiring four wheels , at least two driven ; in the event , fim happily accepted it ) powered by a general electric j47 turbojet engine . on august 5 , 1963 , this first spirit made its first record attempt , using just 90 % of available thrust to reach over the measured mile . the return pass , on 95 % power , turned up a two-way average of . spirit of america was so light on the ground that it did not even need to change tires afterward . for 1964 , breedlove faced competition from walt arfons ' wingfoot express ( piloted by tom green ) , as well as from brother art arfons in his four-wheel , fia-legal green monster . with more engine power , breedlove upped the record to '' with almost insolent ease '' , then to , making him the first man to exceed . this pass was not without incident , however , for one of his drogue parachute 's shroud lines parted , and spirit of america ran on for before hitting a telegraph pole and coming to rest in a lake . this record stood all of twelve days before green monster broke it , recording a two-run average of . in response , breedlove built an fia-legal four-wheeler , sonic i , powered by a j79 turbojet . november 2 , 1965 , breedlove entered the fia record book with a two-run average of . this lasted even less time than before , for green monster came back five days later at . on november 15 , breedlove responded with a record ( after turning in an amazing return pass ) , which held until 1970 . ( it would be broken by gary gabelich 's blue flame , which reached . ) to take the record back , breedlove planned a supersonic rocket car , '' complete with ejector seat . '' also in 1965 , breedlove 's wife , lee breedlove , took the seat in sonic 1 , making four passes and achieving , making her the fastest woman alive , and making them the fastest couple , which they remain . according to author rachel kushner , craig had talked lee into taking the car out for a record attempt in order to monopolize the salt flats for the day and block one of his competitors from making a record attempt . during 1968 , lynn garrison , president of craig breedlove & associates , started to package a deal that saw utah 's governor , cal rampton , provide a hangar facility for the construction of a supersonic car . bill lear , of learjet fame , was to provide support , along with his friend art linkletter . playboy magazine hoped to have the car painted black , with a white bunny on the rudder . trw was supplying a lunar lander rocket motor . a change in public interest saw the concept shelved for a period of time . they also negotiated for the use of the late donald campbell 's wheel-driven bluebird cn7 record-breaker . after a lengthy break from world records and making his name as a real estate agent , breedlove began work on a new spirit in 1992 , eventually named spirit of america formula shell lsrv . the vehicle is 44 & nbsp ; ft . 10 in . long , 8 & nbsp ; ft . 4 in . wide , and 5 & nbsp ; ft . 10 in . high ( 13.67 m by 2.54 m by 1.78 m ) and weighs 9,000 & nbsp ; lb ( 4,100 & nbsp ; kg ) , construction is on a steel tube or space frame with an aluminium skin body . the engine is the same as in the second spirit , a j79 , but it is modified to burn unleaded gasoline and generates a maximum thrust of 22,650 lbf ( 100.75 kn ) . the second run of the vehicle on october 28 , 1996 , in the black rock desert , nevada , ended in a crash at around . returning in 1997 , the vehicle badly damaged the engine on an early run and when the british thrustssc managed over , the re-engined spirit could do no better than . breedlove believes the vehicle is capable of exceeding , but has yet to demonstrate this . in late 2006 , breedlove sold the car to steve fossett , who was to make an attempt on the land speed record in 2007 . fossett died in a plane crash in 2007 , and the car was put up for sale . breedlove 's vehicle , renamed the '' sonic arrow '' , was rolled out on the black rock desert for a photo opportunity on october 15 , 2007 . the car is now on permanent display in the wings over the rockies air & space museum . . endurance and speed records for amc . craig breedlove was put on the payroll at american motors ( amc ) in 1968 to prepare the automaker 's pony and high-performance cars , the javelin and the amx , for speed and endurance records . in january 1968 , one month before the official introduction of the amx model , breedlove , his wife lee , and ron dykes , established fourteen united states automobile club ( usac ) and fédération internationale de l'automobile ( fia ) certified speed records for cars of any engine size , and 106 national and international speed and endurance records for cars with less than . two cars were prepared for the endurance speed runs on a five-mile banked track in texas . the shattered records included a class c amx ( the no . 2 lee breedlove car ) with the standard amc v8 engine ( bored to 304 cubic inches ) with 4-speed manual transmission , achieving a 24-hour average of that was set by craig and his wife lee . new records in a class b amx ( the no . 1 craig breedlove car ) using the optional '' amx '' v8 ( 397 cubic inches ) with a 3-speed automatic transmission , that included a distance with a flying start at , as well as a over a distance from a standing start . after the cars were displayed at the chicago auto show in february 1968 , breedlove took the amx to bonneville . he established a usac sanctioned record of as well as an unofficial run of over . later in the year , american motors entered three similarly equipped javelins with amc v8 engines featuring edelbrock cross-ram intake manifolds and special cylinder heads , in the c/production class at bonneville . during november 1968 , the '' speed spectacular javelin '' run by breedlove was fastest , reaching establishing a speed record that stood for a number of years . . awards and legacy . in 1993 breedlove was inducted into the motorsports hall of fame of america craig breedlove at the motorsports hall of fame of america in 1993 , and in 2000 into the international motorsports hall of fame . he was inducted into the automotive hall of fame in 2009 . the beach boys ' song spirit of america was '' inspired by breedlove 's land speed record , set in 1963 . '' . land vehicle speed records . august 5 , 1963 – breedlove reached in spirit of america at bonneville salt flats , utah , thus earning him the land speed record . october 13 , 1964 – breedlove reached in spirit of america at bonneville , reclaiming the record from art arfons . october 15 , 1964 – just two days later , breedlove broke his own record and breached the 500 & nbsp ; mph barrier at , in spirit of america at bonneville november 2 , 1965 – breedlove reached in spirit of america sonic i at bonneville , reclaiming the record from art arfons . november 15 , 1965 – thirteen days later , breedlove breached the 600 & nbsp ; mph barrier at in spirit of america sonic i at bonneville . references .