John Colet

childhood and education . the eldest son of sir henry colet ( lord mayor of london 1486 and 1495 ) , he was born in london in january 1467 , and was educated at st anthony 's school and at magdalen college , oxford , where he took his m.a . in 1490 . he was already nonresident rector of dennington , suffolk , and vicar of st dunstan 's , stepney , and now became rector of thurning , hunts . in 1493 he went to paris and then to italy , studying canon and civil law , patristics and greek . time abroad . during his time abroad he became acquainted with budaeus ( guillaume budé ) and erasmus , and with the teaching of savonarola . on his return to england in 1496 he took orders and settled at oxford , where he lectured on the epistles of saint paul , replacing the old scholastic method of interpretation with one more in harmony with the new learning . due to their influences , when he arrived back in england , he returned more than just a humanist ; he returned a christian reformer . his methods did much to influence erasmus , who visited oxford in 1498 , and who later received an annuity from colet . holding office . image : eb1911 plate iv . v24 , pg.505 , fig 9.jpg thumb right statue of dean colet by sir william hamo thornycroft . encyclopædia britannica , ed . 1911 , vol . 24 , pg . 505 , plate iv . since 1494 , colet had been prebendary of york , and canon of st martin le grand , london . in 1502 he became prebendary of salisbury , in 1505 prebendary of st paul 's , and immediately afterwards its dean , having previously taken the degree of doctor of divinity . he continued to lecture on the books of the bible ; and he soon afterwards established a perpetual divinity lecture , three days each week , in st paul 's itself . while at st . paul 's between 1505 and 1519 , colet used his preaching , administration , scriptural exegesis and education towards church reform . around 1508 , having inherited his father 's wealth , colet formed his plan for the re-foundation of st paul 's school , which he completed in 1512 , and endowed with estates of an annual value of £122 and upwards . the school , dedicated to the infant jesus , was in place to give young boys a christian education . the celebrated grammarian william lilye was the first master , and the company of mercers were ( in 1510 ) appointed trustees , the first example of non-clerical management in education . some held colet 's religious opinions to be heresy , but william warham , the archbishop of canterbury , refused to prosecute him . king henry viii also held him in high esteem despite his sermons against the french wars . colet was rector of the guild of jesus at st paul 's cathedral and chaplain to henry viii . in 1514 he made the canterbury pilgrimage and in 1515 preached at wolsey 's installation as cardinal . sermons . colet had many distinguished sermons . one is the beginning of the convocation of the clergy of canterbury province at the london cathedral on 6 february 1512 . william warham invited colet to make the speech . colet 's speech is both direct and insightful . it represents his work , or as colet said himself , he is '' speaking out of zeal , a man sorrowing for the ruin of the church '' . furthermore , colet stated that he came '' …here today , fathers , to admonish you with all your minds to deliberate , in this your council , concerning the reformation of the church '' . the convocation sermon is one of the most well known of his sermons . in addition , colet gave a notable sermon before the royal court on good friday , 1513 . he gave this speech in the wake of political tension ; specifically , an english push for war against france . in his speech , colet condemned war and prompted christians to fight only for jesus christ . a christian humanist . colet 's writings are reflective and added to the tradition of christian humanism . he studied cicero , augustine , jerome , john chrysostom , ignatius of antioch , lactantius and polycarp . '' colet , john ( 1467–1519 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography ( 2004 ) oxford university press in his writings , colet refers to italian humanists and platonists marsilio ficino and pico della mirandola . erasmus said of colet , “ when i listen to colet it seems to me that i am listening to plato himself . ” erasmus to john fisher , december 5 , 1499 . erasmus , the correspondence , 1 : 235 . ed . beatrice corrigan et als . toronto : the university of toronto press , 1974 . erasmus likely portrayed colet to show that one could be highly critical of the church while still a loyal priest . his depiction of colet was partly a depiction of himself . studied over time . colet has been studied frequently over time and has experienced resurgences in popularity . white kennett studied colet during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries . kennett passed his notes to samuel knight who used them to write a biography of colet which was published in 1724 . during the nineteenth century , interest in colet increased . several editions of his works and an additional biography were published during that time . scholars believed colet strongly impacted his friend erasmus and the english reformation . later critics went on to view colet as protestant-like , though historical revisionists believe that colet was a reform preacher that wanted to improve the quality of the church . colet died in 1519 of the '' sweating sickness . '' his monument was erected on the south aisle of the choir at the cathedral church of saint paul but destroyed in the great fire of london . . other works . in addition to his sermons colet 's works include some scriptural commentary and works entitled daily devotions and monition to a godly life . together with lilye , erasmus , and wolsey , colet produced materials forming the basis of the authorised latin grammar , used for centuries in the english schools . a number of letters from colet to erasmus also survive . lasting influence of colet . to this day , colet 's achievement is celebrated by st paul 's school , st paul 's girls ' school and st paul 's juniors ( formerly known as colet court ) on john colet day at st paul 's cathedral ( having begun in 2003 ) . the john colet school in wendover , buckinghamshire is named after him , as well as colet gardens , a road in the london suburb of hammersmith , w6 , and john colet school in sydney , australia . colet 's convocation sermon ( 1512 ) . in the introductory paragraph , colet concludes by stating that his presence is due to the need for the council to consider a church reformation . first , colet criticises the living style of the priests . colet explains that the priests should set an example for others as be a beacon of light , because if they are instead figures of darkness , the church will be engulfed by darkness . colet cites four evils , referencing the apostle , that constitute the corrupt , priestly living : devilish pride , carnal concupiscence , worldly covetousness , and worldly occupations . first , in regard to pride of life , colet believes that priests of the day were more consumed by the honour and dignity one could receive by being a part of the priesthood . service to the church must be only humble service . secondly , many priests take part in the lust for the flesh : feasting and banqueting , vain conversation , sports , plays , hunting , and hawking . they are “ drowned in the delights of this world ” and “ patronize those who cater for their pleasure ” . thirdly , covetousness is the third worldly evil , which is also known as lust . colet calls this a plague that has overtaken many priests and blinded many . many take part in the church only for the hope of riches and promotions . priests forget that they should be interested in the good they can do more than the amount of riches that they stand to gain . paul called covetousness the root of all evils . from it , benefices stack up , including pensions and tithes . colet states that : “ every corruption , all the ruin of the church , all the scandals of the world , come from the covetousness of priests ” . the fourth evil arises because priests have become more servants of men than servants of god . according to paul , priests are supposed to be an intermediary between men and god . as such , warfare should only be spiritual in nature and reflective of jesus . in addition , they need to pray , read , and meditate regarding the scriptures . they must deliver the word of god , give the sacraments of salvation , make sacrifices for people , and hold masses for people 's souls . colet then moves on to discuss the needed clergy reform . paul orders that people must '' be reformed into a new mind '' . people should turn to humility , sobriety , charity , and spiritual occupations . reform must begin with the priests so that it can spread throughout the church . colet disagrees with the creation of new laws ; instead he thinks that the old laws must simply be enforced . colet believes several things are important : a good , pure , and holy life , approved morals , moderate knowledge of the scriptures , knowledge of the sacraments , the fear of god and love of the heavenly life . finally , colet urges people to “ return to the god of love and peace ; return to christ , in whom is the true peace of the spirit which passeth all understanding ; return to the true priestly life ” . “ be ye reformed in the newness of your minds , that ye may know those things which are of god ; and the peace of god shall be with you ” . memorial . there was a memorial to him in the aisle at old st paul 's cathedral . '' memorials of st paul 's cathedral '' sinclair , w . p93 : london ; chapman & hall , ltd ; 1909 . see also . list of erasmus 's correspondents . notes . references . gleason , john b . john colet . university of california press , 1989 . olin , john c . the catholic reformation . new york : fordham university , 1992 . colet , john . the catholic reformation . olin , john c . , ed . new york : fordham university , 1992 . arnold , jonathan . “ john colet- preaching and reform at st . paul ’ s cathedral , 1505–1519 . ” reformation and renaissance review : journal of the society for reformation studies 5 , no . 2 ( 2003 ) : 204–209 . . further reading . frederic seebohm , the oxford reformers joseph hirst lupton , life of john colet ( 1887 )