Damascius

life . damascius was born in damascus in syria , whence he derived his name : his syrian name is unknown . in his early youth he went to alexandria , where he spent twelve years partly as a pupil of theon , a rhetorician , and partly as a professor of rhetoric . he was then convinced by his teacher isidore to shift his focus to philosophy and science , and studied under hermias and his sons , ammonius and heliodorus . later on in life he migrated to athens and continued his studies under marinus , the mathematician , zenodotus , and isidore , the dialectician . he became a close friend of isidore , succeeded him as head of the school of athens in ca . 515 , and wrote his biography , part of which is preserved in the bibliotheca of photius . in athens he met severianus of damascus . in 529 , justinian i closed the school , and damascius with six of his colleagues sought an asylum , probably in 532 , at the court of khosrau i of persia . they found the conditions intolerable , and when the following year justinian and khosrau concluded a peace treaty , it was provided that the philosophers should be allowed to return . agathias , scholast . ii . 30 it is believed that damascius returned to alexandria and there devoted himself to the writing of his works . among the disciples of damascius the most important are simplicius , the celebrated commentator on aristotle , epictetus , and eulamius . he dedicated his life of isidore to his disciple theodora . we have no further particulars of the life of damascius ; we only know that he did not found any new school , and thus neoplatonist philosophy ended its external existence . writings . his chief treatise is entitled difficulties and solutions of first principles . it examines the nature and attributes of god and the human soul . this examination is , in two respects , in striking contrast to that of certain other neoplatonist writers . it is conspicuously free from oriental mysticism , and it contains no polemic against christianity , to the doctrines of which , in fact , there is no allusion . hence the charge of impiety which photius brings against him . in this treatise damascius inquires into the first principle of all things , which he finds to be an unfathomable and unspeakable divine depth , being all in one , but undivided . his main result is that god is infinite , and as such , incomprehensible ; that his attributes of goodness , knowledge and power are credited to him only by inference from their effects ; that this inference is logically valid and sufficient for human thought . he insists throughout on the unity and the indivisibility of god . this work is , moreover , of great importance for the history of philosophy , because of the great number of accounts which it contains concerning former philosophers . the rest of damascius 's writings are for the most part commentaries on works of aristotle and plato . the surviving commentaries are : commentary on plato 's parmenides . commentary on plato 's phaedo . this work has been erroneously ascribed to olympiodorus the younger . giovanni reale , john r . catan , 1989 , a history of ancient philosophy : the schools of the imperial age , page 546 . suny press . commentary on plato 's philebus . also erroneously ascribed to olympiodorus . among the lost works there were : commentaries on plato 's timaeus , first alcibiades , and other dialogues . commentaries on aristotle 's de caelo , and other works . the writings of damascius on time , space , and number , cited by simplicius in his commentary on aristotle 's physica , simplicius , fol . 189 , b . , 153 , a . , 183 , b . are perhaps parts of his commentaries on aristotle 's writings . life of isidore . damascius 's biography of his teacher isidore ( perhaps a part of the philosophos historia attributed to damascius by the suda ) , of which photius photius , cod . 242 , comp . 181 ; in volume 6 of the edition by rene henry . has preserved a considerable fragment . the text has been reconstructed and translated recently . polymnia athanassiadi ( ed . ) , damascius . the philosophical history . athens : apamea cultural association , 1999 . pp . 403 . bmcr review it is considered the source containing most details about the life of ammonius hermiae . logoi paradoxoi , in 4 books , of which photius photius , cod . 130 also gives an account and specifies the respective titles of the books . mazzucchi ( 2006 ) has argued that damascius was the author of the pseudo-dionysius , the '' last counter-offensive of the pagan '' ( l'ultima controffensiva del paganesimo ) . see also . iamblichus plotinus proclus simplicius of cilicia decline of greco-roman polytheism azone ammonius saccas . references . sources . polymnia athanassiadi , persecution and response in late paganism . the evidence of damascius . in : journal of hellenic studies 113 ( 1993 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 1–29 . cosmin andron , damascius on knowledge and its object . in : rhizai 1 ( 2004 ) pp . & nbsp ; 107–124 sebastian r . p . gertz , death and immortality in late neoplatonism : studies on the ancient commentaries on plato 's phaedo , leiden : brill , 2011 . sebastian r . p . gertz , '' from ‘ immortal ’ to ‘ imperishable ’ : damascius on the final argument in plato ’ s phaedo '' . in : ancient readings of plato ’ s phaedo ( leiden : 2015 ) , 240-55 . raban von haehling , damascius und die heidnische opposition im 5 . jahrhundert nach christus . in : jahrbuch für antike und christentum 23 ( 1980 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 82–85 . udo hartmann , geist im exil . römische philosophen am hof der sasaniden . in : udo hartmann/andreas luther/monika schuol ( eds . ) , grenzüberschreitungen . formen des kontakts zwischen orient und okzident im altertum . stuttgart 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 123–160 . androniki kalogiratou , the portrayal of socrates by damascius . in : phronimon : journal of the south african society for greek philosophy and the humanities 7 ( 1 ) 2006 , pp . & nbsp ; 45–54 . androniki kalogiratou , theology in philosophy : the case of the late antique neoplatonist damascius . in skepsis : a journal for philosophy and interdisciplinary research xviii , i-ii , 2007 , pp . & nbsp ; 58–79 . john r . martindale , john morris , the prosopography of the later roman empire ii . cambridge 1980 , pp . & nbsp ; 342f . carlo maria mazzucchi , damascio , autore del corpus dionysiacum , e il dialogo περι πολιτικης επιστημης . in : aevum : rassegna di scienze storiche linguistiche e filologiche 80 , nº 2 ( 2006 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 299–334 . carlo maria mazzucchi , iterum de damascio areopagita . in : aevum : rassegna di scienze storiche linguistiche e filologiche 87 , nº 1 ( 2013 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 249–265 . sara ahbel-rappe , scepticism in the sixth century ? damascius ’ 'doubts and solutions concerning first principles , ' journal of the history of philosophy 36 ( 1998 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 337–363 . sara ahbel-rappe , damascius ' problems and solutions regarding first principles , ( new york , 2010 ) ( oup usa american academy of religion - texts & translation ) . marilena vlad , damascius et l ’ ineffable . récit de l ’ impossible discours ( paris , vrin , 2019 )