Wikipedia:Guide for h2g2 Researchers

cultural differences . wikipedia is focused on making an encyclopedia . unlike h2g2 , there 's not a lot of unrelated socializing ; almost all of wikipedia 's chat is about improving specific articles or the project as a whole . wikipedia 's style may sound dry at first to you . this reaction is natural . remember that it 's not wikipedia 's place , as an encyclopedia , to give advice or suggest good restaurants . the edited guide entries knocking on doors and first kiss , last kiss , best kiss and worst kiss for instance , are great h2g2 content but would be out of place here . anyone can edit any article here . your contributions will be edited , rearranged , re-worded and expanded , and you should n't be shy about doing the same to other people 's work . be bold in updating pages ! wikipedia is self-moderated to a greater extent than h2g2 's reactive moderation system . like h2g2 researchers , most wikipedians try to avoid personal attacks . if you say something you regret , just say you 're sorry and delete it . if someone offends you , we have some advice on staying cool when the editing gets hot . good neighbours . many people are members of several different collaboratively written encyclopedia projects at once . here on wikipedia , you will have a '' user page '' with a function similar to your own personal space on h2g2 . unlike the rest of the site , you can put whatever you want on your user page - opinions , hobbies , news , random humor and links to your home pages on other encyclopedia sites - as long as you do n't dump a huge amount of content on your user page that is unrelated to wikipedia . for example , you may want to link to your h2g2 personal space from your wikipedia user page . a userbox has been created specifically to help you do this , called user : ubx/h2g2 . it looks like this : use this code to add it to your user page , replacing u123 with your own u-number from h2g2 : you may also be interested in reading h2g2 's entry about wikipedia . moving content from h2g2 to wikipedia . please copy your good encyclopedic content from h2g2 to wikipedia ! do n't forget to search for related wikipedia content first & mdash ; if wikipedia already has an article on the subject , just merge your own content into it : be bold ! . legal issues . when you contributed to h2g2 , you retained the copyright to those contributions & mdash ; not panicking ltd . is simply granted non-exclusive license to use them as they see fit . you can , therefore , move any unedited entries that you have personally written on h2g2 to wikipedia . mention on the wikipedia article 's talk page ( click '' discuss this page '' ) that you originally wrote the material for h2g2 and give your researcher number ( u-number ) , so that nobody thinks you 're committing plagiarism . for collaborative unedited entries , or entries you did not write , you will need the permission of all major contributors ( see wikipedia : copyright ) . the major exception to this is approved entries . these may incorporate work from multiple people , and their copyright status is unclear . however , you can contribute the original version to wikipedia . you could also ask not panicking ltd for permission to submit the approved version to wikipedia . any contributions you make to wikipedia are released under the creative commons sharealike license . however , you retain the copyright to your own work and are free to modify and distribute it in any way you wish . changes to make . content needs to be converted from guideml to wiki markup . generally it 's easiest to copy and paste the text and add markup rather than copying the guideml . wikipedia titles are generally shorter , so phrases like '' a short guide to '' should be removed , and most titles should only have lower-case letters . see the article titles for all the details . wikipedia has a different manual of style from h2g2 . however , if your article does n't match that style , someone will change it so it does , so do n't panic . also , wikipedia has a much higher proportion of links per article than h2g2 . it 's easy to link something by putting it in square brackets . do n't forget to add links from other articles to yours , where it 's appropriate . on h2g2 you can sometimes use devices like '' one researcher recalls '' or quotes to add experiences of individual researchers . on wikipedia we try to quote opinions from people who are influential , or have some special expertise , and the best people for that generally wo n't be wikipedians . we have a policy called the neutral point of view ( npov ) . it is similar to h2g2 's requirements for balance in edited entries on controversial subjects , but there are subtle differences in the two policies . it may take you a little time to get used to the wikipedia approach , but do n't worry too much about it . anyone can fix your mistakes while you 're getting the hang of things . moving content from wikipedia to h2g2 . moving articles from wikipedia to h2g2 is tricky because of certain conditions required by not panicking ltd . while you are welcome to copy and reuse any wikipedia article , e.g . on your own web site , the requirements of not panicking ltd are not compatible with the creative commons cc-by-sa 3.0 license . typically you can only move wikipedia articles to h2g2 in the event that you are the only person who has worked on that article . the best course of action would be to save a local copy of your wikipedia article on your computer before anyone else edits it . another option is to pull your original version out of the article 's history ; click the '' history '' link at the top of any page for older versions . someone to ask . on wikipedia there 's a genuine plethora of people and locations to ask for help , either generally or more specifically about the transfer from h2g2 to wikipedia . some possibilities are given below . individuals who are happy to be contacted , please add yourselves : wp : th - a help desk dedicated to helping new editors the media copyright helpdesk - any queries about moving copyrighted material not answered above , they should be able to help the reference desk - a library reference desk that can answer both an actual content question or a sourcing query . nosebagbear - hi there ! i was a h2g2 research for 5 years , including being an ace . i moved to wikipedia a couple of years back and am now an admin . ask me anything ! nosebagbear ( talk ) . final words . we hope you find working on wikipedia to be fun and rewarding . if you have questions that you ca n't find the answers to , drop by the village pump and ask away . chances are a friendly wikipedian or three will have some answers for you . there is also a wikipedia : guide for everything2 noders .