Evaporite

formation of evaporite rocks . although all water bodies on the surface and in aquifers contain dissolved salts , the water must evaporate into the atmosphere for the minerals to precipitate . for this to happen , the water body must enter a restricted environment where water input into this environment remains below the net rate of evaporation . this is usually an arid environment with a small basin fed by a limited input of water . when evaporation occurs , the remaining water is enriched in salts , and they precipitate when the water becomes supersaturated . evaporite depositional environments . marine evaporites . marine evaporites tend to have thicker deposits and are usually the focus of more extensive research . boggs , s . , 2006 , principles of sedimentology and stratigraphy ( 4th ed . ) , pearson prentice hall , upper saddle river , nj , 662 p . they also have a system of evaporation . when scientists evaporate ocean water in a laboratory , the minerals are deposited in a defined order that was first demonstrated by usiglio in 1884 . the first phase of the experiment begins when about 50 % of the original water depth remains . at this point , minor carbonates begin to form . the next phase in the sequence comes when the experiment is left with about 20 % of its original level . at this point , the mineral gypsum begins to form , which is then followed by halite at 10 % , excluding carbonate minerals that tend not to be evaporites . the most common minerals that are generally considered to be the most representative of marine evaporites are calcite , gypsum and anhydrite , halite , sylvite , carnallite , langbeinite , polyhalite , and kainite . kieserite ( mgso 4 ) may also be included , which often will make up less than four percent of the overall content . however , there are approximately 80 different minerals that have been reported found in evaporite deposits ( stewart , 1963 ; warren , 1999 ) , though only about a dozen are common enough to be considered important rock formers . . non-marine evaporites . non-marine evaporites are usually composed of minerals that are not common in marine environments because in general the water from which non-marine evaporite precipitates has proportions of chemical elements different from those found in the marine environments . common minerals that are found in these deposits include blödite , borax , epsomite , gaylussite , glauberite , mirabilite , thenardite and trona . non-marine deposits may also contain halite , gypsum , and anhydrite , and may in some cases even be dominated by these minerals , although they did not come from ocean deposits . this , however , does not make non-marine deposits any less important ; these deposits often help to paint a picture into past earth climates . some particular deposits even show important tectonic and climatic changes . these deposits also may contain important minerals that help in today 's economy . melvin , j . l . ( ed ) 1991 , evaporites , petroleum and mineral resources ; elsevier , amsterdam thick non-marine deposits that accumulate tend to form where evaporation rates will exceed the inflow rate , and where there is sufficient soluble supplies . the inflow also has to occur in a closed basin , or one with restricted outflow , so that the sediment has time to pool and form in a lake or other standing body of water . primary examples of this are called '' saline lake deposits '' . saline lakes includes things such as perennial lakes , which are lakes that are there year-round , playa lakes , which are lakes that appear only during certain seasons , or any other terms that are used to define places that hold standing bodies of water intermittently or year-round . examples of modern non-marine depositional environments include the great salt lake in utah and the dead sea , which lies between jordan and israel . evaporite depositional environments that meet the above conditions include : graben areas and half-grabens within continental rift environments fed by limited riverine drainage , usually in subtropical or tropical environments example environments at the present that match this is the denakil depression , ethiopia ; death valley , california graben environments in oceanic rift environments fed by limited oceanic input , leading to eventual isolation and evaporation examples include the red sea , and the dead sea in jordan and israel internal drainage basins in arid to semi-arid temperate to tropical environments fed by ephemeral drainage example environments at the present include the simpson desert , western australia , the great salt lake in utah non-basin areas fed exclusively by groundwater seepage from artesian waters example environments include the seep-mounds of the victoria desert , fed by the great artesian basin , australia restricted coastal plains in regressive sea environments examples include the sabkha deposits of iran , saudi arabia , and the red sea ; the garabogazköl of the caspian sea drainage basins feeding into extremely arid environments examples include the chilean deserts , certain parts of the sahara , and the namib the most significant known evaporite depositions happened during the messinian salinity crisis in the basin of the mediterranean . evaporitic formations . image : saltcrystalcasts.jpg thumb hopper crystal cast of halite in a jurassic rock , carmel formation , southwestern utah evaporite formations need not be composed entirely of halite salt . in fact , most evaporite formations do not contain more than a few percent of evaporite minerals , the remainder being composed of the more typical detrital clastic rocks and carbonates . examples of evaporite formations include occurrences of evaporite sulfur in eastern europe and west asia . c.michael hogan . 2011 . sulfur . encyclopedia of earth , eds . a.jorgensen and c.j.cleveland , national council for science and the environment , washington dc for a formation to be recognised as evaporitic it may simply require recognition of halite pseudomorphs , sequences composed of some proportion of evaporite minerals , and recognition of mud crack textures or other textures . economic importance of evaporites . evaporites are important economically because of their mineralogy , their physical properties in-situ , and their behaviour within the subsurface . evaporite minerals , especially nitrate minerals , are economically important in peru and chile . nitrate minerals are often mined for use in the production on fertilizer and explosives . thick halite deposits are expected to become an important location for the disposal of nuclear waste because of their geologic stability , predictable engineering and physical behaviour , and imperviousness to groundwater . halite formations are famous for their ability to form diapirs , which produce ideal locations for trapping petroleum deposits . halite deposits are often mined for use as salt . major groups of evaporite minerals . this is a chart that shows minerals that form the marine evaporite rocks , they are usually the most common minerals that appear in this kind of deposit . : \begin image : hanksite.jpg thumb hanksite , na 22 k ( so 4 ) 9 ( co 3 ) 2 cl , one of the few minerals that is both a carbonate and a sulfate halides : halite , sylvite ( kcl ) , and fluorite sulfates : such as gypsum , barite , and anhydrite nitrates : nitratine ( soda niter ) and niter borates : typically found in arid-salt-lake deposits plentiful in the southwestern us . a common borate is borax , which has been used in soaps as a surfactant . carbonates : such as trona , formed in inland brine lakes . some evaporite minerals , such as hanksite , are from multiple groups . evaporite minerals start to precipitate when their concentration in water reaches such a level that they can no longer exist as solutes . the minerals precipitate out of solution in the reverse order of their solubilities , such that the order of precipitation from sea water is : calcite ( caco 3 ) and dolomite ( camg ( co 3 ) 2 ) gypsum ( caso 4 and anhydrite ( caso 4 ) . halite ( i.e . common salt , nacl ) potassium and magnesium salts the abundance of rocks formed by seawater precipitation is in the same order as the precipitation given above . thus , limestone ( calcite ) and dolomite are more common than gypsum , which is more common than halite , which is more common than potassium and magnesium salts . evaporites can also be easily recrystallized in laboratories in order to investigate the conditions and characteristics of their formation . possible evaporites on titan . recent evidence from remote sensing and laboratory experiments suggest evaporites are likely present on the surface of titan , saturn 's largest moon . instead of water oceans , titan hosts lakes of titan ( mainly methane ) with many soluble hydrocarbons , such as acetylene , that can evaporate out of solution . evaporite deposits cover large regions of titan 's surface , mainly along the coastlines of lakes or in isolated basins ( lacunae ) that are equivalent to salt pans on earth .