Ideal class group

history and origin of the ideal class group . ideal class groups ( or , rather , what were effectively ideal class groups ) were studied some time before the idea of an ideal was formulated . these groups appeared in the theory of quadratic forms : in the case of binary integral quadratic forms , as put into something like a final form by gauss , a composition law was defined on certain equivalence classes of forms . this gave a finite abelian group , as was recognised at the time . later kummer was working towards a theory of cyclotomic fields . it had been realised ( probably by several people ) that failure to complete proofs in the general case of fermat 's last theorem by factorisation using the roots of unity was for a very good reason : a failure of unique factorization , i.e . , the fundamental theorem of arithmetic , to hold in the rings generated by those roots of unity was a major obstacle . out of kummer 's work for the first time came a study of the obstruction to the factorisation . we now recognise this as part of the ideal class group : in fact kummer had isolated the p-torsion in that group for the field of p-roots of unity , for any prime number p , as the reason for the failure of the standard method of attack on the fermat problem ( see regular prime ) . somewhat later again dedekind formulated the concept of ideal , kummer having worked in a different way . at this point the existing examples could be unified . it was shown that while rings of algebraic integers do not always have unique factorization into primes ( because they need not be principal ideal domains ) , they do have the property that every proper ideal admits a unique factorization as a product of prime ideals ( that is , every ring of algebraic integers is a dedekind domain ) . the size of the ideal class group can be considered as a measure for the deviation of a ring from being a principal ideal domain ; a ring is a principal domain if and only if it has a trivial ideal class group . definition . if r is an integral domain , define a relation ~ on nonzero fractional ideals of r by i ~ j whenever there exist nonzero elements a and b of r such that ( a ) i ( b ) j . ( here the notation ( a ) means the principal ideal of r consisting of all the multiples of a . ) it is easily shown that this is an equivalence relation . the equivalence classes are called the ideal classes of r . ideal classes can be multiplied : if i denotes the equivalence class of the ideal i , then the multiplication ij ij is well-defined and commutative . the principal ideals form the ideal class r which serves as an identity element for this multiplication . thus a class i has an inverse j if and only if there is an ideal j such that ij is a principal ideal . in general , such a j may not exist and consequently the set of ideal classes of r may only be a monoid . however , if r is the ring of algebraic integers in an algebraic number field , or more generally a dedekind domain , the multiplication defined above turns the set of fractional ideal classes into an abelian group , the ideal class group of r . the group property of existence of inverse elements follows easily from the fact that , in a dedekind domain , every non-zero ideal ( except r ) is a product of prime ideals . properties . the ideal class group is trivial ( i.e . has only one element ) if and only if all ideals of r are principal . in this sense , the ideal class group measures how far r is from being a principal ideal domain , and hence from satisfying unique prime factorization ( dedekind domains are unique factorization domains if and only if they are principal ideal domains ) . the number of ideal classes ( the of r ) may be infinite in general . in fact , every abelian group is isomorphic to the ideal class group of some dedekind domain . but if r is in fact a ring of algebraic integers , then the class number is always finite . this is one of the main results of classical algebraic number theory . computation of the class group is hard , in general ; it can be done by hand for the ring of integers in an algebraic number field of small discriminant , using minkowski 's bound . this result gives a bound , depending on the ring , such that every ideal class contains an ideal norm less than the bound . in general the bound is not sharp enough to make the calculation practical for fields with large discriminant , but computers are well suited to the task . the mapping from rings of integers r to their corresponding class groups is functorial , and the class group can be subsumed under the heading of algebraic k-theory , with k 0 ( r ) being the functor assigning to r its ideal class group ; more precisely , k 0 ( r ) z & times ; c ( r ) , where c ( r ) is the class group . higher k groups can also be employed and interpreted arithmetically in connection to rings of integers . relation with the group of units . it was remarked above that the ideal class group provides part of the answer to the question of how much ideals in a dedekind domain behave like elements . the other part of the answer is provided by the multiplicative group of units of the dedekind domain , since passage from principal ideals to their generators requires the use of units ( and this is the rest of the reason for introducing the concept of fractional ideal , as well ) : define a map from r & times ; to the set of all nonzero fractional ideals of r by sending every element to the principal ( fractional ) ideal it generates . this is a group homomorphism ; its kernel is the group of units of r , and its cokernel is the ideal class group of r . the failure of these groups to be trivial is a measure of the failure of the map to be an isomorphism : that is the failure of ideals to act like ring elements , that is to say , like numbers . examples of ideal class groups . the rings z , eisenstein integers zω , and gaussian integers zi , where ω is a cube root of 1 and i is a fourth root of 1 ( i.e . a square root of & minus ; 1 ) , are all principal ideal domains ( and in fact are all euclidean domains ) , and so have class number 1 : that is , they have trivial ideal class groups . if k is a field , then the polynomial ring kx 1 , x 2 , x 3 , . is an integral domain . it has a countably infinite set of ideal classes . class numbers of quadratic fields . if d is a square-free integer ( a product of distinct primes ) other than 1 , then q is a quadratic field . if d 0 , then it is unknown whether there are infinitely many fields q with class number 1 . computational results indicate that there are a great many such fields . however , it is not even known if there are infinitely many number fields with class number 1 . for d 0 , the ideal class group may be half the size since the class group of integral binary quadratic forms is isomorphic to the narrow class group of q . for real quadratic integer rings , the class number is given in oeis a003649 ; for the imaginary case , they are given in oeis a000924 . example of a non-trivial class group . the quadratic integer ring r z is the ring of integers of q . it does not possess unique factorization ; in fact the class group of r is cyclic of order 2 . indeed , the ideal : j ( 2 , 1 + is not principal , which can be proved by contradiction as follows . r has a norm function n ( a + b \sqrt ) 6 , so n ( x ) would divide 2 . if n ( x ) 1 , then x is a unit , and j r , a contradiction . but n ( x ) can not be 2 either , because r has no elements of norm 2 , because the diophantine equation b^2 + 5 c^2 2 has no solutions in integers , as it has no solutions modulo 5 . one also computes that j 2 ( 2 ) , which is principal , so the class of j in the ideal class group has order two . showing that there are n't any other ideal classes requires more effort . the fact that this j is not principal is also related to the fact that the element 6 has two distinct factorisations into irreducibles : : 6 2 & times ; 3 ( 1 + & times ; ( 1 & minus ; . connections to class field theory . class field theory is a branch of algebraic number theory which seeks to classify all the galois theorys of a given algebraic number field , meaning galois extensions with abelian galois group . a particularly beautiful example is found in the hilbert class field of a number field , which can be defined as the maximal unramified abelian extension of such a field . the hilbert class field l of a number field k is unique and has the following properties : every ideal of the ring of integers of k becomes principal in l , i.e . , if i is an integral ideal of k then the image of i is a principal ideal in l . l is a galois extension of k with galois group isomorphic to the ideal class group of k . neither property is particularly easy to prove .