Light meter

use in photography . the earliest type of light meters were called extinction meters and contained a numbered or lettered row of neutral density filters of increasing density . the photographer would position the meter in front of his subject and note the filter with the greatest density that still allowed incident light to pass through . the letter or number corresponding to the filter was used as an index into a chart of appropriate aperture and shutter speed combinations for a given film speed . extinction meters suffered from the problem that they depended on the luminosity function ( which can vary from person to person ) and subjective interpretation . later meters removed the human element and relied on technologies incorporating selenium , cds , and silicon photodetectors . selenium and silicon light meters use sensors that are photovoltaic : they generate a voltage proportional to light exposure . selenium sensors generate enough voltage for direct connection to a meter ; they need no battery to operate and this made them very convenient in completely mechanical cameras . selenium sensors however can not measure low light accurately ( ordinary lightbulbs can take them close to their limits ) and are altogether unable to measure very low light , such as candlelight , moonlight , starlight etc . silicon sensors need an amplification circuit and require a power source such as batteries to operate . cds light meters use a photoresistor sensor whose electrical resistance changes proportionately to light exposure . these also require a battery to operate . most modern light meters use silicon or cds sensors . they indicate the exposure either with a needle galvanometer or on an lcd screen . many modern consumer still and video cameras include a built-in meter that measures a scene-wide light level and are able to make an approximate measure of appropriate exposure based on that . photographers working with controlled lighting and cinematographers use handheld light meters to precisely measure the light falling on various parts of their subjects and use suitable lighting to produce the desired exposure levels . there are two general types of light meters : reflected-light and incident-light . reflected-light meters measure the light reflected by the scene to be photographed . all in-camera meters are reflected-light meters . reflected-light meters are calibrated to show the appropriate exposure for “ average ” scenes . an unusual scene with a preponderance of light colors or specular highlights would have a higher reflectance ; a reflected-light meter taking a reading would incorrectly compensate for the difference in reflectance and lead to underexposure . badly underexposed sunset photos are common exactly because of this effect : the brightness of the setting sun fools the camera 's light meter and , unless the in-camera logic or the photographer take care to compensate , the picture will be grossly underexposed and dull . this pitfall ( but not in the setting-sun case ) is avoided by incident-light meters which measure the amount of light falling on the subject using an integrating sphere ( usually , a translucent hemispherical plastic dome is used to approximate this ) placed on top of the light sensor . because the incident-light reading is independent of the subject 's reflectance , it is less likely to lead to incorrect exposures for subjects with unusual average reflectance . taking an incident-light reading requires placing the meter at the subject 's position and pointing it in the general direction of the camera , something not always achievable in practice , e.g . , in landscape photography where the subject distance approaches infinity . another way to avoid under- or over-exposure for subjects with unusual reflectance is to use a spot meter : a reflected-light meter that measures light in a very tight cone , typically with a one degree circular angle of view . an experienced photographer can take multiple readings over the shadows , midrange and highlights of the scene to determine optimal exposure , using systems like the zone system . many modern cameras include sophisticated multi-segment metering systems that measure the luminance of different parts of the scene to determine the optimal exposure . when using a film whose spectral sensitivity is not a good match to that of the light meter , for example orthochromatic black-and-white or infrared film , the meter may require special filters and re-calibration to match the sensitivity of the film . there are other types of specialized photographic light meters . flash meters are used in flash photography to verify correct exposure . color meters are used where high fidelity in color reproduction is required . densitometers are used in photographic reproduction . exposure meter calibration . in most cases , an incident-light meter will cause a medium tone to be recorded as a medium tone , and a reflected-light meter will cause whatever is metered to be recorded as a medium tone . what constitutes a “ medium tone ” depends on meter calibration and several other factors , including film processing or digital image conversion . meter calibration establishes the relationship between subject lighting and recommended camera settings . the calibration of photographic light meters is covered by iso 2720:1974 . exposure equations . for reflected-light meters , camera settings are related to iso speed and subject luminance by the reflected-light exposure equation : \frac where “ effective scene illuminance ” is that measured by a meter with a hemispherical receptor . iso 2720:1974 calls for reflected-light calibration to be measured by aiming the receptor at a transilluminated diffuse surface , and for incident-light calibration to be measured by aiming the receptor at a point source in a darkened room . for a perfectly diffusing test card and perfectly diffusing flat receptor , the comparison between a reflected-light measurement and an incident-light measurement is valid for any position of the light source . however , the response of a hemispherical receptor to an off-axis light source is approximately that of a cardioid rather than a cosine , so the 12 % “ reflectance ” determined for an incident-light meter with a hemispherical receptor is valid only when the light source is on the receptor axis . cameras with internal meters . calibration of cameras with internal meters is covered by iso 2721:1982 ; nonetheless , many manufacturers specify ( though seldom state ) exposure calibration in terms of k , and many calibration instruments ( e.g . , kyoritsu-arrowin multi-function camera testers specifications for kyoritsu testers are available on the c.r.i.s . camera services web site under “ kyoritsu test equipment . ” ) use the specified k to set the test parameters . exposure determination with a neutral test card . if a scene differs considerably from a statistically average scene , a wide-angle averaging reflected-light measurement may not indicate the correct exposure . to simulate an average scene , a substitute measurement sometimes is made of a neutral test card , or gray card . at best , a flat card is an approximation to a three-dimensional scene , and measurement of a test card may lead to underexposure unless adjustment is made . the instructions for a kodak neutral test card recommend that the indicated exposure be increased by ½ step for a frontlighted scene in sunlight . the instructions also recommend that the test card be held vertically and faced in a direction midway between the sun and the camera ; similar directions are also given in the kodak professional photoguide . the combination of exposure increase and the card orientation gives recommended exposures that are reasonably close to those given by an incident-light meter with a hemispherical receptor when metering with an off-axis light source . in practice , additional complications may arise . many neutral test cards are far from perfectly diffuse reflectors , and specular reflections can cause increased reflected-light meter readings that , if followed , would result in underexposure . it is possible that the neutral test card instructions include a correction for specular reflections . use in illumination . light meters or light detectors are also used in lighting . their purpose is to measure the illumination level in the interior and to switch off or reduce the output level of luminaires . this can greatly reduce the energy burden of the building by significantly increasing the efficiency of its lighting system . it is therefore recommended to use light meters in lighting systems , especially in rooms where one can not expect users to pay attention to manually switching off the lights . examples include hallways , stairs , and big halls . there are , however , significant obstacles to overcome in order to achieve a successful implementation of light meters in lighting systems , of which user acceptance is by far the most formidable . unexpected or too frequent switching and too bright or too dark rooms are very annoying and disturbing for users of the rooms . therefore , different switching algorithms have been developed : difference algorithm , where lights are switched on at a lower light level than they switch off , thus taking ensuring the difference between the light level of the 'on ' state and 'off ' state is not too big time delay algorithms : a certain amount of time must pass since the last switch a certain amount of time at a sufficient illumination level must pass . other uses . in scientific research & development uses , a light meter consists of a radiometer ( the electronics/readout ) , a photo-diode or sensor ( generates an output when exposed to electromagnetic radiation/light ) a filter ( used to modify the incoming light so only the desired portion of incoming radiation reaches the sensor ) and a cosine correcting input optic ( assures the sensor can see the light coming in from all directions accurately ) . when the word light meter or photometer is used in place of radiometer or optometer , or it is often assumed the system was configured to see only visible light . visible light sensors are often called illuminance or photometric sensors because they have been filtered to be sensitive only to 400-700 nanometers ( nm ) mimicking the human eyes sensitivity to light . how accurately the meter measures often depends on how well the filtration matches the human eyes response . the sensor will send a signal to the meter that is proportional to the amount of light that reaches the sensor after being collected by the optics and passing through the filter . the meter then converts the incoming signal ( typically current or voltage ) from the sensor into a reading of calibrated units such as foot-candles ( fc ) or lux ( lm/m^2 ) . calibration in fc or lux , is the second most important feature of a light meter . it not only converts the signal from v or ma , but it also provides accuracy and unit to unit repeatability . national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) traceability and iso/iec 17025 accreditation are two well known terms that verify the system includes a valid calibration . the meter/radiometer/photometer portion may have many features including : zero : subtracts ambient/back ground light levels , or stabilize the meter to the working environment hold : freezes the value on the display . range : for systems that are not linear and auto ranging this function allows the user to select the portion of the meter electronics that best handles the signal level in use . units : for illuminance the units are typically only lux and foot-candles but many light meters can also be used for uv , vis and ir applications so the readout could change to w/cm^2 , candela , watts etc . integrate : sums up the values into a dose or exposure level i.e . lux sec or j/cm^2 . along with having a variety of features , a light meter may also be usable for a variety of applications . these may include the measurement of other bands of light such uva , uvb , uvc and near ir . for example , uva and uvb light meters are used for phototherapy or treatment of skin conditions , germicidal radiometers are used for measuring the uvc level from lamps used for disinfection and sterilization , luminance meters are used to measure the brightness of a sign , display or exit sign , par quantum sensors are used to measure how much of a given light source 's emission will help plants grow , and uv-curing radiometers test how much of the lights emission is effective for hardening a glue , plastic , or protective coating . some light meters also have the ability to provide a readout in many different units . lux and footcandles are the common units for visible light , but so are candelas , lumens , and candela per square meter . in the realm of disinfection , uvc is typically measured in watts per square centimeter , or watts for a given individual lamp assembly , whereas systems used in the context of the curing of coatings often provide readouts in joules per square centimeter . regular measurements of uvc light intensity thus can serve to provide assurance of proper disinfection of water and food-preparation surfaces , or reliable coating hardness in painted products . although a light meter can take the form of a very simple handheld tool with one-button operation , there are also many advanced light-measurement systems available for use in numerous different applications . these can be incorporated into automated systems that can , for example , wipe lamps clean when a certain reduction in output is detected , or that can trigger an alarm when lamp-failure occurs . see also . selenium meter photometer photodetector colorimetry photometry radiometry light value photomultiplier tubes for detecting light at very low levels . pin diode solid state electronic devices for detecting incident light . notes . . references . ctein . 1997 . post exposure : advanced techniques for the photographic printer . boston : focal press . eastman kodak company . instructions for kodak neutral test card , 453-1-78-abx . rochester : eastman kodak company . eastman kodak company . 1992 . kodak professional photoguide . kodak publication no . r-28 . rochester : eastman kodak company . iso 2720:1974 . general purpose photographic exposure meters ( photoelectric type ) — guide to product specification . international organization for standardization . iso 2721:2013 . photography & nbsp ; — & nbsp ; film-based cameras & nbsp ; — & nbsp ; automatic controls of exposure . international organization for standardization . jones , loyd a . , and h . r . condit . 1941 . the brightness scale of exterior scenes and the correct computation of photographic exposure . journal of the optical society of america . 31:651–678 . norwood , donald w . 1938 . exposure meter . us patent 2,214,283 , filed 14 november 1938 , and issued 10 september 1940 . external links . the problem with lux meters an article suggesting that lux meter may read incorrectly when measuring light not from a tungsten source ( i.e . fluorescent , metal halide , sodium , led and other types ) . exposure metering : relating subject lighting to film exposure ( pdf ) a discussion of meter calibration and its practical effects . estimating luminance and illuminance ( pdf ) a kodak guide to using a camera 's exposure meter . basic light measurement principles an article from international light technologies on basic principles