Mersey Ferry

history . medieval ferries . in about 1150 , the birkenhead priory at birkenhead was established . the monks used to charge a small fare to row passengers across the river . at this time , the mersey was considerably wider with sand dunes and marshes to the north leading up to ainsdale beach and sandstone cliffs and shorelines to the south near otterspool . the only suitable landing point for the ferry was in the pool , near the site of the present merseyside police headquarters . weather often stopped crossings and passengers were delayed for days , taking shelter at the priory . in 1317 , a royal licence was issued , granting permission to the priory to build lodging houses for men crossing the river at woodside . king edward ii visited liverpool in 1323 , and the royal accounts show that he used local ferrymen to sail up the river to ince . in 1330 , his son edward iii granted a charter to the priory and its successors for ever : '' the right of ferry there… for men , horses and goods , with leave to charge reasonable tolls '' . at the time , there was only a small hamlet at birkenhead , and a slightly larger village at liverpool . the chester indictments record criminal activities on the mersey ferries in the 14th and early 15th centuries . in 1355 , richard , son of simon de becheton , was murdered on the ferry ; the murderers escaped and took refuge at shotwick . in 1365 , it was recorded that there were four ferryboats operating without a licence , from bromborough and eastham . in 1414 , william de stanley , the servant of john talbot , later earl of shrewsbury , was on the ferry between birkenhead and liverpool when about 200 men assaulted him , and stole his bay horse valued at £5 ( current value - over £2,800 ) , a bow and 14 arrows valued at 3s 4d ( current value - over £95 ) and a barge valued at £10 ( current value - over £5,700 ) . the thieves were fined . a licence was issued in 1357 to the poole family by edward , the black prince , for a ferry from eastham . the licence then passed to the abbey of st werburgh , in chester , and became known as job 's ferry . early ferries also existed across the mersey further upstream , at ince and at runcorn . from the 16th to the 18th century . the monks of birkenhead priory operated a ferry service until the dissolution of the monasteries and the priory 's destruction by henry viii 's troops in 1536 . ownership reverted to the crown , and in 1544 the ferry rights as well as the priory properties were bought by ralph worsley of lancashire for £586 . 11s . 6d ( current value - almost £205,000 ) . the rights later passed to the molyneux family . by 1541 william bromley had the licence for ferries at seacombe , and in 1586 , queen elizabeth granted john poole of sutton the rights at tranmere . during this period , the private owners began to use fully rigged sailing ships . the use of sailing ships meant that bigger vessels could be employed , but in reality these boats were even more at the bidding of the weather . the mersey is famed for its thick fogs , and during these times during winter there was little wind and ferries could not operate . the frequency depended on demand and the weather . by the 18th century , the commercial expansion of liverpool and the increase in stage coach traffic from chester spurred the growth of the transportation of passengers and goods across the river . ferry services from rock house on the wirral – that is , rock ferry – were first recorded in 1709 . by 1753 the cheshire side of the mersey had at least five ferry houses at ince , eastham , the rock , woodside and seacombe . the service from new ferry to liverpool was first mentioned in 1774 . . steam ferries . the first steamship to operate on the mersey was the elizabeth , a wooden paddle steamer , which was introduced in 1815 to operate between liverpool and runcorn . there was considerable debate as to the best way of boarding a ferry vessel . for the steam ferry etna , which entered service at tranmere on 17 april 1817 , the idea of extension stages was mooted . these were long piers that were mounted on wheels and , by using a steam engine , could be wheeled in and out depending on the level of the tide . at woodside , a small slipway was built on the beach to allow the boats to berth , and in 1822 the paddle steamer royal mail began commercial operation between liverpool and woodside . the town of birkenhead was just starting to develop at this point . in 1820 , the birkenhead ferry began operating from a new site just to the south ; this closed in 1870 . the woodside , north birkenhead and liverpool steam ferry company was formed in 1835 , and the slipway at woodside was widened and constructed as a stone pier . in 1838 , the monks ferry company began operating rival ferries from a new stone slip and hotel about 400 metres south of woodside , but this service closed in 1878 . from about 1830 , steam ferries also operated from the new resort developed by james atherton at new brighton , and from nearby egremont . steam ferries also began operating from eastham . by the 1840s , birkenhead was developing into a busy new town . the railway to chester had opened , the town was growing quickly , and the docks were under construction . there were also competing ferry services and disputes over the rights granted to the monks , and there was a need to improve the facilities at woodside . in the early 1840s , the old slipway was replaced with a new stone pier with a small lighthouse at the end . however , this soon became inadequate . in 1847 , the first floating landing stage , which rose and fell with the tide so that boats could dock at any time , was opened at liverpool . the first portion , known as the georges ' landing stage , was designed by william cubitt and was 500 feet long . it was rebuilt and extended in 1874 . . the corporation years . until the establishment of the mersey railway in 1886 , the ferries were the only means of crossing the river , and so all of the routes were heavily used . all of the ferry routes were owned by private interests before coming under municipal ownership in the mid 19th century . the woodside ferry was taken over by the birkenhead commissioners in 1858 and , in 1861 , the wallasey local board took over the ferry services at seacombe , egremont and new brighton . at woodside , land between the woodside hotel and the end of the old pier was reclaimed , and in 1861 the floating landing stage was opened . the pontoons were towed into position , moored by chains originally made for the ss great eastern , and linked to the mainland by two double bridges . the cheshire , the first passenger ferry steamer to have a saloon , operated from woodside in 1864 . the iron pier at eastham was built in 1874 . on 26 november 1878 , the ferry gem , a paddle steamer operated from seacombe by the wallasey local board , collided with the bowfell , a wooden sailing ship at anchor on the river mersey ; five people died as a result . in 1886 the mersey railway tunnel was opened , providing competition for the ferry services . the woodside ferry service began using twin-screw passenger steamers in 1890 , which replaced paddle steamers . in 1894 trains were carrying 25,000 passengers per day and the ferries 44,000 per day . the ferry service at tranmere , which had operated since mediaeval times , closed in 1897 . the pier and landing stage at rock ferry was built in 1899 , and birkenhead corporation also operated the ferry service at new ferry . in 1914 king george v and queen mary travelled on the ferry s.s . daffodil from wallasey to liverpool . during the first world war the steamers iris and daffodil were taken out of service from wallasey to be used as troop ships in the zeebrugge raid in belgium . the ferries had a shallow draft , allowing them to skim over the mines floating beneath the surface , and were robust enough to approach the heavily defended mole curling into the north sea . they both saw action , which was described on 24 april 1918 by roger keyes , 1st baron keyes of the royal navy in a message to the ferries ' manager : '' i am sure it will interest you to know that your two stout vessels carried bluejackets and marines to zeebrugge , and remained alongside the mole for an hour , greatly contributing to the success of the operation . the damage caused by enemy gun fire has been repaired '' . because of their work king george v allowed the vessels to use the word '' royal '' in their name . they needed extensive refitting before they could resume peacetime activities . in the boats themselves , there was quick development . the early incarnations of today 's modern vessels can be seen in some of the early propeller driven ships , mainly the 1906 pair , royal iris and royal daffodil . the wallasey twin screw vessels all had flying bridges with port and starboard docking cabs . as built , the two ferries still had the wheel at promenade deck level , however this was subsequently moved up onto the bridge so navigation was all on one level . they were all fitted with ahead and astern reciprocating engines and most vessels could achieve a speed of around 12 knots , which is about the same as today 's trio of ferries . on early paddlers , the wheelhouse and side cabs were open largely due to the transition from sail to steam , and most ships at the time had open navigation bridges with the ferries being no different . birkenhead did not use flying bridges , instead having a central wheelhouse and two outer navigation boxes which were raised up higher above deck level . wallasey ferries employed a funnel livery of white and black and birkenhead red and black . birkenhead changed to orange and black after the second world war . when the railway tunnels were constructed and opened , the ferry service did suffer somewhat but it always remained popular . it was really the advent of the road tunnels that caused trouble . when the queensway road tunnel opened in 1934 , the ferry service from seacombe lost two million passengers because people started to use the tunnel rather than the ferry . the opening of the road tunnel also had an effect on the luggage boats which were introduced in 1879 . both ferry companies earned a substantial amount from luggage boats , which carried vehicles and goods across the river . when the road tunnel opened , traffic dropped by 80 % . by the 1940s , luggage boat services from both woodside and seacombe to liverpool had ceased . from woodside in 1941 and from seacombe 1947 . due to financial losses incurred from a gradual reduction in patronage , birkenhead corporation gradually closed its southern terminals ; new ferry ( officially ) on 22 september 1927 , eastham in 1929 and rock ferry on 30 june 1939 . the closure of eastham marked the last use of ferry paddle steamers on the river . wallasey were always trying to close egremont , but faced stiff opposition from locals who got petitions to keep the ferry open . the chance came to close egremont during the second world war for economical reasons , after the pier was damaged in a collision . this was in similar circumstances to the demise of new ferry twenty years earlier . as a result , the egremont service never reopened . in 1941 , mines which had drifted into the river mersey stopped ferry crossings . the oxton and bebington vessels were fitted with cranes to enable them to unload united states aircraft from mid-river and deliver them to the liverpool landing stage . the upton vessel was taken by the army and used as a ferry and supply vessel for the anti-aircraft forts in liverpool bay . in 1950 , the ferries carried almost 30 million passengers a year , including 11 million on the woodside ferries and 15 million on seacombe ferries , but by 1970 the total number fell to 7 million . night boats across the river were withdrawn and replaced by buses through the tunnel in 1956 . the mpte takes over . as a result of the transport act 1968 , the transport functions of both wallasey and birkenhead corporations came under the control of the merseytravel ( mpte ) on 1 december 1969 . by this time , new brighton had declined as a tourist destination and coupled with silting problems near the landing stage , the ferry service was withdrawn in 1971 , with the stage and pier subsequently demolished . in spite of the close proximity of wallasey and birkenhead and their respective ferry landing stages , each corporation had used different gangway spacing on their vessels . this meant that a wallasey ferry could not utilise both gangways at birkenhead 's terminal at woodside , and that a birkenhead boat would be similarly disadvantaged at seacombe and new brighton . the pier head at liverpool was obliged to have gangways to suit both sets of ships . when the combined ferry fleet was rationalised , seacombe ferry landing stage required the construction of an additional gangway to cater for the birkenhead vessels . the 1970s economic situation in britain saw costs escalating , with funding limited by the mpte , which was embarking on an expensive operation to construct the merseyrail '' liverpool loop '' extension . compounded with the opening of the kingsway tunnel on 28 june 1971 and a further decline in passenger numbers ( only 4,000-5,000 a day ) , the future of the service was uncertain . it was sentimental , rather than economical grounds which resulted in the retention of the ferries , after much public protest to keep them . however , service frequency was reduced , with ferry fares being linked to bus and rail fares . during this period , maintenance on the ferries was limited considerably , with the woodchurch being laid up as a salvage for parts for mountwood and overchurch . at this time , the large brass helm from overchurch was damaged and was replaced by that from woodchurch . after the damaged helm was repaired , it was placed on woodchurch . this has remained the case , even after both vessels were extensively rebuilt . 1984 was a momentous year for the ferries and can be seen as the beginning of their rise from the slump of the 1970s . for the duration of the international garden festival , a special ferry service was provided to otterspool promenade . this service was usually operated by the overchurch . the ferries also began to operate summer manchester ship canal cruises , a service which had been popular for many year since the canal opened , but declined somewhat in the 1960s and 1970s . sailing ships from the tall ships ' race visited the river in august 1984 , which helped bring patronage to 250,000 over four days , a level unseen for forty years . . bus deregulation and the 1990 changes . on 26 october 1986 as a result of the transport act 1985 , bus services were deregulated and restrictions which prevented regular bus services through the mersey tunnels were abolished . as a result , many buses which formerly stopped at the birkenhead woodside bus/ferry terminal were extended into liverpool . this was another blow to the mersey ferries and the ferry service had to be re-focussed away from commuter traffic , which had declined , to tourist needs . from 1990 a commuter shuttle has operated monday-friday peak period with an hourly river explorer cruise . at weekends river explorer cruises operate from 10:00 to 18:00 . the morning peak service until 2010 ran every 30 minutes on a liverpool-birkehead-seacombe-liverpool circuit , but since then only runs every 20 minutes from liverpool-seacombe ferry and back . the evening peak service runs liverpool-seacombe every 20 minutes . the explorer cruises follow a liverpool-seacombe-birkenhead-liverpool pattern and sail slightly further upstream with a commentary of what can be seen . these operations run with a bias towards seacombe ferry as the vicinity of seacombe lacks the rail and bus connections of birkenhead . in the summer there are also cruises up the manchester ship canal . previous and present fleets . the royal family . the '' royal '' prefix was granted to the ferries iris and daffodil for their service during the first world war where they were instrumental at the mole in zeebrugge . both ferries were badly damaged but returned home to a triumphant greeting . since the original duo 's withdrawal , there have been other royals . the royal daffodil ii was hit by a bomb and sunk at her berth in the second world war , but later raised and returned to service , with little of her pre-war splendour . perhaps the most famous royal is the royal iris of 1951 . she was the best loved of all the mersey ferries . she was the first diesel powered vessel of the wallasey fleet . she had four diesel generators connected to two metrovick marine propulsion units . she differed to all the other ferries as she had super smooth lines and a dummy funnel in place . she played host to hundreds of party cruises and bands such as gerry & the pacemakers , the searchers , the beatles and also elvis costello . she received a major refit in the 1970s and her popular fish and chip cafe - which earned her the name '' the fish and chip boat '' - was removed and replaced with a steak bar . the royal iris remained in service for nearly 40 years before being sold in 1993 - two years after withdrawal - for use as a floating nightclub . she is now berthed at woolwich , london . attempts to bring her back to merseyside have come to nothing due to the prohibitive cost of making her fit for a 1,000 mile journey coastwise . leasowe , egremont and royal daffodil ii . the leasowe and egremont were built by philip and co . in dartmouth , devon and entered service in late 1951 and early 1952 respectively . named after suburbs of wallasey , both vessels were commissioned by wallasey corporation . they were of a traditional design by naval architects graham and woolnough , who are based in liverpool , but boasted modern equipment including crossley multi-speed engines for versatile control . they only had one single boarding gangway and their forward saloons extended to the whole width of the ship . this proved somewhat problematic especially at busy periods , so an additional gangway space was added on the promenade deck for use with the high level terminal gangways . the forward saloons also had facility for a bar area and dance floor , which meant the vessels could be used for cruising . the two vessels were primarily used on the seacombe - liverpool service , augmenting the new brighton run during the summer seasons . egremont differed externally to leasowe in that she had a canvas awning fitted around her funnel . early photographs of leasowe and egremont show them to have deckhead compasses above the wheelhouse and side boxes , which appear to have been removed in the late 1950s . upon the bridge there were numerous modern devices . chadburn synchrostep telegraphs and rudder angle indicators , hydraulic steering telemotor and an automatic whistle control could be found in both the wheelhouse and the navigation boxes . there was also an internal communication system and a ship to shore radio system . similar types of navigation equipment and deck fittings used on these vessels are extant on the edmund gardner pilot boat at merseyside maritime museum . the leasowe and egremont were popular ferries with their crews as they had much improved crew accommodation compared to the earlier steamers , where much of the lower deck space was taken up with boilers and machinery . when the ferries entered service they all had wallasey white and black funnel liveries . the royal daffodil ii was constructed by james lamont and co . at greenock and entered service in 1957 . she was larger than the dartmouth pair as she had three decks and was designed for the dual role of ferry and cruise service . the gross tonnage of royal daffodil ii was 609 . a gross error was the size of her engines , developing 1,360 & nbsp ; bhp a piece she was underpowered and often struggled in strong tides . aside from the engine order telegraphs , she also had helms in the side boxes meaning that the ship could be steered from them if required . the roman ii was added to her name because of a thames estuary cruise ship also called royal daffodil which existed from 1939 until 1967 ( see mv royal daffodil ( 1939 ) ) . with the merger of the wallasey and birkenhead fleets in 1969 , the ferries lost their wallasey colours to be replaced with the primrose yellow and powder blue of the mpte , and latterly emerald green and black . in the mid-1970s , leasowe and royal daffodil ii were sold to greek owners and have been heavily modified since . the leasowe is still cruising around the greek islands . the former royal daffodil ii was converted to a container ship , but still retained its forward section largely in its original condition . the ferry reportedly sank in november 2007 , 20 miles off the coast of cape andreas , in heavy seas . the cause of the sinking was main engine and steering gear failure , and she claimed the lives of both her captain and mate . the egremont was laid up in morpeth dock whilst on sale offer and in fact sprang a leak which flooded her engine room and ruined her engines rendering her inoperable . she was stripped of her machinery and towed to salcombe , where she was used as a floating headquarters for the island cruising club in salcombe , devon , not far from her original birthplace . as of april 2019 , the vessel is no longer in use by the icc and has been offered for sale . mountwood , woodchurch and overchurch . the current mersey ferries fleet comprises two vessels , based on a similar design by naval architects graham and woolnough of liverpool . until 2012 a third ferry , royal daffodil , was also in service . originally named mountwood , woodchurch and overchurch after overspill post-war housing developments of birkenhead . they were commissioned into service by birkenhead corporation . mountwood and woodchurch were built at dartmouth by philip and son . the mountwood was launched on the 31 july 1959 and the woodchurch on the 28 october of the same year . they were loosely based on designs of the leasowe and egremont of the wallasey fleet , although they both weighed considerably more at 464 tonnes , compared with 311 tonnes for the earlier vessels . they are also larger than the older wallasey pair , being approximately 19 feet longer , 6 feet broader and over a foot taller . both vessels were externally identical in almost every way up until 1991 when the shroud protecting the aft funnel vent on the mountwood was changed from square to rounded . compared to the earlier wallasey twins , the mountwood and woodchurch were highly advanced . they benefited from an injection of cash from both birkenhead corporation and the joint tunnel committee . they were given special crossley eight-cylinder engines which were fitted with gears and automatic air brakes . new style telegraphs by chadburns were designed which had a facility for braking the engines for rapid reversal , the telegraphs were part of a brand known as '' synchrostep '' and were all originally unpainted brushed aluminium with shiny brass rimming . overchurch had the same telegraph 'heads ' however they were fitted into the wings and main control position in specially built units which also had instruments fitted to them . they entered service in 1960 and were a hit with ferry passengers . they were light , modern and boasted the latest in marine navigation equipment . they were given an orange and black funnel livery , with a red band just above the rubbing strake . in their early years of service both the ferries carried rope fenders to protect the strakes . on the bridge was also a brass talk tube that linked down to the engine room . a prank amongst bridge crews was to call an engineer on the talk tube then pour water down it , thus soaking the engineer at the other end . the mountwood was used in the film '' ferry cross the mersey '' , a musical and subsequent gerry & the pacemakers song , crossing to liverpool from birkenhead . her near sister overchurch also appeared in the background of several shots . in her early years mountwood was an unreliable ship . she had broken down whilst crossing the river and had to anchor . her passengers were rescued by woodchurch . she also collided with bidston whilst berthing , due to an error in engine movements . in 1962 , mountwood and woodchurch were joined by a new ferry , the overchurch . built at the birkenhead shipyard of cammell laird and co . , overchurch was of all welded construction and also had a bridge that was completely enclosed rather than a wheelhouse and navigation boxes like mountwood and woodchurch . the addition of a totally enclosed bridge meant that there only needed to be one binnacle upon it , whereas on the two sisters there were three , one inside the main wheelhouse and two in the docking/navigation boxes . the overchurch also had much of its instrumentation fitted into specially built units , meaning the ferry had a spacious bridge , rather than the more compact and cluttered bridges of the mountwood and woodchurch . overchurch had a high funnel immediately behind the bridge and also a small bridge deck , giving the appearance of a somewhat forward top-heavy look , as a result . the overchurch was fitted with the same navigation equipment as her near sisters . she differed slightly by being a few tonnes heavier and a few inches longer . the overchurch also had only one access stairway to the promenade deck unlike the dartmouth twins which had two . in 1962 , the overchurch conveyed princess alexandra to open the new cammell laird dry dock . the trio of ferries all remained in near constant operation up until 1981 , when cost-cutting measures saw woodchurch withdrawn for almost three years . it was rumoured that she was cannibalised to help keep her sisters running . whilst in lay up at clarence dry docks , she was offered for sale , with one prospective buyer hoping to use her to operate cruises around the isle of man . she was not sold and after main engine repairs and a full repaint woodchurch returned to service in 1983 , freeing up overchurch to become the primary ferry to be used on a new otterspool service , set up for the 1984 international garden festival . the ferries all operated on a normal 20 minute route throughout this . when the ferries were taken over by the pte , they lost their original liveries and these were swiftly replaced with sky blue and primrose yellow . this was in turn replaced with black and green , and then colours of the union jack for the garden festival . the late 1970s and early 1980s saw very limited budgets for maintenance and the ferries are noted to look in poor condition during this period . in 1989 , mountwood and woodchurch were withdrawn and extensively refurbished internally which resulted in complete rewiring and main engine repairs . they were given new modern interiors and their separate bridge wings and wheel houses were plated over to form one large bridge , although none of the original equipment was removed from the new bridge . they entered service by july 1990 in time for the qe2 's first visit to the mersey and also operated the new '' heritage cruises '' . they also were given a new black and red livery replacing the red white and blue given for the garden festival season of 1984 . the overchurch also underwent some refurbishments at bootle . she was then moved to the ferries ' regular berth on the east float , where she was used as a stand by vessel and during the busy summer season . in 1996 the overchurch was given a small refit which involved the enclosing of the promenade deck shelter . liveries . the ferries companies were identifiable by their different colour liveries displayed on each vessel 's funnel . wallasey ferries carried a black and white colour scheme . early birkenhead steamers carried red and black , however this appears to have changed to orange in the 1920s or 1930s and this remained up until the merger of the two fleets under the mpte in 1969 . from january 2015 , mv snowdrop had a special livery applied , based on the world war i dazzle camouflage and designed by peter blake . . refits and renamings . the overchurch was given her major refit in 1998 at lengthline ship repairers in manchester , which resulted in a major rebuilding of all decks and fitting of new engines and navigation equipment . she was renamed royal daffodil and returned to service in 1999 . mountwood and woodchurch were also refitted and renamed royal iris of the mersey and snowdrop , respectively in 2002 and 2004 . the ferries were re-designed by their original architects - graham and woolnough . when all three vessels were refitted , the previously used helms and binnacles with compasses were placed back on the refurbished bridges . the current two ferries have been in service for nearly 60 years and 2019 sees the 60th anniversary of the launching of royal iris of the mersey and the snowdrop . this remarkable service life is testament to the dedication and care taken by the ferries ' staff over the years to keep the boats in the conditions they can be found today . the refitting of the ferries has extended their working lives by approximately thirty years , and this is steadily increasing with additional repairs that are carried out on the boats on a regular basis . the new wärtsilä engines fitted on the ferries are much more economical than the previous engines by crossley bros of manchester . they are also much 'greener ' and produce much less emissions than the original propulsion units . the ferries ' masts now carry several other navigation lights on their main masts at various points . prior to refit , they had only a forward-facing white light . this is due to the classification of the ferries . the snowdrop and royal iris each carry two kockums super tyfon ta 100/165 type fog horns . royal daffodil carries two kockums super tyfon ta 100/195 horns . these are the original horns fitted when the ferries were first built . both royal iris of the mersey and snowdrop have an e-flat tone , and royal daffodil 's is in f sharp . when berthing the vessel , the captain uses a combination of rudder positions and engine movements . the ferries all have twin rudders and propellers , making them very maneuverable . the mersey ferries used to operate in fog , however currently the service is usually suspended when visibility is very poor . liverpool 08 . the ferries played a big part in liverpool 's european capital of culture 2008 celebrations . the ferries carried record numbers of passengers , and on the 18–21 july , the tall ships returned to the mersey . a combination of the tall ships and the golf open at nearby royal birkdale ensured over 1 million visitors to the city over the weekend , with many of these taking a trip on the famous ferries . sunday 20 july saw an unusual sight of all three ferries out on the river at night , with the snowdrop being berthed at woodside and the royal iris and royal daffodil at seacombe . all three ferries were packed to capacity over the weekend , with the royal daffodil operating a special cruise to witness the parade of sail and departure of the ships on monday 21 july . future . in august 2012 , it was announced that merseytravel were initiating a review into cost saving on mersey ferries operations after the service is running at a £1 million annual loss . as a result of this review , the ferry royal daffodil was withdrawn from service in january 2013 . another threat to the ferries ' future is the cost of replacing the current ferries , the oldest ever to ply the river , when required . in december 2015 merseytravel announced a 20-year plan for the ferries which included the possible closure of one of the two wirral landing stages ( possibly woodside ) , a later start to commuter services which only operate from seacombe to liverpool , and one or two new vessels with better ability to hold social functions or musical events , a facility not available since the disposal of the 1951 royal iris . '' mersey ferry terminal could close , 20-year plan reveals '' , bbc news , 16 december 2015 the mersey ferries long term strategy , whilst currently subject to approval , anticipates that a naval architect will be appointed with the intention of having a new vessel ready for service in 2020–21 . the vessel will be used as the main day to day vessel with snowdrop used as a secondary vessel . in january 2018 , the mayor of the liverpool city region , steve rotheram announced that plans had been drawn up for a new vessel . the announcement stated that naval architects had prepared initial designs and there would be a period of public consultation on the designs . plans were announced in august 2019 for two new low-carbon ferries to be built and for improvement works to take place at seacombe ferry terminal . by using a share of a £172m 'transforming cities fund ' , it is hoped that at least one of the two ferries will be in service by 2022 . cultural references . '' ferry cross the mersey '' was a 1964 song , film , and soundtrack album . the song was written by gerry marsden , recorded by gerry & the pacemakers and was a hit in both the uk and us . in 1989 , a charity version of the song was recorded by liverpool artists the christians , holly johnson , paul mccartney , gerry marsden , and stock aitken waterman , and was released in aid of those affected by the hillsborough disaster . it was number one in the uk chart for three weeks . the ferries also featured in the opening credit sequences of the popular bbc tv comedy series , the liver birds , written by carla lane , which ran from 1969 to 1979 . the ferry depicted was the royal daffodil ii . the ferries were referred to repeatedly in helen forrester 's 1974 book twopence to cross the mersey , because the fare for a journey to the wirral ( two pence ) was too expensive for a destitute liverpool family to afford during the great depression . references . bibliography . . external links . history and images official mersey ferries website photographs of mersey ferries film of the mersey ferries getting places : commuter ferries short film of seacombe ferry in 1901