Stephen V of Hungary

childhood ( 1239–1245 ) . stephen was the eighth child and first son of king béla iv of hungary and his wife , maria , a daughter of theodore i lascaris , emperor of nicaea . he was born in 1239 . archbishop robert of esztergom baptised him on 18 october . the child , heir apparent from birth , was named after saint stephen , the first king of hungary . béla and his family , including stephen , fled to zagreb after the mongols had annihilated the royal army in the battle of mohi on 11 april 1241 . the mongols crossed the frozen danube in february 1242 and the royal family ran off as far as the well-fortified dalmatian town of trogir . the king and his family returned from dalmatia after the mongols unexpectedly withdrew from hungary in march . junior king . duke of slavonia ( 1245–1257 ) . a royal charter of 1246 mentions stephen as '' king , and duke of slavonia '' . apparently , in the previous year , béla had his son crowned as junior king and endowed with the lands between the river dráva and the adriatic sea , according to historians gyula kristó and ferenc makk . the seven-year-old stephen 's provincescroatia , dalmatia and slavoniawere administered by royal governors , known as bans . in a letter addressed to pope innocent iv in the late 1240s , béla iv wrote that '' on behalf of christendom we had our son marry a cuman girl '' . the bride was elizabeth , the daughter of a leader of the cumans whom béla had invited to settle in the plains along the river tisza . elizabeth had been baptized , but ten cuman chieftains present at the ceremony nevertheless took their customary oath upon a dog cut into two by a sword . duke of transylvania and styria ( 1257–1260 ) . when stephen attained the age of majority in 1257 , his father appointed him duke of transylvania . stephen 's rule in transylvania was short-lived , because his father transferred him to styria in 1258 . styria had been annexed in 1254 , but the local lords rose up in rebellion and expelled béla iv 's governor , stephen gutkeled , before stephen 's appointment . stephen and his father jointly invaded styria and subdued the rebels . in addition to styria , stephen also received two neighboring countiesvas and zalain hungary from his father . he launched a plundering raid in carinthia in the spring of 1259 , in retaliation of duke ulrich iii of carinthia 's support of the styrian rebels . stephen 's rule remained unpopular in styria . with support from king ottokar ii of bohemia , the local lords again rebelled . stephen could preserve only pettau ( present-day ptuj , slovenia ) and its region . on 25 june 1260 , stephen crossed the river morava to invade ottokar 's realm . his military force , which consisted of székely , romanian and cuman troops , routed an austrian army . however , in the decisive battle of kressenbrunn king béla 's and stephen 's united army was vanquished on 12 july , primarily because the main forces , which were under king béla 's command , arrived late . stephen , who commanded the advance guard , barely escaped from the battlefield . the peace of vienna , which was signed on 31 march 1261 , put an end to the conflict between hungary and bohemia , forcing béla iv to renounce of styria in favor of ottokar ii . conflicts and civil war ( 1260–1270 ) . stephen returned to transylvania and started to rule it for the second time after 20 august 1260 . he and his father jointly invaded bulgaria and seized vidin in 1261 . his father returned to hungary , but stephen continued the campaign alone . he laid siege to lom on the danube and advanced as far as tirnovo in pursuit of tsar constantine tikh of bulgaria . however , the tsar succeeded in avoiding any clashes with the invaders and stephen withdrew his troops from bulgaria by the end of the year . stephen 's relationship with béla iv deteriorated in the early 1260s . stephen 's charters reveal his fear of being disinherited and expelled by his father . he also accused some unnamed barons of inciting the old monarch against him . on the other hand , stephen 's charters prove that he made land grants in bihar , szatmár , ugocsa , and other counties which were situated outside transylvania . archbishops philip türje and smaragd of kalocsa undertook to mediate after some clashes occurred between the two kings ' partisans in the autumn . according to the peace of pressburg , which was concluded around 25 november , béla iv and his son divided the country and stephen received the lands to the east of the danube . when confirming the treaty on 5 december , stephen also promised that he would not invade slavonia which had been granted to his younger brother , béla , by their father . on this occasion , stephen styled himself '' junior king , duke of transylvania and lord of the cumans '' . a bulgarian nobleman , despot jacob svetoslav sought assistance from stephen after his domains , which were situated in the regions south of vidin , were overrun by byzantine troops in the second half of 1263 . stephen sent reinforcements under the command of ladislaus ii kán , voivode of transylvania to bulgaria . the voivode routed the byzantines and drove them out of bulgaria . stephen granted vidin to jacob svetoslav who accepted his suzerainty . the reconciliation of stephen and his father was only temporary . stephen confiscated the domains of his mother and sister , annaincluding beszterce ( present-day bistrița , romania ) and füzérwhich were located in the lands under his rule . béla iv 's army crossed the danube under anna 's command sometime after the autumn of 1264 . she besieged and took sárospatak and seized stephen 's wife and children . voivode ladislaus kán turned against stephen and led an army , which consisted of cuman warriors , to transylvania . stephen routed him at the fort of déva ( now deva , romania ) . king béla 's judge royal , lawrence arrived at the head of a new army and forced stephen to retreat to feketehalom ( now codlea , romania ) . the judge royal lay siege to the fortress , but stephen 's partisans relieved it . stephen launched a counter-offensive and forced his father 's army to retreat . he gained a decisive victory over his father 's army in the battle of isaszeg in march 1265 . the two archbishops mediated a new consolidation between father and son , which confirmed the 1262 division of the country . béla and stephen signed the peace treaty in the convent of the blessed virgin on the rabbits ' island ( now margaret island in budapest ) on 23 march 1266 . during the civil war in hungary , stephen 's vassal , despot jacob svetoslav submitted himself to tsar constantine tikh of bulgaria . in the summer of 1266 , stephen invaded bulgaria , seized vidin , pleven and other forts and routed the bulgarians in five battles . jacob svetoslav again accepted stephen 's suzerainty and was reinstalled in vidin . from then on , stephen used the title '' king of bulgaria '' in his charters . béla and stephen together confirmed the liberties of the '' royal servants '' , from then on known as noblemen , in 1267 . a double marriage alliance between stephen and king charles i of sicilystephen 's son , ladislaus married charles 's daughter , elisabeth , and charles 's namesake son married stephen 's daughter , marystrengthened stephen 's international position in 1269 . confidence was never restored between béla and stephen . on his deathbed , the old king requested king ottokar ii of bohemia to give shelter to his daughter anna and his partisans after his death . reign ( 1270–1272 ) . the senior king died on 3 may 1270 . his daughter , anna , seized the royal treasury and fled to bohemia . henry kőszegi , nicholas geregye , and lawrence ababéla 's closest advisorsfollowed her and handed over kőszeg , borostyánkő ( bernstein , austria ) and their other castles along the western borders to ottokar ii . instead of leaving hungary , nicholas hahót garrisoned styrian soldiers in his fort at pölöske , and made plundering raids against the nearby villages . stephen nominated his own partisans to the highest offices ; for instance , joachim gutkeled became ban of slavonia , and matthew csák was appointed voivode of transylvania . stephen granted esztergom county to archbishop philip who crowned him king in esztergom on or after 17 may . the polish chronicler jan długosz writes that stephen made '' a pilgrimage to the tomb of st . stanisław '' the annals of jan długosz ( a.d . 1270 ) , p . 213 . in cracow and visited his brother-in-law , boleslaw the chaste , duke of cracow at the end of august . the two monarchs renewed '' the old alliance between hungary and poland '' and entered into an alliance '' to have the same friends and the same enemies '' . stephen also met ottokar ii on an island of the danube near pressburg ( present-day bratislava , slovakia ) , but they only concluded a truce . stephen launched a plundering raid into austria around 21 december . king ottokar invaded the lands north of the danube in april 1271 and captured a number of fortresses , including dévény ( now devín , slovakia ) , pressburg and nagyszombat ( present-day trnava , slovakia ) . ottokar routed stephen at pressburg on 9 may , and at mosonmagyaróvár on 15 may , but stephen won the decisive battle on the rábca river on 21 may . ottokar withdrew from hungary and stephen chased his troops as far as vienna . the two kings ' envoys reached peace of pressburg ( 1271 ) on 2 july . according to their treaty , stephen promised that he would not assist ottokar 's opponents in carinthia , and ottokar renounced the castles he and his partisans held in hungary . the hungarians soon recaptured kőszeg , borostyánkő and other fortresses along the western border of hungary . according to the life of stephen 's saintly sister , margaret , who had died on 18 january 1270 , stephen was present when the first miracle attributed to her occurred on the first anniversary of her death . stephen , in fact , initiated margaret 's canonization at the holy see in 1271 . in the same year , stephen granted town privileges to the citizens of győr . he also confirmed the liberties of the saxon '' guests '' in the szepesség region ( present-day spiš , slovakia ) , contributing to the development of their autonomous community . on the other hand , stephen protected the archbishop of esztergom 's rights against the conditional nobles of the archbishopric who attempted to get rid of their obligations . ban joachim gutkeled kidnapped stephen 's ten-year-old son and heir , ladislaus and imprisoned him in the castle of koprivnica in the summer of 1272 . stephen besieged the fortress , but could not capture it . stephen fell ill and was taken to the csepel island . he died on 6 august 1272 . stephen was buried near to the tomb of his sister , margaret , in the monastery of the blessed virgin on rabbits ' island . family . stephen 's wife , elizabeth , was born around 1239 , according to historian gyula kristó . a charter of her father-in-law , béla iv , refers to one seyhan , a cuman chieftain as his kinsman , implying that seyhan was elizabeth 's father . stephen 's first child by elizabeth , catherine , was born around 1256 . she was given in marriage to stephen dragutin , the elder son and heir of king stephen uroš i of serbia , in about 1268 . her sister mary was born around 1257 and married the future charles ii of naples in 1270 . their grandson charles robert became king of hungary in the first decade of the 14th & nbsp ; century . according to historian gyula kristó , stephen 's third ( unnamed ) daughter was the wife of despot jacob svetoslav . stephen 's third ( or fourth ) daughter , elizabeth , who was born in about 1260 , became a dominican nun in the monastery of the blessed virgin on rabbits ' island . she was appointed prioress in 1277 , but her brother , ladislaus , kidnapped and married her to a czech baron , zavis of falkenstein , in 1288 . stephen 's youngest daughter , anna , was born in about 1260 . she married andronikos palaiologos , son and heir of the byzantine emperor , michael viii . stephen 's first son , ladislaus iv , was born in 1262 . he succeeded his father in 1272 . stephen 's youngest child , andrew , was born in 1268 and died at the age of 10 . references . sources . the annals of jan długosz ( an english abridgement by maurice michael , with commentary by paul smith ) ( 1997 ) . im publications . . external links . the encyclopædia britannica 's article of stephen v - - -