Wolfgang Iser

biography . wolfgang iser was born in marienberg , germany . his parents were paul and else ( steinbach ) iser . he studied literature in the universities of leipzig and tübingen before receiving his phd in english at heidelberg with a dissertation on the world view of henry fielding ( die weltanschauung henry fieldings , 1950 ) . a year later , iser was appointed as an instructor at heidelberg and in 1952 as an assistant lecturer at the university of glasgow . there , iser began to explore contemporary philosophy and literature , which deepened his interest in inter-cultural exchange . he subsequently lectured in many other parts of the world , including asia and israel . he died in constance . he was married to lore iser . hermeneutics . iser is known for his reader-response criticism in literary theory . this theory began to evolve in 1967 , while he was working in the university of konstanz , which he helped to found in the 1960s . together with hans robert jauss , he is considered to be the founder of the constance school of reception theory . in his approach to reader-response theory , iser describes the process of first reading , the subsequent development of the text into a 'whole ' , and how the dialogue between the reader and text takes place . in his study of shakespeare 's histories , in particular richard ii , iser interprets richard 's continually changing legal policy as expression of the desire for self-assertion . here he follows hans blumenberg , and attempts to apply his theory of modernity to shakespeare . in this theory of modernity is self-assertion , which responds to the destruction of scholastic rationalism in the nominalist revolution ( with william of ockham ) . for iser , meaning is not an object to be found within a text , but is an event of construction that occurs somewhere between the text and the reader . schwáb , zoltán . '' mind the gap : the impact of wolfgang iser 's reader-response criticism on biblical studies -- a critical assessment , '' literature & theology , vol.17 , no . 2 , literary hermeneutics ( june , 2003 ) , 170 . specifically , a reader comes to the text , which is a fixed world , but meaning is realized through the act of reading and how a reader connects the structures of the text to their own experience . to illustrate this , iser uses the example of constellations : '' the impressions that arise as a result of this process will vary from individual to individual , but only within the limits imposed by the written as opposed to the unwritten text . in the same way , two people gazing at the night sky may both be looking at the same collection of stars , but one will see the image of a plough , and the other will make out a dipper . the 'stars ' in a literary text are fixed ; the lines that join them are variable '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 287 . a literary work , which for iser is created when a reader and a text '' converge , iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 279 . consists of two '' poles '' : the artistic ( the object , the text created by the author ) and the aesthetic ( the realization accomplished by the reader ) . iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 279 . both of these poles contribute to the two central points of iser 's theory : the concept of '' implied reader '' and narrative '' gaps '' . when an author is composing a text , they have a particular reader in mind , which is in part represented in the text . this reader is not identical to a real , flesh-and-blood reader , but is '' a textual structure anticipating the presence of a recipient without necessarily defining him…the concept of the implied reader designates a network of response-inviting structures , which impel the reader to grasp the text '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the rudiments of a theory of aesthetic response '' , the act of reading : a theory of aesthetic response . baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 1978 , 34 . iser separates the concept of implied reader into two '' interrelated aspects : the reader ’ s role as a textual structure , and the reader ’ s role as a structured act '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the rudiments of a theory of aesthetic response '' , the act of reading : a theory of aesthetic response . baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 1978 , 35 . the textual structure refers to the reader ’ s point-of-view as found within the text . this standpoint is multifaceted , because the narrator , the characters , the plot , and the fictitious reader all offer sides of it . iser , wolfgang . '' the rudiments of a theory of aesthetic response '' , the act of reading : a theory of aesthetic response . baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 1978 , 35 . further , the reader ’ s role as a textual structure is defined by the '' vantage point by which he joins these perspectives , and the meeting place they converge '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the rudiments of a theory of aesthetic response '' , the act of reading : a theory of aesthetic response . baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 1978 , 36 . all , as component parts , operate together to shape the reader ’ s role as found within the text . the reader 's role as a structured act refers to how a reader fulfills the textual structures by causing them to converge within their imagination . iser , wolfgang . '' the rudiments of a theory of aesthetic response '' , the act of reading : a theory of aesthetic response . baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 1978 , 36 . in other words , the textual structures are connected and come to life when a reader takes part in the reading process . this does not mean that the '' real '' reader simply accepts this role , but rather they exist in tension between their own historical reality and experience , and the acceptance of their role as reader . '' the concept of the implied reader as an expression of the role offered by the text is in no way an abstraction derived from a real reader , but is rather the conditioning force behind a particular kind of tension produced by the real reader when he accepts the role '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the rudiments of a theory of aesthetic response '' , the act of reading : a theory of aesthetic response . baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 1978 , 36 . the differences between the real reader , and the role of the fictitious reader , produce a tension that allows for different connections and readings . for iser , a literary work is composed of both written and unwritten portions of a text . as a reader begins the reading process , the sentences that make up a work not only inform the reader of the literary movement , but produce certain expectations within the mind of the reader . iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 282 . however , these expectations are rarely fulfilled , as a text is '' full of unexpected twists and turns , and frustrations of expectations…thus whenever the flow is interrupted and we are led off in unexpected directions , the opportunity is given to us to bring into play our own faculty for establishing connections—for filling in the gaps left by the text itself '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 285 . these gaps are the unwritten portion of the text that calls for the reader 's participation . different readers will decide to fill in the various gaps in different ways , allowing for inexhaustible realizations of the text within its provided interpretive limits . iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 285 . as the reader reflects on what they have read previously in the text , or if they reread the text , new light is shed on the happenings within the narrative as '' certain aspects of the text will assume a significance we did not attach to them on a first reading , while others will recede into the background '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 286 . thus , the structure of a text brings about expectations , which are interrupted by surprising unfulfillment , producing gaps , which require filling by the reader to create a coherent flow of the text . these gaps then , in turn , cause the reader to reread prior events in the text in light of those gap fillings . however , these gaps can not be filled arbitrarily , but through interpretive limits given in the text by an author . iser finds this experience to be the breakdown of the subject-object division , in that '' text and reader no longer confront each other as object and subject , but instead the 'division ' takes place within the reader himself '' . iser , wolfgang . '' the reading process : a phenomenological approach '' , new literary history , vol . 3 , no . 2 , on interpretation : i ( winter , 1972 ) , 298 . in the act of reading , a text becomes a living subject within the reader . . bibliography . die weltanschauung henry fieldings ( 1950 , unpublished dissertation ) die weltanschauung henry fieldings ( max niemeyer verlag , 1952 ) walter pater . die autonomie des ästhetischen ( 1960 ) der implizite leser . kommunikationsformen des romans von bunyan bis beckett ( 1972 ) der akt des lesens . theorie ästhetischer wirkung ( 1976 ) laurence sternes '' tristram shandy '' . inszenierte subjektivität ( 1987 ) shakespeares historien . genesis und geltung ( 1988 ) prospecting : from reader response to literary anthropology ( 1989 ) das fiktive und das imaginäre . perspektiven literarischer anthropologie ( 1991 ) staging politics : the lasting impact of shakespeare 's histories ( 1993 ) the range of interpretation ( 2000 ) how to do theory ( 2006 ) . references . . further reading . ben de bruyn : wolfgang iser : a companion , berlin/boston : de gruyter , 2012 . external links . presidential lectures on wolfgang iser lecture 4 in the yale introduction to the theory of literature video covers iser in detail wolfgang iser . a companion ( 2012 ) book discusses iser 's work in detail wolfgang iser papers , irvine , ms.c.006