Duty

civic duty . duty is also often perceived as something owed to one ’ s country ( patriotism ) , or to one 's homeland or community . civic duties could include : obey the law pay taxes provide for a common defense , should the need arise enroll to vote , and vote at all elections and referenda ( unless there is a reasonable excuse such as a religious objection , being overseas , or illness on polling day ) serve on a jury , if called upon go to the aid of victims of accidents and street crime and testifying as a witness later in court report contagious illnesses or pestilence to public-health authorities volunteer for public services ( e.g . life-saving drills ) donate blood periodically or when needed give time to voice advice on a relevant field of expertise , benefits , workplace improvements and on how it is conducted or run duty of revolution against an unjust government . duties of employment . specific obligations arise in the services performed by a minister of a church , by a soldier , or by any employee or servant . examples : dereliction of duty is an offense in u.s . military law duty to protect , in medicine in loco parentis , for schools professional responsibility for lawyers . legal duties . examples of legal duties include : duty of care duty of candour duty to defend and duty to settle , in insurance duty to rescue duty to retreat misprision of felony duty to vote ( in countries with mandatory voting ) duty to warn fiduciary duties duty to care for children as legal guardian ( opposite of child neglect ) special duties created by a contract in loco parentis ( duty like a parent to child towards nonhuman entities , such as animals , river , environment , etc . e.g . by treating them as legal person . birds to holy rivers : a list of everything india considers “ legal persons ” , quartz ( publication ) , september 2019 . . filial duty . image : admonitions scroll scene 4.jpg right thumb lady feng and the bear in most cultures , children are expected to take on duties in relation to their families . this may take the form of behaving in such a way that upholds the family ’ s honor in the eyes of the community , entering into arranged marriages that benefit the family 's status , or caring for ailing relatives . this family-oriented sense of duty is a particularly central aspect to the teachings of confucius , and is known as xiao , or filial piety . as such , the duties of filial piety have played an enormous role in the lives of people in eastern asia for centuries . for example , the painting lady feng and the bear , from ancient china , depicts the heroic act of a consort of the emperor placing herself between her husband and a rampaging bear . this is meant to be taken as an example of admirable filial behavior . filial piety is considered so important that in some cases , it outweighs other cardinal virtues : in a more modern example , '' concerns with filial piety of the same general sort that motivate women to engage in factory work in korea , japan , taiwan , malaysia , singapore , indonesia , and elsewhere in asia are commonly cited by thai prostitutes as one of their primary rationales for working in the skin trade '' . peletz , michael gates . gender , sexuality , and body politics in modern asia . ann arbor , mi : association for asian studies , 2011 . print . the importance of filial piety can be expressed in this quote from the analects of confucius : '' yu tzu said , 'it is rare for a man whose character is such that he is good as a son and obedient as a young man to have the inclination to transgress against his superiors ; it is unheard of for one who has no such inclination to be inclined to start a rebellion . the gentleman devotes his efforts to the roots , for once the roots are established , the way will grow there from . being good as a son and obedient as a young man is , perhaps , the root of a man 's character ' '' . in various cultures . duty varies between different cultures and continents . duty in asia and latin america is commonly more heavily weighted than in western culture . according to a study done on attitudes toward family obligation : : '' asian and latin american adolescents possessed stronger values and greater expectations regarding their duty to assist , respect , and support their families than their peers with european backgrounds '' . fuligni , a . j . , tseng , v . and lam , m . ( 1999 ) , '' attitudes toward family obligations among american adolescents with asian , latin american , and european backgrounds '' . child development , 70 : 1030–1044 . the deeply rooted tradition of duty among both asian and latin american cultures contributes to much of the strong sense of duty that exists in comparison to western cultures . michael peletz discusses the concept of duty in his book gender , sexuality , and body politics in modern asia : : '' notions of filial duty … are commonly invoked to mobilize the loyalties , labor power , and other resources children in the ostensible interests of the household and , in some cases , those of the lineage clan as a whole . doctrines of filial piety … attuned to them may thus be a source of great comfort and solace to the elders but they can also be experienced as stressful , repressive , or both by those who are enjoined to honor their parents ’ ( and grandparents ’ ) wishes and unspoken expectations '' . peletz , michael g . gender , sexuality , and body politics in modern asia . ann arbor : association for asian studies , 2011 . print . an arranged marriage is an example of an expected duty in asia and the middle east . in an arranged marriage relating to duty , it is expected that the wife will move in with the husband ’ s family and household to raise their children . patrilocal residence is usual ; rarely does the man move in with the woman , or is the married couple allowed to start their own household and life somewhere else . they need to provide for the entire family in labor and care for the farms and family . older generations rely heavily on the help from their children 's and grandchildren 's families . this form of duty is in response to keeping the lineage of a family intact and obliging to the needs of elders . criticisms of the concept . nietzsche . friedrich nietzsche is among the fiercest critics of the concept of duty . '' what destroys a man more quickly '' , he asks , '' than to work , think , and feel without inner necessity , without any deep personal desire , without pleasure—as a mere automaton of “ duty ” ? '' ( the antichrist , § 11 ) nietzsche claims that the task of all higher education is '' to turn men into machines '' . the way to turn men into machines is to teach them to tolerate boredom . this is accomplished , nietzsche says , by means of the concept of duty . ( twilight of the idols , “ skirmishes of an untimely man ” § 9.29 ) schopenhauer 's writings , among them on the basis of morality , had a profound effect on nietzsche and led him to a series of inversions to show that morality was not based in '' compassion or sympathy '' but in life overcoming itself through the will to power . among these inversions '' duty '' and '' pity , '' from kant and schopenhauer respectively . ayn rand . ayn rand , a youthful admirer of nietzsche , anchored her morality against kant 's notion of duty . '' in a deontological theory , all personal desires are banished from the realm of morality ; a personal desire has no moral significance , be it a desire to create or a desire to kill . for example , if a man is not supporting his life from duty , such a morality makes no distinction between supporting it by honest labor or by robbery . if a man wants to be honest , he deserves no moral credit ; as kant would put it , such honesty is 'praiseworthy , ' but without 'moral import . ' '' ayn rand lexiconduty . . see also . deontological ethics dharma filial piety mitzvah morality . references . external links . duty and moral worth