Unnatural Death (novel)

plot . lord peter wimsey and his friend chief inspector parker are told about the death , in late 1925 , of an elderly woman named agatha dawson who had been suffering from terminal cancer . she was being cared for by mary whittaker , her great-niece and a trained nurse . miss dawson had an extreme aversion to making a will , believing that miss whittaker , her only known relative , would naturally inherit everything . wimsey is intrigued in spite of the fact that there is no evidence of any crime ( a post-mortem found no sign of foul play ) , nor any apparent motive ( on miss dawson 's death her estate did indeed pass , as she had expected and wished , to her great-niece ) . wimsey sends his private investigator , miss climpson , to the village of leahampton to investigate . she discovers that shortly before her death miss dawson had dismissed her maids , the sisters bertha and evelyn gotobed . wimsey places advertisements in the press asking them to get in touch . a few days later , bertha is found dead in epping forest . on the body is a £5 banknote , originally issued to a mrs muriel forrest who lives in an elegant flat in south audley street , mayfair . wimsey and parker visit her . she claims not to remember the banknote , but thinks she may have put it on a horse . wimsey tricks her into providing her fingerprints on a wineglass . in a drawer he finds a hypodermic syringe with a doctor 's prescription '' to be injected when the pain is very severe '' . evelyn gotobed tells wimsey of an episode shortly before the sisters were dismissed in which miss whittaker had tried to get them to witness miss dawson 's will , without the latter 's knowledge . a mysterious west indian clergyman named hallelujah dawson had also turned up , claiming to be an impecunious distant relative . mrs forrest asks wimsey to visit her at her flat in london where she clumsily makes advances to him . wimsey suspects blackmail . he kisses her and realises that she is physically revolted by his caress . wimsey discovers a motive for miss dawson to be killed before the end of 1925 : a new 'property act ' coming into force on 1 january 1926 will change the law of inheritance , resulting in an intestacy 's property no longer passing to a closest-relative great-niece but being forfeit to the crown . much play is made of a fictionalised uncertainty in the meaning of the word '' issue '' . mary whittaker – who miss climpson has concluded '' is not of the marrying sort '' – disappears from leahampton along with vera findlater , an impressionable young woman who is besotted with her . several days later miss findlater 's body is found on the downs , apparently killed by a blow to the head . mary whittaker has it seems been kidnapped . there are indications that the culprit is a black man , and a distinctive cap found nearby is linked to hallelujah dawson . however , a post-mortem finds that vera findlater was already dead when she was struck , and wimsey realises that the whole scene has been faked in order to frame the entirely innocent clergyman . tyre tracks from mrs forrest 's car are found nearby , and wimsey suspects her and mary whittaker of acting in collusion . wimsey 's manservant , bunter , realises that the fingerprints on mrs forrest 's wineglass are identical to those on a cheque written by miss whittaker . wimsey at last understands that muriel forrest and mary whittaker are one and the same person , and that she carried out the murders by injecting air into her victims ' bloodstream with a hypodermic syringe , causing blockage and immediate death through heart failure . meanwhile miss climpson , unable to contact wimsey , heads to south audley street where she is attacked by mary whittaker . wimsey and parker arrive just in time to save miss climpson from becoming the final victim . whittaker is arrested , and commits suicide in prison . characters . lord peter wimsey – protagonist , aristocratic amateur detective detective-inspector charles parker – wimsey 's friend mervyn bunter – wimsey 's manservant miss alexandra katherine climpson – enquiry agent employed by wimsey miss agatha dawson ( deceased ) – wealthy woman who died suddenly some time before the book opens miss mary whittaker – miss dawson 's great-niece dr carr – miss dawson 's doctor miss vera findlater – friend and besotted admirer of miss whittaker miss philliter – former nurse of miss dawson , engaged to dr carr bertha and evelyn gotobed – former servants of miss dawson rev hallelujah dawson – impoverished west indian clergyman and distant cousin of miss dawson mr murbles – solicitor and friend of wimsey mrs muriel forrest – fashionable lady living in london . literary significance and criticism . according to james brabazon in his dorothy l sayers : a biography ( 1981 ) , sayers drew her ingenious ( and medically doubtful ) murder method from her familiarity with motor engines , gained from her affair with a car mechanic and motor-bike enthusiast . in their review of crime novels ( revised edn 1989 ) , the us writers barzun and taylor stated that '' the tale is perhaps a little forced in conception and remote in tone . that is the trouble with all the great masters – they accustom us to such dazzling performances that when they give us what would seem wonderful coming from other hands , we sniff and act choosy . the mode of compassing death has been carped at , but no one could do anything but rejoice at miss climpson and her subterfuges . '' barzun , jacques and taylor , wendell hertig . a catalogue of crime . new york : harper & row . 1971 , revised and enlarged edition 1989 . hrf keating , writing in 1989 , noted that sayers had '' invented a murder method that is appropriately dramatic and cunningly ingenious , the injection of an air-bubble with a hypodermic '' . however , '' not only would it require the use of an instrument so large as to be farcical , but miss sayers has her bubble put into an artery not a vein . no wonder afterwards she pledged herself 'strictly in future to seeing i never write a book which i know to be careless ' . '' keating , h.r.f . the bedside companion to crime . new york : mysterious press , 1989 . . themes and treatment . in murder in the closet : essays on queer clues in crime fiction before stonewall ( 2017 ) , noah stewart describes mary whitaker as being '' to my knowledge the most clearly delineated homosexual character in golden age detective fiction , despite the word 'lesbian ' never being used , and she 's depicted as enticing a young girl into a life of homosexuality '' . the episode in which mary whittaker is kissed by wimsey is '' the closest that a writer in 1927 would be able to come to saying that a character was a lesbian and that kissing a man made her want to vomit . '' laura vorachek argues that , in the novel , '' sayers attempts to challenge the prevalent cultural associations of blackness and criminality . '' . legal background . on 1 january 1926 , the date specified by sayers , two important property statutes came into force in england : the law of property act 1925 and the administration of estates act 1925 . the latter , corresponding most closely with the ‘ property act ’ of the novel , swept away the old rules on intestacy and specified by way of a six-point list the persons who would inherit if the intestate left neither issue nor parents . if the deceased had no surviving relatives of the classes mentioned ( which did not include great-niece ) , the estate would go to the crown . administration of estates act 1925 , original version as printed . adaptations . in may 1975 , an adaptation was made for bbc radio 4 , produced by simon brett and starring ian carmichael as lord peter wimsey . . references . external links .