Roots revival

history . the british folk revival was an academic movement to transcribe and record traditional british songs during the late 19th and early 20th century . pioneers of this movement were the harvard professor francis james child ( 1825–96 ) , compiler of the english and scottish popular ballads ( 1882–92 ) , sabine baring-gould ( 1834–1924 ) , frank kidson ( 1855–1926 ) , lucy broadwood ( 1858–1939 ) , and anne gilchrist ( 1863–1954 ) . b . sweers , electric folk : the changing face of english traditional music ( oxford : oxford university press , 2005 ) , pp . 31–8 . the folk song society was founded in 1898 to promote this new endeavour . a major figure in this movement was cecil sharp who was the most influential on the repertoire of subsequent performers and defining the nature of folk song . his lectures and other publications attempted to define a musical tradition that was rural in origin , oral in transmission and communal in nature . the american folk music revival , which focused on culture and entertainment , began in the 1930s and 1940s . during the great depression , folk music styles were disseminated around the country , as delta blues , latino and cajun musicians , and itinerant honky tonk singers spread to cities like chicago , los angeles , and new york city . the growth of the music industry in the same period was also important ; higher potential profits from music placed pressure on artists , songwriters , and label executives to replicate previous hit songs . this meant that musical fads , such as hawaiian slack-key guitar , never died out completely , since a broad range of rhythms , instruments , and vocal stylings were incorporated into disparate popular genres . the movement became global in the 1960s and 1970s . in most cases , the folk music being revived was not quite extinct , though some had n't been played for years or was moribund ; such cases include the celtic music of cornwall and the isle of man , for example . in other cases , such as cameroon and the dominican republic , no revival was necessary as the music remained common , and was merely popularized and adapted for mainstream audiences at home and abroad . roots revivals . algerian music : beginning as early as 1964 , gaining steam in the 1970s and continuing through the 1980s , a mainstream raï revival occurred , and pop-raï stars like khaled and chaba fadela gained worldwide audiences ; the same period saw similar trends occur among music of kabylie such as idir , ferhat and lounis ait menguellet , who popularized the native sounds of their people belgian music : starting early in the 1960s , a wave of popular folk-based performers emerged , led by wannes van de velde , who drew primarily on flemish traditions . by the 1980s , popular bands included brabants volksorkest and the folk rock band kadril . music of benin : artists like tohon stan have created a popular version of benin 's numerous styles of indigenous folk music , such as tchink-system , a derivative of the funeral genre of tchinkoumé cambodian music : the early 1960s saw a revival of classical music and dance , inspired by princess norodom buppha devi and led by sinn sisamouth , though the rise of the khmer rouge largely ended this trend . music of cameroon : beginning with bikutsi in the 1950s and continuing with makossa into the end of the 20th century , cameroon 's popularized folk musics have become among the most prominent in africa . messi me nkonda martin undoubtedly did the most to evolve bikutsi from its folk origins into a popular style using electric guitars and other importations , while manu dibango brought makossa to new audiences around the world . chinese music : partially as a reaction against attempts by the communist government to use traditional styles to drum up patriotism and loyalty , the 1970s saw the creation of chinese rock and cantopop ( in hong kong ) , both of which made some use of native folk styles , especially in vocal techniques . the leader of chinese rock is undoubtedly cui jian . ivorian music : ernesto djédjé 's ziglibithy style incorporates a number of folk genres from across côte d'ivoire , a diverse country with hundred of ethnic groups ; djédjé 's most immediate influence was the folk rhythms of the bété . croatian music : by the 1980s , croatian pop-folk had seen some mainstream success , and a wave of bands appeared , inspired by vještice , who combined međimurje folk music with rock in an innovative fusion of sounds . czech music : in 1966 , the porta festival was held , and a wave of singer-songwriters inspired by the likes of american pete seeger arose . danish music : in contrast to its neighbors , denmark did not see a roots revival until the late 1990s , when performers like morten alfred høirup gained a widespread following in the country . dutch music : the late 1960s saw a revival of dutch folk music , led by performers like gerard van maasakkers ; popularity was limited , and soon ended , though region of friesland has maintained a strong traditional music scene . music of egypt : the city of cairo is the most important center for egyptian music , which includes a variety of popularized folk styles , including northern sawahii and southern saiyidi . finnish music : finland 's folk styles include a variety of national genres and ballads , while the traditional rhyming sleigh songs rekilaulu have become an integral part of many pop singers . in 1967 , the savonlinna opera festival , the first of several similar festivals , contributed to a revival of finnish opera and other more traditional styles . french music : though many of france 's regional styles have seen popularization , the most vibrant scene is undoubtedly the traditional music of brittany . the region boasts a uniquely celtic heritage , which has been emphasized by the revival since its beginnings in the early 1970s , led by alan stivell . corsican music has also seen a revival , though with little popular success , concurrent with the rise of corsican nationalism in the 1970s . in the same way occitan music , has also seen a revival with occitan nationalism and reviviscence of occitan speaking in 60 's ( politic crisis with gaullists to a clash with french linguistic imperialism and conservative politics ) see also the québécois under canadian music . gambian music : by the 1970s , gambian musicians were mostly playing popular merengue or other styles . a visit by pop band the super eagles to london to record saw a change , as they were encouraged to continue their practice of gambian folk . the band became known as ifang bondi , and their music was called afro-manding blues . garifuna music : starting in the 1970s and continuing into the following decades , the garifunas , an afro-caribbean people found throughout central america , began turning to their native punta sound and creating popular styles like punta rock , which found an audience across the area . pen cayetano was the most important figure in this scene . german music : following the 1968 student revolution in west germany , singer-songwriters playing a kind of expressive , melancholy music with traditional influences became popular . due to governmental interference , east germany did not see much of this influence until the mid-1970s . music of ghana : ghana is best known for the highlife style of music , which has been popular throughout the 20th century . by the late 1960s , however , the pop scene was dominated by generic guitar bands that imitated western acts . the 1971 soul to soul festival , however , featured a number of african american musicians ( like wilson pickett and tina turner ) , which had the effect of legitimizing african culture , thus causing a major roots revival that brought highlife to international audiences . greek music : the late 1960s and early 1970s coup repressed rembétika , a style which had developed earlier in the century . this oppression ironically created a major boom in popularity for the genre , which became associated with political resistance and rebellion . singer-songwriters like dionysis savvopoulos also became wildly popular , and were seen as voices of the greek nation . music of israel : early zionist settlers in palestine , as far back as the 1880s , sought to create a new mode of jewish folk music that was based on biblical musical modes that had long since been abandoned . these composers , who included matityahu shelem , yedidiah admon , and many others , drew on yemenite , arabic and other antique sources to create a unique style that they considered a revival of ancient jewish music . the songs that they and their followers composed constitute a canonical body of folk music called '' songs of the land of israel . '' these songs are still widely performed today by popular artists . another example of roots revival in israel is the preservation of regional jewish musical styles . the music of north african and middle eastern jewish communities has morphed into an eclectic new style called '' muzika mizrahit '' . folksongs in yiddish and ladino have been revived and recorded by artists like chava alberstein and yehoram gaon . yair dalal incorporates stylistic elements of the music of his native iraq in his synthetic musical style . italian music : the diverse regions of italy are home to dozens of varieties of folk music . by the 1950s , their popularity was declining rapidly and a group of musicians and musicologists founded organizations like istituto de martino and nuovo canzoniere italiano to help preserve folk cultures . the following decade saw a revival of a number of traditions , including ciccio busacca 's fusions of sicilian folk styles , central italy 's jazzy modern folk , pioneered by canzoniere del lazio , the re-appearance of the lira through the work of re niliu , the popularization of diverse genres of northern italian music and some of the work of world-famous tenor enrico caruso , who revitalized naples ' canzone napoletana tradition . in contrast to many other countries ' , italy 's roots revival has resulted in very little mainstream success . music of japan : though elements of traditional japanese music can be found in some rock and pop from the country , the only major roots revival was okinawan , and began in the late 1980s . popularized okinawan folk music includes genres like kawachi ondo and goshu ondo . korean music : in the early 1970s , a genre called t'ong guitar developed , performed by singer-songwriters inspired by the likes of american bob dylan and joan baez . korean folk has seen little popular success , though there has been some for the pansori , nongak and sanjo styles . latvian music : its traditional long suppressed or appropriated by the soviet union , latvia 's kokles ( an instrument similar to a box zither ) was revived and popularised in the 1970s , led by traditional suiti kokle player jānis poriķis and ethnomusicologist valdis muktupāvels . lithuanian music : the soviet union had sponsored some music festivals , such as the dainų šventės , but did not allow for much lyrical or musical innovation , and kept all songwriters from experimenting with politically aware and dissident lyrics . an active cultural rebellion occurred in the 1960s , based around a series of national music festivals and concerts . malian music : cuban music had become extremely popular in mali by the 1960s , and little folk music could compete . the country 's second president , however , moussa traoré , encouraged the growth of a malian music industry , resulting in a revival of some kinds of folk music , and a popularization led by salif keita . later fanto sacko 's bajourou music and wassoulou music also became popularized . however , by the 1980s , malian pop had lost most traces of its folk origins and was simply dance music , even topping the european charts ; another roots revival occurred , led by guinean acoustic singer and kora player jali musa jawara . mozambiquan music : music was used in the 1960s by the independence movement in mozambique . leaders in this movement encouraged the growth of a national music industry . by the 1970s , native forms of music , such as marrabenta , had been popularized . russian music : starting in about 1966 , a group of bards arose , most prominently including vladimir vysotsky , and vyacheslav shchurov organized a number of concerts for folk singers . this led to a revival and revitalization of russian folk songs , a trend which continued in ensuing decades . sami music : the sami , an indigenous people found in central and northern scandinavia , northern finland and northwestern russia , have a tradition of folk songs called joiks , which have been popularized by the likes of mari boine , who remains a legend in the field . slovenian music : in the 1950s , the so-called '' folk popular music '' emerged with groups like avsenik and lojze slak band , based on modernized slovenian-style polka . in the 1980s , a completely different trend emerged , based on more archaic folk music , usually from specific regions ; and it was popularized by groups like istranova ( slovenian istria ) and singer vlado kreslin ( prekmurje ) . latin america , portugal and spain . argentine music : in the 1960s , andean nationalism was spreading across argentina , chile , bolivia and peru . argentina 's nativist scene includes landmark performers like mercedes sosa and atahualpa yupanqui , who helped spawn the nueva canción scene . bolivian music : the 1950s saw an increase in nationalist identity surrounding the quechua and aymara peoples , and a number of intellectuals began associating themselves with folk music , clothing , cuisine and other elements . by the mid-1960s , a folk revival was blossoming , led by edgar jofré . music of brazil : beginning in the 1950s and continuing for several decades , a multitude of brazilian styles ( most importantly samba ) and imported american jazz combined to create the wildly popular bossa nova scene . this soon evolved into the politically charged tropicalia genre , which starred controversial and acclaimed singer-songwriters caetano veloso and gilberto gil . chilean music : in the early to mid-1960s , the burgeoning nueva canción movement spread throughout chile , argentina , bolivia and peru , featuring a wave of singer-songwriters who incorporated folk elements and nationalist lyrics , often critical of governmental authorities , and achieved great acclaim . violeta parra is sometimes viewed as the founder of the scene , for she popularized quechua and aymara songs and provided an outlet for performances by future luminaries like victor jara . cuban music : by the 1960s , cuban music had seen international success in the form of pop-mambo , chachacha and other genres , and many artists were disillusioned with these styles , which were seen as watered-down . a vanguard of singer-songwriters like silvio rodríguez and pablo milanés arose , composing politically aware songs in a style that came to be called nueva trova . dominican music : merengue had been popular in the dominican republic for decades since evolving out of confusing folk origins , but did not truly become a form of pop music until the early 1960s , when legends like johnny ventura brought the music to new audiences at home and abroad . spanish music was incorporated into spanish baroque music in the harpsichord works of soler . later composers such as albeniz , falla , rodrigo and giuliani used the dance rhythms of spain . the classical guitarists andrés segovia , john williams and julian bream popularised the music through their recordings . current popular folk musicians include susana seivane , hevia and milladoiro . a roots revival nueva canción , which also evolved into new form of socially committed music occurred in several spanish-speaking countries . portuguese music : in the 1960s and 1970s , josé afonso led a return to more traditionally styled fado music , which later evolved into a number of new song forms that incorporated socio-political lyrics and foreign influences . english-speaking countries . : includes english and celtic revivals : for additional celtic music , see the french section above australian music : beginning in the 1980s , australian aborigines began turning to their native styles of folk music , which were updated , creating popular bands and styles like aboriginal rock . canadian music : though some artists , like the band , neil young and joni mitchell , had been integral parts of the 1960s american folk rock scene , canada has seen its own distinctive revival of styles . this includes the late 1970s scene in maritime canada , which glorified the area 's celtic heritage and was led by regional legends figgy duff and stan rogers , as well as the mid-1960s quebecois revival led by gilles vigneault . there were also revivals of acadian , inuit and other folk styles . in the 1950s and 1960s dedicated folk music collectors spread out across the country to record traditional music . the songs and tunes were popularized on public radio by performers such as alan mills , stu davis , marg osborne , and the travellers . '' folk music revival '' , the encyclopedia of music in canada a number of musicians who grew up listening to this traditional music became singer-songwriters in the 1970s ; for example , gordon lightfoot and ian and sylvia . dicaire , david , the folk music revival , 1958–1970 : biographies of fifty performers , mcfarland , 2001 english music : there were two folk music revivals in england . the first , led by cecil sharp , was academic . it involved the collection of songs and tunes and their publication in journals . it was at its peak about 1910 . the second revival involved large-scale public performances of english music , beginning with the appearance of the copper family at the royal albert hall in 1952 , together with a proliferation of folk clubs meeting mainly in the upper rooms of public houses . starting in the late 1960s the songs were performed in a contemporary style ; this was the origin of the british folk rock style . irish music : there was a revival of irish folk music that began in the early 20th century , based both in dublin and ireland , though the longer-lasting and more famous revival began in 1955 with the album '' the lark in the morning '' , whose recording was supervised by diane hamilton and which featured liam clancy and tommy makem prior to their involvement with the influential but u.s.-based clancy brothers and tommy makem . later famous groups include the dubliners ( founded 1962 ) , the chieftains ( 1963 ) , ceoltóirí chualann , and clannad ( 1973 ) . later , singer-songwriters such as christy moore were inspired by american popular folk singers , and they took to modernizing and adapting irish music for modern audiences . the result was a dramatic change from folk traditions , including the introduction of the bouzouki and influences including soul and rock . scottish music : the scottish folk revival begin in 1951 when hamish henderson created the people 's festival . the boys of the lough were one of the first instrumental celtic groups to tour the world . us music : the american folklore society was founded in 1888 . some members , including frank clyde brown , george lyman kittredge , and john lomax began collecting and recording 'trivial ' music of minority groups . during the late 1920s and early 1930s , performers such as a . p . carter , bascom lamar lunsford , lesley riddle , and woody guthrie specifically began to seek out traditional songs to incorporate them into their performance repertoire . a traditional music revival started the american folk music revival that began in the 1940s and led to a new genre , contemporary folk music . a group of american archivists and researchers that included john a . lomax , his son alan lomax , poet carl sandburg , musician charles seeger , and others collected , recorded , and published old ballads , prison songs , appalachian folk music and black blues . a number of performers influenced by traditional music , such as pete seeger , josh white , burl ives , and the weavers , enjoyed considerable commercial success in the 1940s , leading to a broader commercial revival in the late 1950s through the mid-1960s with performers such as the kingston trio , joan baez , and peter , paul and mary selling millions of record albums . the folk revival in the us led to the creation of folk rock , a new genre that drew on songs and themes associated with folk music and arranged them with rock ‘ n ’ roll instruments . many of the early artists and groups associated with the genre began as folk musicians , most notably bob dylan , simon & garfunkel , roger mcguinn of the byrds , and jerry garcia of the grateful dead . the 21st century saw a smaller revival of appalachian folk music with the release of the 2000 motion picture soundtrack to '' o brother , where art thou ? '' . singers such as gillian welch and alison krauss and the bluegrass performer ralph stanley were featured on the album . transnational : during the 2010s , folk-inspired acts began to score chart hits in the uk , us and beyond . most notably the uk group mumford & sons won the grammy ( us national academy of recording arts and sciences award ) for best album in 2013 . references . further reading . general . bakan , michael b . ( 2007 ) . world music : traditions and transformations . bohlman , philip v . ( 1988 ) . the study of folk music in the modern world . bohlman , philip v . ( 2002 ) . world music : a very short introduction . broughton , simon ; mark ellingham & jon lusk ( 2006 ) . the rough guide to world music : africa and the middle east vol . 1 ellingham , mark ; james mcconnachie & simon broughton ( editor ) ( 2000 ) . the rough guide to world music vol . 2 ( including latin & north america , caribbean , india , asia and pacific ) froots ( previously folk roots ) , a specialist music magazine published monthly in the uk fujie , linda , david locke and jeff titon ( 2004 ) . worlds of music : an introduction to the music of the world 's peoples . hal leonard publishing corporation ( 1997 ) . international folksongs . hart , mickey and karen kostyal ( 2003 ) . songcatchers : in search of the world 's music . rosenberg , neil v . and w . v . rosenberg ( editor ) ( 1993 ) . transforming tradition : folk music revivals examined . sandberg , larry & dick weissman ( 1976 ) . the folk music sourcebook . new york : alfred a . knopf . scully , michael f . ( 2008 ) . the never-ending revival : rounder records and the folk alliance ( university of illinois press ) . regional . czulinski , winnie ( 2006 ) . drone on ! : the high history of celtic music . lyle , emily b . ( 2001 ) . scottish ballads . morrish , john , english folk dance and song society , martin carthy et al . ( 2007 ) . the folk handbook : working with songs from the english tradition . racy , a . j . ( 2004 ) . making music in the arab world : the culture and artistry of tarab . rice , timothy ( 1994 ) . may it fill your soul : experiencing bulgarian music . rosenberg , neil v . ( 1993 ) . bluegrass : a history . sawyers , june skinner ( 2001 ) . celtic music : a complete guide . smith , c . c . ( 1998 ) . spanish ballads . wilentz , sean ( 2005 ) . the rose and the briar : death , love and liberty in the american ballad . woods , fred ( 1979 ) . folk revival : the rediscovery of a national music . poole , dorset : blandford press .