Komura Jutarō

early life . komura was born to a lower-ranking samurai family in the service of the obi domain in kyushu 's hyūga province ( now nichinan , miyazaki prefecture ) . he attended the daigaku nankō , the predecessor of tokyo imperial university . in 1875 , he was selected by the ministry of education as one of the first students to study abroad under a government scholarship . at harvard university , komura shared lodgings with the fellow japanese student kaneko kentarō . in due course , komura graduated from harvard law school in 1878 . career . in 1880 , komura joined the ministry of justice and , after serving as a judge of the supreme court of japan , transferred in 1884 to the translation bureau in the ministry of foreign affairs . in 1893 , komura was the chargé d'affaires at the japanese legation in beijing , in qing dynasty china . in that position , he conveyed to the chinese government japan 's intention of dispatching troops to korea under the provisions of the treaty of tientsin to subdue the tonghak rebellion , which led to the first sino-japanese war . during the war , komura was appointed as civilian administrator for territories japan had captured in manchuria . he was also a key figure in the negotiations to end the war , culminating in the treaty of shimonoseki , which he helped to draft . following the assassination of queen min of korea , komura was dispatched to replace miura gorō as the japanese minister to korea . keane , emperor of japan . page 516 . in his position as resident minister in korea , he negotiated the komura-weber memorandum in may 1896 with his russian counterpart , karl ivanovich weber , to allow joint interference in korean internal affairs by the japanese and the russian empires . keane , page 526 . komura served as vice minister for foreign affairs until september 1898 , when he was named ambassador to washington , d.c . in september 1901 , komura became minister for foreign affairs under the first katsura administration , and he signed the boxer protocol on behalf of japan . he was elevated into the kazoku peerage with the title of baron ( danshaku ) in 1902 and decorated with the 1st class of the order of the rising sun . in 1902 , komura helped to conclude the anglo-japanese alliance in 1902 . his tenure as foreign minister was marked with increasing tension between japan and russia over korea and manchuria , which cumulated in the russo-japanese war in 1904–1905 . image : treaty of portsmouth.jpg thumb right negotiating the treaty of portsmouth ( 1905 ) . from left to right : the russians at the far side of table are korostovetz , nabokov , witte , rosen , plancon , and the japanese at the near side of table are adachi , ochiai , komura , takahira , satō . the large conference table is now preserved at the museum meiji mura in inuyama , aichi prefecture , japan . after the withdrawal of russian forces in the region , russian diplomats witte and rosen and their japanese colleagues takahira ochiai , komura , and others met in portsmouth to sign the peace treaty . during the negotiations , witte tried to keep russia 's rights on the southern part of sakhalin island , referring to the treaty of saint petersburg ( 1875 ) , which gave the kuril islands to japan in exchange for russian rights in sakhalin , but komura declared that '' war cancels all treaties . '' the war was ended with komura 's signature on behalf of the japanese government of the treaty of portsmouth , which was highly unpopular in japan and led to the hibiya incendiary incident . '' japan 's present crisis and her constitution ; the mikado 's ministers will be held responsible by the people for the peace treaty -- marquis ito may be able to save baron komura , '' new york times . september 3 , 1905 ; '' text of treaty ; signed by the emperor of japan and czar of russia komura also met with e . h . harriman , the american railway magnate , to propose a joint venture between harriman 's conglomerate and japan towards the development of the south manchuria railway . on his return to japan , he found that the agreement was opposed by the genrō and so it was not implemented . komura also met with chinese representatives in beijing and signed the peking treaty of december 1905 , which transferred the former russian rights in southern manchuria to japan . for those services , komura was awarded the order of the paulownia flowers in 1906 and was appointed to become a member of the privy council . from june 1906 to august 1908 , komura served as ambassador to britain and was made a knight commander of the order of the bath by king edward vii and a member of the royal victorian order . on his return to tokyo , he resumed the post of foreign minister in the second katsura administration and signed the root–takahira agreement with the united states . his peerage title was also elevated to that of count ( '' hakushaku '' ) in 1907 . komura also played a key role in the japan-korea annexation treaty in 1910 and in concluding various international agreements in 1911 to restore japan 's tariff autonomy . he was elevated to the title of marquis ( '' koshaku '' ) on april 21 , 1911 . suffering from tuberculosis in his final years , komura moved to the seaside resort of hayama in kanagawa prefecture , but he died of the disease on november 26 , 1911 . his grave is at aoyama cemetery , tokyo . in popular culture . in ryōtarō shiba 's semi-historical work saka no ue no kumo , komura inherited massive debts from his father , which he had difficulty with repayment . as a result , he wore the same frayed frock coat for years , regardless of season or occasion . that , combined with his short stature and a large mustache , led to the derisive nickname of '' the rat minister '' in the diplomatic community in his early career . in the japanese taiga drama adaptation of shiba ’ s work , the role of komura is played by actor naoto takenaka . . honors . from the article in the japanese wikipedia . peerages . baron - 7 february 1902 count - 21 september 1907 marquess - 21 april 1911 . decorations and ranks . order of the sacred treasure , third class ( 31 october 1895 ) grand cordon of the order of the rising sun ( 27 february 1902 ; second class : 21 october 1899 ) macmurray , john van antwerp . ( 1921 ) . treaties and agreements with and concerning china , 1894-1919 : a collection , p . 522 . hon . knight grand cross of the order of st michael and st george ( gcmg ) - 8 july 1905 . grand cordon of the order of the paulownia flowers - 1 april 1906 hon . knight grand cross of the order of the bath ( gcb ) - 1907 . hon . knight grand cross of the royal victorian order ( gcvo ) - 7 may 1907 . london gazette : on the occasion of prince fushimi sadanaru 's visit to england second degree in the official order of precedence - 26 november 1911 ( posthumous ) an international center komura memorial hall was built in nichinan , miyazaki on the former obi domain of the komura family in honour of komura jutarō and his accomplishments in japan foreign relations expansion . this memorial and museum is presented on the web site of the ministry of land , infrastructure , transport and tourism for the island of kyūshū . . see also . list of ambassadors from japan to south korea . references . further reading . davis , richard harding , and alfred thayer mahan . ( 1905 ) . the russo-japanese war ; a photographic and descriptive review of the great conflict in the far east , gathered from the reports , records , cable despatches , photographs , etc . , etc . , of collier 's war correspondents new york : collier 's weekly . oclc : 21581015 beasley , w.g . japanese imperialism 1894-1945 . oxford university press . kanayama , nobuo . komura jutaro to potsumasu : roshia ni '' gaiko '' de katta otoko . php kenkyujo ( 1984 ) . ( japanese ) korostovetz , j.j . ( 1920 ) . pre-war diplomacy the russo-japanese problem . london : british periodicals limited . macmurray , john van antwerp . ( 1921 ) . treaties and agreements with and concerning china , 1894-1919 : a collection . oxford : oxford university press . paine , s.c.m . the sino-japanese war of 1894-1895 : perception , power , and primacy , 2003 , cambridge university press , cambridge , ma , 412 pp . & nbsp ; morris , edmund . theodore rex . modern library ; reprint edition ( 2002 ) . external links . national diet library , portraits of modern japanese historical figures , komura juntaro yomiuri shimbun : > 15 % of primary school students in japan confused takayoshi kido with komura or toshimichi ōkubo , 2008 . the museum meiji mura hisahiko okazaki , komura jutaro and his age , 2011 ( e-book )