Jeremy Taylor

early life . taylor was born in cambridge , the son of a barber , nathaniel . dictionary of national biography , 2004 he was baptised on 15 august 1613 . his father was educated and taught him grammar and mathematics . he was then educated at the perse school , cambridge , cambridge news ( the perse school 400 year anniversary supplement ) 16 september 2015 , p . 34 . before going to gonville and caius college at cambridge university where he gained a bachelor of arts degree in 1630/1631 and a master of arts degree in 1634 . the best evidence of his diligence as a student is the enormous learning of which he showed so easy a command in later years . in 1633 , although still below the canonical age , he took holy orders , and accepted the invitation of thomas risden , a former fellow-student , to supply his place for a short time as lecturer at st paul 's cathedral . career under laud . archbishop william laud sent for taylor to preach in his presence at lambeth , and took the young man under his wing . taylor did not vacate his fellowship at cambridge before 1636 , but he spent , apparently , much of his time in london , for laud desired that his considerable talents should receive better opportunities of study and improvement than the obligations of constant preaching would permit . in november 1635 he had been nominated by laud to a fellowship at all souls college , oxford , '' jeremy taylor '' , ccel where , says wood ( athen . oxon . , ed . bliss , iii . 781 ) , love and admiration still waited on him . he seems , however , to have spent little time there . he became chaplain to his patron the archbishop , and chaplain in ordinary to charles i . kiefer , james e . , '' jeremy taylor , bishop and theoloian '' , biographical sketches of memorable christians of the past at oxford , william chillingworth was then busy with his magnum opus , the religion of protestants , and it is possible that through his discussions with chillingworth taylor may have been turned towards the liberal movement of his age . after two years in oxford , he was presented , in march 1638 , by william juxon , bishop of london , to the rectory of uppingham , in rutland . there he settled down to the work of a country priest . in the next year he married phoebe langsdale , by whom he had six children : william ( d.1642 ) , george ( ? ) , richard ( the last two died c.1656/7 ) , charles , phoebe and mary . dictionary of national biography , 2004 this mary married francis marsh ( 1626-93 ) , archbishop of dublin . in the autumn of the same year he was appointed to preach in st mary 's on the anniversary of the gunpowder plot , and apparently used the occasion to clear himself of a suspicion , which , however , haunted him through life , of a secret leaning to the roman catholic position . this suspicion seems to have arisen chiefly from his intimacy with christopher davenport , better known as francis a sancta clara , a learned franciscan friar who became chaplain to queen henrietta ; but it may have been strengthened by his known connection with laud , as well as by his ascetic habits . more serious consequences followed his attachment to the royalist cause . the author of the sacred order and offices of episcopacy or episcopacy asserted against the arians and acephali new and old ( 1642 ) , could scarcely hope to retain his parish , which was not , however , sequestrated until 1644 . taylor probably accompanied the king to oxford . in 1643 he was presented to the rectory of overstone , northamptonshire , by charles i . there he would be in close connection with his friend and patron spencer compton , 2nd earl of northampton . royalist prisoner . during the next fifteen years taylor 's movements are not easily traced . he seems to have been in london during the last weeks of charles i in 1649 , from whom he is said to have received his watch and some jewels which had ornamented the ebony case in which he kept his bible . he had been taken prisoner with other royalists in the siege of cardigan castle on 4 february 1645 . in 1646 he is found in partnership with two other deprived clergymen , keeping a school at newton hall , in the parish of llanfihangel aberbythych , carmarthenshire . here he became private chaplain to and benefited from the hospitality of richard vaughan , 2nd earl of carbery , whose mansion , golden grove , is immortalised in the title of taylor 's still popular manual of devotion , and whose first wife was a constant friend of taylor . taylor wrote some of his most distinguished works at golden grove . alice , the third lady carbery , was the original of the lady in john milton 's comus . taylor 's first wife had died early in 1651 . his second wife was joanna bridges or brydges , said to be a natural daughter of charles i ; there is no good evidence for this . edmund gosse , 'jeremy taylor ' , 1904 . she owned a good estate , though probably impoverished by parliamentarian exactions , at mandinam , in carmarthenshire . several years following their marriage , they moved to ireland . from time to time taylor appears in london in the company of his friend john evelyn , in whose diary and correspondence his name repeatedly occurs . he was imprisoned three times : in 1645 for an injudicious preface to his golden grove ; again in chepstow castle , from may to october 1655 , on what charge does not appear ; and a third time in the tower in 1657 , because of the indiscretion of his publisher , richard royston , who had decorated his collection of offices with a print representing christ in the attitude of prayer . writings . a discourse of the liberty of prophesying ( 1646 ) , a famous plea for toleration published decades before john locke 's letters concerning toleration . apology for authorised and set forms of liturgy against the pretence of the spirit ( 1649 ) great exemplar . a history of . jesus christ ( 1649 ) , inspired , its author tells us , by his earlier intercourse with the earl of northampton twenty-seven sermons ( 1651 ) , for the summer half-year twenty-five sermons ( 1653 ) , for the winter half-year the rule and exercises of holy living ( 1650 ) the rule and exercises of holy dying ( 1651 ) a controversial treatise on the real presence . ( 1654 ) golden grove ; or a . ( 1655 ) unum necessarium ( 1655 ) , on the doctrine of repentance , perceived pelagianism gave great offence to presbyterians . discourse of the nature , offices and measures of friendship ( 1657 ) ductor dubitantium , or the rule of conscience . ( 1660 ) the worthy communicant ; or a discourse of the nature , effects , and blessings consequent to the worthy receiving of the lords supper . ( 1660 ) the rule and exercises of holy living provided a manual of christian practice , which has retained its place with devout readers . the scope of the work is described on the title-page . it deals with the means and instruments of obtaining every virtue , and the remedies against every vice , and considerations serving to the resisting all temptations , together with prayers containing the whole duty of a christian . holy dying was perhaps even more popular . a very charming piece of work of a lighter kind was inspired by a question from his friend , mrs katherine phillips ( the matchless orinda ) , asking how far is a dear and perfect friendship authorised by the principles of christianity ? in answer to this he dedicated to the most ingenious and excellent mrs katherine phillips his discourse of the nature , offices and measures of friendship ( 1657 ) . his ductor dubitantium , or the rule of conscience . ( 1660 ) was intended to be the standard manual of casuistry and ethics for the christian people . j . franklin , the science of conjecture : evidence and probability before pascal ( baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 2001 ) , 86–88 . his works were translated into welsh by nathanael jones . bishop in ireland ( ulster ) at the restoration . he probably left wales in 1657 , and his immediate connection with golden grove seems to have ceased two years earlier . in 1658 , through the kind offices of his friend john evelyn , taylor was offered a lectureship in lisburn , co . antrim , by edward conway , 2nd viscount conway . at first he declined a post in which the duty as to be shared with a presbyterian , or , as he expressed it , where a presbyterian and myself shall be like castor and pollux , the one up and the other down , and to which also a very meagre salary was attached . he was , however , induced to take it , and found in his patron 's property at portmore , on lough neagh , a congenial retreat . at the restoration , instead of being recalled to england , as he probably expected and certainly desired , he was appointed to the see of down and connor , to which was shortly added the additional responsibility for overviewing the adjacent diocese of dromore . as bishop he commissioned in 1661 the building of a dromore cathedral for the dromore diocese . he was also made a member of the irish privy council and vice-chancellor of the university of dublin . none of these positions was a sinecure . of the university he wrote : accordingly , he set himself vigorously to the task of framing and enforcing regulations for the admission and conduct of members of the university , and also of establishing lectureships . his episcopal labours were still more arduous . there were , at the date of the restoration , about seventy presbyterian ministers in the north of ireland , and most of these were from the west of scotland , with a dislike for episcopacy which distinguished the covenanter . no wonder that taylor , writing to james butler , 1st duke of ormonde shortly after his consecration , should have said , '' i perceive myself thrown into a place of torment '' . his letters perhaps somewhat exaggerate the danger in which he lived , but there is no doubt that his authority was resisted and his overtures rejected . this was taylor 's golden opportunity to show the wise toleration he had earlier advocated , but the new bishop had nothing to offer the presbyterian clergy but the alternative of submission to episcopal ordination and jurisdiction or deprivation . consequently , at his first visitation , he declared thirty-six churches to be vacant ; and repossession was secured on his orders . at the same time many of the gentry were apparently won over by his undoubted sincerity and devotedness as well as by his eloquence . with the roman catholic element of the population he was less successful . not knowing the english language , and firmly attached to their traditional forms of worship , they were nonetheless compelled to attend a service they considered profane , conducted in a language they could not understand . as reginald heber says taylor died at lisburn on 13 august 1667 . he was buried at dromore cathedral where an apsidal chancel was later built over the crypt where he was laid to rest . as our life is very short , so it is very miserable ; and therefore it is well that it is short . god , in pity to mankind , lest his burden should be insupportable and his nature an intolerable load , hath reduced our state of misery to an abbreviature ; and the greater our misery is , the less while it is like to last ; the sorrows of a man 's spirit being like ponderous weights , which by the greatness of their burden make a swifter motion , and descend into the grave to rest and ease our wearied limbs ; for then only we shall sleep quietly , when those fetters are knocked off , which not only bound our souls in prison , but also ate the flesh till the very bones opened the secret garments of their cartilages , discovering their nakedness and sorrow . : :—from rules and exercises of holy dying -- > . family . jeremy taylor is said to have been a lineal descendant of rowland taylor , but the assertion has not been proved . through his daughter , mary , who married archbishop francis marsh , he had numerous descendants . burke 's peerage , 1857 , p.664 : sir henry marsh , baronet ; burke 's landed gentry , 1871 , vol . ii , p . 888 , marsh of springmount . notes .