RijnGouweLijn

original plan . the rgl would have been the first system in the netherlands where light rail vehicles shared heavy rail tracks with heavy rail trains , similar to the tram-train systems around karlsruhe and saarbrücken , germany . this shared track runs from gouda through alphen aan den rijn to leiden . the existing heavy rail track was to bee adapted and seven additional stops added . for leiden , the plan was to have new track through the centre ( breestraat ) at street level ( alternatives that were proposed were around the centre on existing track , or in a tunnel through the centre ) . the province of south holland was in favour of this , but based on a referendum in march 2007 among the leiden population , the municipality was against it . the province threatened to force the municipality to accept a trajectory through leiden . following that , the municipality agreed to accept the rgl through the city . the province and municipality then agreed that the route would follow hooigracht and langegracht . the proposed line passed through leiden centraal railway station and then used the new tracks to katwijk with a branch to noordwijk . the light-rail vehicles used were of the bombardier flexity swift model , produced in vienna . the usage of the designation a32 is originally from sl in stockholm , sweden . in the beginning they were used on the regular railway service between gouda and alphen aan den rijn . the stations were adapted by adding new low-level platforms , either as extensions to existing high-level platforms or by building them on the opposite side of the track to the high-level platforms . from 2003 to 2009 there was test traffic with light rail vehicles on the heavy rail track from gouda to alphen aan den rijn . the rgl was divided into two sub-projects : rgl-east ( gouda-leiden transferium 't schouw a44 ) and rgl-west ( leiden transferium 't schouw a44-katwijk/noordwijk ) , both of which were due for completion in late 2015 . completion depended on financial support from the national government , and in the autumn of 2009 , state secretary of transport tineke huizinga indicated that the line to katwijk would cost €45 million . the line to noordwijk was to be served by buses in the meantime . background . long before there was light rail , some of the tracks had tram traffic . in the 1960s , leiden had the blue and yellow tram lines . in the 1960s , 70s and 80s plan were often put forward for the tram to return to the previous sections of the blue and yellow tram . the first ideas for the rgl were presented in the early 90s by boudewijn leeuwenburgh , the former district chief of nzh . the tram system was initially intended to be a much larger light rail network , with branches to leiderdorp , the district of ridderfeld in alphen and schiphol . there were also suggestions to link the rgl to randstadrail , for example by establishing the trajectory of leiden-zoetermeer and/or leiden-leidschendam-voorburg via voorschoten . none of the ideas have been implemented . people soon began to oppose the rgl . tram traffic was seen as a hazard for cyclists and pedestrians . there was also criticism of the high construction cost of the project . in the 90s it was budgeted for 450 million guilders ( €222 million ) , but by 2007 the amount had risen to €470 million . there were fears of cuts in city and regional bus networks . furthermore , there was doubt about the effectiveness of the rgl . the critics were in favour of extending the rail line from leiden to utrecht , and investment in dedicated bus lanes on the route from leiden to katwijk and noordwijk . ridership . in the 1990s it was projected that approximately 78,000 passengers a day would use the rgl ( total number for the system gouda-katwijk/noordwijk ) . despite the negative impact on the bus network in favor of the rgl it was expected that the accessibility of central leiden would be greatly improved . a track through the centre of leiden would mean that the travel time for people who have a destination outside leiden would be significantly longer , and this course had repercussions for the passenger forecast . these estimates were repeatedly reduced . the most recent forecasts a ridership of 50,000 passengers — 42,000 more than in the busiest tram line in amsterdam ( number 5 ) . on the route leiden-katwijk/noordwijk the number of passengers would only be slightly higher than on the current bus network . eastern section ( gouda - alphen aan den rijn - leiden ) . the section between gouda and leiden was originally scheduled to be inaugurated in 2005 . this was later postponed to 2007 and later to 2015 , simultaneously with western section . from 2003 to 2009 light rail vehicles were used on the existing railway between gouda and alphen aan den rijn . the future rgl would then continue to leiden lammenschans railway station . in the period 2012-2014 , the whole section would be upgraded to double track . through leiden . the original plan was that the rgl should continue from leiden lammenschans railway station as a city tram to leiden central station . this process was controversial , especially regarding safety , cost and impact on cyclists and the bus network . especially controversial was a single track section through the breestraat . therefore , in addition to the original plan several alternative plans were developed . in one of those alternatives the rgl would follow the existing route of the railway line all the way to leiden centraal , or to a point near the station . the railway would be doubled , and perhaps be moved to a concrete overpass above the current track . these alternative plans were shown to be three to four times more expensive than the originally proposed route through the city centre . on 7 march 2007 a referendum was held in leiden , on the arrival of the rgl to leiden ( a specific route was not mentioned in the referendum question ) . 69 % of the leiden inhabitants voted 'no ' to the proposal . accordingly , the town rejected the rgl , but the province threatened to impose the tram line anyway . this led a majority of the politicians in leiden to accept , in 2008 , an alternative route of the rgl , through hooigracht/langegracht . whereas the tram in the initial proposal would go through steenstraat/3e binnenvestgracht stationsweg to the station , it was to go through the lammermarkt and schuttersveld . according to the last urban vision , the tram would cross the railway in the rijnsbruger tunnel instead of the joop walenkamp tunnel , implying the removal of the bicycle lane and taxi stop . after leiden centraal station , the line would pass the leiden university medical center and the bio science park , reaching transferium 't schouw . western section ( leiden - katwijk / noordwijk ) . from transferium 't schouw a44 , the rgl would go as light rail to katwijk aan den rijn , then fork into branches to katwijk aan zee and noordwijk respectively . in 2005 , an agreement was signed between all municipalities except the municipality of leiden to share the costs of the project , with the national government and province covering a large part of the construction cost , and the county bearing all risks for the operation of the line . the western branch of the rgl was also important for the opening of the new building located on the former valkenburg naval air base . in katwijk and noordwijk there was much opposition to the tram plans , both among the general population and in the town councils . neither community wanted tram traffic in the town centres . for noordwijk it would end at the european space research and technology centre on the border with katwijk . the municipalities presented an alternative alignment of the rgl . the rgl noordwijk-binnen would run to voorhout station and the ns station at sassenheim . in katwijk there was opposition against the branch to katwijk aan zee . in both communities the tram line would have to be imposed by the provincial government , as had happened earlier in leiden . in the autumn of 2009 the national government provided €45 million for the line to katwijk , but not to noordwijk . there is a gap of €55 million , for which a solution had to be found . in june 2009 , a preferred route was approved by the provincial council of south holland . both katwijk and noordwijk got a tram to the coast . however , the province addressed the concerns of katwijk and routed the line not on the boulevard but to finish in badstraat . test traffic with light rail vehicles . in march 2003 test traffic was started between gouda and alphen aan den rijn with light rail equipment on existing rail tracks , largely using rgl vehicles . these were bombardier a32s , a model that is also used on the tvärbanan light rail line in stockholm . the grey and blue trams were fitted with yellow stickers to resemble ns '' sprinter '' trains . on 13 december 2009 , the trial ended and '' sprinter '' trains took over the line . the a32 trams were sold to stockholm . lower platforms . in north waddinxveen the existing platform was extended with a low wooden platform . at boskoop the island platform was considerably extended and this is the only concrete platform apart from the platform at gouda . in alphen aan den rijn a new 4lr wooden platform was built along the old freight track . there is a fence between the two separate tracks , to improve driver safety as the cab door opens directly onto the track , not on the platform . because the trains are wider than the a32 trams , extra warning stripes were placed along the platforms to warn passengers of the height/width difference in alighting and boarding . the operation suffered from frequent signal interference caused by malfunctioning axle counters and/or atp-ng-train security . soon the rgl got a bad reputation because of the cancellation of a large number of journeys . however the number of passengers per day , around 5,000 , during the period 2003-2009 was stable , despite a large increase in many other rail routes in the randstad . the six light rail vehicles purchased for the test eventually proved inadequate , also because of the large number of problems they faced . end of test . in august 2009 it was announced that the proposed precursor of the rgl on the gouda-alphen route would disappear as of 13 december 2009 , because using only sprinter the train timetables could be improved . a more direct train service between gouda and leiden centraal was introduced , decreasing the travel time by 8 minutes . future . with the route through the hooigracht/langegracht in leiden decided ( 2008 ) , and the decision of the provincial government on the western route , the future of the rgl was a little clearer , but that did not mean that all obstacles have been overcome . the municipality of noordwijk refused to cooperate and several parties in the city council of leiden remained fiercely opposed to the rgl ( including d66 and sp , never strong supporters of the rgl ) . end of the rgl . on wednesday 30 january 2013 , the provincial government chose to stop this version of the rgl project . instead , there were to be more trains , stations and buses . see also . gouda alphen aan den rijn leiden katwijk randstadrail . external links . official website ( april 14 , 2012 ) ( dutch , with summary in english ) . because the official website has been removed , this link refers to the last available version on the internet archive .