Charles François Dumouriez

early life . dumouriez was born in cambrai , on the scheldt river in northern france , to parents of noble rank . his father , antoine-françois du périer , served as a commissary of the royal army , and educated his son most carefully and widely . the boy continued his studies in paris at the lycée louis-le-grand , and in 1757 began his military career as a volunteer in the campaign of rossbach , where he served as a cornet in the régiment d'escars . he received a commission for good conduct in action , and served in the later german campaigns of the seven years ' war with distinction ( he received 22 wounds ) ; but at the peace he was retired as a captain , with a small pension and the cross of st louis . dumouriez then visited italy and corsica , spain and portugal , and his memoranda to the duc de choiseul on corsican affairs at the time of the corsican republic led to his re-employment on the staff of the french conquest of corsica , for which he gained the rank of lieutenant-colonel . in 1767 choiseul gave dumouriez a military command as deputy quartermaster general to the army of corsica under the marquis de chauvelin . after this , he became a member of the secret du roi , the secret service under louis xv , which gave full scope to his diplomacy skills . in 1770 he undertook a mission into poland to the confederation of bar , where , in addition to his political business , he organized a polish militia for the war of the bar confederation . on 23 may , his polish soldiers were smashed by the russian forces of general alexander suvorov in the battle of lanckorona . the fall of choiseul ( 1770 ) brought about dumouriez 's recall . in 1772 , upon returning to paris , dumouriez sought a military position from the marquis de monteynard , secretary of state for war , who gave him a staff position with the regiment of lorraine writing diplomatic and military reports . in 1773 , he found himself imprisoned in the bastille for six months , apparently for diverting funds intended for the employment of secret agents into the payment of personal debts . during his six months of captivity dumouriez occupied himself with literary pursuits . he was then removed to caen , where he remained in detention until the accession of louis xvi in 1774 . dumouriez was then recalled to paris and assigned to posts in lille and boulogne by the comte de saint-germain , the new king 's minister of war . upon his release , dumouriez married his cousin , a certain mademoiselle de broissy , but he proved a neglectful and unfaithful husband , and in 1789 the couple separated . madame dumouriez took refuge in a convent . in the meantime , dumouriez had turned his attention to the internal state of his own country , and amongst the very numerous memoranda which he sent to the government was one on the defence of normandy and its ports , which procured for him in 1778 the post of commandant of cherbourg , which he administered with much success for ten years . he became a maréchal de camp in 1788 , but his ambition was not satisfied . career during the revolution . at the outbreak of the revolution , seeing the opportunity for carving out a new career , he went to paris , where he joined the jacobin club in 1789 . the death of mirabeau , to whose fortunes he had attached himself , proved a great blow . however , opportunity arose again when , in his capacity as a lieutenant-general and the commandant of nantes , he offered to march to the assistance of the national constituent assembly after the royal family 's unsuccessful flight to varennes . in 1790 , dumouriez was appointed french military advisor to the newly established independent belgian government and remained dedicated to the cause of an independent belgian republic . minister of war , louis lebègue duportail , promoted dumouriez from president of the war council to major-general in june 1791 and attached him to the twelfth division , which was commanded by general jacques alexis de verteuil . on august 24 , 1792 , dumouriez wrote to his ally general françois kellermann about the void in military power within france . within this letter , dumouriez voices his opinions adamantly that lafayette was a '' traitor '' '' from hero to “ traitor ” : the french revolution . '' lafayette : citizen of two worlds . cornell university , n.d . web . 26 mar . 2017 . dumouriez , charles françois . '' letter to general françois kellermann '' . 24 august 1792 . '' department of history . '' illustrations from révolutions de paris department of history . n.p . , n.d . web . 19 feb . 2017 . he then attached himself to the girondist party and , on 15 march 1792 , became the french minister of foreign affairs . dumouriez then selected pierre lebrun as his first officer for belgian and liégeois affairs . the relationship between the girondists and dumouriez was not based on ideology , but rather based on the practical benefit it gave to both parties . dumouriez needed people in the legislative assembly to support him , and the girondists needed a general to give them legitimacy in the army . brace , richard munthe , general dumouriez and the girondins 1792-1793 , in the american historical review , vol . 56 , no . 3 , ( april , 1951 ) , pp . 493-509 . he played a major part in the declaration of war against austria ( 20 april ) , and he planned the invasion of the netherlands . his foreign policy was greatly influenced by jean-louis favier . savage , gary . favier ’ s heirs : the french revolution and the secret du roi , in the historical journal , vol . 41 , no . 1 , ( march 1998 ) , pp . 225-258 . favier had called for france to break its ties with austria . on the king 's dismissal of roland , clavière and servan ( 13 june 1792 ) , he took servan 's post of minister of war , but resigned it two days later on account of louis xvi 's refusal to come to terms with the national constituent assembly , and went to join the army of marshal luckner . after the émeute of 10 august 1792 and lafayette ’ s flight , he gained appointment to the command of the '' army of the centre '' . at the same moment , france 's enemies assumed the offensive . dumouriez acted promptly . his subordinate kellermann repulsed the prussians at valmy ( 20 september 1792 ) , and dumouriez himself severely defeated the austrians at jemappes ( 6 november 1792 ) . after these military victories , dumouriez was ready to invade belgium to spread revolution . he was a true revolutionary in the sense that he believed that nations which had undergone a revolution , in this instance france , should give aid to oppressed countries . as his plans were largely limited to belgium , this tunnel vision sometimes prevented him from acting in the most logical fashion as a commander . howe , patricia chastain , charles-francois dumouriez and the revolutionizing of french foreign affairs in 1792 , in french historical studies , vol . 14 , no . 3 , ( spring , 1986 ) , pp . 367-390 . returning to paris , dumouriez encountered popular ovation , but he gained less sympathy from the revolutionary government . his old-fashioned methodical method of conducting war exposed him to the criticism of ardent jacobins , and a defeat would have meant the end of his career . to the more radical elements in paris , it became clear that dumouriez was not a true patriot when he returned to paris on 1 january 1793 and worked during the trial of louis xvi to save him from execution . dumouriez had also written a letter to the convention scolding it for not supplying his army to his satisfaction and for the decree of 15 december , which allowed the french armies to loot in the territory they had won . the decree insured that any plan concerning belgium would fail due to a lack of popular support among the belgians . this letter became known as “ dumouriez ’ s declaration of war ” . after a major defeat in the battle of neerwinden in march 1793 , he made a desperate move to save himself from his radical enemies . arresting the four deputy-commissioners of the national convention who had been sent to inquire into his conduct ( camus , bancal-des-issarts , quinette , and lamarque ) as well as the minister of war , pierre riel de beurnonville , he handed them over to the enemy , and then attempted to persuade his troops to march on paris and overthrow the revolutionary government . the attempt failed , and dumouriez , along with the duc de chartres ( afterwards king louis philippe ) and his younger brother , the duc de montpensier , fled into the austrian camp . this blow left the girondists vulnerable due to their association with dumouriez . later life and death . following his defection in april 1793 , dumouriez remained in brussels for a short time , and then travelled to cologne , seeking a position at the elector 's court . he soon learned he had become an object of suspicion among his countrymen , the royal houses , aristocracies , and clergy of europe . in response , dumouriez wrote and published in hamburg a first volume of memoirs in which he offered his version of the previous year 's events . dumouriez now wandered from country to country , occupied in ceaseless royalist intrigues , until 1804 when he settled in england , where the british government granted him a pension . he became a valuable adviser to the british war office in its struggle against napoleon , though the extent of his aid only became public many years later . in 1814 and 1815 , he endeavoured to procure from louis xviii the baton of a marshal of france , but failed to do so . he died at turville , near henley-on-thames , on 14 march 1823 . dumouriez 's memoirs appeared at hamburg in 1794 . an enlarged edition , la vie et les mémoires du général dumouriez , appeared at paris in 1823 . dumouriez also wrote a large number of political pamphlets .