Óengus II

life . óengus succeeded his brother caustantín to the throne . previously thought to have been of dál riatan origin and descended from fergus mac echdach , their family is now assumed to have been that of the first king óengus i , perhaps originating in circinn ( presumed to correspond with the modern mearns ) , a pictish family with ties to the eóganachta of munster in ireland . broun , '' pictish kings '' , p . 82 , table 67 . óengus , along with his brother , son eogán , and nephew domnall , is included in the duan albanach , a praise poem from the reign of malcolm iii of scotland listing máel coluim 's predecessors as kings of scots , of alba and of dál riata from fergus mór and his brothers onwards . the inclusion of pictish kings from caustantín to eogán in the duan led to the supposition that dál riata was ruled by pictish kings , or rather that dál riata kings ruled pictland , leading to supposition that the origins of the kingdom of alba lay in a gaels conquest of pictland . see bannerman , smyth , for alternative views of this process ; compare foster . however , it is now suggested that their inclusion is due to their importance in the religious communities of dunkeld and st andrews , where they were seen as founders and early patrons . broun , '' pictish kings '' , pp.80 & ndash ; 81 ; see also broun , '' dunkeld '' , p . 105 , note 40 . however , a modern reconstruction of the later lists of dál riata kings presumes that óengus 's nephew domnall was king of dál riata during this time ( approximately 811 & ndash ; 835 ) . broun , '' pictish kings '' , pp . 75 & ndash ; 83 . óengus died in 834 , the only event of his reign reported in the irish annals , and was succeeded by his nephew drest mac caustantín . annals of ulster , s.a . 834 . óengus 's son eogán was later king and was killed with his brother bran in a battle against vikings in 839 . association with saint andrew . walter bower in his scotichronicon ( 1440s ) supplies a legend according to which saint andrew appears to óengus ii in 832 , on the eve of a battle against the angles . the saint advises the king to watch for the '' sign of the cross of christ in the air '' . bower 's account has precedents in earlier chroniclers john of fordun ( iv , xiii & ndash ; xiv ) and andrew of wyntoun . a still earlier reference of the 12th century simply states that '' king hungus '' won a victory aided by saint andrew , in gratitude for which the picts agreed to venerate the saint . broun , '' st andrews '' , p . 108 . skene , in his notes to fordun iv , xiii & ndash ; xiv , states that the episode is placed in the 4th century , making the entire tale anachronistic in the extreme . the three kings whom the legend has been tied to are athelstan of england and athelstan of east anglia , as well as guthrum the old ( whose baptismal name was athelstan ) . the '' cross of christ '' vision in bower 's account ( itself a reminisence of the milvian bridge episode ) is turned into the white on blue saltire in the narrative by george buchanan ( 1506–1582 ) , who has such a saltire appear in the sky in the form of a cloud formation during the battle . the religious site at st andrews , originally cennrígmonaid , long predates this óengus . túathalán , first known abbot of cennrígmonaid , died in 747 , and it is thought likely that the establishment is due to the earlier óengus ( king from 729 ; died 761 ) or to nechtan mac der-ilei ( king 706 & ndash ; 724 and ? 728 & ndash ; 729 ; died 732 ) . the st andrews sarcophagus is assumed to have been made for the remains of nechtan or the first óengus . henderson , pp . 155 & ndash ; 156 . the later st andrews tradition recounting the supposed arrival of saint regulus ( or saint rule ) at st andrews , with relics of st andrew , has him met at forteviot by three sons of óengus : eogán , nechtan and finguine . broun , '' pictish kings '' , p . 81 and note 27 . broun notes that , apart from eogán , the names may be fictitious . however , nechtan mac der-ilei 's paternal grandfather was named finguine , so that some person of that name could have been linked with the earliest history of cennrígmonaid . . see also . house of óengus . notes . references . alan orr anderson , early sources of scottish history a.d 500 & ndash ; 1286 , volume 1 . reprinted with corrections , stamford : paul watkins , 1990 . bannerman , john . '' the scottish takeover of pictland and the relics of columba '' in dauvit broun and thomas owen clancy ( eds . ) spes scotorum : saint columba , iona and scotland . edinburgh : t & t clark , 1999 dauvit broun , '' dunkeld and the origins of scottish identity '' in dauvit broun and thomas owen clancy ( eds ) , op . cit . broun , dauvit . '' pictish kings 761-839 : integration with dál riata or separate development '' in sally foster ( ed . ) the st andrews sarcophagus : a pictish masterpiece and its international connections . dublin : four courts press , 1998 . broun , dauvit , '' the church of st andrews and its foundation legend in the early twelfth century '' in simon taylor ( ed . ) kings , clerics and chronicles in scotland , 500-1297 : : essays in honour of marjorie ogilvie anderson on the occasion of her ninetieth birthday . dublin : four courts press , 2000 . clancy , thomas owen . '' caustantín son of fergus ( uurgust ) '' in m . lynch ( ed . ) the oxford companion to scottish history . oxford & new york : oxford up , 2002 . john of fordun , chronicle of the scottish nation , ed . william forbes skene , tr . felix j.h . skene , 2 vols . reprinted , lampeter : llanerch press , 1993 . sally foster , picts , gaels and scots : early historic scotland . london : batsford , henderson , isabel . '' primus inter pares : the st andrews sarcophagus and pictish sculpture '' in simon taylor ( ed . ) op . cit . smyth , alfred p . warlords and holy men : scotland ad 80-1000 . reprinted , edinburgh : edinburgh up , 1998 . external links . annals of ulster , part 1 , at celt ( translated ) duan albanach , at celt ( translated ) the pictish chronicle