HMS Carnarvon

design and description . carnarvon was designed to displace . the ship had an length overall of , a beam of and a deep draught of . she was powered by two 4-cylinder triple-expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of and gave a maximum speed of . the engines were powered by seventeen niclausse and six cylindrical boilers . chesneau & kolesnik , p . 71 she carried a maximum of of coal and her complement consisted of 610 officers and enlisted men . friedman 2012 , p . 336 her main armament consisted of four breech-loading ( bl ) 7.5-inch mk i guns mounted in four single-gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure and one wing turret . friedman 2012 , p . 256 the guns fired their shells to a range of about . friedman 2011 , pp . 75–76 her secondary armament of six bl 6-inch mk vii guns was arranged in casemates amidships . four of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . friedman 2012 , pp . 256 , 260–61 they had a maximum range of approximately with their shells . friedman 2011 , pp . 80–81 carnarvon also carried eighteen quick-firing gun 3-pounder hotchkiss guns and two submerged 18-inch torpedo tubes . her two 12-pounder 8 cwt guns could be dismounted for service ashore . at some point in the war , the main deck six-inch guns of the devonshire-class ships were moved to the upper deck and given gun shields . their casemates were plated over to improve seakeeping and the four 3-pounder guns displaced by the transfer were landed . friedman 2012 , p . 280 the ship 's waterline belt armor ranged from in thickness and was closed off by transverse bulkheads . the armour of the gun turrets was also five inches thick whilst that of their barbettes was six inches thick . the protective deck armour ranged in thickness from and the conning tower was protected by of armour . . construction and service . carnarvon , named to commemorate the welsh county , silverstone , p . 220 was keel by william beardmore & company at their dalmuir shipyard on 1 october 1902 and launched on 7 october 1903 . she was completed on 29 may 1905 and was initially assigned to the 3rd cruiser squadron of the mediterranean fleet . she was transferred to the 2nd cruiser squadron of the atlantic fleet in june 1907 and was then assigned to the reserve third fleet at devonport in april 1909 . the ship was transferred to the second fleet at devonport in march 1912 and subsequently became the flagship of the 5th cruiser squadron until the start of world war i . gardiner & gray , p . 13 she participated in the fleet manoeuvres in july–august 1913 as well as those in july 1914 . on 31 july , a few days before war was declared on germany , she encountered the german light cruiser in the english channel returning home and the two ships saluted each other . transcript when news of the outbreak of hostilities was received on 5 august , carnarvon , now the flagship of rear admiral archibald stoddart , was at sea , making for the canary islands from gibraltar . hms carnarvon – july 1913 to november 1918 she was quickly sent to cape verde and captured the german merchant ship on 23 august 1914 . she escorted her prize to freetown , sierra leone for disposal and resumed patrolling . she moved to the brazilian coast in october and then proceeded to the falkland islands with the squadron commanded by vice-admiral doveton sturdee . massie , pp . 244 , 249 . battle of the falklands . upon arrival at port stanley on 7 december , sturdee informed his captains that he planned to recoal the entire squadron the following day from the two available colliers and to begin the search for the east asia squadron , believed to be running for home around the tip of south america , the day after . vice-admiral maximilian von spee , commander of the german squadron , had other plans and intended to destroy the radio station at port stanley on the morning of 8 december . the appearance of two german ships at 07:30 caught sturdee 's ships by surprise , but the germans were driven off by shells fired by the predreadnought battleship when they came within range around 09:20 . carnarvon completed recoaling at 08:00 and the squadron cleared the harbour by 10:30 . sturdee ordered '' general chase '' at that time , but carnarvon could only manage and fell behind the other british ships . his two battlecruisers were the fastest ships present and inexorably began to close on the german cruisers , opening fire at 12:55 that straddled the light cruiser , the rear ship in the german formation . it was clear to spee that his ships could not outrun the battlecruisers and that the only hope for any of his ships to survive was to scatter . so he turned his two armoured cruisers around to buy time by engaging the battlecruisers and ordered his three light cruisers to disperse at 13:20 . carnarvon , now behind , had no hope of catching the scattering german ships and continued to trail the battlecruisers . massie , pp . 258–265 carnarvon finally came within range of the german armoured cruisers and opened fire shortly before rolled over and capsized at 16:17 . she then engaged until sturdee ordered '' cease fire '' at 17:50 . the german captain had started to scuttle his ship 10 minutes earlier when it was clear that the situation was hopeless and his ship sank at 18:00 . carnarvon rescued 20 survivors from gneisenau , but only wreckage was visible when she later steamed through the area where scharnhorst had sunk . massie , pp . 270–273 after the battle she participated in the hunt for the light cruiser that had escaped during the battle and investigated anchorages in argentina , chile and the island of south georgia before proceeding north to brazil in february . she struck a coral reef off the abrolhos archipelago on 22 february 1915 and had to be beached to avoid sinking . the ship received temporary repairs at rio de janeiro the following month . carnarvon received permanent repairs in montreal , canada , from may to july after which she escorted several british h-class submarines from halifax to the united kingdom en route to devonport . she then returned to halifax where she was based for the rest of the year . now assigned to the north america and west indies station , she resumed her duties protecting british shipping for the rest of the war . in 1919 , she began serving as a cadet training ship , remaining in that role until she was listed for sale in march 1921 . carnarvon was sold for scrap on 8 november 1921 and subsequently broken up in germany . . notes . footnotes . bibliography . . further reading . . external links . hms carnarvon memoir 1914–1915 – annotated transcript of a diary kept by george h . j . hanks , a sick bay attendant .