Henriette Roosenburg

start of resistance work . born in the hague to an upper-class family , jet , as she was called by family and friends , was a graduate student at the university of leiden at the start of world war ii . during 1941 , she became involved in the dutch resistance . she started out by helping jewish people flee or go into hiding . during 1942 and 1943 , she collected information for the editors-in-chief of the influential dutch resistance newspaper het parool ( the watchword ) . in 1943 , she was recruited as a helper on an escape line running via belgium , france and the pyrenees to spain , from where escapees could travel to london . it was set up at the instruction of the dutch government in exile in london , with the aim to have people brought over to england to inform the government on the occupied homeland and the dutch resistance . dutch secret agent piet gerbrands , trained in england , was dropped in the netherlands in march 1943 to organize the line . he used the assistance of the resistance group fiat libertas , which already ran both an escape line for allied air men shot down over the netherlands and an intelligence line to brussels . the escape line for the government was to be a separate line and was given the name st john , a codename of gerbrands ' . jet , who spoke french fluently and could pass for a belgian citizen , worked under the alias gaby . she took her charges to brussels , from where the belgian guide ( 'passeur ' ) henri-jean nys assisted them to toulouse . secret agent gerbrands was the first to return to london . however , the line st john only functioned briefly . the nazi counterintelligence agencies were able to disrupt the line by arresting various dutch and belgian helpers between the end of september and november 1943 . practically all of the members of resistance group fiat libertas were also arrested . military espionage jet , however , escaped arrest various times . when the government escape line was abandoned , she helped several allied airmen escape to brussels . her ability to rapidly cross the dutch-belgian border gained her the nickname zip : she seemed to 'zip ' to and fro . the dutch bureau of intelligence in london , working for the dutch government and responsible for sending secret agents such as gerbrands , by now knew of jets feats and capacities . the bureau had for some time been eager to establish a line for military intelligence . the allied high command was preparing an invasion on the west coast of continental europe and needed information about the military situation in various countries . jet was traced in brussels by a guide who asked her to travel to bern , switzerland , where a group of dutch citizens worked to collect information and send it to the dutch government . jet set off for switzerland at the end of december 1943 . in bern , she received instructions to organize a new resistance group in the netherlands to collect military information and to set up a line via paris , france , to switzerland . but when she returned in january 1944 , the nazi 's were closing in on her . she had barely organised the intelligence line when she was caught on march 1 , 1944 , in brussels , where she had traveled with intelligence for switzerland . she was betrayed by an belgian infiltrator who was later executed by the belgian resistance . trial and death sentence jet was transferred to the hague and interrogated severely and exhaustingly , but she managed to protect the new intelligence line and her coworkers . in july 1944 , she and 19 other members of the former resistance group fiat libertas were moved to utrecht , the netherlands , for their trial . here , jet again met up with nel lind , whom she had known previously as the organizer of the escape line for allied pilots . she also met joke folmer for the first time . joke ( pronounced '' yo-kuh '' ) had proven to be a competent and successful guide , who until her arrest in april 1944 had helped 320 people escape to belgium . half of them were allied air men and many of them managed to return to england . both women would become her companions until the end of the war and during their subsequent journey home . they figure prominently in '' the walls came tumbling down '' . the group were court-martialled by the german army on the charge of 'feindbegünstigung ' , aiding and abetting the enemy , because their espionage activities and assistance to allied pilots had undermined the interests of the german army , and had favoured enemy forces . joke , nel and jet were sentenced to death ; jet even thrice , with the advise to absolutely carry out the sentence , since she was considered very dangerous . escape from execution while their sentences were being considered for pardon , the allied forces reached the dutch border town of breda at the beginning of september 1944 . many nazis and nazi sympathisers fled to germany overnight ; the military director of the prison in utrecht was among them . he took the women who had been sentenced to death with him . the women were loaded into cattle wagons at the train station in utrecht , but the procedural documents were left with the person who decided on pardons . it made them 'häftlinge ohne papiere ' , undocumented prisoners , which saved their lives . after several transfers they ended up in the german prison at waldheim . by then they were night and fog prisoners , destined to disappear without a trace . they were oblivious to the fact that , in the growing chaos , confirmation of their death sentences was slowly catching up with them . they were liberated just in time . the american army was advancing from the west , but on may 6 , 1945 , the soviet army reached waldheim and released the prisoners . months after the end of the war , a large envelope surfaced in the netherlands bearing the stamps of all their prisons , with dates just days after they had left . interview with joke folmer , 2008 , by sonja van 't hof . waldheim prison at waldheim , henriette and the other prisoners were severely undernourished , and spent most of their free time embroidering bits of cloth with terse iconography about their experience . for instance , one section of roosenburg 's embroidery shows a crude drawing of a gun to indicate that the prisoners had heard what they thought was allied gunfire , as well as the names '' nel '' and '' joke '' in morse code to indicate that she was in solitary confinement , that nell and joke were in the two adjacent cells , and that they communicated by tapping morse code on the walls . after their release , henriette and four other dutch nn prisoners ( dries , nell , joke , and fafa , a dutch nn prisoner with severe arthritis ) had a chance to return to the netherlands a few days later when the u.s . army arrived with trucks to carry people through the russian lines . however , fafa 's arthritis was so severe that she could not walk ; and the surrounding roads were largely unpaved and rough . the other four did not believe that fafa would survive the trip even if there were room for her cot—and there was not room for her cot ; the truck was densely packed and offered standing room only . the group had heard that the russians intended to send displaced persons back home via odessa , a port in ukraine on the black sea ; considering that too far of a side trip , dries , nell , joke , and henriette stayed behind to take fafa to a local civilian hospital instead , and then set out on their own for the netherlands . the russians had established sentries along major routes , including bridges , and were disallowing all unauthorized travel for fear german soldiers would escape along with former german pows . henriette and her friends , through bartering and guile , came to travel along elbe river in a small boat from waldheim to coswig , where they were accosted by russian soldiers and taken to a displaced persons camp populated by belgium , dutch , and italy . on 6 june 1945 roosenburg and a group of dutch people were exchanged for a group of russian pows ; they made their way to a red cross camp where they found that only the french and belgians would be flying home ; the rest would have to wait several weeks until a truck came . roosenburg convinced a dutch captain to give her group documentation stating that they were political prisoners and should have priority in transportation home ; the paperwork she suggested did not mention their nationality , and so left them free to impersonate french or belgian political prisoners . the next day roosenburg and 15 other dutch set out for halle airfield , where they convinced an american soldier to allow them flight on the next plane to belgium . once in belgium , the group set about calling friends and friends ' friends to tell them they were alive and on their way home , and on 12 june they arrived at a monastery in the southern netherlands where she and her friends were housed with between 1500 and 2000 others . the netherlands had just been recently liberated and was suffering famine ; as a result , trains to the north of the netherlands only ran every three or four weeks . but roosenburg happened to meet her cousin , dirk roosenburg , who had become a first lieutenant in the dutch army ; he arranged for henriette and her friends to be driven north the next day , where they reunited with their families . after the war , henriette became a correspondent for time inc . , serving in paris and the hague , and then new york city for a decade . at the beginning of her stay in new york , she wrote the book the walls came tumbling down about her experience traveling from waldheim to the netherlands , and was later awarded the bronze lion . she died in 1972 at the age of 56 . references .