Beautiful Thing (play)

plot of the screen version . the story is set in thamesmead , a working class area of south east london dominated by post-war council estates . jamie , a teen who is infatuated with his classmate , ste , has to deal with his single mother sandra , who is pre-occupied with ambitious plans to run her own pub and with an ever-changing string of lovers , the latest of whom is tony , a neo-hippie . sandra finds herself at odds with leah , a sassy and rude neighbour who has been expelled from school , does several drugs , and constantly listens and sings along to her mother 's cass elliot records . while jamie 's homosexuality remains concealed , his introvert nature and dislike of football are reason enough for his classmates to bully him at every opportunity . ste , who is living together with his drug-dealing brother and abusive , alcoholic father in the flat next door , is one night beaten by his father so badly that sandra takes pity and lets him sleep over . in the absence of a third bed , ste has to make do with sleeping 'top-to-toe ' with jamie . on the second night they share a bed : after a massage and a minor conversation , the boys soon change sleeping arrangements and jamie kisses ste for the first time . the next morning , ste panics and leaves before jamie awakens , avoiding him for days . jamie works up the nerve to steal a gay times from a newsagent , apparently starting to accept his sexuality and affection for ste . jamie finally spots ste at a nearby party and confronts him ; they prepare to leave together . the party ends badly , with sandra taking vengeance on leah for gossiping , who then threatens to 'spill the beans ' about ste and jamie and confesses to having covered up for ste in front of his father and brother . ste reacts poorly , angrily rejecting jamie and running away . slowly , ste accepts jamie 's love and their relationship begins to develop as they visit a gay bar together . sandra follows them and discovers their secret , and the story reaches its climax as a bad trip by leah ( on an unnamed drug ) precipitates sandra 's breakup with tony ; the news of sandra 's new job comes out ; and sandra confronts ste and jamie . sandra comes to accept her son 's relationship . the play ends with the two boys slow-dancing in the courtyard of their council flats to the cass elliot song '' dream a little dream of me '' , while a guarding sandra dances defiantly at their side with leah as the local residents look on ; some of them shocked , some of them enjoying the moment themselves . theatrical productions . 28 july 1993 ( world premiere ) : bush theatre , london , directed by hettie macdonald . it featured patricia kerrigan , mark letheren , jonny lee miller , sophie stanton and philip glenister . 29 march 1994 : west end at the donmar warehouse which ran until 23 april 1994 , donmarwarehouse.com with amelda brown , mark letheren , shaun dingwall , sophie stanton and hugh bonneville instagram willdowe.com hughbonneville.uk 26 september 1994 : west end at the duke of york 's theatre , with amelda brown , zubin varla , richard dormer , diane parish and rhys ifans . february 1998 ( australian premiere ) : directed by michael darragh and produced by make believe productions in sydney . an official sydney gay and lesbian mardi gras festival event , the critically acclaimed independent production starred simon corfield ( jamie ) , natalie murray ( leah ) , fiona harris ( sandra ) , andrew wallace ( ste ) and charles kevin ( tony ) . 16 may 1998 ( american premiere ) : produced by famous door theater company in chicago , illinois . 10 august 1998 : ( edinburgh festival fringe premiere ) : southbridge resource centre , edinburgh , directed by dan hyde . produced by the absolute banana theatre company . 14 february 1999 ( new york city premiere ) : cherry lane theatre in new york , new york . 13 may 1999 : rotherham arts centre , directed by darren rhodes . produced by out of the blue theatre company . 5 august 2002 : southbridge resource centre , edinburgh , directed by dan hyde . produced by the about turn theatre company . 21 august to 26 august 2002 : marlborough theatre , brighton , directed by dave brinson . produced by grassy knoll theatre company . november 2002 : coliseum theatre , oldham , greater manchester november 2005 : leicester haymarket theatre starring jeremy legat ( jamie ) , spencer charles noll ( ste ) , kate wood ( sandra ) , gracy goldman ( leah ) and adam blake ( tony ) . january to march 2006 : sound theatre in london starring andrew garfield , gavin brocker , leo bill , sophie stanton and naomi bentley . july to september 2006 : sound theatre in london starring jonathan bailey , gavin brocker , steven meo , carli norris and michelle terry . september 2007 : south london theatre this was the first performance by actors of the same age ( and younger ) as the characters they portrayed . directed by elaine heath , produced by stuart draper of melmoth . starring david clements as jamie , tom bucher as ste , rita goodhead as leah , fiona cullen as sandra and chris learmouth as tony . 31 october to 3 november 2007 : drama studio , university of sheffield by sutco . 11 january 2008 ( german premiere ) : junges theater bonn . notably this is a performance with actors being the same age as the characters they portray . february 2008 : soulstice theatre in milwaukee , wisconsin , directed by mark e . schuster . the cast features zach kunde as jamie , chris darnieder as ste , jillian smith as sandra , amanda carson as leah , and doug giffin as tony . 1 may 2008 : directed and acted by fever theatre at hemsworth arts and community college . the production features kyle crookes , ( jamie ) aaron peace , ( tony ) joss froggatt , ( ste ) stacey young , ( leah ) and lauren raynor ( sandra ) . the script has been cut to a thirty-minute runtime . 26 june 2008 : produced by em-lou productions at the battersea arts centre , directed by peter darney , featuring harry bradshaw as jamie , niall phillips as ste , anna stolli as sandra , finn hanlon as tony , louise tyler as leah . 15 july 2008 : produced by the hillyer theatre company at the everyman theatre in cheltenham , directed by jack fayter , with richard loftus as jamie , joel stubbs as ste , evelyne beech as sandra , megan travers as leah and steve roberts as tony . 12 december 2008 : produced and directed by michael darragh at zhijiang dream factory , shanghai , china . featuring joakim eriksson ( jamie ) , sophie lloyd ( leah ) , christy shapiro ( sandra ) , derek kwan ( ste ) and jp lopez ( tony ) . 9 january to 1 march 2009 ( paris/french language premiere ) : le vingtième théâtre , paris . directed by kester lovelace . a drama ties production . featuring matila malliarakis ( jaimie ) , ivan cori ( ste ) , tadrina hocking / delphine lacouque ( sandra ) , simon hubert ( tony ) and aude-laurence clermont ( leah ) . translation : pascal crantelle . may 2009 ( gent/dutch language premiere ) directed by fabio van hoorebeke . featuring pieter van nieuwenhuyze ( jonas ) , bert verbeke ( steve ) , chadia cambie ( sandra ) , steve de schepper ( tony ) and jolijn antonissen ( leah ) . 10 february to 20 february 2010 ( alberta premiere ) : walterdale playhouse , edmonton . directed by justen bennett . featuring doran werner ( jamie ) , maura frunza ( leah ) , amelia duplessis ( sandra ) , joel taras ( ste ) , and randy brososky ( tony ) . april 22–24 , 2010 : oberlin college in oberlin , oh , directed by matthew wright , oberlin college theater & dance starring linus ignatius ( jamie ) , david ohana ( ste ) , hannah finn ( sandra ) , hallie haas ( leah ) , and andrew gombas ( tony ) . oberlin 's beautiful thing 19 may to 2 june 2010 : directed by andrew cuthbertson at bath spa university theatre , bath , the egg theatre , bath , the tacchi-morris arts centre in taunton , the tower in winchester and the drill hall in london . featuring adam james green as jamie , pete peasey as ste , grace k . miller as sandra , daniel harland as tony , and aimee farey as leah . 16–24 july 2010 : tasmanian premiere directed by glenn braithwaite , presented by the old nick theatre company at the peacock theatre in hobart , tasmania . 9 november to 3 december 2011 : directed by sarah frankcom at the royal exchange theatre , manchester . featuring matthew tennyson as jamie , tommy vine as ste , tara hodge as leah , claire-louise cordwell as sandra and alex price as tony . 9 february to 25 february 2012 : directed by stephen m . raeburn at the browncoat pub and theatre , wilmington . featuring kenny rosander as jamie , ryan p . c . trimble as ste , anna gamel as leah , terrie batson as sandra , and charles auten as tony . regional premiere . facebook 28 january to 29 january 2013 : directed by peter hynds and produced by ts theatre productions in swindon , uk ; performed at the arts centre , swindon . this production starred dominic baker ( jamie ) , josh foyster ( ste ) , sarah lewis ( sandra ) , ella thomas ( leah ) , and howard trigg ( tony ) . swindonweb.com 14 february to 2 march 2013 : directed by brandon martignago and produced by burley theatre in sydney as an official sydney gay and lesbian mardi gras festival event . this 20th anniversary production starred michael brindley ( jamie ) , stephanie king ( leah ) , amanda stephans lee ( sandra ) , luke willing ( ste ) and andrew hearle ( tony ) . april - may arts theater in london 's west end 30 april to 30 may 2013 : directed by jp quirk and produced by jeannine collins in batavia , il . usa . this 20th anniversary production starred timothy vogel ( jamie ) , [ kasia karbarz ( leah ) , erin cauley ( sandra ) , michael sherry ( ste ) , tony pelligrino ( tony ) and jon witt ( ronnie ) . photos - facebook 24 july to 26 july 2015 : directed by lawkin law , translated by 我要真翻譯 and produced by theatrideo in hong kong , at the hong kong cultural centre . this production starred koch fung koon ho 馮小西 ( jamie ) , joe chan 陳祖 ( ste ) , angle kwok lai man 郭麗敏 ( sandra ) , clara ho wing yee 何潁怡 ( leah ) , and romeo wong chun kit 王俊傑 ( tony ) . photos - facebook 21 february 2017 : directed by ryan gooderham at thurston community college , beyton . starring matt gibson ( jamie ) , charlie stannard ( ste ) , aisling brooks ( sandra ) , imogen turnbow ( leah ) and daniel mckeown ( tony ) . 1 june to 29 june 2018 : 25th anniversary production at above the stag theatre . 3 july to 7 july 2018 : open air , site-specific dance-theatre adaptation performed on the thamesmead housing estate where the play is set and the 1996 beautiful thing ( film ) was shot . co-directed by bradley hemmings and robby graham and produced by haitham ridha as part of greenwich+docklands international festival - beautiful thing , 3-7 july 2018 , greenwich+docklands international festival . 11 october to 27 october 2018 : in-house production by tobacco factory theatres , bristol . directed by mike tweddle and starring finn hanlon as tony , amy-leigh hickman as leah , ted reilly as jamie , phoebe thomas as sandra and tristan waterson as ste . references .