Geography of Missouri

regions . northern plains . the dissected till plains portion of the northern plains region lies in the portion of the state north of the missouri river , while the osage plains portion extends into the southwestern portion of the state bordering the ozark plateau . thus the northern plains covers an area slightly more than a third of the state . this region is a beautiful , rolling country , with a great abundance of streams . it is more hilly and broken in its western half than in its eastern half . the elevation in the extreme northwestern missouri is about . and in the extreme northeastern portion about . , while the rim of the region to the southeast , along the border of the ozark region , has an elevation of about . the valleys for the larger streams are about 250 to deep and sometimes 8 to wide with the country bordering them being the most broken of the region . the smaller streams have so eroded the whole face of the country that little of the original surface plain is to be seen . the mississippi river runs along the length of missouri 's eastern side and is skirted throughout by topographic relief of 400 to . elevation . ozark plateau . the ozark region is essentially a low dome , with local faulting and minor undulations , dominated by a ridge or , more exactly , a relatively even belt of highland that runs from near the mississippi river about ste . genevieve to mcdonald county on the arkansas border . high rocky bluffs rise precipitously on the mississippi , sometimes to a height of or so above the water , from the mouth of the meramec river to ste . genevieve . these mark where that river cuts the ozark ridge . across the mississippi river , this ridge is continued by the shawnee hills in illinois . the elevations of the crests in missouri vary from 1,100 to . this second physiographic region comprises somewhat less than two-thirds of the area of the state . the burlington escarpment of mississippian rocks , which in places is as much as 250 to in height , runs along the western edge of the ordovician formations and divides the region into an eastern and a western area , known respectively to physiographers as the salem plateau and the springfield plateau . headward erosion by the south flowing tributaries to the white river in northern arkansas has created a southern escarpment to both the springfield and salem plateaus that runs from mcdonald through barry , stone , christian , douglas , and howell counties . to the south of this escarpment lies some of the more rugged and highly dissected parts of the missouri ozarks . the famed shepherd of the hills region near branson lies within this rugged area . to the east of the west plains plain lies the dissected valleys of the eleven point river and the current river . superficially , each is a simple rolling plateau , much broken by erosion ( though considerable undissected areas drained by underground channels remain ) , especially in the east , and dotted with hills . some of these are residual outliers of the eroded mississippian limestones to the west , and others are the summits of a precambrian topography above and around which sedimentary formations were deposited and then eroded . there is no arrangement in chains , but only scattered rounded peaks and short ridges , with winding valleys about them . the two highest points in the state are taum sauk mountain at in the st . francois mountains in iron county and lead hill just east of the community of cedar gap at in the southwestern corner of wright county . few localities have an elevation exceeding . rather broad , smooth valleys , well degraded hills with rounded summits , and despite the escarpments generally smooth contours and sky-lines , characterize the bulk of the ozark region . mississippi alluvial plain . the third region , the lowlands of the south-east and part of the mississippi alluvial plain , has an area of some . it is an undulating country , for the most part well drained , but swampy in its lowest portions . the mississippi is skirted with lagoons , lakes and morasses from ste . genevieve to the arkansas border , and in places is confined by levees . these lowlands are the northernmost extent of the mississippi embayment . the area is within the new madrid seismic zone and includes the epicenter location of the 1811–12 new madrid earthquakes at new madrid , missouri . drainage . the drainage of the state is wholly into the mississippi river , directly or indirectly , and to a large extent into either that river or the missouri river within the borders of the state . the latter stream , crossing the state and cutting the eastern and western borders at or near st louis and kansas city respectively , has a length within missouri of . the areas drained into the mississippi outside the state through the st . francis , white and other minor streams are relatively small . the larger streams of the ozark dome are of decided interest to the physiographer . those of the white system have open trough valleys bordered by hills in their upper courses and canyons in their lower courses . both the ozark region and the northern plain region are divided by minor escarpments into ten or twelve sub-regions . there are remarkable differences in the drainage areas of their two sides , with interesting illustrations of shifting water-partings ; and the white , gasconade , osage and other rivers are remarkable for upland meanders , lying , not on flood-plains , but around the spurs of a highland country . these incised meanders have been interpreted to have formed by downward erosion after uplift of an older peneplain surface . many streams in missouri are called '' rivers '' though they are small enough perhaps to be called '' creeks '' . this is due to a direct translation of the french word '' rivière '' which implies a stream size smaller than the french word '' fleuve '' , meaning '' a river that flows to the sea '' . an example of this is '' loutre river '' , from '' rivière loutre '' , or '' otter stream '' . caves . the ozarks region has a well-developed karst topography with numerous areas of sinkholes , losing stream , and cavern development . caves , within areas of limestone and dolomite bedrock , occur in great numbers in and near the ozark mountain region in the southwestern part of missouri . more than a hundred have been discovered in stone county alone , and there are many in christian , greene and mcdonald counties . marvel cave is located a short distance southeast of the center of stone county . the entrance originally was through a large sink-hole at the top of roark mountain , though now an easier entrance has been made . marvel cave has a large hall-like room about long and about wide with bluish-grey limestone walls , and a vaulted roof , rising from 100 to . due to its acoustic properties the room has been named the auditorium . at one end is a large stalagmite formation about in height and about in girth , called the white throne . exploration of jacobs cavern , near pineville , mcdonald county , revealed human and animal skeletons along with crude implements . crystal cave , near joplin , jasper county , has its entire surface lined with calcite crystals and scalenohedron formations , from 1 to in length . other caves include friede 's cave , about six miles ( 10 & nbsp ; km ) northeast of rolla , phelps county and mark twain cave ( in marion county , about one mile ( 1.6 & nbsp ; km ) south of hannibal ) , which has a deep pool containing many eyeless fish . see also . list of missouri state parks mountain peaks of missouri