Space syntax

thesis . the general idea is that spaces can be broken down into components , analyzed as networks of choices , then represented as maps and graphs that describe the relative connectivity and integration of those spaces . it rests on three basic conceptions of space : an isovist ( popularised by michael benedikt at university of texas ) , or viewshed or visibility polygon , the field of view from any particular point axial space ( idea popularized by bill hillier at ucl ) , a straight sight-line and possible path convex space ( popularized by john peponis , and his collaborators at georgia tech ) , an occupiable void where , if imagined as a wireframe diagram , no line between two of its points goes outside its perimeter : all points within the polygon are visible to all other points within the polygon . the three most popular ways of analysing a street network are integration , choice and depth distance . integration measures the amount of street-to-street transitions needed from a street segment , to reach all other street segments in the network , using shortest paths . the graph analysis could also limit measure integration at radius ' n ' , for segments further than this radius not to be taken into account . the first intersecting segment requires only one transition , the second two transitions and so on . the result of the analysis finds street segments that require fewest turns to reach all other streets , which are called 'most integrated ' and are usually represented with hotter colors , such as red or yellow . integration can also be analyzed in local scale instead of the scale of the whole network . in the case of radius 4 , for instance , only four turns are counted departing from each street segment . measure also is highly related to network analysis centrality . theoretically , the integration measure shows the cognitive complexity of reaching a street , and is often argued to 'predict ' the pedestrian use of a street : the easier it is to reach a street , the more popular it should be . while there is some evidence of this being true , the method is biased towards long , straight streets that intersect with many other streets . such streets , as oxford street in london , come out as especially strongly integrated . however , a slightly curvy street of the same length would typically be segmented into individual straight segments , not counted as a single line , which makes curvy streets appear less integrated in the analysis . the choice measure is easiest to understand as a 'water-flow ' in the street network . imagine that each street segment is given an initial load of one unit of water , which then starts pouring from the starting street segment to all segments that successively connect to it . each time an intersection appears , the remaining value of flow is divided equally amongst the splitting streets , until all the other street segments in the graph are reached . for instance , at the first intersection with a single other street , the initial value of one is split into two remaining values of one half , and allocated to the two intersecting street segments . moving further down , the remaining one half value is again split among the intersecting streets and so on . when the same procedure has been conducted using each segment as a starting point for the initial value of one , a graph of final values appears . the streets with the highest total values of accumulated flow are said to have the highest choice values . like integration , choice analysis can be restricted to limited local radii , for instance 400m , 800m , 1600m . interpreting choice analysis is trickier than integration . space syntax argues that these values often predict the car traffic flow of streets , but , strictly speaking , choice analysis can also be thought to represent the number of intersections that need to be crossed to reach a street . however , since flow values are divided ( not subtracted ) at each intersection , the output shows an exponential distribution . it is considered best to take a log of base two of the final values in order to get a more accurate picture . depth distance is the most intuitive of the analysis methods . it explains the linear distance from the center point of each street segment to the center points of all the other segments . if every segment is successively chosen as a starting point , a graph of cumulative final values is achieved . the streets with lowest depth distance values are said to be nearest to all the other streets . again , the search radius can be limited to any distance . applications . from these components it is thought to be possible to quantify and describe how easily navigable any space is , useful for the design of museums , airports , hospitals , and other settings where wayfinding is a significant issue . space syntax has also been applied to predict the correlation between spatial layouts and social effects such as crime , traffic flow , and sales per unit area . references needed . software . in general , the analysis uses one of many software programs that allow researchers to analyse graphs of one ( or more ) of the primary spatial components . history . space syntax originated as a programme research in the early 1970s when bill hillier , adrian leaman and alan beattie came together at the school of environmental studies at university college london ( now part of the bartlett school of architecture ) . bill hillier had been appointed director of the unit for architectural studies ( uas ) as successor to john musgrove . they established a new msc programme in advanced architectural studies and embarked on a programme of research aimed at developing a theoretical basis for architecture . previously bill hillier had written papers with others as secretary to the riba , notably 'knowledge and design ' and 'how is design possible ' . these laid the theoretical foundation for a series of studies that sought to clarify how the built environment relates to society . one of the first cohort of students on the mscaas was julienne hanson who went on to co-author the social logic of space ( sls ) with bill hillier ( cup , 1984 ) . this brought together in one place a comprehensive review of the programme of research up to that point , but also developed a full theoretical account for how the buildings and settlements we construct an not merely the product of social processes , but also play a role in producing social forms . sls also developed an analytic approach to representation and quantification of spatial configuration at the building and the settlement scale , making possible both comparative studies as well as analysis of the relationship between spatial configuration and aspect of social function in the built environment . these methods coupled to the social theories have turned out to have a good deal of explanatory power . space syntax has grown to become a tool used around the world in a variety of research areas and design applications in architecture , urban design , urban planning , transport and interior design . many prominent design applications have been made by the architectural and urban planning practice space syntax limited , which was founded at the bartlett , university college london in 1989 . these include the redesign of trafalgar square with foster and partners and the pedestrian movement model for the city of london . over the past decade , space syntax techniques have been used for research in archaeology , information technology , urban and human geography , and anthropology . since 1997 , the space syntax community has held biennial conferences , and many journal papers have been published on the subject , chiefly in environment and planning b . criticism . space syntax 's mathematical reliability has come under scrutiny because of a seeming paradox that arises under certain geometric configurations with 'axial maps ' , one of the method 's primary representations of spatial configuration . this paradox was proposed by carlo ratti at the massachusetts institute of technology , but comprehensively refuted in a passionate academic exchange with bill hillier and alan penn 2004 . there have been moves to combine space syntax with more traditional transport engineering models , using intersections as nodes and constructing visibility graphs to link them , by researchers including bin jiang , valerio cutini and michael batty . recently there has also been research development that combines space syntax with geographic accessibility analysis in gis , such as the place syntax-models developed by the research group spatial analysis and design at the royal institute of technology in stockholm , sweden . a series of interdisciplinary works published from 2006 by vito latora , sergio porta and colleagues , proposing a network approach to street centrality analysis and design , have highlighted space syntax ' contribution to decades of previous studies in the physics of spatial complex networks .