New Orleans rhythm and blues

characteristics . new orleans rhythm and blues can be characterized by predominant piano , '' singing '' horns , and call-and-response elements . jason berry , jonathon foose , and tad jones , up from the cradle of jazz ( athens : university of georgia press , 1986 ) , 5 . clear influences of kansas city swing bands can be heard through the extensive use of trumpet and saxophone solos . gérard herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues , trans . brigette debord ( fayetville : university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , 154 . a '' double '' bass line , when the guitar and bass play in unison , was combined with a strong backbeat to make the music easy to dance to . it is also common to hear the influence of caribbean rhythms such as the mambo , rhumba , and the calypso . berry , foose , and jones , up from the cradle of jazz , 20 . in addition , the usage of blue notes is characteristic . like most blues , new orleans r & b typically follows a standard three-stanza form that contains tonic , subdominant , and dominant chords . within these chords , the three '' blue notes '' , also known as flatted notes , are the third , fifth , and seventh scale degrees . in new orleans r & b , the flatted third is particularly notable . berry , foose , and jones , up from the cradle of jazz , 70 . . early pioneers . new orleans rhythm and blues was pioneered by local barrelhouse pianists champion jack dupree , archibald , and professor longhair . professor longhair , otherwise known as '' fess '' , was considerably influential in the development of the new orleans r & b sound . allen toussaint , an important figure in new orleans r & b , described him as '' the bach of rock ' n ' roll '' . john broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans ( gretna : pelican , 1974 ) ,4 . he combined caribbean and boogie-woogie rhythms to create his signature style . the result was a usage of polyrhythms that he often whistled while playing . mcknight , '' researching new orleans rhythm and blues , '' 115 . although he was admired by other new orleans musicians , he did not gain national attention until the end of his career . mcknight , '' researching new orleans rhythm and blues , '' 117 . during his early career , longhair visited the caldonia inn to listen to dave bartholomew 's band . when he sat in for bartholomew 's pianist , a large crowd suddenly flooded the venue . he then decided to start his own band called the four hairs combo . soon after , the band recorded their first four tunes at the hi-hat club for the star talent label . in 1950 , longhair worked briefly with mercury records and recorded '' baldheaded '' . the song reached no.5 on billboard 's r & b chart . due to financial complications , his work with mercury was cut short . during the 1950s , he worked with atlantic records and recorded '' tipitina '' , which at the time was only a local hit , but today is recognized as a new orleans r & b classic . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 7 . . professors and barrelhouse pianists . there were two types of local pianists in new orleans ; '' professor '' pianists and '' barrelhouse '' pianists . professors were often classically trained and understood music theory . they played in a variety of styles in the brothels of storyville . because they were more skilled , audiences expected them play any request that was thrown their way . notable '' professor '' pianists include buddy christian , clarence williams , alton purnell , spencer williams , and jelly roll morton . barrelhouse pianists were often untrained with little to no background in music theory . they were mostly self-taught and played mostly in a blues style . barrelhouse pianists were considered semi-professional and played for drinks , food , or tips . jeff hannusch , i hear you knocking ' ( ville platte : swallow , 1987 ) , 3 . . popular artists . roy brown , dave bartholomew , paul gayten , smiley lewis , fats domino , annie laurie , and larry darnell were the primary artists who achieved national fame . john broven , '' appendix , '' in rhythm and blues in new orleans ( gretna : pelican , 1974 ) , pp . 228-237 . roy brown . roy brown is considered to be one of the pioneers of the new orleans urban blues as one of the first singers to blend elements of gospel into the blues . his '' crying '' sound became his signature . hannusch , i hear you knockin ' , 71 . in march 1947 , cecil gant heard brown sing '' good rocking tonight '' during a set break at a club called the rainbow room . cecil enjoyed the song so much that he had brown sing it over the phone for de luxe records . hannusch , i hear you knockin ' , 74 . brown signed a contract with deluxe , and recorded the song at j & m studio . '' good rocking tonight '' was an immediate success in new orleans , and reached the national charts about one year later . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 21 . it became his biggest hit , and was successful enough for brown and his band '' the mighty men '' to tour across california and the southwestern united states . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues , 27 . '' good rocking tonight , '' made a reappearance in the charts in 1949 after deluxe was sold to king records , who did their best to promote it , something that was not easy because at the time the word '' rock '' was a slang for '' sex '' , which many people believed the song implied . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 23 . in 1950 , brown climbed his way up the charts once again with his song '' hard luck blues '' . other popular tunes by roy brown include '' boogie at midnight '' , '' love do n't love nobody '' , '' long about sundown '' , '' cadillac baby '' , '' party doll '' , '' let the four winds blow '' , and '' saturday night '' . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 24 . . dave bartholomew . dave bartholomew was a bandleader and trumpet player . in the early stages of his career , between 1939 and 1942 , he played on the s.s capitol riverboat with fats pichon . toward the end of his residency , pichon resigned to take a solo gig at the old absinthe house in new orleans . bartholomew took over the riverboat band until he was drafted in 1942 . while serving in the army , he learned how to arrange music as a member of the 196th agf band . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 19 . upon discovering his passion for arranging and band leading , he was eager to return to new orleans and make a name for himself . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 18 . in 1949 , bartholomew and his band recorded the hit song '' country boy '' , while signed with deluxe . his true calling however , was to be involved with music production . he established himself as a band leader who arranged , produced , and scouted talent . during the 1950s , bartholomew co-wrote most of the hits coming out of new orleans . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues , 154-155 . . paul gayten . paul gayten moved with his trio to new orleans in his early twenties and established a residency at the club robin hood . in 1947 , his band recorded the two r & b hits '' true ( you do n't love me ) '' and '' since i fell for you '' with singer annie laurie for deluxe . when deluxe records was bought out by king records , the braun brothers placed a new focus on gayten 's production skills . soon after , he became the director for chess records . berry , foose , and jones , up from the cradle of jazz , 76 . . smiley lewis . overton amos lemons , also known as smiley lewis , was known for singing and playing guitar at nearly every venue in new orleans early in his career . he had an extensive vocal range and a deep voice that could fill a room without any amplification . after the war , he formed a trio with herman seals and tuts washington . the two became very popular locally . while scouting for talent , the braun brothers were impressed by smiley and signed them to deluxe in 1947 . three years later , he signed to imperial records whom he worked with for ten years . he found moderate success with his songs '' i hear you knocking '' and '' the bells are ringing '' . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 34 . unfortunately he was overshadowed by fats domino who was also signed to imperial and achieved national recognition for his cover of '' i hear you knockin ' '' . berry , foose , and jones , up from the cradle of jazz , 72-74 . elvis presley hit '' one night ( of love ) '' , was originally recorded by lewis and was titled , '' one night ( of sin ) '' . similarly , gale storm 's cover of '' i hear you knockin ' '' made billboard 's hot 100 charts . . fats domino . in 1949 , dave bartholomew and lew chudd visited the hideaway club to listen to fats domino sing . they were impressed with his version of '' junker blues '' and immediately signed him to imperial records . berry , foose , and jones , up from the cradle of jazz , 34 . that same year , domino did his first recording session at the j & m studio under the direction of dave bartholomew . of the eight songs that were cut during the session , '' the fat man '' was chosen as domino 's first big hit . a distinguishing element of the r & b hit was domino 's horn-like scat singing . following the success of '' the fat man '' , domino toured with jewel king and dave bartholomew 's band . when his song '' goin ' home , '' reached number one in the r & b charts in 1952 , his status as a star was confirmed . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 32 . the biggest hit of his career however , was '' blueberry hill '' . between the years of 1950 and 1955 , he continues to make the r & b charts over a dozen times . berry , foose , and jones , up from the cradle of jazz , 36 . in 1956 , he was the first black artist to make an appearance on the steve allen show . he would later make appearances on the perry como , the big beat , and american bandstand . berry , foose , and jones , up from the cradle of jazz , 35-36 . domino 's voice was a unique blend of creole intonations , nasal scat singing , and a warm tone . he was known for using tuplet piano figures in many of his songs . the '' new orleans '' sound is heard in his cover of smiley lewis 's '' blue monday '' , with his combination of parade rhythms and barrelhouse blues . rick coleman , blue monday : fats domino and the lost dawn of rock ' n ' roll ( boston : da capo , 2006 ) , 8 . fats domino was described by dave bartholomew as the '' cornerstone '' of rock ' n ' roll . coleman , blue monday : fats domino and the lost dawn of rock ' n ' roll , xvi . . notable record labels and producers . cosimo matassa . cosimo matassa was the leading record producer in new orleans between 1940 and 1960 . he created the '' cosimo sound '' with guitar , baritone saxophone , and tenor saxophone doubling the bass line . he also owned j & m studio and jazz city studio , where he recorded nearly all r & b hits in new orleans between 1940-1960 . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 13 . . deluxe records . david and julian braun , also known as the braun brothers , owned an independent record label called '' deluxe '' which was based in linden , new jersey . seeing that new orleans was overflowing with talent , they decided to visit the city in 1947 with hopes of singing some new artists . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 17 . deluxe signed dave bartholomew , paul gayten , smiley lewis , roy brown , and annie laurie . in 1949 deluxe records was bought out by syd nathan , owner of king records . . imperial records . lew chudd founded imperial records in 1947 . during its early years , the label centered around country music and west coast jump bands . looking to expand his business , chudd reached out to dave bartholomew . they decided that they would work together and explore the up-and-coming r & b scene . they recorded their first r & b studio session with jewel king and tommy ridgley at j & m studio . broven , rhythm and blues in new orleans , 25-27 .