Tito Kayak

protest involvement . raising of puerto rican flag at statue of liberty . on november 5 , 2000 , tito kayak and five other vieques activists stepped onto the top deck of the statue of liberty in new york city in protest and kayak then placed a puerto rican flag on the statue 's crown socialism and liberation : planted flag us national park service : planted flag project muse : today 's research , tomorrow 's inspiration : planted flag letter to from vieques mayor to pres . bill clinton : planted flag upside down world-planted flag . carolina apartment complex protest . on march 15 , 2005 , kayak chained himself to a vehicle after entering a marriott hotel property on a carolina , puerto rico , beach to protest against the building of an apartment complex . '' like many other puerto ricans , they were concerned about the courtyard marriott hotel ’ s plan to expand in an area contiguous to the terrestrial marine zone and located on a beach area used by families and workers for recreation . if the construction were allowed to continue , it would have had a substantial negative impact on the environment and make the public beach inaccessible , to non-hotel guests . '' environmental movement and peaceful action . retrieved july 22 , 2009 . . raising of puerto rican flag at the united nations . on june 13 , 2005 , kayak was arrested inside the united nations headquarters in new york city after he attempted to switch the united nations flag with the puerto rican one , while the united nations special committee on decolonization discussed the political status of puerto rico . he was subsequently ( october 11 , 2013 ) found not guilty by a manhattan criminal court judge of the filed state charge but was fined 500 for trespassing . victory as tito kayak walks free retrieved july 22 , 2009 . . arrest in israel while in support of the palestine cause . on april 20 , 2007 , kayak was arrested in israel puerto rico ’ s tito kayak under arrest in israel retrieved july 22 , 2009 . after he climbed a surveillance tower near israel 's west bank separation barrier and planted a palestinian flag in support of palestine . kayak spent about five hours in the tower , before climbing down . after his arrest , kayak stated that '' all i did was to express my identification with the villagers against the wall which is believed to be evil and illegal by the whole world and many leaders like nelson mandela , jimmy carter and the united nations '' . . san juan 's paseo caribe crane case . on november 14 , 2007 , kayak climbed the construction cranes at the paseo caribe project in san juan , puerto rico , and remained perched on the crane for one week . in a daring escape , kayak rappelled down from the crane and unto a red kayak in the water below while police officers were kept at bay by his supporters . tito kayak then rowed himself under a bridge whose clearance was too low for the police powerboats and switched out of the kayak , so when the kayak was apprehended he was no longer on board . meanwhile , he swam across to the other shore . when he was spotted by the police helicopters , supporters jumped into the water further confusing the police and facilitating kayak 's final getaway . tito kayak eludes police as paseo caribe protest in puerto rico continues retrieved july 22 , 2009 . . commemorating david sanes ' death . on april 14 , 2009 , during the anniversary celebrations of david sanes 's death , tito kayak arrived at the former bombing range of vieques , a restricted area operated by the federal fish and wildlife , and painted a sign saying '' bieke or death . the struggle continues '' ( '' bieke '' was a reference to vieques ) on the former navy operation post ( op ) . reclaiming the beaches . retrieved july 22 , 2009 . sanes , a civilian navy security guard , had died 10 years earlier victim of a u.s . navy bomb while on duty at the operation post . 2010-2011 university of puerto rico strike activism . on january 25 , 2011 , puerto rico police officers arrested a number of protesters who , using civil disobedience , attempted to bar entry and exit from the university of puerto rico , río piedras campus , during the university of puerto rico strikes , 2010–11 . one of the protesters , wearing a hood , was later found to be tito kayak . desesmascaran a tito kayak . el vocero . san juan , puerto rico . retrieved january 27 , 2011 . . 2012 oscar lópez rivera incarceration . on 7 june 2012 , tito kayak started a two-leg , lone high seas voyage from ciudad bolivar , venezuela to san juan , puerto rico , and then from san juan , puerto rico to washington , d.c . , usa , to protest the u.s . incarceration of puerto rican political prisoner oscar lópez rivera . tito kayak vuelve a enfrentar problemas en el mar . noticel . 2 july 2012 . retrieved 2 july 2012 . travesia a remo por la libertad y la paz : desde ciudad bolivar hasta puerto rico en solaridad con el preso politico mas antiguo : oscar lópez rivera . ccs . ( via cyber news ) bolivar , venezuela . year 3 . issue 1002 . 17 may 2012 . retrieved 2 july 2012 . ( originally by brenda peña lópez of el nuevo dia , guaynabo , puerto rico . ) unete a la travesia admirable por la libertad de oscar lopez rivera . roso grimau . 17 may 2012 . retrieved 2 july 2012 . lópez rivera is said to be '' among the longest held political prisoners in the history of puerto rico and in the world . '' “ oscar lópez rivera , entre la tortura y la resistencia ” , by luis nieves falcón . '' repeating islands : news and commentary on caribbean culture , literature , and the arts . '' 2 december 2011 . retrieved 22 march 2012 . . legacy . an amendment to the puerto rico penal code ( article 208a ) is largely attributed as a reaction to tito kayak ’ s protests against urban and commercial development and is commonly known as the tito kayak law ( even though there is no such declaration in the law itself ) . dan golpe mortal a la ‘ ley tito kayak ’ . la perla del sur . ponce , puerto rico . year 31 . issue 1530 . 27 march 2013 . retrieved 28 march 2013 . the law attempted to criminalize activism at construction sites . law 149 of 2004 was amended by law no . 158 of 2010 , adding article 208-a which made it a felony to enter , without authorization , a properly approved construction site for the purpose of temporarily or permanently obstructing work . it also penalized the occupation of the construction site 's associated land or equipment . although the legislative act makes no mention of the tito kayak name nor exists any such designation in the amendment proper , the legislation is commonly cited in the press as '' ley tito kayak '' ( tito kayak law ) and has entered the local lexicon as such . in march 2013 , tito kayak celebrated as the law was declared unconstitutional by a commonwealth of puerto rico judge sitting at the ponce , puerto rico . . see also . list of puerto ricans . references . . external links . international solidarity movement 's article on tito kayak news of kayak arrested in israel against the wall in bilin : 30 marchers wounded and an international rounded up news of kayak 's protest in paseo caribe