Te Kooti

early life . te kooti 's early years are obscure . he was born at te pa-o-kahu in the gisborne region as a son of hone rangipatahi ( father ) and hine turakau ( mother ) , of the rongowhakaata subtribe ( iwi ) . their hapū was ngati maru , whose villages were situated near the awapuni lagoon , where the waipaoa river runs into the ocean . binney , redemption songs , p 16 ; beaufoy , 2006 , p 9 arikirangi is thought to be the original name of te kooti . his birth date is thought to be approximately 1832 . binney , redemption songs , p 16 a matakite ( visionary ) of nukutaurua on mahia peninsula , named toiroa ikariki ( ikarihi ) , prophesied the birth of te kooti ( as well as the coming of the white men , the pākehā ) : the song is dated 1766 . the pakerewhā were strangers with red or white skin and arikirangi was a grandchild of toiroa , still to be born . binney , redemption songs , p 11 te kooti is understood to be his christian baptismal name . te kooti was apparently a very troublesome boy to his father , who tried to kill him . in 1852 he became notorious as one of a group of young maori causing trouble in the gisborne district . he took on the role of a '' social bandit '' , breaking into settlers ' homes and stealing goods as part of a plunder party . binney , redemption songs , p 21 he was sent to the mission school at whakato , near manutuke . in 1846–1847 he was taught by samuel williams . samuel and his uncle , william williams '' helped the boy to find a new world in the bible '' . mitcalfe , 1963 , p 46 but his reputation was still suffering , also after contacts with the reverend thomas samuel grace , who was to replace william williams for a few years ( 1850–1853 ) . local chiefs were asked by settlers to work with the local runanga ( maori council ) to solve problems with te kooti but te kooti 's men persisted in taking pigs , horses , cattle and alcohol , angering the runanga run by senior chiefs . as a result , te kooti 's pa was attacked by te aitanga-a-matiaki . many prisoners were taken but te kooti escaped . binney , redemption songs , p 22 he had to leave home and went to sea on different ships that traded along the coasts of the north island . exile . in 1865 while fighting with government forces to suppress the pai marire ( or hauhau cult ) , he was arrested as a spy while trying to contact his brother who was fighting with the hauhau , and exiled to the chatham islands , together with the rebels he had been fighting against . he was never tried and took every opportunity to demand a trial . some say he got his name from this , '' kooti '' pronounced '' courty '' , others that it was a māori version of the last name '' coates '' . if he did supply the pai marire with guns as is alleged , he also took part in a battle against them . there are allegations he fired blanks on this occasion . while on the chatham islands te kooti experienced visions and became a religious leader . te kooti was referred to by other prisoners as tawhaki , the twice born , after his unexpected survival from tuberculosis . binney , stories without end , p 188 he also performed some sleight of hand , such as using matchheads to set his hand on fire above the altar during a church service . these tricks swayed the māori prisoners on chatham islands , and when some of the chiefs present on the island were sent back to the mainland , te kooti took advantage of the situation to become the local leader . only te kooti 's uncle was not impressed by these tricks , which he saw right through . nevertheless , te kooti established a faith named ringatū ( '' upraised hand '' ) which gained many followers , and is still present in new zealand society today . during this time on the chatham islands , te kooti ( or te koti as he signed in the documents ) was married in a civil marriage to maata te owai on 27 july 1867 . the marriage documents reveal that he was born in 1832 . king , being pakeha now , p 202 . escape . in 1868 , expecting a resupply boat , te kooti prophesied that two boats would soon arrive to take them off the island . normally the prisoners worked on a farm but using the excuse of rain a number of convicts were able to enter the redoubt . there were actually only 6 guards on the whole island as the majority had been removed in april to hokitika where a fenian uprising was feared . on 4 july 1868 , te kooti led an escape , and with 168 other prisoners seized the schooner rifleman , with supplies and rifles , scuttled another vessel the florence so that the alarm could not be raised and set off back to the north island . one chatham island sergeant was killed because of a personal grievance . king , moriori the pākehā sailors were allowed to live and set sail for the coast of new zealand with help from the māori hijackers . the sailors attempted to sail towards wellington , but with te kooti 's expertise at sailing were caught and told they would be thrown overboard if they did not keep a course for the east coast . on the fourth day at sea , the ship was becalmed and te kooti declared that a sacrifice was needed . te kooti had his uncle , te warihi otini , binney , redemption songs , p 20 thrown overboard and soon afterwards the ship made headway again . upon their arrival at whareongaonga in poverty bay , te kooti asked the māori king movement and the tuhoe tribes for refuge but was rejected . he also sought dialogue with the colonial government but was rebuffed . he sent a statement to the effect that if the government wanted a war , he would give it to them in november . at war . on 10 november 1868 , te kooti and his followers attacked the township of matawhero on the outskirts of gisborne . some 54 people were slaughtered , including women and children . the dead included 22 local māori as well as european settlers . this was probably a revenge attack , motivated by te kooti 's imprisonment as a spy . te kooti was then pursued by colonial and sympathetic māori forces . his community was surrounded at ngatapa , but te kooti and his warriors managed to escape . from there , te kooti was chased to te porere . there , he set up a pa and withstood an attack from the british forces , including some opposing maori troops , under major kepa . after much fighting , the british broke through into the pa and te kooti had to abandon it , leaving many dead and wounded . te kooti himself was shot in the finger on his escape . from there , te kooti escaped into the urewera and made an alliance with the tuhoe leadership . from 1869 to 1872 , te kooti and his followers raided throughout the central north island while being pursued by their colonial and māori enemies . his power was only broken once his tuhoe allies were systematically conquered by his enemies . but once again te kooti managed to escape , this time to the king country where he spent the next decade under the protection of the māori king . te kooti used this time to develop his religion . pardon and later life . in 1878 te kooti was thrown out of a hui at hikurangi , which had been called by the government , because he had broken the ban on alcohol that was enforced by king tāwhiao . te kooti stormed out of the meeting and went into a wild rage . in the morning he returned covered in albatross feathers , shuffling and bent over , having taken on the persona of a shuffling old man . te kooti is portrayed in this narrative as tawhaki , the twice born . he threw off his disguise and lightning flashed from his arm pits . the feathers were to show divinely inspired peace , according to the story . binney , stories without end , p 189 in 1883 , te kooti was pardoned by the government and began to travel new zealand . his followers grew and he decided to return to his old home . however , his past violence had not been forgotten and the local magistrate arrested him and imprisoned him , citing an anticipatory breach of the peace . te kooti was released on the condition that he never again try to return to his old home . te kooti appealed this decision , and was initially successful , but in 1890 the court of appeal ruled that the terror and alarm that te kooti 's reappearance would have entailed justified the magistrate 's decision . notes . bibliography . beaufoy , betty – conflict : the story of te kooti and the settlers . publ . dorset enterprises , wellington 2006 . judith binney . redemption songs : a life of te kooti arikirangi te turuki , auckland : auckland university press , 1995 . binney , judith . stories without end . wellington : bridget williams books , 2010 . king , michael . being pakeha now . penguin , 2004 king , michael . moriori , 2000 mitcalfe , barry . '' the tohunga and the testament : te kooti – with a bible in one hand , a gun in the other '' , pp 45–40 in nine new zealanders . christchurch : 1963 . in fiction . maurice shadbolt – season of the jew . publ . hodder & stoughton , london & w.w . norton , new york , 1987 . external links . te kooti biography in an encyclopaedia of new zealand ( 1966 ) editorial objection to the pardon , hawera & normanby star , 1883 te kooti arikirangi te turuki at the new zealand electronic text centre