Paul of Samosata

life . paul was born at samosata into a family of humble origin . he was elected bishop of antioch in 260 . he held the civil office of procurator ducenarius . his monarchianism teachings aroused strong opposition in the church . he was also accused of corruption on a grand scale . edward gibbon describes him as follows : the wealth of that prelate was a sufficient evidence of his guilt , since it was neither derived from the inheritance of his fathers , nor acquired by the arts of honest industry . but paul considered the service of the church as a very lucrative profession . his ecclesiastical jurisdiction was venal and rapacious ; he extorted frequent contributions from the most opulent of the faithful , and converted to his own use a considerable part of the public revenue . by his pride and luxury the christian religion was rendered odious in the eyes of the gentiles . his council chamber and his throne , the splendour with which he appeared in public , the suppliant crowd who solicited his attention , the multitude of letters and petitions to which he dictated his answers , and the perpetual hurry of business in which he was involved , were circumstances much better suited to the state of a civil magistrate than to the humility of a primitive bishop . when he harangued his people from the pulpit , paul affected the figurative style and the theatrical gestures of an asiatic sophist , while the cathedral resounded with the loudest and most extravagant acclamations in the praise of his divine eloquence . against those who resisted his power , or refused to flatter his vanity , the prelate of antioch was arrogant , rigid , and inexorable ; but he relaxed the discipline , and lavished the treasures of the church on his dependent clergy , who were permitted to imitate their master in the gratification of every sensual appetite . for paul indulged himself very freely in the pleasures of the table , and he had received into the episcopal palace two young and beautiful women , as the constant companions of his leisure moments . gibbon , edward , the decline and fall of the roman empire , vol . 1 , ch . 16 in 269 , seventy bishops , priests and deacons assembled at antioch as a pre-ecumenical synod or council called the synods of antioch . from egypt to the euxine sea , the bishops were in arms and in motion . several councils were held , confutations were published , ex-communications were pronounced , ambiguous explanations were by turns accepted and refused , treaties were concluded and violated . gibbon , edward , the decline and fall of the roman empire , vol . 1 , ch . 16 . the synod deposed paul as bishop and elected dominus as his successor . they also wrote an encyclical letter to dionysius and maximus , bishops of rome and alexandria respectively . this letter is the only indisputably contemporary document concerning him and was preserved in eusebius of caesarea 's ecclesiastical history . eusebius , ecclesiastical history , book 7 , chapter 30 however , because the synod had acted without consulting the clergy or the people , its authority was in question , enabling paul to claim continued possession of his bishopric . since he had friendly relations with zenobia , the separatist queen of palmyra ruling in syria , he maintained his occupancy of the bishop 's house in antioch for another four years . late in 272 , however , when the emperor aurelian defeated zenobia , paul lost her protection . aurelian allowed the two parties , for and against paul , to present their cases before his own tribunal . aurelian was not a christian and had no interest in the doctrinal issues of the church . wishing only to restore order , he relied on the judgment of the bishops of italy and rome . the unanimous verdict was for paul to relinquish his position as bishop . the ruling of aurelian occurred during the '' little peace of the church '' , a roughly 40-year period when christianity flourished without official sanctions from the central government . it was the first time the church had sought the emperor 's intervention in an internal dispute . kevin butcher , roman syria and the near east ( getty publications , 2003 ) , p . 378 . . teachings . paul 's teaching is a form of monarchianism , which emphasized the oneness of god . paul taught that jesus was born a mere man , but that he was infused with the divine logos or word of god . hence , jesus was seen not as god-become-man but as man-become-god . in his discourses to sabinus , of which only fragments are preserved in a book against heresies ascribed to anastasius , paul writes : '' having been anointed by the holy spirit he received the title of the anointed ( i.e . christos ) , suffering in accordance with his nature , working wonders in accordance with grace . for in fixity and resoluteness of character he likened himself to god ; and having kept himself free from sin was united with god , and was empowered to grasp as it were the power and authority of wonders . by these he was shown to possess over and above the will , one and the same activity ( with god ) , and won the title of redeemer and saviour of our race . '' '' the saviour became holy and just ; and by struggle and hard work overcame the sins of our forefather . by these means he succeeded in perfecting himself , and was through his moral excellence united with god ; having attained to unity and sameness of will and energy ( i.e . activity ) with him through his advances in the path of good deeds . this will be preserved inseparable ( from the divine ) , and so inherited the name which is above all names , the prize of love and affection vouchsafed in grace to him . '' '' we do not award praise to beings which submit merely in virtue of their nature ; but we do award high praise to beings which submit because their attitude is one of love ; and so submitting because their inspiring motive is one and the same , they are confirmed and strengthened by one and the same indwelling power , of which the force ever grows , so that it never ceases to stir . it was in virtue of this love that the saviour coalesced with god , so as to admit of no divorce from him , but for all ages to retain one and the same will and activity with him , an activity perpetually at work in the manifestation of good . '' '' wonder not that the saviour had one will with god . for as nature manifests the substance of the many to subsist as one and the same , so the attitude of love produces in the many a unity and a sameness of will which is manifested by unity and sameness of approval and well-pleasingness . '' paul was an early forerunner of adoptionism . it was suggested that the paulicians of armenia adhered to his teachings , and received their name from him . however , historical records show that the paulicians were bitterly persecuted more for their gnostic and iconoclasm views than for their adherence to adoptionism . paul 's pupil lucian of antioch is considered to have had a major influence on arius the founder of arianism . eusebius ' account . another major source of information we have of paul of samosata comes from eusebius of caesarea , who described some of the doctrines and practices paul displayed openly , which included : receiving money for his religious services , eusebius of caesarea , ecclesiastical history , book vii . chapter xxx . section 7 . as well as paying others to preach his doctrines . eusebius of caesarea , ecclesiastical history , book vii . chapter xxx . section 12 . preferring to be called an imperial procurator of queen zenobia , rather than bishop . eusebius of caesarea , ecclesiastical history , book vii . chapter xxx . section 8 . he stopped the production of psalms to christ , and trained women to sing psalms to himself eusebius of caesarea , ecclesiastical history , book vii . chapter xxx . section 10 . as an angel come down from heaven . eusebius of caesarea , ecclesiastical history , book vii . chapter xxx . section 11 . likewise , eusebius hints to the fact that paul was '' too familiar '' with his women followers , eusebius of caesarea , ecclesiastical history , book vii . chapter xxx . section 13 . whom he called '' subintroductae '' . . aftermath . canon 19 of the first council of nicaea dealt with the paulianists : athanasius of alexandria explained that despite the fact that the followers of paul of samosata baptised in the name of the trinity , they did not make it in the orthodox sense , making their baptism invalid . the paulianists seemed to have disappeared soon after the council , although the paulicianists , a 7th-century dualistic sect , were often misidentified as being one and the same . . see also . bogomilism . notes . references . clifton , chas s . ( 1992 ) : encyclopedia of heresies and heretics , abc-clio books .