Anilox

usage . depending on the detail of the images to be printed , the press operator will select an anilox roll with a higher or lower line screen . '' line screen '' is the term used for the number of cells engraved on the anilox . low line screen rolls ( 100-300 lpi ) are used where a heavy layer of ink is desired , such as in heavy block lettering . higher line screens ( 500-1500 lpi ) produce finer details and are used in cmyk color model work such as reproducing photographs . often a job will require a different line screen for each color to be printed . experienced press operators are skilled at determining the appropriate rolls for a given print job . depending on the design of the printing press , the anilox roll is either semi-submerged in the ink fountain , or comes into contact with a so-called metering roller , which is semi-submerged in the ink fountain . in either instance , a thick layer of typically viscous ink is deposited on the roller . a doctor blade is used to shave excess ink from the surface leaving just the measured amount of ink in the cells . the roll then rotates to make contact with the flexographic printing plate which receives the ink from the cells for transfer to the printed material . anilox roll selection should be based on cell volume or capacity of the engraved cells . print results are accomplished with this volume , which transfers to the printing plate and then to the substrate . in general transfer , efficiency is approximately 25 % to the substrate . cell count remains the same for the life of the roll , while volume changes over time due to wear , plugging and damage . cell count accommodates volume at various cell shapes available from the laser engraving process . the same cell count can be engraved to or wear to different volumes . contemporary ink metering systems employ a self contained system known as a chambered doctor blade system which is basically a manifold which delivers ink to the anilox roll . ink is pumped through a hose to the chamber which fills to capacity . ink is retained within the system by end seals and doctor blades . one blade works as a retaining blade , simply holding ink within the chamber . the other reverse angle blade works as previously described , removing excess ink from the engraved surface of the anilox roll . chambered doctor blade systems are recognized for high quality , consistency and accuracy removing the influence of press speed and some human subjectivity . roll manufacture and specification . anilox rolls were originally made using a process of mechanical engraving , utilizing hardened steel tools of various cell counts and cell shapes diamond pecking machine , but modern rolls are laser engraved . the characteristics of an anilox roll determine the amount of ink that will be transferred to the plate : angle of the cells , cell volume , and line screen . a 60 degree angle ensures maximum density in a given space . lower volume makes for less ink . low line numbers will allow for a heavy layer of ink to be printed , whereas high line numbers will permit finer detail in printing . both cell volume and line screen are closely correlated . the rolls are often specified by their line screen , which is the number of cells per linear inch . these often range from around 250 to upwards of 2000 , though the precise numbers vary by manufacturer . most rolls sold are within 800 lpi , although a spike in demand for those with 800–1200 lines has been seen . anilox rolls are almost always designed to be removed from the press for cleaning and for swapping out with different line screen rolls . anilox rolls are properly specified by cell volume for the required print application . lower volumes thinner ink films for the highest quality process printing . higher volumes address combination , screens , line work , solid coverage and coating applications . in virtually all printing applications with various print requirements , one volume will not print all to the highest quality . limited print stations generally call for a compromise between the highest quality graphics and color . there are many variables to consider when specifying an anilox roll beyond the print requirements , such as substrate , ink system , plate material , plate mounting tape , press speed , and drying capacity . the best course of action is to consult suppliers of all these components for proper engraving specifications from their experience . anilox roll specifications . there are two ways to specify anilox roll settings : on transfer volume or on line count . each specification has both a european standard and an american standard . transfer volume . transfer volume is the volume of ink that will be transferred per unit surface area of paper . the european standard for transfer volume is cm³/m² or cubic centimetre per square meter , which means 1 cm³ of ink will be transferred onto 1 m² of paper . sometimes ink suppliers will give a recommended transfer weight per square meter , expressed in g/m² . this can be converted to cm³/m² by dividing by the density of the ink in g/cm³ . the american standard for transfer volume is a billion cubic microns per square inch , typically written as bcm / in² , bcm/sq in , or bcm . a cubic micron ( μm³ ) is a unit of volume and one billion cubic microns ( 1 000 000 000 μm³ ) is equal to 0.001 cm³ . since one square meter is equal to 1550 square inches , it follows that 1 bcm/in² 1.55 cm³/m² . line count . line count measures the finesse of the pattern on the anilox roll . it measures how many cells are engraved per centimetre or inch . in europe the standard is lpcm or lines per centimetre . in america , the standard is lpi or lines per inch . the conversion from transfer volume to line count is not straightforward . this is because depending on the pattern used for the cell and depth of gravure of the anilox roll , the cell might contain higher or lower volumes of ink . the only way to convert cm³/m² ( transfer volume ) to lpcm ( cell finesse ) or bcm to lpi is to look at the conversion chart provided by the anilox roll supplier . also , any given anilox roll will age after some time and its actual transfer volume will be less and less . handling and maintenance . though large wide-web flexo rolls are only maneuverable by overhead crane , on smaller presses anilox rolls are often handled directly by operators . extreme caution must be taken when handling these pieces of hardware as a single bump against a hard surface or sharp corner can destroy the delicate cell structure on the surface and render a roller completely useless , at a cost of around 5000 for even small narrow-web rollers . nicks and scratches add up quickly , so fine brushes ( never brass brushes ) are used for cleaning the anilox roll . anilox rollers that are used with water , solvent and oil based inks , which dry when left sitting out and unagitated , must be cleaned immediately after use or a problem known as plugging occurs , where minuscule amounts of ink dry in the cells . this leaves tiny , but unacceptable , pinholes in anything printed from the roll in the future . anilox rolls can also become damaged if a steel doctor blade breaks and begins to grind the anilox roll . this creates a defect in the print called a '' score line '' due to the scoring of the anilox . references . . external links . sri brochure ( pdf , 3.3 mb )