Trypanosomatida

medical importance . the three major human diseases caused by trypanosomatids are ; african trypanosomiasis ( sleeping sickness , caused by trypanosoma brucei and transmitted by tsetse fly ) , south american trypanosomiasis ( chagas disease , caused by trypanosoma cruzi and transmitted by triatomine bugs ) , and leishmaniasis ( a set of trypanosomal diseases caused by various species of leishmania transmitted by sandflies ) . evolution . the family is known from fossils of the extinct genus paleoleishmania preserved in burmese amber dating to the albian ( 100 mya ) and dominican amber from the burdigalian ( 20–15 mya ) of hispaniola . the genus trypanosoma is also represented in dominican amber in the extinct species trypanosoma antiquus . . taxonomy . three genera are dixenous ( two hosts in the life cycle ) – leishmania , phytomonas and trypanosoma and the remainder are monoxenous ( one host in the life cycle ) . paratrypanosoma appears to be the first evolving branch in this order . fifteen genera are recognised in the trypanosomatidae and there are three subfamilies – blechomonadinae , leishmaniinae and strigomonadinae . the genera in the subfamily strigomonadinae are characterised by the presence of obligatory intracellular bacteria of the kinetoplastibacterium genus . family trypanosomatidae calkins 1926 trypanomorphidae woodcock 1906 ; trypanosomataceae senn 1911 genus agamomonas grassé 1952 genus batracoleishmania dasgupta 2011 genus blastocrithidia laird 1959 genus cercoplasma roubaud 1911 genus cystotrypanosoma roubaud 1911 genus jaenimonas votypka & hamilton 2015 genus lamellasoma davis 1947 genus leptowallaceina podlipaev & frolov 2000 genus lewisonella chalmers 1918 nomen dubium genus malacozoomonas nicoli , penaud & timon-david 1972 genus nematodomonas nicoli , penaud & timon-david 1972 genus †paleoleishmania poinar & poinar , 2004 genus †paleotrypanosoma poinar 2008 genus paramecioides grassé 1882 genus sauroleishmania ranque 1973 genus sergeia svobodová et al . 2007 non stimpson 1860 non nasonov 1923 non sergio manning & lemaitre 1994 genus trypanomonas danilewsky 1885 genus trypanomorpha woodcock 1906 genus undulina lankester 187 genus wallaceina bulat , mokrousov & podlipaev 1999 proteomonas podlipaev , frolov & kolesnikov 1990 non hill & wetherbee 1986 genus wallacemonas kostygov & yurchenko 2014 subfamily paratrypanosomatinae votýpka & lukeš 2013 genus paratrypanosoma votypka & lukes 2013 subfamily trypanosomatinae genus trypanosoma gruby 1843 subfamily blechomonadinae votypka & suková 2013 genus blechomonas votypka & suková 2013 subfamily leishmaniinae sensu maslov & lukeš 2012 clade crithidiatae maslov & lukeš 2012 genus crithidia léger 1902 genus leptomonas kent 1880 genus lotmaria schwarz 2015 clade leishmaniatae maslov & lukeš 2012 genus borovskyia kostygov & yurchenko 2017 genus endotrypanum mesnil & brimont 1908 genus leishmania ross 1903 genus novymonas votýpka et al . 2015 genus paraleishmania cupolillo et al . 2000 genus zelonia shaw , camargo et teixeira 2016 subfamily phytomonadinae kostygov & yurchenko 2015 genus herpetomonas kent 1880 non donovan 1909 genus lafontella kostygov & yurchenko 2015 genus phytomonas donovan 1909 subfamily strigomonadinae votypka et al . 2014 genus angomonas souza & corte-real 1991 genus kentomonas votypka et al . 2014 genus strigomonas lwoff & lwoff 1931 . life cycle . some trypanosomatids only occupy a single host , while many others are heteroxenous : they live in more than one host species over their life cycle . this heteroxenous life cycle typically includes the intestine of a bloodsucking insect and the blood and/or tissues of a vertebrate . rarer hosts include other bloodsucking invertebrates , such as leeches , and other organisms such as plants . different species go through a range of different morphologies at different stages of the life cycle , with most having at least two different morphologies . typically the promastigote and epimastigote forms are found in insect hosts , trypomastigote forms in the mammalian bloodstream and amastigotes in intracellular environments . morphologies . a variety of different morphological forms appear in the life cycles of trypanosomatids , distinguished mainly by the position , length and the cell body attachment of the flagellum . the kinetoplast is found closely associated with the basal body at the base of the flagellum and all species of trypanosomatid have a single nucleus . most of these morphologies can be found as a life cycle stage in all trypanosomatid genera however certain morphologies are particularly common in a particular genus . the various morphologies were originally named from the genus where the morphology was commonly found , although this terminology is now rarely used because of potential confusion between morphologies and genus . modern terminology is derived from the greek ; '' mastig '' , meaning whip ( referring to the flagellum ) , and a prefix which indicates the location of the flagellum on the cell . for example , the amastigote ( prefix '' a- '' , meaning no flagellum ) form is also known as the leishmanial form as all leishmania have an amastigote life cycle stage . amastigote ( leishmanial ) . amastigotes are a common morphology during an intracellular lifecycle stage in a mammalian host . all leishmania have an amastigote stage of the lifecycle . leishmania amastigoes are particularly small and are among the smallest eukaryotic cells . the flagellum is very short , projecting only slightly beyond the flagellar pocket . promastigote ( leptomonad ) . the promastigote form is a common morphology in the insect host . the flagellum is found anterior of nucleus and flagellum not attached to the cell body . the kinetoplast is located in front of the nucleus , near the anterior end of the body . epimastigote ( crithidial ) . epimastigotes are a common form in the insect host and crithidia and blastocrithidia , both parasites of insects , exhibit this form during their life cycles . the flagellum exits the cell anterior of nucleus and is connected to the cell body for part of its length by an undulating membrane . the kinetoplast is located between the nucleus and the anterior end . trypomastigote ( trypanosomal ) . this stage is characteristic of the genus trypanosoma in the mammalian host bloodstream as well as infective metacyclic stages in the fly vector . in trypomastigotes the kinetoplast is near the posterior end of the body , and the flagellum lies attached to the cell body for most of its length by an undulating membrane . opisthomastigote ( herpetomonad ) . a rarer morphology where the flagellum posterior of nucleus , passing through a long groove in the cell . endomastigote . a morphotype where the flagellum does not extend beyond the deep flagellar pocket . image : leishmaniamexicana amastigote sem.jpg amastigote : false colour sem micrograph of amastigote form leishmania mexicana . the cell body is shown in orange and the flagellum is in red . 219 pixels/μm . image : leishmaniamexicana promastigote sem.jpg promastigote : false colour sem micrograph of promastigote form leishmania mexicana . the cell body is shown in orange and the flagellum is in red . 119 pixels/μm . image : trypanosomabrucei_procyclictrypomastigote_sem.jpg trypomastigote : false colour sem micrograph of procyclic form trypanosoma brucei . the cell body is shown in orange and the flagellum is in red . 84 pixels/μm . . other features . notable characteristics of trypanosomatids are the ability to perform trans-splicing of rna and possession of glycosomes , where much of their glycolysis is confined to . the acidocalcisome , another organelle , was first identified in trypanosomes . . references . . external links . trykipedia , trypanosomatid specific ontologies tree of life : trypanosomatida taxonomya at bold systems taxonomy at taxonomicon open tree taxonomy zipcodezoo