Wikipedia:Obtaining geographic coordinates

from maps . from printed maps . looking at a printed map or atlas , either those you own or at a library . from online maps . . wikipedia compatible geotagging metadata generators . list of services , directly providing wikipedia/wikimedia commons compatible geotagging metadata . currently preferred geotagging templates are : for english wikipedia and or for wikimedia commons . ; void ( prompt ( 'coordinates for wikipedia ' , output ) ) ; : to use these bookmarklets , centre the map on the desired point and then open the newly created bookmark . a coordinate template text will appear , ready to be pasted to wikipedia . google earth . google earth makes it easy to search for the coordinates of any location and zooming in on them . the coordinate format can be chosen via tools → options → 3d view → show lat/long . there are many ways to obtain coordinates : move the mouse pointer to where you want , then use the keyboard to select the menue item edit → copy view location to copy the coordinates to the clipboard . more convenient is the associated keyboard shortcut . if it is not provided in the currently chosen language of google earth , change it to english ( uk ) ( tools → options → general → language settings ) . move the mouse pointer to where you want , and note the coordinates displayed on the bottom of the earth display window . the numbers will have to be written from the screen manually , but this does let you choose an appropriately rounded value , without excess precision , for the location you 're capturing . center the screen on your location by double-clicking on it , then use the view in google maps button at the top ( google earth 4.1 and newer ) . this will open google maps within google earth . you can see the center coordinates in decimal format in the address bar , but unfortunately you can not copy them directly . to do so , use the button open this page in your default web browser to display the same google maps page in your browser with unrestricted access to its address bar . of course , all the methods listed above for google maps are also available . center the screen on your location by double-clicking on it , then create a placemark ( add placemark -button or menu add → placemark . the '' new placemark '' window displays the coordinates . for the coordinates of an existing placemark , right click on it on the sidebar and select '' copy '' . this makes the clipboard hold a kml ( '' keyhole markup language '' ) description of the placemark . since kml is xml , it 's easily manipulable . towards the bottom of the placemark is a tag . which contains the long/lat coordinates in decimal degrees . note that the order of the coordinates is lon/lat ; you may want to swap the both in order to get the more common lat/lon notation . also note that the precision is ridiculously high ; you 'll probably want to trim it down . install the google earth version of the hjl_get_coor tool : ald-hjl-koord-en.kmz . once it 's installed , a crosshair icon appears in the middle of the google earth screen . move the view so that the crosshair is on your desired location , and then click on it . there is a link to the hjl_get_coor tool , which gives the coordinates back in your chosen wiki markup that can be copied and pasted to an article . the exported kml or kmz file can also be converted to templates using the kmlconvert tool . openstreetmap . openstreetmap can be used ; simply navigate to the desired point by double-clicking on it , select the '' share '' icon from the top-left toolbar , copy the '' link '' url ( n.b . not the shortlink ) and extract the coordinate values from it . for example , includes a latitude of 52.54341 and a longitude of -1.91035 . world wind . nasa world wind can access a large online database of u.s . and global placenames ( cities , villages and other geographic & anthropogenic features ) . street addresses can be found using yahoo and virtual earth geocoders ( works for the us , australia , uk , japan . and maybe some other countries ) . ( offline search requires this pack press ctrl-f , enter the official place name , click search , you will probably find the place you 're looking for . click go . ( of course you can navigate to the desired spot with your mouse ; select view- > show position to see the coordinates ) press ctrl-c to copy the decimal coordinates . paste it into wikipedia . example : for tucson international airport → worldwind : //goto/world earth & lat 32.11611 & lon -110.94109 & alt 24389 '' . from directories/databases . for the us . the united states geological survey 's public domain gnis database service is extremely extensive , although riddled with errors . it also provides linkouts to topozone and terraserver so that you can tweak the results to your liking . most of these coordinates use us census tiger us census boundary and annexation survey find longitude and latitude coordinates by us zip code search engine for gps coordinates of latitude and longitude of the united states of america . for other regions . for placenames in antarctica , try geographic names information system , antarctica for placenames in australia , try geoscience australia place name search for placenames in canada , try the canadian geographical names data base ( cgndb ) querying canadian geographical names for placenames in the uk , streetmap.co.uk is very useful for clicking on a precise point to show the coordinates . near the foot of a page displaying a map is a link '' click here to convert/measure coordinates '' which takes you to a '' grid conversion results '' page with the wgs84 latitude and longitude amongst other useful values . from other sources . using a gps receiver with a clear view of the sky . looking for '' waypoint '' files on sites for gps users , e.g . geocaching.com outdooractive.com findu.com google for a city name together with '' latitude '' , '' longitude '' will usually yield a plethora of useful results ( example ) formats and formatting uk places and irish places traditionally use grid references , and a latitude /longitude system tied to an osgb36 datum . this gives a 112m difference . the nad83 map datum is sufficiently close to wgs84 for initial use . it is best to double check on a mapping site such as wikimapia . cordinates obtained in china from commercial sources ( google , bing , baidu , etc . ) may be obfuscated with gcj-02 or bd-09 . vector sources are more frequently affected than satellite sources . use this gadget to obtain deobfuscated coordinates , then double check on openstreetmap . add to article finally , add the coordinates to the relevant article : see also geographic coordinate system list of geographic information systems software list of gis data sources wikipedia : wikiproject geographical coordinates