Cymbal alloys

bell bronze . bell bronze , also known as bell metal , is the traditional alloy used for fine cymbal , many gong , and , as the name suggests , bells . it is normally stated to be one part tin to four parts copper , that is 20 % tin , and this is still the most common formula , but there has always been some variation . larger and smaller bells are cast with differing amounts of tin , and some bell , gong , and cymbal makers use small but significant amounts of other elements , notably silver , gold , and phosphorus . bell bronze is a two-phase alloy , meaning some of the tin is not dissolved in the copper grains but exists between them . this makes the metal harder and more brittle than a single-phase alloy , and also affects the way the metal responds to hardening by hammering and lathing , and greatly restricts the use of mechanised techniques of manufacture . major orchestras generally use bell-bronze cymbals , which are capable of a greater dynamic range than any others . they are also generally the preferred cymbals of drum kit players . signature bronze alloys . in 1989 paiste released professional cymbal series composed of sheet metal bronze with about 15 % tin . though the manufacturing requires the metal to be rolled hot at certain stages , it is not tempered like traditional b20 cymbals but annealed . using this alloy allows for greater consistency between blanks compared to traditional cymbal alloy , and is more applicable to paiste 's 2002 production methods . examples include paiste signatures , traditionals and dark energy . paiste calls this signature bronze or sound formula , and for a time produced no bell metal cymbals , but now produces high-end cymbals of both this alloy and bell bronze . since then , other manufactures followed the lead and implemented lines of high tin sheet metal alloy . zildjian project 391 series employed paiste alloy explicitly , however many companies ( zildjian included ) produce cymbals with b12 ( such as zildjian zht , now s series ) and b10 alloys . meinl cymbals are well known for employing both alloys . there is some evidence that a similar sheet alloy was used by the hammerax company ( though with added iron and nickel . . malleable bronze . malleable bronze is an alloy of tin and copper containing typically 8 % tin . it is a single-phase alloy and can be cold rolled into sheets , unlike bell bronze . it is readily available as commercial sheet metal in many grades and thicknesses . cymbal bronzes containing 8 % tin are most normally called b8 alloy . paiste refer to their 8 % tin bronze as 2002 alloy . from the mid 20th century there were attempts to make top-quality cymbals from malleable bronze , originally for reasons of economy . as the paiste patent referred to above says : less than three decades ago experiments were carried out for economical considerations with a commercial common bronze sheet or plating containing 8 % tin by weight . the result was that the old bronze rule was confirmed and proven to be correct . one had to realize that with careful working and processing of the cymbal it was possible to achieve considerable qualitative results with the bronze sheet or plating containing 8 % by weight tin , but these results could never approach the results obtained with traditional cymbals having a tin content of 20 % by weight . not everyone agrees with this unfavourable assessment , written well after the development of the very successful paiste 2002 series . in particular , top-line malleable bronze cymbals proved exceptionally suitable for the louder music then developing . the best of them now approach , and some claim equal , the best bell bronze cymbals in quality . examples of malleable bronze cymbals include : harpy h , meinl one of a kind , meinl custom and amun , meinl lightning and raker , meinl classics and some generation x , meinl trooper and cadet , orion solo pro and solo pro master , orion viziuss , paiste 2002 and giant beat , paiste 802 and alpha , paiste 502 and some exotic percussion , pearl pro , meinl mcs , sabian b8 and b8 pro , sabian pro , sabian pro sonix , sabian apx , sabian b8x , soultone custom brilliant , soultone extreme , soultone natural , soultone vintage , soultone vintage oldschool 1964 , soultone gospel , ufip tiger , ufip supernova , zildjian i series , zbt , zxt , zht , and the sonic '' xxx '' series by krash cymbalz , a b10 alloy line for the heavy-handed , aggressive drummer . krashcymbalz.com/ceo derek '' d-day '' kendall . brass . some of the finest traditional gongs and china cymbals and nearly all zills are made from brass . however , it is widely used in cymbals . brass cymbals are inexpensive beginners ' cymbals , not meant to last long ; the rigidity of brass yields cymbals harsh in sound and very prone to cracks at the bell hole and the border . many of the '' show '' cymbals provided by many drum kit manufacturers for use in shop window displays are also made from brass . these are typically very poor in tone , some even being disks of untreated metal and unplayable despite the reputable brand name they may bear . the brass for cymbals is about 38 % zinc in copper , which is very easily worked , readily available as sheet metal , and easily the cheapest metal stock normally used for cymbals . the tone of brass cymbals tends to be warm but dull compared to any sort of tin bronze , and very few drummers exploit it . examples of brass cymbals include : harpy b , meinl marathon m38 , meinl meteor , meinl hcs , orion twister , paiste 101 , paiste 302 and some exotic percussion , pearl , royal , twister series by orion , solar and sbr by sabian , soultone intro , ufip m8 , planet z by zildjian . nearly all zill of all makes are also made out of brass . nickel silver . nickel silver as used in cymbal making is an alloy of copper and nickel , and an alloy with about 12 % nickel is used for some beginners ' cymbals . a very few specialised high-quality cymbals are also made from nickel silver , as are some top-quality gongs tending to the more modern and exotic sounds . some maintain that the term nickel silver should only be used for alloys containing an appreciable content of zinc , and would call this cymbal alloy nickel bronze instead , but the use of the term nickel silver for all cymbal bronzes with nickel as the main alloying metal is well established . nickel silver is malleable and available as commercial sheet metal , and gives a bright tone but without the shimmer and sensitivity of tin bronzes . in the early to mid 20th century nickel alloy cymbals were far more widely produced and used , and so many older recordings were probably made using cymbals with a significant nickel content . evelyn glennie is particularly noted for exploiting the tones of nickel silver cymbals . examples of nickel silver cymbals include : some foremost , meinl streamer and marathon n12 , paiste 402 , the original 1970s paiste 101 ( current 101s are brass ) and some exotic percussion , sabian signature glennies garbage , and some zilco . other metals . cymbals have also been made from silicon and aluminum bronzes but these alloys have not become generally popular . meinl fx9 is an alloy of 69 % copper , 15 % manganese , 15 % zinc and 1 % aluminium , and was used for the new meinl generation x line released in 2003 . previous generation x models were made from malleable bronze . fx9 is described by meinl as not being a bronze at all , and was previously described by their sales literature as containing tin rather than zinc . there is a minority view that the word '' bronze '' should be reserved for two-phase alloys , which may be their usage here . unlike cymbals , some gongs are made from several different metals fused together . many different metals have been used . parts of some traditional gongs , notably the bosses of some '' nipple '' gongs , are made from iron based alloys . a few independent cymbal makers have also used stainless steel and titanium to produce cymbals and gongs . see also . cymbal making cymbal manufacturers . references . ; sources the cymbal book , hugo pinksterboer - techniques and culture of current cymbal makers the cymbal book , hal leonard , - comprehensive history . external links . how alloying elements affect the properties of copper alloys ( ru : сплавы для тарелок