Albert Sorel

life . he was born at honfleur and remained throughout his life a lover of his native normandy . his father , a rich manufacturer , wanted him to take over the business but his literary vocation prevailed . he went to live in paris , where he studied law and , after a prolonged stay in germany , entered the foreign office ( 1866 ) . he had strongly developed literary and artistic tastes , was an enthusiastic musician ( even composing a little ) , and wrote both poetry and novels ( la grande falaise , 1785–1793 , le docteur egra in 1873 ) ; but he was not a socialite . he was the first cousin to the philosopher georges sorel . alain de benoist , vu de droite : anthologie critique des idées contemporaines ( paris : le labyrinthe , 2001 1977 ) , pp . 275–78 . . academic life . anxious to understand present as well as past events , he was above all a student . in 1870 he was chosen as secretary by m . de chaudordy , who had been sent to tours as a delegate in charge of the diplomatic side of the problem of national defence . he proved a most valuable collaborator , full of finesse , good temper , and excellent judgment , and at the same time hard-working and discreet . after the war , when émile boutmy founded the ecole libre des sciences politiques ( which later became the paris institute of political studies or , as it is more widely known , sciences po ) . sorel was appointed to teach diplomatic history ( 1872 ) , a duty which he performed with striking success . some of his courses were converted into books : le traité de paris du 20 novembre 1815 ( 1873 ) ; histoire diplomatique de la franco-prussian war ( 1875 ) ; and the précis du droit des gens which he published ( 1877 ) in collaboration with his colleague theodore funck-brentano . . writings . in 1875 sorel left the foreign office and became general secretary to the newly created office of the présidence du sénat . here again , in a position where he could observe and review affairs , he performed valuable service , especially under the presidency of audiffret-pasquier , who was glad to have sorel 's advice in the most serious crises of internal politics . his duties left him , however , sufficient leisure to enable him to accomplish the great work of his life , l'europe et la révolution française . online editions : l'europe et la révolution française - google books l'europe et la revolution française - internet archive his object was to repeat the work already done by heinrich von sybel but from a less restricted point of view and with a clearer and calmer understanding of the chessboard of europe . he spent almost thirty years in the preparation and composition of the eight volumes of this diplomatic history ; volume 1 appeared in 1885 ; volume 8 in 1904 . francis herrick says , '' it is still the best analysis of the european state system in the eighteenth century and the classic introduction to the study of revolutionary and napoleonic diplomacy . '' francis h . herrick , introduction to albert sorel , europe under the old regime ( 1947 ) p vi . in questia he was not merely a conscientious scholar ; the analysis of the documents , mostly unpublished , on french diplomacy during the first years of the revolution , which he published in the revue historique ( vol . v.-vii . , x.-xiii . ) , shows with what scrupulous care he read the innumerable despatches which passed under his notice . he was also , and above all things , an artist . he drew men from the point of view of a psychologist as much as of a historian , observing them in their surroundings and being interested in showing how greatly they are slaves to the fatality of history . it was this fatality which led the rashest of the conventionals to resume the tradition of the ancien régime , and caused the revolutionary propaganda to end in a system of alliances and annexations which carried on the work of louis xiv . this view is certainly suggestive , but incomplete ; it is largely true when applied to the men of the french revolution , inexperienced or mediocre as they were , and incompetent to develop the enormous enterprises of napoleon i . . literary works . in the earlier volumes the reader is struck by the grandeur and relentless logic of the drama which the author unfolds . in the later volumes the reader may begin to have reservations , but the work is so complete and so powerfully constructed that it commands its audiences admiration . side by side with this great general work , sorel undertook various detailed studies more or less directly bearing on his subject . in la question d'orient au xviii e siècle , les origines de la triple alliance ( 1878 ) , he shows how the partition of poland on the one hand reversed the traditional policy of france in eastern europe , and on the other hand contributed towards the salvation of republican france in 1793 . in the grands écrivains series he was responsible for montesquieu ( 1887 ) and mme de staël ( 1891 ) . the portrait which he draws of montesquieu is all the more vivid for the intellectual affinities which existed between him and the author of the lettres persanes ( persian letters ) and the esprit des lois ( the spirit of the laws ) . later , in bonaparte et hoche en 1797 , he produced a critical comparison which is one of his most finished works ( 1896 ) . in the recueil des instructions données aux ambassadeurs he prepared vol . i . dealing with austria ( 1884 ) . most of the articles which he contributed to various reviews and to the temps newspaper have been collected into volumes : essais d'histoire et de critique ( 1883 ) , lectures historiques ( 1894 ) , nouveaux essais d'histoire et de critique ( 1898 ) , etudes de littérature et d'histoire ( 1901 ) . these writings contain a great deal of information and ideas not only about political men of the last two centuries but also about certain literary men and artists of normandy . honours came to him in abundance as an eminent writer and not as a public official . he was elected a member of the académie des sciences morales et politiques ( december 18 , 1889 ) on the death of fustel de coulanges , and of the académie française ( 1894 ) on the death of hippolyte taine . . criticisms . sorel 's work , especially on the downfall of napoleon , has come under much criticism recently by revisionist historians . his view was that napoleon was legitimately fighting for the long-established french aim of 'natural frontiers ' and that napoleon merely inherited a foreign 'situation ' and therefore did not create his own foreign policy , which has been contended by recent historians , such as matthew maclachlan and michael broers . they stressed that napoleon was a nonconformist general and that his actions abroad did not conform with any traditional french foreign policy . later years . his speeches on his two illustrious predecessors show how keenly sensible he was of beauty and how unbiased was his judgment , even in the case of those whom he most esteemed and loved . he had just obtained the great prix osiris of 100,000 francs , conferred for the first time by the institut de france , when he was stricken with his last illness and died at paris . he was associated with turkish poets like yahya kemal beyatlı and the historian yusuf akçura . . references . external links .