Quantum indeterminacy

measurement . an adequate account of quantum indeterminacy requires a theory of measurement . many theories have been proposed since the beginning of quantum mechanics and quantum measurement continues to be an active research area in both theoretical and experimental physics . v . braginski and f . khalili , quantum measurements , cambridge university press , 1992 . possibly the first systematic attempt at a mathematical theory was developed by john von neumann . the kind of measurements he investigated are now called projective measurements . that theory was based in turn on the theory of projection-valued measures for self-adjoint operators which had been recently developed ( by von neumann and independently by marshall stone ) and the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics ( attributed by von neumann to paul dirac ) . in this formulation , the state of a physical system corresponds to a vector of length 1 in a hilbert space h over the complex numbers . an observable is represented by a self-adjoint ( i.e . hermitian ) operator a on h . if h is finite dimensional , by the spectral theorem , a has an orthonormal basis of eigenvectors . if the system is in state ψ , then immediately after measurement the system will occupy a state which is an eigenvector e of a and the observed value λ will be the corresponding eigenvalue of the equation a e λ e . it is immediate from this that measurement in general will be non-deterministic . quantum mechanics , moreover , gives a recipe for computing a probability distribution pr on the possible outcomes given the initial system state is ψ . the probability is : \operatorname_a ( u ) s ) . this is a probability measure defined on the borel subsets of r which is the probability distribution obtained by measuring a in s . logical independence and quantum randomness . quantum indeterminacy is often understood as information ( or lack of it ) whose existence we infer , occurring in individual quantum systems , prior to measurement . quantum randomness is the statistical manifestation of that indeterminacy , witnessable in results of experiments repeated many times . however , the relationship between quantum indeterminacy and randomness is subtle and can be considered differently . gregg jaeger , '' quantum randomness and unpredictability '' philosophical transactions of the royal society of london a doi/10.1002/prop.201600053 ( 2016 ) online pdf in classical physics , experiments of chance , such as coin-tossing and dice-throwing , are deterministic , in the sense that , perfect knowledge of the initial conditions would render outcomes perfectly predictable . the ‘ randomness ’ stems from ignorance of physical information in the initial toss or throw . in diametrical contrast , in the case of quantum physics , the theorems of kochen and specker , s kochen and e p specker , the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics , journal of mathematics and mechanics 17 ( 1967 ) , 59–87 . the inequalities of john bell , john bell , on the einstein podolsky rosen paradox , physics 1 ( 1964 ) , 195–200 . and experimental evidence of alain aspect , alain aspect , jean dalibard , and gérard roger , experimental test of bell ’ s inequalities using time-varying analyzers , physical revue letters 49 ( 1982 ) , no . 25 , 1804–1807 . alain aspect , philippe grangier , and gérard roger , experimental realization of einstein–podolsky–rosen–bohm gedankenexperiment : a new violation of bell ’ s inequalities , physical review letters 49 ( 1982 ) , no . 2 , 91–94 . all indicate that quantum randomness does not stem from any such physical information . in 2008 , tomasz paterek et al . provided an explanation in mathematical information . they proved that quantum randomness is , exclusively , the output of measurement experiments whose input settings introduce logical independence into quantum systems . tomasz paterek , johannes kofler , robert prevedel , peter klimek , markus aspelmeyer , anton zeilinger , and caslav brukner , '' logical independence and quantum randomness '' , new journal of physics 12 ( 2010 ) , no . 013019 , 1367–2630 . tomasz paterek , johannes kofler , robert prevedel , peter klimek , markus aspelmeyer , anton zeilinger , and caslav brukner , '' logical independence and quantum randomness — with experimental data '' , ( 2010 ) . logical independence is a well-known phenomenon in mathematical logic . it refers to the null logical connectivity that exists between mathematical propositions ( in the same language ) that neither prove nor disprove one another . edward russell stabler , an introduction to mathematical thought , addison-wesley publishing company inc . , reading massachusetts usa , 1948 . in the work of paterek et al . , the researchers demonstrate a link connecting quantum randomness and logical independence in a formal system of boolean propositions . in experiments measuring photon polarisation , paterek et al . demonstrate statistics correlating predictable outcomes with logically dependent mathematical propositions , and random outcomes with propositions that are logically independent . tomasz paterek , johannes kofler , robert prevedel , peter klimek , markus aspelmeyer , anton zeilinger , and caslav brukner , '' logical independence and quantum randomness '' , new journal of physics 12 ( 2010 ) , no . 013019 , 1367–2630 . tomasz paterek , johannes kofler , robert prevedel , peter klimek , markus aspelmeyer , anton zeilinger , and caslav brukner , '' logical independence and quantum randomness — with experimental data '' , ( 2010 ) . in 2020 , steve faulkner reported on work following up on the findings of tomasz paterek et al ; showing what logical independence in the paterek boolean propositions means , in the domain of matrix mechanics proper . he showed how indeterminacy 's indefiniteness arises in evolved density operators representing mixed states , where measurement processes encounter irreversible 'lost history ' and ingression of ambiguity . steve faulkner , the underlying machinery of quantum indeterminacy ( 2020 ) . . see also . uncertainty principle quantum mechanics quantum entanglement complementarity ( physics ) interpretations of quantum mechanics : comparisons chart quantum measurement counterfactual definiteness epr paradox . notes . . references . a . aspect , bell 's inequality test : more ideal than ever , nature 398 189 ( 1999 ) . g . bergmann , the logic of quanta , american journal of physics , 1947 . reprinted in readings in the philosophy of science , ed . h . feigl and m . brodbeck , appleton-century-crofts , 1953 . discusses measurement , accuracy and determinism . j.s . bell , on the einstein–poldolsky–rosen paradox , physics 1 195 ( 1964 ) . a . einstein , b . podolsky , and n . rosen , can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete ? phys . rev . 47 777 ( 1935 ) . g . mackey , mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics , w . a . benjamin , 1963 ( paperback reprint by dover 2004 ) . j . von neumann , mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics , princeton university press , 1955 . reprinted in paperback form . originally published in german in 1932 . r . omnès , understanding quantum mechanics , princeton university press , 1999 . external links . common misconceptions regarding quantum mechanics see especially part iii '' misconceptions regarding measurement '' .