Piombino

overview . it has an ancient historical centre , derived from the time in which it was the etruscans ' port , in the surroundings of populonia . in the middle ages , it was instead an important port of the republic of pisa . its hinterland hosts a considerable industrial area . its port is still heavily used , both for industry and for tourism , with ferry-boats to portoferraio ( elba ) and olbia ( sardinia ) . geography . the bounding communes of piombino are campiglia marittima , follonica , san vincenzo and suvereto . the town has seven civil parishes ( frazione ) : baratti , colmata , fiorentina , la sdriscia , populonia , populonia stazione and riotorto . history . the area of modern piombino was settled since ancient times . during the etruscan era the main city in the area was populonia , now a frazione within the comune of piombino . the name piombino derives almost certainly from populino , meaning '' small populonia '' , which the refugees gave to a small village where they had taken refuge after the city had been attacked by greek pirates ( 9th century ) . it is also probable that piombino had already been founded during the ostrogoth domination . in 1022 the monastery of san giustiniano was founded in the area , boosting the activity of fishermen , sailors and workers . in 1115 piombino submitted to the republic of pisa , becoming its second main port : authority was exerted by a capitano ( '' captain '' ) . during the conflicts between the pisane and the genoese ( 12th–13th centuries ) the city was sacked various times . in 1248 the capitano ugolino arsopachi built the channels . the castle of piombino remained a pisan possession until gerardo appiani , ceding pisa to the visconti of milan , carved out the independent state of the principality of piombino that included the islands of the tuscan archipelago : elba , pianosa , montecristo , capraia , gorgona , and giglio , for his family who held it until 1634 . in 1445 , through his marriage with caterina appiani , rinaldo orsini acquired the lordship . in 1501–1503 the principality was under cesare borgia . in 1509 the appiani became princes of the holy roman empire with the title of piombino . after cosimo i de ' medici had occupied it in the course of the war against siena , in 1553 and 1555 a french-ottoman fleet attacked piombino , but was pushed back . in 1557 the peace treaty reinstated the appiani , with the exception of portoferraio , given to the grand duchy of tuscany , and the area of orbetello , which became the state of the presidi under spanish control . in 1594 the principality of piombino was created by emperor rudolf ii of habsburg , the first prince being alessandro appiani d'aragona . in 1634 the title was acquired by the ludovisi , whose member niccolò i had married polissena appiani in 1632 . in 1708 it went to the boncompagni with antonio i . in 1801 napoleon abolished the principate , piombino and its lands being annexed by the kingdom of etruria ; in 1809 they were given to napoleon 's sister , elisa baciocchi . after the napoleon 's final defeat and the congress of vienna , the state of piombino was annexed by the grand duchy of tuscany . it became part of the unification of italy in 1860 . the battle of piombino . during world war ii , in the days that followed the announcement of the armistice of cassibile , piombino was the setting for one of the first episodes of the italian resistance . nell'anniversario della battaglia di piombino , uno storico racconta perché la città merita l'onorificenza la medaglia d'oro , dopo 55 anni « il massimo riconoscimento va concesso per ristabilire la verità » on 10 september 1943 , during operation achse , a small german flotilla , commanded by kapitänleutnant karl-wolf albrand , tried to enter the harbour of piombino but was denied access by the port authorities . general cesare maria de vecchi , in command of the italian coastal forces ( and a former fascist gerarca ) , commanded the port authorities to allow the german flotilla to enter , against the advice of commander amedeo capuano , the naval commander of the harbour . piombino città di eroi 8 settembre ’ 43 : la breve illusione di pace once they entered and landed , the german forces showed a hostile behaviour , and it became clear that their intent was to occupy the town ; the local population asked for a resolved reaction by the italian forces , threatening an insurrection , but the senior italian commander , general fortunato perni , instead ordered his tanks to open fire on the civilians , to disperse the crowds ; de vecchi forbade any action against the germans . this however did not stop the protests ; some junior officers , acting on their own initiative and against the orders ( perni and de vecchi even tried to dismiss them for this ) , assumed command and started distributing weapons to the population , and civilian volunteers joined the italian sailors and soldiers in the defense . 55° della battaglia di piombino battle broke out at 21:15 on 10 september , between the german landing forces ( who aimed to occupy the town centre ) and the italian coastal batteries , tanks , and civilian population . italian tanks sank the german torpedo boat ta11 ; uboat.net seekrieg , september 1943 italian artillery also sank seven marinefährprahme , the péniches mainz and meise ( another péniche , karin , was scuttled at the harbour entrance as a blockship ) and six luftwaffe service boats ( fl.b.429 , fl.b.538 , fl.c.3046 , fl.c.3099 , fl.c.504 e fl.c.528 ) , and heavily damaged the torpedo boat ta 9 and the steamers carbet and capitano sauro ( formerly italian ) . forum marinearchiv sauro and carbet were scuttled because of the damage they had suffered . wrecksite – carbet . the german attack was repelled ; by the dawn of 11 september , 120 germans had been killed and about 200–300 captured , 120 of them wounded . italian casualties had been 4 killed ( two sailors , one guardia di finanza brigadier , and one civilian ) and a dozen wounded ; taglio del nastro per la banchina « giorgio perini » marinai d'italia four italian submarine chasers ( vas 208 , 214 , 219 and 220 ) were also sunk during the fighting . later in the morning , however , de vecchi ordered the prisoners to be released , and had their weapons given back to them . cesare maria de vecchi – dizionario biografico treccani new popular protests broke out , as the italian units were disbanded and the senior commanders fled from the city ; the divisional command surrendered piombino to the germans on 12 september , and the city was occupied . many of the sailors , soldiers and citizens who had fought in the battle of piombino retreated to the surrounding woods and formed the first partisan formations in the area . for the deeds of its citizens , the town received a gold medal for military valour from president carlo azeglio ciampi . main sights . co-cathedral of sant'antimo ( c . 1377 ) , built by the augustinians and originally dedicated to st . michael . it is in gothic architecture , a memoir of the rule of pisa over piombino . the interior , with two naves ( one added in 1933 ) , houses precious works by andrea guardi , including a baptismal font . the counter-façade has renaissance sepulchres of the appiani family . also by guardi is the cloister ( 1470 ) . the rivellino ( walls tower-gate ) , the most ancient monument in the city ( 1212 ) . the chiesa della misericordia ( early 13th century ) . it houses a precious 15th century crucifix . the cassero pisano ( castle ) . it is formed by two distinct building , the fortress , built under cosimo i de ' medici ( 1552–53 ) , and the cassero ( late 15th century ) , the latter used as military jail until 1959 . the palazzo comunale ( town hall ) , mostly a modern reconstruction of the ancient palazzo degli anziani ( 1435 ) . in the musters hall , with portraits of the princes of piombino . chapel of st . anne , a noteworthy renaissance work by guardi . annexed is the torre civica ( town tower , 16th century ) . the cisterna di cittadella ( citadel 's cistern ) , also by guardi . on the sides are the portraits of jacopo iii appiani and his son and wife , later disfigured by order of cesare borgia . casa delle bifore ( house of the mullioned windows , 1280s ) . the natural province reserve padule orti bottagone , created in 1998 , next to the locality of torre del sale . twin towns — sister cities . piombino is twinned with : flémalle , belgium . miscellanea . piombino has schools , gymnasia ( middle school ) , lyceums ( high school ) , churches , banks , parks and squares . in the locality of punta falcone is an astronomical observatory , created in 1976 . east of piombino , there is a power station with 1280 mw generation capacity with two chimneys , each tall . west of piombino , there is the start of the submarine power cable section to corsica from hvdc sacoi . see also . atletico piombino baratti ( town ) la rocchetta lighthouse populonia principality of piombino . references . external links . official website tourism in piombino