Guardians of the Lost Library

background . rosa created guardians of the lost library at the request of scandinavia-based , european disney publisher egmont in reference to the fact that norway had officially declared 1993 to be '' the year of the book '' in order to promote reading ( as the story was published in norway and denmark in 1993 , one year prior to its first edition in the original english ) . rosa figured that he would honor the written word best by sending the ducks on an epic quest for the library of alexandria , where he : : '' could show the evolution of books from papyrus scrolls through parchment tomes and the first gutenberg volumes on up to the present day . in the process , it was easy to show how books have recorded and even inspired the advancements of science and art through the ages . and what could be better than for the key to tracing the library around the world be that most famous mythical book of all - the junior woodchuck guidebook ? ! '' . plot . donald duck and his nephews go to the new woodchuck museum to see the exhibit on artifacts from the first junior woodchucks . the nephews are particularly enthusiastic about an old , worn , massive volume that is the oldest known copy of the junior woodchucks guidebook . scrooge mcduck is also there to get a copy of the guidebook , which he knows contains an enormous wealth of information . however , the scoutmaster refuses , on the regulation that mcduck is too old to join the organization , and only members are allowed to read its guidebook . also the scoutmaster suspects , correctly , that scrooge would use the information mainly to enrich himself , as he has recently done by acquiring the entire log books of the 16th century spanish fleet to find lost treasures . scrooge tells the nephews that he would like to find the library of alexandria for the same purpose . the head of the junior woodchucks organization agrees to sponsor scrooge 's trip in the name of science as well as lend out general snozzie , the woodchucks bloodhound . scrooge and the nephews set out to find the lost library , leaving behind donald totally oblivious to the events as he sits constantly glued to the tv , currently holding the occupation of scrooge 's money bin guard . they set out to egypt , where they find an underground chamber with a million bronze tubes containing the original scrolls of the library of alexandria . unfortunately , it turns out that the scrolls have long crumbled to dust . cleopatra had however founded a special organization , '' the guardians of the great library '' , to protect the unique book collection . still in operation centuries later , the guardians had complete parchment copies made shortly before the burning of the library which were shipped to byzantium , greece around 400ad , to become known as the library of constantinople . in istanbul , modern-day turkey , these '' 100,000 parchment scrolls '' ( '' perhaps they left out the plays and poetry '' ) once were '' the light of the dark ages for 800 years '' and had '' the books from the great libraries of islam '' added to them over time . however , the entire collection finally perished in a fire . yet the contents survived , since for centuries the orthodox monks had copied them into the modern technology of 10,000 manuscripts ( with each hand-written book holding 10 original scrolls ) . this byzantine library of manuscripts was however stolen in 1204 in the sack of constantinople during the fourth crusade , crusader knights bringing the books to venice . in venice , these books were kept in an abbey whose library henceforth '' sparked the renaissance '' , inspired '' leonardo and michelangelo '' , and motivated marco polo and his father to journey to the orient , paying back the library by adding the great books from kublai khan 's empire of cathay to it upon marco 's return . the venice library was lost in 1485 during the collapse of the abbey 's bell tower , but following the invention of movable type printing by johannes gutenberg in 1439 , the rotting books had been saved in their entirety by making their first typeset copy '' of about 1,000 volumes '' , with each typeset book containing 10 manuscripts . inspired by phoenician accounts dating 600bce of rich new lands beyond the western ocean in the books , lorenzo de medici sent a bookdealer named cristobal colon in 1484 to buy these 1,000 volumes , but colon never turned the books over to the medici family . when scrooge and the nephews find out that the english name of this bookdealer-turned sailor happens to be christopher columbus and that columbus 's private library is in seville , spain , scrooge is pacing out the door , '' already halfway across france '' . in the biblioteca colombina , they are forced to decipher columbus ' private notes hand-written in a secret , unknown code by means of the woodchuck guidebook , to find out columbus had the library moved to santo domingo in 1498 , far from the reach of the medici and the spanish king , but ferdinand ii of aragon soon found out and had columbus put into chains . scrooge and the nephews hurry back to duckburg ( where they encounter donald still in front of the tv , making condescending remarks about their passion for '' some dusty old library books '' ) to search scrooge 's above-mentioned spanish logs to find out whether the library had ever been removed from the island . apparently , francisco pizarro had it moved to his new capital , modern-day lima , peru in 1535 , where beginning in 1551 , the scholars at san marcos university added '' all the knowledge of the mayans , aztecs , incas , and olmecs '' . when the spanish tried to send the library home to spain in 1579 , the ships were captured by sir francis drake . as the battle had damaged his own ship , drake was forced to go ashore on the coast of nova albion , founding fort drake borough which later became duckburg , for the sole purpose of burying the library below the fort , on killmotor hill where scrooge built his money bin in 1902 ( see fort duckburg ) . hurrying into old caves and bricked gangways scrooge never explored before below the bin , they find a large crypt full of old books . on closer inspection , only the covers are left , since the vellum pages turn out to have been eaten by rats . scrooge is furious because the library seems to have perished once and for all . however , in the middle of the room stands a metal case , with the emblem of the guardians of the lost library our heroes first saw in egypt : an ibis symbolizing thoth , the egyptian deity of wisdom and writing . an inscription on a metal plate by the last survivor of drakeborough tells how he , on drake 's orders , had the library condensed into one single volume with every information no other surviving book in the world included . as the lost library 's last guardian , he had this one book sealed into this rat-proof metal box . scrooge is triumphant that the unique essence of the library seems to have survived after all , but upon opening the box he is deeply frustrated to find it empty . the nephews stitch the remaining puzzle together : the british did n't find the library when they reoccupied drakeborough , but cornelius coot , the founder of the city of duckburg , found it during the late 18th century , and left the book to his son clinton coot , the founder of the junior woodchucks . the very volume that was on display in the woodchuck museum at the beginning of the story , it was used as the framework for the junior woodchuck 's guidebook , the only one book in the world scrooge can not buy . this not only explains why the guidebook facilitated them to follow the trail of the lost library all over the world with its enormous knowledge base , but also the fact the junior woodchuck 's logo , based on the letters j and two ws , looks uncannily like the inverted ibis emblem of the guardians of the lost library . later on , scrooge comments on how depressed he is about not getting the books he has traveled all over the globe for , until the boys remind him that he would have had to turn the library over to alexandria . scrooge gets excited about how much money he saved on the fine he would have had to pay otherwise for 100,000 library scrolls each overdue for 2,000 years , and donald complains about the noise drowning out the tv , muttering '' cripes ! they 're still going on about their stupid library ! as if messing with books was as interesting as watching tv ! hah ! that 'll be the day ! '' . historical accuracy . the story contains at least one potential historical error : it apparently claims that alexander the great intended alexandria to be the capital of his empire . actually , he built it to be the capital of egypt but not of the entire empire . babylon was the capital of alexander 's empire , even though alexandria became the capital of the diadochic ptolemaic kingdom under alexander 's immediate successor ptolemy i soter . the exact quote found in guardians of the lost library , '' the city was founded by alexander the great in the fourth century b . c . to be the capital of his empire ! '' is a bit ambiguous , meaning either that it was alexander 's direct personal intention or that it was about to happen independently of whatever alexander had intended . disney and in-universe references . disney reference . scrooge makes a reference to mickey mouse not being published anymore . that was true during the time this story was first published but it was mainly used as an inside joke . duckburg genealogy . the names fulton gearloose and clinton coot were first used in this story but it was not revealed that they were the fathers of gyro gearloose and grandma duck , respectively . other stories by don rosa . guardians of the lost library was later referenced in part 10 : the invader of fort duckburg ( 1994 ) , of don rosa 's the life and times of scrooge mcduck where in 1902 the first three junior woodchucks are expelled from their former headquarter , the ruins of fort duckburg recently bought by scrooge . as the boyscouts walk down killmotor hill , along with some jwc pennants they carry a large , old volume with the iris emblem of the guardians of the lost library with them . one of the junior woodchucks says '' someday we 've just got to make pocket-size copies of this monster ! '' as the condensed book passed on by the last survivor of drakeborough and found by clinton coot is the framework for the first edition of the junior woodchucks guidebook , in rosa 's later story the lost charts of columbus ( 1995 ) , the junior woodchucks intend to raise funds for excavations at the site of cleopatra 's hidden library in egypt before it was brought to byzantium . so they organize a raffle and gladstone gander wins a fishing trip to canada , where he recovers the golden helmet from barks 's eponymous story , allowing azure blue to resume his plans of owning north america . above-mentioned ancient phoenician accounts of the americas having inspired lorenzo de medici and christopher columbus in guardians of the lost library are revisited in this story as well . publication history . guardians of the lost library was first published in uncle scrooge adventures 27 , july , 1994 . compared to european prints , this original english-language edition was of a poor quality where on a number of pages the cmyk printing plates had been misaligned resulting in more than obvious color fringing . the story was eventually re-published at a higher printing quality in gemstone 's 60 years of uncle crooge celebratory edition uncle scrooge 383 , november , 2008 ( which turned out to be gemstone 's ultimate disney comic publication , as boom ! kids was about to take over publishing disney 's classic characters starting september , 2009 ) . again , original art by rosa was used for the cover , however the artwork used for the 2008 reprint had been initially made by rosa not specifically as cover art but as part of a series of collectibles related to his stories that had been originally published by french disney magazine picsou magazine in 2004 . inducks information on the don rosa collectible artwork first published in picsou magazine 385 , february 2004 , and later used for the cover of uncle crooge 383 while the 2008 reprint featured a superior printing quality and the 2008 cover was shaded as usual with north american disney comics , with the reprinted story itself gemstone replaced gladstone publishing 's 1994 finer-graded colorization featuring many soft gradients with egmont 's european solid-hue color scheme .