Czochralski method

application . monocrystalline silicon ( mono-si ) grown by the czochralski method is often referred to as monocrystalline czochralski silicon ( cz-si ) . it is the basic material in the production of integrated circuits used in computers , tvs , mobile phones and all types of electronic equipment and semiconductor devices . czochralski crystal growth method . bbc.co.uk . 30 january 2003 . retrieved on 2011-12-06 . monocrystalline silicon is also used in large quantities by the photovoltaic industry for the production of conventional mono-si solar cells . the almost perfect crystal structure yields the highest light-to-electricity conversion efficiency for silicon . production of czochralski silicon . high-purity , semiconductor-grade silicon ( only a few parts per million of impurities ) is melted in a crucible at , usually made of quartz . dopant impurity atoms such as boron or phosphorus can be added to the molten silicon in precise amounts to dope the silicon , thus changing it into p-type or n-type silicon , with different electronic properties . a precisely oriented rod-mounted seed crystal is dipped into the molten silicon . the seed crystal 's rod is slowly pulled upwards and rotated simultaneously . by precisely controlling the temperature gradients , rate of pulling and speed of rotation , it is possible to extract a large , single-crystal , cylindrical ingot from the melt . occurrence of unwanted instabilities in the melt can be avoided by investigating and visualizing the temperature and velocity fields during the crystal growth process . this process is normally performed in an inert atmosphere , such as argon , in an inert chamber , such as quartz . crystal sizes . image : silicon grown by czochralski process 1956.jpg thumb 240px silicon crystal being grown by the czochralski method at raytheon , 1956 . the induction heating coil is visible , and the end of the crystal is just emerging from the melt . the technician is measuring the temperature with an optical pyrometer . the crystals produced by this early apparatus , used in an early si plant , were only one inch in diameter . due to efficiencies of scale , the semiconductor industry often uses wafers with standardized dimensions , or common wafer specifications . early on , boules were small , a few cm wide . with advanced technology , high-end device manufacturers use 200 & nbsp ; mm and 300 & nbsp ; mm diameter wafers . width is controlled by precise control of temperature , speeds of rotation , and the speed at which the seed holder is withdrawn . the crystal ingots from which wafers are sliced can be up to 2 metres in length , weighing several hundred kilograms . larger wafers allow improvements in manufacturing efficiency , as more chips can be fabricated on each wafer , with lower relative loss , so there has been a steady drive to increase silicon wafer sizes . the next step up , 450 & nbsp ; mm , is currently scheduled for introduction in 2018 . doubts over 450mm and euv . electronicsweekly.com . december 30 , 2013 . retrieved on 2014-01-09 . silicon wafers are typically about 0.2–0.75 & nbsp ; mm thick , and can be polished to great flatness for making integrated circuits or textured for making solar cells . the process begins when the chamber is heated to approximately 1500 degrees celsius , melting the silicon . when the silicon is fully melted , a small seed crystal mounted on the end of a rotating shaft is slowly lowered until it dips just below the surface of the molten silicon . the shaft rotates counterclockwise and the crucible rotates clockwise . the rotating rod is then drawn upwards very slowly—at about 25 & nbsp ; mm per hour when making a crystal of ruby —allowing a roughly cylindrical boule to be formed . the boule can be from one to two metres , depending on the amount of silicon in the crucible . the electrical characteristics of the silicon are controlled by adding material like phosphorus or boron to the silicon before it is melted . the added material is called dopant and the process is called doping . this method is also used with semiconductor materials other than silicon , such as gallium arsenide . incorporating impurities . image : silicon seed crystal puller rod.jpg thumb 240px a puller rod with seed crystal for growing single-crystal silicon by the czochralski method thumb thumb when silicon is grown by the czochralski method , the melt is contained in a silica ( quartz ) crucible . during growth , the walls of the crucible dissolve into the melt and czochralski silicon therefore contains oxygen at a typical concentration of 10 & nbsp ; cm . oxygen impurities can have beneficial or detrimental effects . carefully chosen annealing conditions can give rise to the formation of oxygen precipitates . these have the effect of trapping unwanted transition metal impurities in a process known as gettering , improving the purity of surrounding silicon . however , formation of oxygen precipitates at unintended locations can also destroy electrical structures . additionally , oxygen impurities can improve the mechanical strength of silicon wafers by immobilising any dislocations which may be introduced during device processing . it was experimentally shown in the 1990s that the high oxygen concentration is also beneficial for the radiation hardness of silicon particle detectors used in harsh radiation environment ( such as cern 's lhc/hl-lhc projects ) . therefore , radiation detectors made of czochralski- and magnetic czochralski-silicon are considered to be promising candidates for many future high-energy physics experiments . cern rd50 status report 2004 , cern-lhcc-2004-031 and lhcc-rd-005 and cited literature therein it has also been shown that the presence of oxygen in silicon increases impurity trapping during post-implantation annealing processes . however , oxygen impurities can react with boron in an illuminated environment , such as that experienced by solar cells . this results in the formation of an electrically active boron–oxygen complex that detracts from cell performance . module output drops by approximately 3 % during the first few hours of light exposure . eikelboom , j.a . , jansen , m.j . , 2000 . characterisation of pv modules of new generations ; results of tests and simulations . report ecn-c-00-067 , 18 . . mathematical form . concerning a mathematical expression of impurity incorporation from melt , james d . plummer , michael d . deal , and peter b . griffin , silicon vlsi technology , prentice hall , 2000 , pp . 126–27 consider the following . the impurity concentration in the solid crystal that results from freezing an amount of volume can be obtained from consideration of the segregation coefficient . : k_o : segregation coefficient : v_0 : initial volume : i_0 : number of impurities : c_0 : impurity concentration in the melt : v_l : volume of the melt : i_l : number of impurities in the melt : c_l : concentration of impurities in the melt : v_s : volume of solid : c_s : concentration of impurities in the solid during the growth process , volume of melt dv freezes , and there are impurities from the melt that are removed . : di -k_o c_l dv\ ; : di - k_o \frac : f v_s / v_o\ ; . see also . float-zone silicon . references . external links . czochralski doping process