Thomas Tenison

life . he was born at cottenham , cambridgeshire , the son and grandson of anglican clergymen , who were both named john tenison ; his mother was mercy dowsing . he was educated at norwich school , going on to corpus christi college , cambridge , as a scholar on archbishop matthew parker 's foundation . he graduated in 1657 , and was chosen fellow in 1659 . for a short time he studied medicine , but in 1659 was privately ordained . as curate of st andrew the great , cambridge from 1662 , he set an example by his devoted attention to the sufferers from the plague . in 1667 he was presented to the living of holywell-cum-needingworth , huntingdonshire , by the earl of manchester , to whose son he had been tutor , and in 1670 to that of st peter mancroft , norwich . in 1680 he received the degree of doctor of divinity , and was presented by king charles ii to the important london church of st martin-in-the-fields . tenison , according to gilbert burnet , '' endowed schools including archbishop tenison 's school , lambeth , founded in 1685 and archbishop tenison 's school , croydon , founded in 1714 , set up a public library , and kept many curates to assist him in his indefatigable labours '' . being a strenuous opponent of the church of rome , and '' whitehall lying within that parish , he stood as in the front of the battle all king james 's reign '' . in 1678 , in a discourse of idolatry , he had condemned the heathenish idolatry practised in the church of rome , and in a sermon which he published in 1681 on discretion in giving alms was attacked by andrew poulton , head of the jesuits in the savoy . tenison 's reputation as an enemy of romanism led the duke of monmouth to send for him before his execution in 1685 , when bishops thomas ken and francis turner refused to administer eucharist ; but , although tenison spoke to him in '' a softer and less peremptory manner '' than the two bishops , he was , like them , not satisfied with the sufficiency of monmouth 's penitence . under king william iii , tenison was in 1689 named a member of the ecclesiastical commission appointed to prepare matters towards a reconciliation of the dissenters , the revision of the liturgy being specially entrusted to him . a sermon he preached on the commission was published the same year . he strongly supported , at least in public , the glorious revolution , though not without some private misgivings , especially concerning the ejection of archbishop william sancroft and the other '' non-juring '' bishops . henry hyde , 2nd earl of clarendon in his diary records some frank remarks made by tenison on this subject at a dinner party in 1691 : he preached a funeral sermon for nell gwyn in 1687 , in which he represented her as truly penitent & ndash ; a charitable judgment that did not meet with universal approval . the general liberality of tenison 's religious views won him royal favour , and , after being made bishop of lincoln in 1691 , he was promoted to archbishop of canterbury in december 1694 . archbishop of canterbury . he attended queen mary during her last illness and preached her funeral sermon in westminster abbey . when william in 1695 went to take command of the army in the netherlands , tenison was appointed one of the seven lords justices to whom his authority was delegated . after mary 's death , tenison was one of those who persuaded the king that his long and bitter quarrel with her sister anne must be ended , as it had weakened the authority of the crown . gregg , edward queen anne yale university press 1980 p.102 he was sworn in as a member of the privy council of england in 1695 upon his appointment as archbishop of canterbury . this gave him the honorific '' the right honourable '' for life . under queen anne . along with gilbert burnet he attended the king on his deathbed . he crowned william 's successor , queen anne , but during her reign was in very little favour at court : gregg p.206 the queen thought that he inclined too much to the low church , and clashed repeatedly with him over her sole right to appoint bishops . she entirely ignored his wishes when she appointed sir jonathan trelawny , 3rd baronet , as bishop of winchester : when he tried to remonstrate , the queen cut him short with the cold remark that '' the matter was decided . '' only with great difficulty did he persuade her to appoint his nominee william wake , as bishop of lincoln . somerset , anne queen anne harper press 2102 p.224 increasingly he lost influence to john sharp , archbishop of york , whom the queen found far more congenial . gregg p.146 he was a commissioner for the union with scotland in 1706 ; but in the last years of the queen 's reign he was very much a secondary political figure , and from september 1710 , though he was still nominally a member of the cabinet , ceased to attend its meetings . gregg p.141 a strong supporter of the hanoverian succession , who shocked many by referring to anne 's death as a blessing , somerset p.540 he was one of three officers of state to whom , on the death of anne , was entrusted the duty of appointing a regent till the arrival of george i , whom he crowned on 20 october 1714 . for the last time at the coronation of an english monarch , the archbishop asked if the people accepted their new king : the witty catherine sedley , former mistress of james ii , remarked '' does the old fool think we will say no ? '' tenison died in london a year later . he was instrumental in the last years of his life in the literary executorship of sir thomas browne 's manuscript writings known as christian morals . other works . besides the sermons and tracts above mentioned , and various others on the '' popish '' controversy , tenison was the author of the creed of mr hobbes examined ( 1670 ) and baconia , or certain genuine remains of lord bacon ( 1679 ) . he was one of the founders of the united society partners in the gospel . family . he married anne , daughter of richard love ; but died without issue . edward tenison ( 1673–1735 ) ll.b ( cantab . ) , his cousin , became bishop of ossory ( ireland ) ( 1730/1731-1735 ) . george stanhope , a letter from the prolocutor to the reverend dr . edward tenison , archdeacon of carmarthen , 1718 another relative , richard tennison ( 1642–1705 ) , became bishop of meath . thomas is said to have advanced richard in his career : in his will he left legacies to all of richard 's five sons . in appearance he was described as a large , brawny , '' hulking '' figure , very strong when young but afflicted with gout in later life . somerset p.224 . armorials . the personal coat of arms of archbishop tenison consist of the arms of the see of canterbury impaled with the tenison family arms . the former , placed on the dexter side of honour , are blazoned as : azure , an archiepiscopal cross in pale or surmounted by a pall proper charged with four cross ( heraldry ) sable . the arms of tenison , placed on the sinister side of the escutcheon are blazoned as : gules , a bend engrailed argent voided azure , between three leopard 's faces or jessant-de-lys azure . in standard english : a red field bearing a white ( or silver ) diagonal band with scalloped edges , and a narrower blue band running down its centre . this lies between three gold heraldic lion 's faces , each of which is pierced by a fleur-de-lys entering through the mouth . origin . these arms are a difference , or variant , of the mediaeval arms of the family of denys of siston , gloucestershire , and may have been adopted by the tenison family because its name signifies '' denys 's or denis 's son '' . the arms were originally those of the norman de cantilupe family , whose feudal tenants the denys family probably were in connection with candleston castle in glamorgan . thomas de cantilupe ( died 1282 ) , bishop of hereford , gave a reversed ( i.e . upside down ) version of the cantilupe arms to the see of hereford , which uses them to this day . a version of the denys arms was also adopted by the family of the poet laureate alfred , lord tennyson , not known to have been a descendant of archbishop thomas tenison . suspected discovery of his coffin . in 2016 , during the refurbishment of the garden museum , museum web-site which is housed at the medieval church of st mary-at-lambeth , church of st mary , lambeth british history on-line 30 lead coffins were found ; one with an archbishop 's red and gold mitre on top of it . times on-line two archbishops were identified from nameplates on their coffins ; with church records revealing that a further three archbishops , including tenison , were likely to be buried in the vault . . see also . archbishop tenison 's school , croydon archbishop tenison 's school list of archbishops of canterbury . notes . references . . further reading . edward carpenter , thomas tenison , archbishop of canterbury : his life and times ( spck , 1948 ) . external links . archbishop tenison 's papers at lambeth palace library