Publius Flavius Vegetius Renatus

dating of work . the latest event alluded to in his epitoma rei militaris is the death of the emperor gratian ( 383 ) ; the earliest attestation of the work is a subscriptio by flavius eutropius , writing in constantinople in 450 , which appears in one of two families of manuscripts , suggesting that a division of the manuscript tradition had already occurred . despite eutropius ' location in constantinople , the scholarly consensus is that vegetius wrote in the western roman empire . walter goffart . the date and purposes of vegetius ' de re militari . in rome 's fall and after , chapter 3 , pp 49-80 . hambledon press 1989 . vegetius dedicates his work to the reigning emperor , who is identified as theodosius , ad theodosium imperatorem , in the manuscript family that was not edited in 450 ; the identity is disputed : some scholars identify him with theodosius i , n.p . milner sets forth the argument for theodosius in vegetius : epitome of military science , second edition ( liverpool : university press , 1996 ) , pp . xxxvii ff ; t . d . barnes , '' the date of vegetius '' phoenix 33.3 ( autumn 1979 ) , pp . 254–257 , makes the case for theodosius . while others follow otto seeck seeck , '' die zeit des vegetius '' , hermes 11 ( 1876 ) , 61–83 . seeck 's conclusions changed the mind of karl lang , who twice edited the teubner de re militaria , and adopted seeck 's ascription . and identify him with the later valentinian iii , dating the work to 430-35 . g . r . watson , the roman soldier ( ithaca : cornell university press , 1969 ) , p . 26 . goffart agrees that the later date is likely , suggesting that the work may have been intended to support a military revival in the time of aetius 's supremacy . walter goffart . the date and purposes of vegetius ' de re militari . in rome 's fall and after , chapter 3 , pp 49-80 . hambledon press 1989 . rosenbaum also argues that he wrote in the early 430s ; theodosius ii might then have been the dedicatee . rosenbaum uses allusions from vegetius 's works and relationships to the work of merobaudes to suggest that vegetius was a senior court official , primiscrinius to the praetorian prefect , who had been an agens in rebus . rosenbaum , s ; '' who was vegetius ? '' published on academia.edu 2015 . epitoma rei militaris . vegetius ' epitome mainly focuses on military organization and how to react to certain occasions in war . vegetius explains how one should fortify and organize a camp , how to train troops , how to handle undisciplined troops , how to handle a battle engagement , how to march , formation gauge and many other useful methods of promoting organization and valour in the legion . as g . r . watson observes , vegetius ' epitoma '' is the only ancient manual of roman military institutions to have survived intact '' . despite this , watson doubts its value , for vegetius '' was neither a historian nor a soldier : his work is a compilation carelessly constructed from material of all ages , a congeries of inconsistencies '' . watson , the roman soldier , pp . 25f these antiquarian sources , according to his own statement , were cato the elder , cornelius celsus , frontinus , paternus and the imperial constitutions of augustus , trajan , and hadrian ( 1.8 ) . the first book is a plea for army reform ; it vividly portrays the military decadence of the late roman empire . vegetius also describes in detail the organisation , training and equipment of the army of the early empire . the third book contains a series of military maxims , which were ( appropriately enough , considering the similarity in the military conditions of the two ages ) the foundation of military learning for every european commander from william the silent to frederick the great . his book on siegecraft contains the best description of late empire and medieval siege machines . among other things , it shows details of the siege engine called the onager , which afterwards played a great part in sieges until the development of modern cannonry . the fifth book gives an account of the materiel and personnel of the roman navy . according to the encyclopædia britannica eleventh edition , '' in manuscript , vegetius ' work had a great vogue from its first advent . its rules of siegecraft were much studied in the middle ages . '' n.p . milner observes that it was '' one of the most popular latin technical works from antiquity , rivalling pliny the elder 's natural history in the number of surviving copies dating from before ad 1300 . '' milner , vegetius , p . xiii it was translated into english , french ( by jean de meun and others ) , italian ( by the florentine judge bono giamboni and others ) , catalan , spanish , czech , and yiddish before the invention of printing . the first printed editions are ascribed to utrecht ( 1473 ) , cologne ( 1476 ) , paris ( 1478 ) , rome ( in veteres de re mil . scriptores , 1487 ) , and pisa ( 1488 ) . a german translation by ludwig hohenwang appeared at ulm in 1475 . however , from that point vegetius ' position as the premier military authority began to decline , as ancient historians such as polybius became available . niccolò machiavelli attempted to address vegetius ' defects in his l'arte della guerra ( florence , 1521 ) , with heavy use of polybius , frontinus , and livy , but justus lipsius ' accusation that he confused the institutions of diverse periods of the roman empire and g . stewechius ' opinion that the survival of vegetius ' work led to the loss of his named sources were more typical of the late renaissance . milner , vegetius , pp . xiiif . while as late as the 18th century a soldier such as marshal puysegur based his own works on this acknowledged model , in milner 's words , vegetius ' work suffered '' a long period of deepening neglect '' . milner , vegetius , p . xiv . vegetius emphasizes the shortcomings of the roman army in his lifetime . to do this , he eulogises the army of the early empire . in particular , he stresses the high standard of the legionaries and the excellence of the training and the officer corps . in reality , vegetius probably describes an ideal rather than the reality . the army of the early empire was a formidable fighting force , but it probably was not in its entirety quite as good as vegetius describes . in particular , the 5-foot-10-inch minimum height identified by vegetius would have excluded the majority of the men in roman times ( the roman foot was and inch was , hence a 5'10 '' roman was , which is just above average height of roman ( italian ) men of the time from skeletal evidence from herculaneum in 79 ad ) . the emperor valentinian ( 364–375 ) lowered the height minimum to 5 ' 7 '' roman which equals . despite the romanticism extolling the idealized virtues of the roman legion of an earlier time , vegetius ' de re militari remains a reliable and useful insight into the success of the early roman empire . references . translations . military institutions of vegetius , translated with a preface and notes by lieutenant john clarke , london , 1767 . abridged reprint ( books iv and v omitted ) : the military institutions of the romans , military service publishing company , harrisburg , pa . 1944 . vegetius : epitome of military science , translated with notes and introduction by n.p . milner , translated texts for historians , vol . 16 , liverpool : liverpool university press , 1993 . ( second edition 1996 ; second revised edition 2011 . ) het romeinse leger , dutch translation by fik meijer , polak/van gennep publishers , amsterdam , 2004 . external links . the complete latin text of de re militari is available online : the latin library intratext from the lessing j . rosenwald collection at the library of congress de re militari cologne nicolaus goetz , ca . 1475 . de re militari augsburg , johann wiener , ca . 1475 . the 1944 abridged edition of lieutenant john clarke 's 1767 translation ( omitting books iv and v , '' of interest only to military antiquarians '' ) is available online : the military institutions of the romans a complete facsimile of john clarke 's 1767 translation is available at google books : military institutions of vegetius 1529 german-language edition of de re militari published by heinrich stayner with woodcuts variously depicting underwater diving suits , siege equipment , cannons , and air mattresses for the comfort of soldiers in the field . vier bücher der ritterschafft ( all 121 full-page woodcuts and 2 half-page woodcuts freely available for download in a variety of formats from science history institute digital collections ) .