W. G. G. Duncan Smith

early life . duncan smith was born in madras , india ( now chennai ) on 28 may 1914 , the son of a mysore post office superintendent , wilfrid arthur smith and anna cecilia smith ( née duncan ) . he was educated at nairn and morrison 's academy , crieff , in scotland , where he joined his school 's officers ' training corps . returning to india in 1933 , he became a coffee and tea planter , but in 1936 returned to britain to work as a mechanical engineer , and then was a salesman for great western motors in reading . with war looming , he joined the royal air force volunteer reserve ( rafvr ) . . second world war . a sergeant at the start of the second world war , duncan smith was commissioned as a pilot officer ( on probation ) on 29 september 1940 . serving with no . 7 operational training unit at the outbreak of war , smith was posted to the spitfire-equipped no . 611 squadron raf at raf hornchurch in october 1940 . he was awarded a distinguished flying cross ( dfc ) in june 1941 , and went to no . 603 squadron raf in august 1941 as a flight commander . smith was due for a rest but had to remain operational , leading his squadron while bringing their new squadron leader up to speed . he was promoted to flying officer ( war-substantive ) on 29 september . on 20 november he was taken ill , passing out after returning from a convoy patrol . smith spent some time in hospital with double pneumonia , the symptoms of which he had assumed was only the result of exhaustion from a long operational tour . upon recovery in january 1942 , duncan smith rejoined the '' hornchurch wing '' , now flying the improved spitfire mk.ix . in march 1942 he was promoted to acting squadron leader and given command of no . 64 squadron raf . he was promoted to flight lieutenant ( war-substantive ) on 27 june . during the ill-fated dieppe raid on 19 august , duncan-smith was shot down by enemy fighter but rescued from the english channel with injuries and eardrum pain . in august he became an acting wing leader at raf north weald . in november he was rested from operations with a posting to take charge of the tactics branch at fighter command , his input leading to the formation of the fighter command school of tactics at raf charmy down . he was promoted to squadron leader ( war-substantive ) on 30 november . while smith 's non-operational tour was recognised as very productive , he began to seek a return to operations , and he was sent to malta to command the 244th fighter wing . during this time his flew in support of the allied landings on sicily . on 12 july he was shot down for the second time , but this episode ended well when he landed at safi airfield on malta with his mark ix spitfire riddled with cannon shells in fuselage , elevator and rudder : '' my spitfire was in a mess . cannon shells had blasted a couple of large holes in the side . one had burst against the radio and armour behind my seat . another , having made a hole the size of a football , had torn the control wires to shreds . the elevator was hanging by one thread of frayed wire and my rigger neatly snapped this with a sharp blow from his fingers . 'you will not be needing that any more , ' he grinned at me . 'it all looks very untidy - does n't it ? ' another cannon shell had torn big pieces out of the elevator and rudder surfaces . '' smith , duncan w.g.g : spitfire into battle , p.151-152 potential victors could be expertenfw . heinrich steis from 4./jg 27 or ofw . günther '' hupatz '' seeger of 7./jg 53 . on 2 september 1943 just before invasion to italy , a fuel shortage , when switching fuel tanks failed , forced him to bail out into the sea badly hitting his knee cap in the proces , being rescued after more than six hours adrift . he was very lucky for the second time , when dragged to walrus by rope , plane was severely shot up by enemy fighter . '' the walrus was badly holed below the water and a cannon shell had pierced the wing tank , but luckily , though petrol spewed all over the place , the old bus did not catch fire . the blow i felt was from a bullet that tore through the collar of my mae west grazing my neck before smacking into the walrus . we got down at milazzon safely , after a brilliant landing by the pilot , and i was whisked off to the american field hospital close by . there they were very kind and after fixing up my leg and dressing the neck wound tried to keep me for the night , but i managed to talk the doctor into letting me return to lentini . the walrus air sea rescue aircraft was a total wreck having been damaged in too many vital parts . '' smith , duncan w.g.g : spitfire into battle , p.164-169 the sad end to the story , except duncan losing his footwear in the sea , was news , that his comrade dick charrington was shot down and killed during this rescue mission by enemy fighter . if we consider the time , area and date , uffz . alfred scharl of 2./jg 53 could be the one , who killed him on 2 september 1940 at 17.20 15 km north of tropea at no height . who severely damaged the walrus is not known . after all those sunburns , injuries , wounds and return of ear pain from 19 august 1942 , he was considered not to be fit for action . as an acting group captain , he then took charge of 324 wing , finally leaving in march 1945 . duncan smith was credited with 17 enemy aircraft shot down , two shared destroyed , six probables , two shared probables and eight damaged in aerial combat . price 1997 , p . 25 . he was awarded the distinguished service order and bar and the dfc and bar in recognition of his bravery . he was the author of spitfire into battle ( 1981 ) , an account of aerial combat in the supermarine spitfire . post war . on 3 december 1946 , duncan smith was promoted to the temporary rank of squadron leader in the rafvr ( seniority from 1 november 1946 ) , receiving promotion to the substantive rank of flight lieutenant in the rafvr on 1 november 1947 ( seniority from 1 december 1942 ) . on 22 march 1948 , he was appointed to a permanent raf commission in the rank of squadron leader , with seniority from the same date . he received a second bar to his dfc for service in the malayan emergency in 1952 , and was promoted to wing commander on 1 january 1953 . he retired on 24 november 1960 , retaining the rank of group captain . . personal life . duncan smith was given his mother 's maiden name ( duncan ) as a middle name—a fairly conventional practice of the edwardian period—but his father 's name was '' smith '' , not '' duncan smith '' and , in second world war raf records , duncan smith himself is always listed as w . g . g . d . smith , not w.g.g . duncan smith . it is not known precisely when he started using his mother 's maiden name as part of his surname but he decided to pass the name to his children . whether this makes the current family surname '' duncan smith '' or still '' smith '' is a moot point . his second wife , pamela summers ( whom he married in 1946 ) was a ballet dancer who was born in nanking , china where her father was a commissioner in the chinese postal service . her maternal grandmother was ellen oshey matsumuro , a japanese woman whose father was a japanese artist . their son iain duncan smith is a politician who was leader of the conservative party from september 2001 to november 2003 and secretary of state for work and pensions in the cameron–clegg coalition . in his office hangs a portrait of adam duncan , the admiral who defeated the dutch navy at the battle of camperdown in 1797 . it is , however , very unlikely that w . g . g . d . smith ’ s mother was a legitimate descendant of admiral duncan . “ iain duncan smith ’ s ancestors part 2 : not an admiral in sight ” at pottoingaround.wordpress.com dated 20 september 2015 . honours and awards . 22 july 1941 – pilot officer wilfrid george gerald duncan smith ( 85684 ) , no . 611 squadron is appointed a distinguished flying cross : 26 december 1941 – acting flight lieutenant w.g.g.d . smith dfc ( 85684 ) , no . 603 squadron is awarded bar to distinguished flying cross : 11 september 1942 – squadron leader w.g.g.d . smith dfc ( 85684 ) , no . 64 squadron is awarded the distinguished service order : 20 march 1945 – acting group captain w.g.g.d . smith dso , dfc ( 85684 ) is awarded a bar to the distinguished service order : . sources . price , dr . alfred . spitfire mark v aces 1941 – 1945 . london : osprey publishing , 1997 . price , dr . alfred . spitfire mark i/ii aces 1939 – 41 . london : osprey publishing , 1996 . references .