Cheng Man-ch'ing

early years . cheng 's father died when cheng was very young . around the age of nine , cheng was struck on the head by a falling brick or roof tile , and was in a coma for a short while . he recuperated slowly , and was apprenticed to a well-known artist , wang xiangchan , in hopes that simple jobs like grinding ink would help his health . within a few years , his teacher sent him out to earn his living at painting . cheng 's aunt chang kuang , also known by her artist 's name of hongwei laoren , was a well-known painter . during cheng 's childhood , his mother took him out to find medicinal plants and taught him the fundamentals of traditional chinese herbal medicine . cheng taught poetry and art in several leading colleges in beijing and shanghai and was a successful artist . at the age of nineteen , he was a professor of poetry at an esteemed art school in beijing . later in shanghai , he became acquainted with influential figures including wu changshi , cai yuanpei , zheng xiaoxu , xu beihong , and zhang daqian . in his twenties , he developed lung disease ( believed to be tuberculosis partly from exposure to the chalk dust from the school blackboards ) . ill to the point of coughing up blood , he began to practice t'ai chi ch'uan more diligently to aid his recovery . cheng retired from teaching and devoted himself for several years to the study of t'ai chi ch'uan , traditional chinese medicine , and literature . in addition to his childhood instruction , cheng man-ch'ing received formal chinese medical training . while he was teaching painting in a shanghai art school , one of his friends grew ill and was unable to find relief . cheng man-ch'ing wrote a complex prescription for his friend , who took the medicine and recovered fully . one story from his memorial book is that a retired traditional doctor named song you-an came across the prescription . he demanded to be put in contact with the person who wrote it , as the sophistication and erudition of the prescription showed exceptional talent and competence . as war was raging across china at that time , it took several years before cheng man-ch'ing was able to present himself for study . with song , cheng received instruction and became conversant with the chinese pharmacopoeia . dr song was the twelfth generation of physician in his family ; his medical school had a formidable collection of traditional medicines . around 1930 cheng met the well-known master yang chengfu ( 1883–1936 ) , with whom he began to study yang-style t'ai chi ch'uan , until yang died . while the exact dates of cheng 's study with yang are not clear , one of yang 's top students , scholar chen weiming wrote that cheng studied six years with yang . see zheng manqing 's zhengzi taijiquan shi san pian , p . i cheng , according to yang 's son zhenji , ghostwrote yang 's second book essence and applications of taijiquan or the substance and application of t'ai chi ch'uan ( taijiquan tiyong quanshu , 1934 ) , for which cheng also wrote a preface and most likely arranged for the calligraphic dedications . cheng taught t'ai chi ch'uan , practiced medicine , and continued his art practice in sichuan province during the sino-japanese war years . in this period he taught abraham liu while at the central military academy , china 's equivalent of west point.reference 1 at age 32 he taught t'ai-'chi ch'uan at the central military academy ( formerly the huang-po military academy -equivalent to west point in the united states . ) '' by 1946 , he had developed a significantly abbreviated 37-move version of yang 's traditional form . he wrote the manuscript for his thirteen chapters during this period , and showed them to his elder classmate chen weiming , who gave it his imprimatur . taiwan . cheng moved to taiwan in 1949 and continued his career as a physician and as a teacher of his new t'ai chi ch'uan form , as well as actively practicing painting , poetry , and calligraphy . he published cheng 's 13 chapters of t'ai chi boxing in 1950 which has been translated into english twice . he started the shih chung t'ai chi association in taipei , where many now well-known students ( benjamin lo , liu hsi-heng , hsu i-chung , dr qi jiang tao , robert w . smith , t . t . liang , william c . c . chen , huang sheng shyan and others trained with him . though he tended not to advertise it , cheng served as one of the painting teachers of soong mei-ling , madame chiang kai-shek , whom he taught to paint lotuses ; and as personal physician to chiang kai-shek in taiwan and perhaps earlier . united states . in 1964 , cheng moved with his family ( madame cheng , two sons , and three daughters ) to the united states , where he taught at the new york t'ai chi association at 211 canal street in manhattan . he then founded and taught at the shr jung t'ai chi school at 87 bowery in new york city 's chinatown section , with the assistance of his six american senior students , known as the '' big six '' : tam gibbs , lou kleinsmith , ed young , mort raphael , maggie newman , and stanley israel . ( some students of that era say that there were the five senior students , plus stanley israel in the second level . ) later students/assistants are known as '' the little six '' : victor chin , y y chin , jon gaines , natasha gorky , wolfe lowenthal , and ken vansickle . other american students include frank wong , michael and lora howard , herman kauz , rené houtrides , patt benton , lucjan shila , carol yamasaki , robert ante , judyth weaver , patrick watson , min pai , lawrence galante , lisa marcusson , saul krotki , robert chuckrow , robert d . morningstar and william c . phillips . in taiwan , cheng 's students continued running the school in his absence . it operated initially under the direction of liu hsi-heng . hsu i-chung is the current director . while living in new york city , cheng often spent several hours in the early afternoons studying or teaching classes of three or four students in the c . v . starr east asian library in columbia university , usually in a small , mahogany-panelled loft above the main floor . for relaxation , he raised orchids . writings . in 1967 in collaboration with robert w . smith , and t . t . liang , cheng published '' t'ai chi , the supreme ultimate exercise for health , sport and self-defense , '' which was his second t'ai chi book in english . he wrote over a dozen other books on a variety of subjects , including the i ching , the tao te ching , the analects of confucius , books of poetry , essays , medicine , and art collections . translations of his works include : '' master cheng 's new method of t'ai chi ch'uan self-cultivation '' ; '' cheng man ch'ing : essays on man and culture '' ; '' cheng man ch'ing : master of five excellences , '' and '' t'ai chi ch'uan : a simplified method of calisthenics for health and self-defense . '' cheng also produced several t'ai chi films , and some of his classes and lectures were recorded and in later years released on dvd . cheng man-ch'ing 's t'ai chi ch'uan . cheng man-ch'ing is best known in the west for his t'ai chi ch'uan . the following are some of the characteristics of his '' yang-style short form . '' it eliminates most of the repetitions of certain moves of the yang long form . it takes around ten minutes to practice instead of the twenty to thirty minutes of the yang long form the hand and wrist are held open , yet relaxed , in what cheng called the '' fair lady 's hand '' formation ( as opposed to the straighter '' chinese tile '' formation of the yang style ) the form postures are not as expansive as yang chengfu 's form cheng postures are performed in '' middle frame '' style , which changes the movement of the feet from the yang version . cheng 's concept of '' swing and return '' in which the momentum from one movement initiates the next . these changes allowed cheng to teach larger numbers of students in a shorter time . his shortened form became extremely popular in taiwan and malaysia , and he was one of the earliest chinese masters to teach t'ai chi ch'uan publicly in the united states . his students have continued to spread his form around the world . cheng rejected the appellation '' yang-style short form '' to characterize his t'ai chi . when pressed on the issue , he called his form '' yang-style t'ai chi in 37 postures . '' however , the postures in his form are counted differently from those in the yang chengfu form . in the older form each movement counts as a posture , whereas in the cheng form postures are counted only the first time they are performed , and rarely or not at all when they are repeated . these differences in how the postures are counted have led some cheng practitioners , such as william c . c . chen , to characterize their own forms as exceeding 70 '' movements , '' and indeed , upon close comparison with the yang chengfu form , cheng 's postures , if counted the same way as yang 's are , would number over 70 . moreover , there is nothing in cheng 's teaching to prohibit a practitioner of his style from repeating any number of movements just as many or more times than they are repeated in the yang chengfu form . cheng 's changes to the yang-style form have never been officially recognised by the yang family and ( perhaps partly because of the continued popularity of cheng 's shortened form ) his style is still a source of controversy among some t'ai chi ch'uan practitioners . from cheng 's own point of view , the approval of his elder brother disciple ch'en wei-ming was all the recognition he needed , since by that time yang chengfu was deceased , and all of the current generation of yang chengfu leaders were junior to him . legacy . cheng man-ch'ing 's legacy includes many hundreds of schools around the world that follow his lineage . in taiwan , a number of his direct students still teach , and the shih chung school still operates . huang sheng shyan ( huang xingxian ) , one of cheng 's most accomplished disciples , established over 40 schools in south east asia , through which cheng 's t'ai chi has continued to reach over 10,000 practitioners . grandmaster william c.c . chen continues to teach in new york city . patrick a kelly ( 2004 ) . relax , deep mind : taiji basics . training manual in the taiji system of huang xingxian ( p.16 ) . patrick a kelly ( 2007 ) . infinite dao . a record of 20 years training with huang xingxian ( p.77 ) . a little-appreciated dimension of cheng 's legacy was his willingness to teach non-chinese students . while he was not the first chinese martial artist to do this in america , his warm embrace of westerners , who ran the gamut from experienced fighters to long-haired hippies of the day , proved controversial with the chinese association that had initially sponsored his move to new york . at one point , when cheng was out of the country , the association members locked the western students out of the canal street school . informed of this , cheng instructed ed young to find a new location . upon his return to new york , cheng taught at the new location , 87 bowery , sending an unmistakable message of inclusiveness and rejecting the insularity that was traditional in the chinese martial arts community . in new york city , among cheng 's senior students , maggie newman and ed young are still teaching . while prof . cheng was still teaching in new york , he asked fred lehrman to help initiate schools in milwaukee wi , minneapolis mn , gainesville fl , boulder co , and halifax , nova scotia . among these , the ones in milwaukee and at naropa institute in boulder have continued into the new millennium . the official program at naropa institute was initially created by judyth o . weaver with the permission of chögyam trungpa in 1974 . it had over 500 students in the first tai chi summer session . from 1975 it included several of the main shih jung teachers , including lehrman , tam gibbs , maggie newman , ed young , and wolfe lowenthal as visiting instructors over the next period of years , in addition to resident teachers jane and bataan faigao from 1977 . naropa institute course catalogs . the faigaos also established rocky mountain t'ai chi ch'uan in boulder . the new york school of tai chi chuan , later the t'ai chi foundation , was founded by patrick watson at the request of prof . cheng . william c . phillips operates patience t'ai chi association in brooklyn , ny . don ahn founded the ahn t'ai chi studio and taught thousands of students form and taoism techniques . cheng 's students carried on his tradition of writing about t'ai chi , creating study material , and documenting his teaching . a recent feature film '' the professor '' documents his years in new york city . cheng man-ch'ing 's sequence . preparation beginning ward off , left ward off , right roll back squeeze push ( postures 3 through 7 are known as '' grasping the sparrow 's tail '' ) single whip raise hands shoulder strike white crane stretches its wings brush knee left play guitar ( followed by brush knee left ) step up and block parry and punch apparent close-up cross hands embrace tiger , return to mountain ( followed by roll back , squeeze , push , then corner single whip ) fist under elbow step back and repulse monkey , right step back and repulse monkey , left ( followed by three more repulse monkeys : right , left , and right ) diagonal flying wave hands like clouds , left wave hands like clouds , right ( followed by three more cloud hands left , right , left , to single whip ) single whip , lower style ( also known as '' snake creeps up '' ( or down ) ) golden cock stands on one leg , right golden cock stands on one leg , left separation of the right foot separation of the left foot turn body and kick with heel ( this posture is followed by brush knee , left and then brush knee , right ) step forward and punch ( followed by ward-off right , roll back , squeeze , push and single whip ) fair lady weaves ( works ) shuttle i- a textbook example of how defense precedes offense in tai chi fair lady weaves ( works ) shuttle ii ( followed by two more fair ladies , grasping the sparrow 's tail , single whip and snake creeps down ) step up to seven stars retreat to ride tiger turn body sweep lotus leg bend bow shoot tiger ( the form is close out by step up , block , parry and punch followed by apparent close-up , cross hands and close ) . t'ai chi ch'uan lineage tree with yang-style focus . references . cheng man-ch'ing . see '' zheng manqing '' entry for selected chinese titles . cheng man-ch'ing . cheng man-ch'ing videos . ( 2007 ) . set of 1960s videos on dvd of cheng teaching in new york city . cheng man-ch'ing . cheng-tsu 's thirteen treatises on t'ai chi ch'uan . translated by benjamin lo and martin inn . berkeley : north atlantic books ( 1985 ) . cheng man-ch'ing ; master cheng 's new method of t'ai chi self-cultivation , translated by mark hennessy ; frog , ltd . books , berkeley , ca ; ( 1999 ) cheng man-ch'ing , and robert w . smith , t'ai chi rutland , vt : tuttle , 1967 . chuckrow , robert ; the tai chi book-refining and enjoying a lifetime of practice . a cmc shr jung nyc student . davis , barbara ; '' in search of a unified dao : zheng manqing 's life and contributions to taijiquan . '' in journal of asian martial arts , v.5 , n . 2 , p . & nbsp ; 36-59 . demarco , m . & lafredo , t . g . ( eds ) . cheng man-ch'ing and t'ai chi : echos in the hall of happiness . santa fe , nm : via media publishing , 2014 . kauskas , jan . laoshi : tai chi , teachers , and pursuit of principle . santa fe , nm : via media publishing , 2014 . kauz , herman ; tai chi handbook . a cmc shr jung nyc student . lowenthal , wolfe ; there are no secrets : professor cheng man-ch'ing and his tai chi chuan . a cmc shr jung nyc student . mcfarlane , stewart the complete book of t'ai chi . dk publishing , new york ( 1997 ) . , paperback . covers only the 37 form of cheng man-ch'ing 's tai chi ; illustrated drawings . strugatz , barry , director . '' the professor : tai chi 's journey west '' asin b01eu15ziq . first run features . wile , douglas . zheng manqing 's uncollected writings on taijiquan , qigong , and health , with new biographical notes . milwaukee : sweet ch ' i press , 2007 . yang chengfu . taijiquan tiyong quanshu . 1934 . translated by louis swaim as the essence and applications of taijiquan . 2005 . yang zhenji , yang chengfu shi taijiquan guangxi : guangxi minzu chubanshe , 1993 . zheng manqing . zhengzi taijiquan shisan pian cheng-tzu 's thirteen treatises on t'ai chi ch'uan . taiwan ( 1950 ) . zheng manqing . taijiquan zixiu xinfa master cheng 's new method of t'ai chi ch'uan self-cultivation zheng manqing . yi quan the complete i ching . taipei : meiya publishing ( 1974 ) . zheng manqing . zheng manran shuhua ji collection of zheng manran 's calligraphy and painting . taipei : zhonghua shuju ( 1971 ) . . external links . cheng man-ching site . zheng manqing.com a tribute site . cheng man-ching official site . cheng man-ch'ing biography project information . biography of cheng man-ch'ing from his memorial book '' the professor '' cheng man-ch'ing documentary film . site for the shr chung tai chi chuan association founded by cheng . in chinese and english . cmc tai chi teacher directory list of cmc form postures . list of cmc form postures in chinese , pinyin , english , german . wolfe lowenthal and the long river tai chi circle list of cmc instructors taichi of master cheng man-ching in berlin , germany - third generation lineage show here ( grasp sparrows ’ s tail is like two men sawing from cheng tzu 's thirteen treatises on t ’ ai chi ch ’ uan neigong.net articles on t'ai chi by a nyc student of prof . cheng . chengtaiji , shanghai , china . school of huang xingxian 's disciple . a list of books written by cmc and his students a compilation of cmc videos