1908 in literature

events . february 15 – the weekly boys ' story paper the magnet is first published in london , containing '' the making of harry wharton '' , the first serial story of the fictional greyfriars school written by charles hamilton as frank richards and introducing the character of billy bunter . march – ezra pound leaves america for europe . in april , he moves to venice , where in july he publishes himself his first collection of poems , a lume spento ( dedicated to his friend philadelphia artist william brooke smith , who has just died of tuberculosis ) . in august he settles in london , where he will remain until 1920 and in december publish a quinzaine for this yule . june 18 – mark twain buys a house in redding , connecticut . summer – the marlowe society stages a production at the new theatre , cambridge ( england ) , of milton 's masque comus , directed by rupert brooke . july – katherine mansfield moves to london ; she will never return to her native new zealand . september 30 – maurice maeterlinck 's the blue bird ( l'oiseau bleu ) is premièred , at konstantin stanislavsky 's moscow art theatre . october 3 – the avenida theatre opens on buenos aires ' avenida de mayo with a production of lope de vega 's el castigo sin venganza ( justice without revenge , 1631 ) directed by maría guerrero . november 18 – the release in france of la mort du duc de guise marks the first film with a screenplay by an eminent man of letters , the playwright henri lavedan ; it is also directed by two men of the theatre , charles le bargy and andré calmettes , and features actors of the comédie-française . december – ford madox ford begins publication of the literary magazine the english review in london . the first issue contains original work by thomas hardy , henry james , joseph conrad , john galsworthy and w . h . hudson , and begins serialization of h . g . wells 's realist semi-autobiographical satirical novel tono-bungay . december 1 – cuala press , set up at churchtown , dublin , as a private press independent of the former dun emer press in connection with the irish literary revival and arts and crafts movement by elizabeth yeats with editorial support from her brother w . b . yeats , produces its first publication , poetry and ireland : essays by w . b . yeats and lionel johnson ( died 1902 ) . unknown dates ethiopian linguist afevork ghevre jesus 's ልብ ፡ ወለድ ፡ ታሪክ ። ( libb wolled tārīk , '' a heart-born story '' ) , the first novel in amharic , is published in rome . the malay tale hikayat hang tuah ( c . 1700 ) is first published , edited by sulaiman bin muhammed nur and william shellabear . robert hunt ( 2002 ) , international bulletin of missionary research 26 ( 1 ) : 31 . the romanian writer urmuz is known to be working on his manuscript stories , the bizarre pages , printed only after 1922 . . new books . fiction . afevork ghevre jesus – libb wolled tārīk ( a heart-born story ) leonid andreyev – the seven who were hanged francis aveling – arnoul the englishman arnold bennett buried alive the old wives ' tale bigehuan zhuren ( 碧荷館主人 ) – new era ( 新紀元 , xīn jìyuán ) algernon blackwood – john silence , physician extraordinary alexander bogdanov – red star mary elizabeth braddon – during her majesty 's pleasure rhoda broughton – mamma g . k . chesterton – the man who was thursday marie corelli – holy orders james oliver curwood – the courage of captain plum and the gold hunters machado de assis – memorial de aires grazia deledda – l'edera ( the ivy , first italian publication ) mary and jane findlater – crossriggs anatole france – penguin island e . m . forster – a room with a view john fox , jr . – the trail of the lonesome pine mary e . wilkins freeman – the shoulders of atlas maxim gorky – a confession jeannie gunn – we of the never never robert hichens – a spirit in prison william hope hodgson – the house on the borderland alfred kubin – die andere seite ( the other side ) gaston leroux – the perfume of the lady in black jack london – the iron heel w . somerset maugham – the magician josé toribio medina – los restos indígenas de pichilemu natsume sōseki ( 夏目 漱石 ) the miner ( kōfu , 坑夫 ) sanshirō ( 三四郎 ) ten nights of dreams ( yume jū-ya , 夢十夜 , short stories ) baroness orczy – the elusive pimpernel mary roberts rinehart – the circular staircase arthur schnitzler – der weg ins freie georges sorel – reflections on violence h . de vere stacpoole – the blue lagoon hermann sudermann – the song of songs caton theodorian – sângele solovenilor edgar wallace angel esquire the council of justice robert walser – der gehülfe ( the assistant ) mary augusta ward – the testing of diana mallory jakob wassermann – caspar hauser oder die trägheit des herzens ( caspar hauser or the inertia of the heart ) h . g . wells – the war in the air . children and young people . l . frank baum dorothy and the wizard in oz aunt jane 's nieces at millville ( as edith van dyne ) the children 's encyclopædia ( begins publication ) kenneth grahame – the wind in the willows selma lagerlöf – the girl from the marsh croft lucy maud montgomery – anne of green gables ferenc móra – rab ember fiai ( sons of a captive ) e . nesbit – the house of arden beatrix potter the tale of jemima puddle-duck the tale of samuel whiskers or the roly-poly pudding percy f . westerman – a lad of grit . drama . j . m . barrie – what every woman knows jacinto benavente – señora ama ( the lady loves ) tristan bernard – the brighton twins ( les jumeaux de brighton ) alexandre bisson – madame x ( la femme x ) hall caine – pete ( new version of the manxman ) maxim gorky – the last ones ( poslednje ) maurice maeterlinck – the blue bird ( l'oiseau bleu ) octave mirbeau – home ( le foyer ) emma orczy – beau brocade alicia ramsey – byron w . graham robertson – pinkie and the fairies edward sheldon – salvation nell j . m . synge – the tinker 's wedding israel zangwill – the melting pot . poetry . edward carpenter – iolaus : anthology of friendship w . h . davies – nature poems maria konopnicka – rota ( oath ) . non-fiction . robert baden-powell – scouting for boys sarah bernhardt – my double life annie besant , c . w . leadbeater – occult chemistry edward carpenter – the intermediate sex g . k . chesterton – all things considered w . h . davies – the autobiography of a super-tramp levi h . dowling – the aquarian gospel of jesus the christ gertrude jekyll – colour in the flower garden jack london – war of the classes francisco i . madero – la sucesión presidencial en 1910 titu maiorescu – critice ( critical essays ) friedrich nietzsche ( died 1900 ) – ecce homo ( book ) ( written 1888 ) m . ostrogorski – democracy and the organization of political parties ( la démocratie et l'organisation des partis politiques , 1903 ) george panu – amintiri de la junimea din iași ( recollections from junimea of iași ; first volume ) charlotte carmichael stopes – the sphere of 'man ' in relation to that of 'woman ' in the constitution alfred r . tucker – eighteen years in uganda and east africa . births . january 9 – simone de beauvoir , french feminist philosopher ( died 1986 ) january 16 – pavel nilin , soviet novelist and playwright ( died 1981 ) january 18 – jacob bronowski , polish-born scientist and poet ( died 1974 ) january 20 fleur cowles , american journalist , editor and illustrator ( died 2009 ) jean s . macleod , scottish-english romantic novelist ( died 2011 ) february 4 – julian bell , english poet ( killed 1937 ) february 29 – dee brown , american novelist and historian ( died 2002 ) march 6 – dame felicitas corrigan , english writer and benedictine nun ( died 2003 ) march 8 – ebrahim al-arrayedh , indian-born bahraini poet ( died 2002 ) march 22 – louis l'amour , american author ( died 1988 ) may 17 – frederic prokosch , american novelist and poet ( died 1989 ) may 25 – theodore roethke , american poet ( died 1963 ) may 27 – peggy ramsay , born margaret venniker , australian-born british theatrical agent ( died 1991 ) may 28 – ian fleming , english espionage novelist ( died 1964 ) june 14 – kathleen raine , english poet , scholar , and translator ( died 2003 ) june 27 – joão guimarães rosa , brazilian novelist ( died 1967 ) july 23 – elio vittorini , italian author ( died 1966 ) august 21 – m . m . kaye , indian-born english novelist and autobiographer ( died 2004 ) august 23 – arthur adamov , french absurdist playwright ( died 1970 ) august 28 robert merle , french novelist ( died 2004 ) marguerite young , american novelist , poet and biographer ( died 1995 ) september 4 – richard wright , african-american novelist and poet ( died 1960 ) september 9 – cesare pavese , italian poet and novelist ( died 1950 ) september 17 – john creasey , english crime writer ( died 1973 ) october 5 – joshua logan , american stage and film writer and director ( died 1988 ) october 13 – robert liddell , english biographer , novelist and poet ( died 1992 ) october 24 – phyllis shand allfrey ( phyllis byam shand ) , dominican writer ( died 1986 ) november 8 – zhou yang , chinese literary theorist ( died 1989 ) november 8 – martha gellhorn , american journalist ( suicide 1998 ) november 9 – lucian boz , romanian and australian literary critic ( died 2003 ) november 21 – elizabeth george speare , american children 's writer ( died 1994 ) november 23 – nelson s . bond , american author , playwright and scriptwriter ( died 2006 ) november 28 claude lévi-strauss , belgian-born french anthropologist ( died 2009 ) mary oppen , american poet , activist and photographer ( died 1990 ) november 30 – buddhadeb bosu , bengali poet and writer ( died 1974 ) december 14 – mária szepes , hungarian novelist and screenwriter ( died 2007 ) . deaths . january 14 – holger drachmann , danish poet and dramatist ( born 1846 ) january 18 – edmund clarence stedman , american poet and critic ( born 1833 ) january 25 – ouida ( maria louise ramé ) , english novelist ( born 1839 ) february 7 – alexander ertel , russian novelist and short story writer ( born 1855 ) march 4 – mrs . henry clarke ( amy key ) , english historical novelist and children 's writer ( born 1853 ) march 19 – eduard zeller , german philosopher ( born 1814 ) march 25 – aleksey zhemchuzhnikov , russian poet , dramatist and critic ( born 1821 ) april 20 – henry chadwick , english-born american baseball writer and historian ( born 1824 ) may 7 – ludovic halévy , french playwright and author ( born 1834 ) may 23 – françois coppée , french author , le poète des humbles ( born 1842 ) june 5 – jonas lie , norwegian writer ( born 1944 ) june 16 – mary elizabeth hawker , scottish-born english fiction writer ( born 1848 ) july 3 – joel chandler harris , american journalist and author ( born 1848 ) july 28 – otto pfleiderer , german theologian ( born 1839 ) august 4 – bronson howard , american dramatist ( born 1842 ) august 14 – anton giulio barrili , italian novelist ( born 1836 ) september 29 – machado de assis , brazilian writer ( born 1839 ) november 8 – victorien sardou , french dramatist ( born 1831 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : rudolf christoph eucken newdigate prize : julian huxley , '' holyrood '' . references .