Wikipedia:WikiProject Genealogy

goals . improve articles related to genealogy as a hobby , profession , and academic field . standardize and verify family trees and ahnentafel charts on wikipedia . standardize and verify lists of descendants on wikipedia . discuss the creation of a wikimedia genealogy project . things you can do . find genealogy-related articles and add the wikiproject genealogy banner to their talk pages . such as family articles give importance and quality ratings to genealogy articles needing assessment . make improvements to our current article collaboration . expand articles needing expansion . fix articles needing cleanup . the current genealogy wikiproject collaboration is : genealogy . please help improve the article to good article standards ! improve and harmonise contents presentation within family articles . assessment . to assess articles , use the wikiproject genealogy banner on the article 's talk page . under class , give the article a quality rating : fa , fl , a , ga , b , c , start , stub , list , or na under priority , give the article a priority/importance rating : top , high , mid , low for example , a good article of high importance will use this code : genealogy articles by quality genealogy articles by importance . importance scale . priority must be regarded as a relative term . if priority values are applied within this project , these only reflect the perceived importance to this project . an article judged to be '' top-class '' in one context may be only '' mid-class '' in another project . the criteria used for rating article priority are not meant to be an absolute or canonical view of how significant the topic is . rather , they attempt to gauge the probability of the average reader of wikipedia needing to look up the topic ( and thus the immediate need to have a suitably well-written article on it ) . quality scale . . article alerts . wikipedia : wikiproject genealogy/article alerts . templates . the most common template used for displaying ancestry trees is ( for what the german word ahnentafel means see the wikipedia article '' ahnentafel '' ) . for help on how to use and other templates and methods that are available for displaying family/ancestory trees see help : family trees and the documentation within the templates . current template discussions . place below any templates that are potentially useful for members of this project and that are currently the subject of a discussion ( most recent first ) : these should automatically appear in article alerts . wikidata equivalent . a wikidata ancestry equivalent similar to wikitree , for a language independent encyclopedically relevant database , likely containing mostly monarchs and such . thus , each generation where ancestry is deemed relevant in biographical articles would not need a complete reformatting , while access and implementation over the language board would be facilitated . naturally , if applied , a new template rendering from this wikidata family tree would be needed . also , precaution of personal integrity would be a main issue . members . please feel free to add your name to this list if you would like to join this project . currently active participants are also listed here . the following are registered members of this wikiproject : ( currently not very active on wikipedia , but now trying to resurrect this wikiproject nonetheless ) aka : darius von whaleyland ( had previously attempted to resurrect the project and standardize genealogical boxes currently in use at wikipedia ; also the founder of wikipedia : wikiproject succession box standardization and a frequenter to any royalty page ) ( very interested in genealogy , and tracking how people tie together through their blood lines ) ( amateur genealogist with advanced knowledge of genealogical systems and terminology ; strongly agreeing with and frequently adhering to the project goals ! ) ( amateur genealogist with many years of experience ; interest is in royalty pages and genealogy in general . member of ancestry.com , geni.com , and others ) dan koehl ( talk ) founder of wikipedia : wikiproject genealogy dec 9 , 2002 ( link to first edit ) interest is european middle-ages nobility and royalty , but also genealogy in general . member in wikitree , geni.com and several other genealogy websites . interest in hawaiian royalty , british royalty and european royalty as well as genealogy in general . british , usa , portal : ukraine experience . aspire to start articles and expand stubs , translate , edit , and source other language settlement pages into english with reliable sources from the wikipedia library . amateur genealogist interest is european middle-ages nobility and royalty , but also genealogy in general . genealogist interested in jewish genealogy in general , but my dream is to have a free open world spanning family tree i 'd love to see a wikimedia genealogy project . i invite project members and passersby to contribute to this discussion at meta-wiki . -- -user : another believer ( user talk : another believer ) 01:09 , 7 february 2017 ( utc ) i 'm with another believer . to restrict this project to wikipedia in the eglish language is not a very good idea . what about a domain wikitree , wikigenea or something similar ? & nbsp ; klaas & nbsp ; ` z4 & x241f ; ` & nbsp ; v 08:41 , 7 february 2017 ( utc ) strong interest in a wikimedia genealogy project aimed at building a public single tree ( one profile per person ) , including an option for adding living people using privacy controls . people with wikipedia entries in any language , or with content on other projects , can be linked . i 'm currently a member of wikitree and werelate . gap9551 ( talk ) 18:32 , 4 march 2017 ( utc ) christiankl ( talk ) 13:20 , 15 june 2017 ( utc ) happy to help ! amateur . genetic genealogy/tools/websites , links in notables ' articles to genealogical material or websites when appropriate . salgo60 swedish genealogy has free church books online and we have done a lot see swedish church parishes , phabricator project space wmse-riksarkivet-tora i have initiated or populated properties , , , , , . amateur . i 'll help where i can ! professional genealogist . want to improve accuracy of genealogy-related articles and genealogical content on wikipedia . also see talk page for my thoughts on project goals.tea and crumpets ( talk ) 22:43 , 28 june 2019 ( utc ) amateur genealogists with years of experience . i am particularly interested in sub saharan africa family history and genealogy , especially senegambian precolonial royalty.tamsier ( talk ) 01:01 , 4 july 2019 ( utc ) user : ibn_daud amateur genealogists . i mostly focus on early rabbinic genealogy ibn daud ( talk ) 06:04 , 9 may 2020 ( utc ) european , mostly belgian genealogy . -- brookford ( talk ) 20:39 , 22 may 2020 ( utc ) amateur genealogist , focused mostly on european and new zealand european genealogy . userbox . feel free to insert the template : user wikiproject genealogy on your user page with the following code : .