Kerry Livgren

biography . livgren was raised in topeka , kansas by his father , allen leroy , an industrial engineer , and his mother , betty ( nee mcelhiney ) . he was drawn to music at a young age , and his first musical interests developed with classical and jazz influences . his musical odyssey started with an electric guitar he built using a cheap stella guitar , a sears amplifier and a low-quality astatic microphone . along with learning guitar , livgren also focused on learning to write songs due to his desire for more creative expression and originality . he attended washburn university for some time . early years , 1960s–1973 . livgren was a member of numerous bands in the late 1960s and early 1970s and quickly developed a reputation for complex compositions and poetic lyrics that explored spiritual themes . his investigations into various religions are reflected in the lyrics of his songs on kansas ' first six albums . livgren formed his first band , the gimlets , with several close friends in high school including john pribble , drums , scott kessler , bass , tim strauss , guitar , and dan wright on keyboards . they soon found themselves booked after school and on weekends throughout kansas and neighboring missouri , where they played their original compositions , which were a blend of pop , english and psychedelic rock . after graduating from topeka west high school in 1967 , livgren continued to perform with the gimlets through college before joining a predominantly black mainstream rhythm and blues band named the mellotones , in which he met keyboard player don montre in 1969 . forming a deep friendship , livgren and montre decided to leave the mellotones and join the more commercially viable band kansas ( band ) , which included lynn meredith and wright . though this band was doing well financially , livgren became frustrated because of his desire for more creative expression , and he and montre decided to start their own band . they briefly reformed the gimlets with former members scott kessler and wright along with several new members . a short time later , they renamed the band saratoga after the name on the pencil that livgren was using to write songs . saratoga included meredith , montre , wright , livgren , phil ehart and dave hope . in 1970 , livgren and ehart decided to form a new group by combining the best members from saratoga and phil 's band white clover ( which included steve walsh , rich williams , hope and jeff glixman ) . while livgren and ehart were discussing what to call the new band , hope walked in on the conversation and suggested they call themselves kansas . this version of kansas ( referred to as '' kansas i '' by fans ) was known for its complex musical arrangements and originality , but this lineup lasted for only one year . in 1971 , ehart and hope left the group , and livgren reworked the band and continued it under the name kansas . ( this group later became known by fans as kansas ii and is the lineup that reformed decades later as proto-kaw ) . kansas ii continued to perform livgren 's original works that fused experimental rock with psychedelia and jazz . during this time , kansas ii recorded a demo cassette that was released commercially 30 years later . kansas ii generated a loyal fan following , and the built-in audience helped the band secure concert bookings . however , financial problems plagued the band , and after a record deal with jefferson airplane 's label failed to materialize and an old school bus broke down while the band was on the road touring , the band dissolved in 1973 . shortly afterward , livgren was invited by ehart to join the reformed white clover , which also included vocalist walsh , violinist robby steinhardt , bassist hope , guitarist williams and ehart on drums . before livgren joined the band , white clover had sent out a five-song demo tape , which don kirshner was interested in for his new label . as part of the effort to sign with kirshner , the players soon renamed themselves kansas , becoming the third , and eventually the best-known , lineup to use this name . commercial success with kansas , 1974–1983 . after three albums in two years failed to provide them with a hit single , kansas was under pressure from kirshner and cbs records to write a hit . livgren and the band realized it was their last chance . due to walsh experiencing writer 's block , livgren wrote or co-wrote all the songs for the group 's fourth album , leftoverture . on the last day of rehearsal for the new album , livgren brought the band one more song , which they performed once before heading to the studio . the song , '' carry on wayward son '' , became kansas ' first hit , reaching no . 11 . riding the success of leftoverture , livgren wrote '' dust in the wind '' for the point of know return album . like '' carry on wayward son , '' '' dust in the wind '' was added to the album at the last minute . livgren said the song was an acoustic guitar warmup . while playing it one day at home when his wife was doing laundry , she told him he should put it on the album . since the album at that point had extra time available , he presented the song to the band and it was included . it became their highest charting single , reaching no . 6 . in early 1979 , livgren became interested in the urantia book , a series of papers that claim to be a revelation authored by supernatural beings . its influence can be felt in the lyrics of kansas ' 1979 album monolith . livgren subsequently rejected urantia doctrine , and while on tour with the band in support of monolith , he converted to christianity . this was a result of a series of debates in the back of the tour bus with jeff pollard of louisiana 's le roux , the opening act for kansas during the tour . the discussions between livgren and pollard concerned whether the bible or the urantia book was the accurate record of the life of jesus christ . because of the debates , livgren became convinced that the bible was the genuine record of christ and that he had been mistaken in following the teachings of the urantia book . after a private hotel room conversion experience , he became an evangelical christian . in 1980 , livgren released his first solo album , seeds of change . the album features several members of kansas , along with ambrosia singer david pack and noted heavy metal singer ronnie james dio , who sang on the tracks '' to live for the king '' and '' mask of the great deceiver . '' livgren recorded three more albums with kansas . however , tension was growing among the band members as a result of the increasingly christian perspective of his lyrics . walsh left the band near the end of 1981 as a result , with steinhardt following suit prior to recording of the band 's 1983 drastic measures album . meanwhile , ironically , livgren had also become increasingly dissatisfied with the band 's musical direction ( at least in part due to his newfound faith ) , and he would leave the band himself shortly after drastic measures was released . livgren has continued to appear occasionally with kansas on various tours since the 1990s and contributed new songs to the kansas boxed set in 1994 ( '' wheels '' ) and to freaks of nature in 1995 ( '' cold grey morning '' ) . in 2000 , the original and current members of kansas reunited at livgren 's studio to record a new album written entirely by livgren , titled somewhere to elsewhere . though the album received very favorable reviews , sales were not comparable to kansas ' past successes decades earlier . ad , 1983–1988 . in 1983 , after his departure from kansas , livgren recorded his second self-produced album for cbs , time line with hope , warren ham , michael gleason and drummer dennis holt . by the end of the recording sessions , the session musicians had jelled , and he decided to name the group ad . due to legal entanglements caused by his contractual obligations with kansas , livgren was unable to market ad in the mainstream secular market . after negotiating with the record label , he received a waiver to perform with ad in the christian rock market . unfortunately , this would become a hindrance to commercial viability for the band . ad toured extensively between 1983 and 1986 , sometimes playing bars and clubs one night and then churches the next . livgren has stated on several occasions that he experienced some of the highest and lowest points in his career during his time with ad . livgren mentions in his book seeds of change : the spiritual quest of kerry livgren that his time playing live with ad was his best as a guitarist . ad released art of the state in 1985 . due to financial difficulties , ad faded away in 1986 after releasing the album reconstructions , though no official breakup was announced . in 1988 , livgren released a collection of previously unreleased ad songs titled prime mover . livgren played all instruments , and all vocals were performed by ham . in 1997 , livgren rediscovered recordings of two ad performances from 1984 and 1985 that had been recorded by the soundboard engineer . though they had not been made for release , livgren remastered them and released them as a '' thank you '' to fans on a cd-r title called ad live . the performances include mistakes and technical problems left intact and is meant as an archival release . solo years , 1989–2000 . in 1989 , livgren released his first all-instrumental album , one of several possible musiks . he played all instruments on the album , which combines orchestral , jazz and rock styles . this effort won livgren his first dove award for instrumental album of the year . livgren then released a double-cd retrospective celebrating 10 years since his first solo recording titled decade . it included livgren 's first two albums , seeds of change and time line , in their entirety plus tracks from other albums and previously unreleased songs . enthusiasts of livgren 's music continue to hold this album in high regard , making it very hard to find . in 1994 , after moving back to topeka , kansas , livgren created grandyzine ( presumably a wordplay of the phrase '' grand design '' ) production company and numavox records . he converted a restored barn on his farm into a state-of-the-art recording and production facility . in 1995 , livgren released his next solo album , when things get electric , on his new label . in 1996 , he released his first soundtrack for sony 's fourth mind 's eye computer animation feature titled odyssey into the mind 's eye . in 1998 , livgren mostly re-recorded the album prime mover and added five new songs and a new version of '' fair exchange '' from the kansas album vinyl confessions to the reissue , prime mover ii . ( he reworked and reissued the album again in 2008 as prime mover ( redux ) . ) in 2000 , livgren released collector 's sedition , featuring several vocalists including his nephew , jake livgren . at this time , livgren was writing new songs prolifically and realized that some of them '' sounded like kansas . '' he called phil ehart and offered him the opportunity to hear the songs . this led to a reunion album with kansas titled somewhere to elsewhere , which featured the then-touring version of kansas along with livgren and dave hope , the original bassist . the album was recorded at livgren 's grandyzine studio in his converted barn where he performed on the album as lead guitarist and keyboardist and produced the album . this was the first time livgren had written all the songs for a kansas album . shortly after the release of somewhere to elsewhere , livgren began work on the best of kerry livgren . both retrospective and forward-looking , it contains tracks from all his solo releases and some ad tracks . the album also includes two new songs and new recordings of four older songs . each of these new versions features the original vocalists , including ham , gleason and dio . proto-kaw , 2003–present . in 2003 , cuneiform records issued a collection of material recorded by kansas ii , the early lineup that had included livgren , meredith , wright , montre , john bolton , rod mikinski and brad schulz , calling the group proto-kaw . the band then reformed under that name and released before became after in 2004 on inside out records . they released their second album , the wait of glory , on january 31 , 2006 , also on inside out records . unlike before became after , this work was composed of entirely new material written by livgren as well as a live dvd of proto-kaw 's appearance at the 2005 nearfest . on may 20 , 2007 , proto-kaw announced that band members were back in the studio working on a new album consisting of new material and reworking older songs from livgren 's solo works . the untitled album 's release date was not announced . in december 2008 , livgren announced that proto-kaw was no longer together due to the band members ' other commitments . the cd they had been working on , when and if released , will be a solo release by livgren with no definite release date . in late 2010 , livgren announced that the members of proto-kaw had decided to finish working on the band 's partially finished cd . although he was unable to play guitar or keyboard due to having suffered a stroke , livgren worked diligently with other band members to finish recording the cd and did all the mixing and post-production work at his home studio . on august 6 , 2011 , the band had a cd release party in kansas city for their fourth cd , entitled forth . other projects . livgren has resumed work on one of his most ambitious works to date , titled cantata : the resurrection of lazarus . it is an epic , orchestral and vocal composition based on the biblical story told in john , chapter 11 , and is still in production . it has been in development for more than 20 years and features a large ensemble cast . numerous vocal talents are being considered for the roles . livgren also currently teaches an adult sunday school class at topeka bible church and has posted a theological study on his website . though livgren is known for his music , he is quick to point out that it is only one of his many pursuits . on his website , he quotes his biography : '' i 'm a family man , i have a role in my church , i 'm running a record label , a studio , a production company , a farm , and i have more hobbies and interests than there are hours in the day . '' . influence and recognition . as primary songwriter , lead guitarist and keyboard player for kansas , having penned such hits as '' carry on wayward son '' and '' dust in the wind '' , livgren propelled the band to worldwide success and critical acclaim , with numerous gold and multi-platinum albums and more than 14 million recordings sold to date . kansas produced eight gold albums , one platinum album , two quadruple-platinum albums , one platinum live album , and a 1 & nbsp ; million-selling gold single , '' dust in the wind '' , according to the kansas state historical society . '' carry on wayward son '' has been covered by bands including dream theater , rachel rachel , critical mass , shryne , yngwie j . malmsteen , stryper , and country superstars the oak ridge boys as well as continuing appearances on album soundtracks such as the movies heroes and anchorman . it is also featured in the video games guitar hero ii , rock band 2 and guitar hero smash hits . the song also was used prominently in the tv series supernatural . '' dust in the wind '' has been covered by sarah brightman , gabriel & dresden , christian artists billy smiley and acappella and by new york yankees center fielder and aspiring jazz guitarist bernie williams on his 2004 debut album the journey within . it has also been referenced in bill and ted 's excellent adventure . the song was featured in a subaru commercial in 2006 and in the film old school . it was also prominently featured in several episodes of the television series highlander : the series . it could also be heard at the end of a 2010 honda commercial as rendered by a marching band . in a small twist of irony , '' dust in the wind '' was also covered in 2006 by john elefante , kansas ' lead singer following the departure of steve walsh , who sang lead on the original version in 1977 . the single was certified gold as a digital download by the riaa in 2005 , almost 30 years after it sold 1 million copies as a single . livgren 's music is used by permission for the theophilos bible software . the intro music is an excerpt from '' and i saw , as it were … konelrad '' from the album one of several possible musiks . other portions of the software use the following songs or excerpts from songs : '' all creation sings '' from art of the state ; '' beyond the pale '' from time line ; '' highway to the heart '' and '' no standing '' from reconstructions ; '' i 'll follow you '' from prime mover ; '' just one way '' from seeds of change ; '' racing away '' from when things get electric ; and '' smoke is rising , '' '' two thousand down '' and '' when things get electric '' from when things get electric . kerry livgren is listed as a '' famous kansan '' by the kansas state historical society . the platinum record awarded to him for the kansas album monolith hangs in the kansas museum of history . he was also honored by the kansas state legislature with a commendation on april 28 , 2006 . . guest appearances . livgren 's keyboard and guitar playing can be heard on the 2nd chapter of acts albums rejoice ( 1981 ) , singer sower ( 1983 ) and night light ( 1985 ) . he also plays on the robin crow album electric cinema ( 1992 ) and contributes a guitar solo to '' long story , '' a song on neal morse 's album testimony ( 2003 ) . in addition , livgren recorded a guitar solo on the song '' rockstar now '' on the crunchy album loserville ( 2007 ) . on his website , livgren reported in july 2009 that he had recently contributed to the new album by former kansas bandmate john elefante . according to elefante 's website , revolution of mind by john elefante and mastedon is to be released soon . . book . in 1983 , livgren published his autobiography , seeds of change : the spiritual quest of kerry livgren , co-written with kenneth boa . a revised and expanded edition was released in 1991 that updated the book to cover his time with ad . stroke . on september 1 , 2009 , livgren had a stroke early in the day . his condition was reported as '' serious , but stable . '' by september 4 , family members called his condition positive and said his progress in recovering was encouraging . livgren underwent surgery and received two stents in his carotid arteries . the area of his brain in which the stroke-causing clot formed deals with language and other high-end skills . livgren 's family says his face did not have the '' sagging '' often found in stroke victims , he recognized family members , and would squeeze their hands in recognition . the family established the kansas band website as the only authorized source for information on livgren 's recovery . livgren has now recovered partially and has resumed work on his various musical projects . he made his first post-stroke appearance with kansas on january 28 , 2011 , when he conducted the kansas state university symphony orchestra for '' dust in the wind '' during a special concert celebrating the 150th anniversary of the state of kansas . livgren was greeted with a prolonged standing ovation . discography . with kansas . 1974 kansas 1975 song for america 1975 masque 1976 leftoverture 1977 point of know return 1978 two for the show live 1979 monolith 1980 audio-visions 1982 vinyl confessions 1983 drastic measures 1992 live at the whisky live ( guest appearance only ) 2000 somewhere to elsewhere 2009 there 's know place like home live ( guest appearance only ) compilations 1984 the best of kansas 1992 carry on 1994 the kansas boxed set 1999 the best of kansas expanded 2002 the ultimate kansas 2004 sail on : the 30th anniversary collection ( 2cd/1dvd ) 2005 on the other side re-release of carry on . solo , ad , proto-kaw . 1980 seeds of change 1984 time line ( kerry livgren/ad ) 1985 art of the state ( ad ) 1986 reconstructions ( ad ) 1988 prime mover ( kerry livgren/ad ) 1989 one of several possible musiks 1995 when things get electric ( kerry livgren and corps de pneuma ) ( remastered in 2005 ) 1997 odyssey into the mind 's eye soundtrack ( remastered in 2005 ) 2000 collector 's sedition ( review ) 2002 early recordings from kansas 1971–1973 ( proto-kaw ) 2004 before became after ( proto-kaw ) 2006 the wait of glory ( proto-kaw ) 2011 forth ( proto-kaw ) live and compilations 1998 ad live ( ad ) ( review ) 1988 compact favorites ( ad ) 1992 decade 2002 best of kerry livgren reissues 1997 reconstructions reconstructed , reissue of reconstructions , partly re-recorded ( remastered , repackaged in 2006 ) 1998 prime mover ii , reissue of prime mover , partly re-recorded , with additional tracks ( review ) 2007 collector 's sedition ( director 's cut ) , reissue of collector 's sedition , partly re-recorded , remixed and remastered 2007 decade vol . ii , reissue of time line ( previously reissued on decade disc 2 ) , two tracks remixed 2008 prime mover ( redux ) , reissue of prime mover ii , further re-recorded 2009 decade vol . i , reissue of seeds of change ( previously reissued on decade disc 1 ) , partly re-recorded 2014 before became after , partly re-recorded , remixed and remastered 2015 the wait of glory , partly re-recorded , remixed and remastered 2016 forth , partly re-recorded , remixed and remastered 2017 several more musiks , reissue of one of several possible musiks , partly re-recorded , remixed and remastered , with additional tracks . books . 1980 seeds of change : the spiritual quest of kerry livgren , with kenneth boa ; revised and expanded edition released in 1991 , . see also . kansas ad proto-kaw . references . bibliography . . external links . proto-kaw official site