S-Video

background . standard analog television signals go through several processing steps on their way to being broadcast , each of which discards information and lowers the quality of the resulting images . the image is originally captured in rgb form and then processed into three signals known as ypbpr . the first of these signals is called y , which is created from all three original signals based on a formula that produces an overall brightness of the image , or luma . this signal closely matches a traditional black and white television signal and the y/c method of encoding was key to offering backward compatibility . once the y signal is produced , it is subtracted from the blue signal to produce pb and from the red signal to produce pr . to recover the original rgb information for display , the signals are mixed with the y to produce the original blue and red , and then the sum of those is mixed with the y to recover the green . a signal with three components is no easier to broadcast than the original three-signal rgb , so additional processing is required . the first step is to combine the pb and pr to form the c signal , for chrominance . the phase and amplitude of the signal represent the two original signals . this signal is then bandwidth-limited to comply with requirements for broadcasting . the resulting y and c signals are mixed together to produce composite video . to play back composite video , the y and c signals must be separated , and this is difficult to do without adding artifacts . each of these steps is subject to deliberate or unavoidable loss of quality . to retain that quality in the final image , it is desirable to eliminate as many of the encoding/decoding steps as possible . s-video is an approach to this problem . it eliminates the final mixing of c with y and subsequent separation at playback time . signal . the s-video cable carries video using two synchronized signal and ground pairs , termed y and c . y is the luma signal , which carries the luminance & nbsp ; – or black-and-white & nbsp ; – of the picture , including synchronization pulses . c is the chroma signal , which carries the chrominance & nbsp ; – or coloring-in & nbsp ; – of the picture . this signal contains two color-difference components . the luminance signal carries horizontal and vertical sync pulses in the same way as a composite video signal . in composite video , the signals co-exist on different frequencies . to achieve this , the luminance signal must be low-pass filtered , dulling the image . as s-video maintains the two as separate signals , such detrimental low-pass filtering for luminance is unnecessary , although the chrominance signal still has limited bandwidth relative to component video . compared with component video , which carries the identical luminance signal but separates the color-difference signals into cb/pb and cr/pr , the color resolution of s-video is limited by the modulation on a subcarrier frequency of 3.57 to 4.43 megahertz , depending on the standard . this difference is meaningless on home videotape systems , as the chrominance is already severely constrained by both vhs and betamax . carrying the color information as one signal means that the color has to be encoded in some way , typically in accord with ntsc , pal , or secam , depending on the applicable local standard . use . in many european countries , s-video was less common because of the dominance of scart connectors , which were present on televisions until the advent of hdmi . it is possible for a player to output s-video over scart , but televisions ' scart connectors are not necessarily wired to accept it , and if not the display would show only a monochrome image . s-video drama : ( . camp0s.com in this case it is sometimes possible to modify the scart adapter cable to make it work . the european usage of rgb video is because the rgb quality of most retro computers and consoles is better than s-video . . physical connectors . atari 800 . the atari 800 introduced separate chroma/luma output in late 1979 . the signals were put on pin 1 and 5 of a 5-pin 180 degree din connector socket . atari did not sell a monitor for its 8-bit computer line , however . . commodore 64 . the commodore 64 released in 1982 ( with the exception of the earliest revisions using a 5-pin video port ) also offers separate chroma and luma signals using a different connector . although commodore business machines did not use the term '' s-video '' as the standard did not formally exist until 1987 , a simple adapter connects the computer 's '' lca '' ( luma-chroma-audio ) 8-pin din socket to a s-video display , or an s-video device to the commodore 1702 monitor 's lca jacks . . 4-pin mini-din . the four-pin mini-din connector is the most common of several s-video connector types . the same mini-din connector is used in the apple desktop bus for macintosh computers and the two cable types can be interchanged . other connector variants include seven-pin locking '' dub '' connectors used on many professional s-vhs machines , and dual '' y '' and '' c '' bnc connectors , often used for s-video patch panels . early y/c video monitors often used phono ( rca connector ) that were switchable between y/c and composite video input . though the connectors are different , the y/c signals for all types are compatible . the mini-din pins , being weak , sometimes bend . this can result in the loss of colour or other corruption ( or loss ) in the signal . a bent pin can be forced back into shape , but this carries the risk of the pin breaking off . these plugs are usually made to be plug-compatible with s-video , and include optional features , such as component video using an adapter . they are not necessarily s-video , although they can be operated in that mode . 7-pin mini-din . thumb left non-standard 7-pin mini-din connectors ( termed '' 7p '' ) are used in some computer equipment ( pcs and macs ) . a 7-pin socket accepts , and is pin compatible with , a standard 4-pin s-video plug . the three extra sockets may be used to supply composite video , an rgb or ypbpr video signal , or an i²c interface . the pinout usage varies among manufacturers . in some implementations , the remaining pin must be grounded to enable the composite output or disable the s-video output . some dell laptops have a s/pdif in a 7-pin socket . . 8-pin mini-din . 65px the 8-pin mini-din connector is used in some ati radeon video cards . 9-pin video in/video out . image : pseudo minidin-9 diagram.png 65px 9-pin connectors are used in graphics systems that feature the ability to input video as well as output it . ati radeon : using video in and video out . again , there is no standardization between manufacturers as to which pin does what , and there are two known variants of the connector in use . as can be seen from the diagram above , although the s-video signals are available on the corresponding pins , neither variant of the connector will accept an unmodified 4-pin s-video plug , though they can be made to fit by removing the key from the plug . in the latter case , it becomes all too easy to misalign the plug when inserting it with consequent damage to the small pins . see also . audio and video connector rf connector composite monitor list of video connectors video in video out . references .