Hemiola

etymology . the word hemiola comes from the greek adjective ἡμιόλιος , hemiolios , meaning '' containing one and a half , '' '' half as much again , '' '' in the ratio of one and a half to one ( 3:2 ) , as in musical sounds . '' henry george liddell and robert scott , a greek-english lexicon , 9th edition ( oxford : clarendon press , 1940 ) . the words '' hemiola '' and '' sesquialtera '' both signify the ratio 3:2 , and in music were first used to describe relations of pitch . dividing the string of a monochord in this ratio produces the interval of a perfect fifth . beginning in the 15th century , both words were also used to describe rhythmic relationships , specifically the substitution ( usually through the use of coloration—red notes in place of black ones , or black in place of '' white '' , hollow noteheads ) of three imperfect notes ( divided into two parts ) for two perfect ones ( divided into three parts ) in tempus perfectum or in prolatio maior . don michael randel , '' hemiola , hemiolia '' , the harvard dictionary of music , fourth edition . cambridge : the belknap press of harvard university press , 2003 , julian rushton , '' hemiola hemiolia '' , the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , second edition , edited by stanley sadie and john tyrrell . london : macmillan publishers , 2001 . . pitch . the perfect fifth . hemiola can be used to describe the ratio of the lengths of two strings as three-to-two ( 3:2 ) , that together sound a perfect fifth . the early pythagoreans , such as hippasus and philolaus , used this term in a music theory context to mean a perfect fifth . andrew barker , greek musical writings : vol . 2 harmonic and acoustic theory ( cambridge : cambridge university press , 1989 ) : 31 , 37–38 . the justly tuned pitch ratio of a perfect fifth means that the upper note makes three vibrations in the same amount of time that the lower note makes two . in the cent system of pitch measurement , the 3:2 ratio corresponds to approximately 702 cents , or 2 % of a semitone wider than seven semitones . the just perfect fifth can be heard when a violin is tuned : if adjacent strings are adjusted to the exact ratio of 3:2 , the result is a smooth and consonant sound , and the violin sounds in tune . just perfect fifths are the basis of pythagorean tuning , and are employed together with other just intervals in just intonation . the 3:2 just perfect fifth arises in the justly tuned c major scale between c and g . oscar paul , a manual of harmony for use in music-schools and seminaries and for self-instruction , trans . theodore baker ( new york : g . schirmer , 1885 ) , p.165 . other intervals . later greek authors such as aristoxenus and ptolemy use the word to describe smaller intervals as well , such as the hemiolic chromatic pyknon , which is one-and-a-half times the size of the semitone comprising the enharmonic pyknon . andrew barker , greek musical writings : vol . 2 harmonic and acoustic theory ( cambridge : cambridge university press , 1989 ) : 164–65 , 303 . . rhythm . in rhythm , hemiola refers to three beats of equal value in the time normally occupied by two beats . don michael randel ( ed . ) , new harvard dictionary of music ( cambridge , massachusetts : belknap press of harvard university press , 1986 ) , p . & nbsp ; 376 . . vertical hemiola : sesquialtera . the oxford dictionary of music illustrates hemiola with a superimposition of three notes in the time of two and vice versa . michael kennedy , '' hemiola , hemiolia '' , the oxford dictionary of music ( oxford and new york : oxford university press , 2002 ) . one textbook states that , although the word '' hemiola '' is commonly used for both simultaneous and successive durational values , describing a simultaneous combination of three against two is less accurate than for successive values and the '' preferred term for a vertical two against three … is sesquialtera . '' paul cooper perspectives in music theory ; an historical-analytical approach ( new york : dodd , mead , 1973 ) : 36 . the new harvard dictionary of music states that in some contexts , a sesquialtera is equivalent to a hemiola . don michael randel , new harvard dictionary of music ( cambridge , massachusetts : harvard university press , 1986 ) : 744 . grove 's dictionary , on the other hand , has maintained from the first edition of 1880 down to the most recent edition of 2001 that the greek and latin terms are equivalent and interchangeable , both in the realms of pitch and rhythm , william smyth rockstro , '' hemiolia '' , a dictionary of music and musicians ( a.d . 1450–1880 ) , by eminent writers , english and foreign , vol . 1 , edited by george grove , d . c . l . , ( london : macmillan and co . , 1880 ) : 727 ; rockstro , william smyth , sesqui , a dictionary of music and musicians ( a.d . 1450–1883 ) , by eminent writers , english and foreign , vol . 3 , edited by george grove , d . c . l . ( london : macmillan and co . , 1883 ) : 475 although david hiley , e . thomas stanford , and paul r . laird hold that , though similar in effect , hemiola properly applies to a momentary occurrence of three duple values in place of two triple ones , whereas sesquialtera represents a proportional metric change between successive sections . david hiley , e . thomas stanford , and paul r . laird , '' sesquialtera '' , the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , second edition , 29 vols . , edited by stanley sadie and john tyrrell ( london : macmillan publishers , 2001 ) : 23:157–59 . . sub-saharan african music . a repeating vertical hemiola is known as polyrhythm , or more specifically , cross-beat . the most basic rhythmic cell of sub-saharan africa is the 3:2 cross-rhythm . novotney observes : '' the 3:2 relationship ( and its permutations ) is the foundation of most typical polyrhythmic textures found in west african musics . '' eugene d . novotney , '' the three against two relationship as the foundation of timelines in west african musics '' , thesis ( urbana , il : university of illinois . 1998 ) , p . 201 . web : unlockingclave.com . agawu states : '' the resultant 3:2 rhythm holds the key to understanding . there is no independence here , because 2 and 3 belong to a single shape . '' v . kofi agawu , representing african music : postcolonial notes , queries , positions ( new york : routledge , 2003 ) : 92 . in the following example , a ghanaian gyil plays a hemiola as the basis of an ostinato melody . the left hand ( lower notes ) sounds the two main beats , while the right hand ( upper notes ) sounds the three cross-beats . david peñalosa , the clave matrix ; afro-cuban rhythm : its principles and african origins ( redway , ca : bembe inc . , 2009 ) : 22 . . european music . alison latham ( ed ) , '' cross-rhythm '' , the oxford companion to music ( oxford and new york : oxford university press , 2002 ) . in compound time or . where a regular pattern of two beats to a measure is established at the start of a phrase . this changes to a pattern of three beats at the end of the phrase . the minuet from j . s . bach 's keyboard partita no . 5 in g major articulates groups of 2 times 3 quavers that are really in time , despite the metre stated in the initial time-signature . alison latham ( ed . ) , '' cross-rhythm '' , the oxford companion to music ( oxford and new york : oxford university press , 2002 ) . the latter time is restored only at the cadences ( bars 4 and 11–12 ) : later in the same piece , bach creates a conflict between the two metres against : hemiola is found in many renaissance pieces in triple rhythm . one composer who exploited this characteristic was the 16th-century french composer claude le jeune , a leading exponent of musique mesurée . one of his best-known chansons is '' revoici venir du printemps '' , where the alternation of compound-duple and simple-triple metres with a common counting unit for the beat subdivisions can be clearly heard : the hemiola was commonly used in baroque music , particularly in dances , such as the courante and minuet . other composers who have used the device extensively include corelli , handel , weber and beethoven . a spectacular example from beethoven comes in the scherzo from his string quartet no . 6 . as philip puts it , '' the constant cross-rhythms shifting between and , commoner at certain earlier and later periods , were far from usual in 1800 , and here they are made to sound especially eccentric owing to frequent sforzandi on the last quaver of the bar . it looks ahead to later works and must have sounded very disconcerting to contemporary audiences . '' philip radcliffe , beethoven 's string quartets ( london : hutchinson , 1965 ) : 41 . later in the nineteenth century , tchaikovsky frequently used hemiolas in his waltzes , as did richard strauss in the waltzes from der rosenkavalier , and the third movement of robert schumann 's piano concerto is noted for the ambiguity of its rhythm . john daverio says that the movement 's '' fanciful hemiolas . serve to legitimize the dance-like material as a vehicle for symphonic elaboration . '' john daverio , robert schumann : herald of a new poetic age ( oxford and new york : oxford university press , 1997 ) : 314 . , says '' perhaps in no other first movement by brahms does the development of these elements play so critical a role . the first movement of the third is cast in meter that is also open , through internal recasting as ( a so-called hemiola ) . metrical ambiguity arises in the very first appearance of the motto opening theme . '' at the beginning of the second movement , , of his string quartet ( 1903 ) , ravel '' uses the pizzicato as a vehicle for rhythmic interplay between and . '' roger nichols , ravel ( london : dent , 1977 ) : 24 . . horizontal hemiola . peter manuel , in the context of an analysis of the flamenco soleá song form , refers to the following figure as a horizontal hemiola or '' sesquialtera '' ( which mistranslates as : '' six that alters '' ) . it is '' a cliché of various spanish and latin american musics . well established in spain since the sixteenth century '' , a twelve-beat scheme with internal accents , consisting of a bar followed by one in , for a 3 & nbsp ; + 3 & nbsp ; + 2 & nbsp ; + 2 & nbsp ; + 2 pattern . peter manuel , '' flamenco in focus : an analysis of a performance of soleares '' , in analytical studies in world music , edited by michael tenzer , 92–119 ( oxford and new york : oxford university press , 2006 ) : 102 . this figure is a common african bell pattern , used by the hausa people of nigeria , in haitian vodou drumming , cuban palo , and many other drumming systems . the figure is also used in many sub-varieties of the flamenco genre ( bulerías , for example ) , and in various popular latin american musics . it is also a fundamental feature of the czech furiant dance form , familiar from the two examples in slavonic dances op . 48 . the horizontal hemiola suggests metric modulation changing to . this interpretational switch has been exploited , for example , by leonard bernstein , in the song '' america '' from west side story , as can be heard in the prominent motif ( suggesting a duple beat scheme , followed by a triple beat scheme ) : . see also . syncopation . references . further reading . brandel , rose ( 1959 ) . the african hemiola style , ethnomusicology , 3 ( 3 ) :106–17 , correction , 4 ( 1 ) : iv . ottó károlyi ( 1998 ) . traditional african & oriental music , penguin books .