Stellation

kepler 's definition . in 1619 kepler defined stellation for polygons and polyhedra as the process of extending edges or faces until they meet to form a new polygon or polyhedron . he stellated the regular dodecahedron to obtain two regular star polyhedra , the small stellated dodecahedron and great stellated dodecahedron . he also stellated the regular octahedron to obtain the stella octangula , a regular compound of two tetrahedra . stellating polygons . stellating a regular polygon symmetrically creates a regular star polygon or polygonal compound . these polygons are characterised by the number of times m that the polygonal boundary winds around the centre of the figure . like all regular polygons , their vertices lie on a circle . m also corresponds to the number of vertices around the circle to get from one end of a given edge to the other , starting at 1 . a regular star polygon is represented by its schläfli symbol a polyhedron is stellated by extending the edges or face planes of a polyhedron until they meet again to form a new polyhedron or compound . the interior of the new polyhedron is divided by the faces into a number of cells . the face planes of a polyhedron may divide space into many such cells , and as the stellation process continues then more of these cells will be enclosed . for a symmetrical polyhedron , these cells will fall into groups , or sets , of congruent cells – we say that the cells in such a congruent set are of the same type . a common method of finding stellations involves selecting one or more cell types . this can lead to a huge number of possible forms , so further criteria are often imposed to reduce the set to those stellations that are significant and unique in some way . a set of cells forming a closed layer around its core is called a shell . for a symmetrical polyhedron , a shell may be made up of one or more cell types . based on such ideas , several restrictive categories of interest have been identified . main-line stellations . adding successive shells to the core polyhedron leads to the set of main-line stellations . fully supported stellations . the underside faces of a cell can appear externally as an '' overhang . '' in a fully supported stellation there are no such overhangs , and all visible parts of a face are seen from the same side . monoacral stellations . literally '' single-peaked . '' where there is only one kind of peak , or vertex , in a stellation ( i.e . all vertices are congruent within a single symmetry orbit ) , the stellation is monoacral . all such stellations are fully supported . primary stellations . where a polyhedron has planes of mirror symmetry , edges falling in these planes are said to lie in primary lines . if all edges lie in primary lines , the stellation is primary . all primary stellations are fully supported . miller stellations . in '' the fifty-nine icosahedra '' coxeter , du val , flather and petrie record five rules suggested by miller . although these rules refer specifically to the icosahedron 's geometry , they have been adapted to work for arbitrary polyhedra . they ensure , among other things , that the rotational symmetry of the original polyhedron is preserved , and that each stellation is different in outward appearance . the four kinds of stellation just defined are all subsets of the miller stellations . we can also identify some other categories : a partial stellation is one where not all elements of a given dimensionality are extended . a sub-symmetric stellation is one where not all elements are extended symmetrically . the archimedean solids and their duals can also be stellated . here we usually add the rule that all of the original face planes must be present in the stellation , i.e . we do not consider partial stellations . for example the cube is not usually considered a stellation of the cuboctahedron . generalising miller 's rules there are : 4 stellations of the rhombic dodecahedron 187 stellations of the triakis tetrahedron 358,833,097 stellations of the rhombic triacontahedron 17 stellations of the cuboctahedron ( 4 are shown in wenninger 's polyhedron models ) an unknown number of stellations of the icosidodecahedron ; there are 7071671 non-chiral stellations , but the number of chiral stellations is unknown . ( 20 are shown in wenninger 's polyhedron models ) seventeen of the nonconvex uniform polyhedra are stellations of archimedean solids . miller 's rules . in the book the fifty nine icosahedra , j.c.p . miller proposed a set of rules for defining which stellation forms should be considered '' properly significant and distinct '' . these rules have been adapted for use with stellations of many other polyhedra . under miller 's rules we find : there are no stellations of the tetrahedron , because all faces are adjacent there are no stellations of the cube , because non-adjacent faces are parallel and thus can not be extended to meet in new edges there is 1 stellation of the octahedron , the stella octangula there are 3 stellations of the dodecahedron : the small stellated dodecahedron , the great dodecahedron and the great stellated dodecahedron , all of which are kepler–poinsot polyhedra . there are 58 stellations of the icosahedron , including the great icosahedron ( one of the kepler–poinsot polyhedra ) , and the second and final stellations of the icosahedron . the 59th model in the fifty nine icosahedra is the original icosahedron itself . many '' miller stellations '' can not be obtained directly by using kepler 's method . for example many have hollow centres where the original faces and edges of the core polyhedron are entirely missing : there is nothing left to be stellated . on the other hand , kepler 's method also yields stellations which are forbidden by miller 's rules since their cells are edge- or vertex-connected , even though their faces are single polygons . this discrepancy received no real attention until inchbald ( 2002 ) . other rules for stellation . miller 's rules by no means represent the '' correct '' way to enumerate stellations . they are based on combining parts within the stellation diagram in certain ways , and do n't take into account the topology of the resulting faces . as such there are some quite reasonable stellations of the icosahedron that are not part of their list – one was identified by james bridge in 1974 , while some '' miller stellations '' are questionable as to whether they should be regarded as stellations at all – one of the icosahedral set comprises several quite disconnected cells floating symmetrically in space . as yet an alternative set of rules that takes this into account has not been fully developed . most progress has been made based on the notion that stellation is the reciprocal or dual process to facetting , whereby parts are removed from a polyhedron without creating any new vertices . for every stellation of some polyhedron , there is a dual facetting of the dual polyhedron , and vice versa . by studying facettings of the dual , we gain insights into the stellations of the original . bridge found his new stellation of the icosahedron by studying the facettings of its dual , the dodecahedron . some polyhedronists take the view that stellation is a two-way process , such that any two polyhedra sharing the same face planes are stellations of each other . this is understandable if one is devising a general algorithm suitable for use in a computer program , but is otherwise not particularly helpful . many examples of stellations can be found in the list of wenninger 's stellation models . stellating polytopes . the stellation process can be applied to higher dimensional polytopes as well . a stellation diagram of an n-polytope exists in an ( n & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; 1 ) -dimensional hyperplane of a given facet . for example , in 4-space , the great grand stellated 120-cell is the final stellation of the regular 4-polytope 120-cell . naming stellations . the first systematic naming of stellated polyhedra was cayley 's naming of the regular star polyhedra ( nowadays known as the kepler–poinsot polyhedra ) . this system was widely , but not always systematically , adopted for other polyhedra and higher polytopes . john conway devised a terminology for stellated polygons , polyhedra and polychora ( coxeter 1974 ) . in this system the process of extending edges to create a new figure is called stellation , that of extending faces is called greatening and that of extending cells is called aggrandizement ( this last does not apply to polyhedra ) . this allows a systematic use of words such as 'stellated ' , 'great , and 'grand ' in devising names for the resulting figures . for example conway proposed some minor variations to the names of the kepler–poinsot polyhedra . stellation to infinity . wenninger noticed that some polyhedra , such as the cube , do not have any finite stellations . however stellation cells can be constructed as prisms which extend to infinity . the figure comprising these prisms may be called a stellation to infinity . by most definitions of a polyhedron , however , these stellations are not strictly polyhedra . wenninger 's figures occurred as duals of the uniform hemipolyhedra , where the faces that pass through the center are sent to vertices '' at infinity '' . from mathematics to art . alongside from his contributions to mathematics , magnus wenninger is described in the context of the relationship of mathematics and art as making '' especially beautiful '' models of complex stellated polyhedra . the italian renaissance artist paolo uccello created a floor mosaic showing a small stellated dodecahedron in the basilica of st mark , venice , c . 1430 . uccello 's depiction was used as the symbol for the venice biennale in 1986 on the topic of '' art and science '' . the same stellation is central to two lithographs by m . c . escher : contrast ( order and chaos ) , 1950 , and gravitation , 1952 .