Braunston

description . the main village of braunston is situated on a hill above the road and the canals , and formerly had a windmill , the building of which still stands but without any sails . the village contains several pubs ( the boathouse , the admiral nelson , the plough , and the wheatsheaf ) , a selection of shops - excellent butchers , hairdressers and village stores incorporating the post office , a fish and chip shop , car servicing garage and a primary school . the braunston manor hotel has now closed with the main house reverting to residential use and the outhouse buildings redeveloped for a housing development . in 1374 , the manor itself was the subject of one of a number of property disputes involving the landowning corbet family . braunston 's main claims to fame are its canal and church . church . all saints ' church braunston has overlooked the village and the villagers for over 10 centuries and the canals and the boat people for over 300 years . otherwise known as the '' cathedral of the canals '' , it has existed since the early 13th century . however , the land on which is stands has been sacred for longer still , as it was used as an ancient tumulus for the local farmsteads as early as the 10th century , although little evidence to this time is available . although the original norman structure was nearly demolished when the site was polluted by several murders in 1290 , the church was later rebuilt in the 14th century . the second incarnation of the church served the area for over 400 years , until the site was demolished , with authority from rev . alfred butler clough in 1848 , due to dilapidation of the structure . the third incarnation of the church cost £6,800 , money raised primarily through donations and aided by grants from the church building society and the peterborough diocesan society . notable contributors to the funds also include her majesty the queen dowager and the oxford canal company . in outline the new church was similar to its mediaeval predecessor in having no north chancel . the body of the church was made wider to provide accommodation for the enlarged population which had followed the coming of the canals . the new church had the number of seats increased from 363 to 732 . despite the overwhelming impression of space and light the interior design of the church was rather austere . the biggest change made was in the appearance of the chancel itself which was transformed by redecoration . this was the work of the leading high church designer , william butterfield , architect of rugby school . today the church still provides regular services to the area , and often allows visitors to tour the ancient grounds , on non-service days . several relics have been kept by the church since its original incarnation , such as : a sculpture , almost certainly in memory of william , fourth baron ros , who died on a pilgrimage to the holy land in 1352 . the de ros family held the braunston manor from 1200 to 1508 . the church chest , which once housed the parish records dating from 1538 and now deposited in the county records office in northampton . the norman font , the only remaining part of the first church on the site . the piscina , a stone basin used for draining water used in the mass pre-reformation . the head of the churchyard cross , possibly fourteenth century which has on the four sides the remains of carvings of the crucifixion , the madonna and child , a robed ecclesiastic and a warrior . . canals . the canal alongside braunston is a junction between the oxford canal and the grand union canal , which was once an important part of the national transport system . many former boating families have links to braunston , the churchyard in the village having many graves of boatmen and women . the village thrived for over 150 years on the canal trade - carrying goods from the midlands to london . now it is a centre for leisure activities and boasts by far and away the busiest stretch of canal anywhere in the country . the unique triangular junction between the two canals has two bridges made at horseley ironworks carrying the towpath over the canal . this was not the original meeting point of the grand junction and oxford canals : the junction was moved in the course of improvements to the oxford canal in the 1830s , prior to which the junction was near where the marina is today , and where a third horseley ironworks bridge can be seen . the canals are no longer used for carrying freight , but are now used mostly by pleasure boats . braunston has a marina filled with these pleasure boats and is usually quite busy . from the marina , six locks carry the grand union canal up to braunston tunnel , some 2,049 yards ( 1,874 m ) long . railways . despite its small size , braunston was once served by two railway stations , both now closed . the first , braunston london road was on the former lnwr weedon to leamington spa branch line , via daventry , was located near the marina and closed in september 1958 . a couple of miles north-west of braunston was braunston and willoughby station on the former great central main line , which served braunston and the village of willoughby , which it was closer to . this was the last main line to be constructed from the north of england to london and opened in march 1899 . braunston and willoughby station closed in april 1957 and the line itself in september 1966 . to the south of the station was the 13-arch willoughby viaduct crossing the river leam : the viaduct was demolished about 1980 . braunston primary school . braunston c.e . primary school is located in the middle of the village . it is a one form entry school . it has one class for each age group from reception to year 6 , with the capacity for 30 children in each class . the curriculum is divided up into stages according to age : foundation stage – the reception class , key stage 1 - years 1 and 2 , key stage 2 - years 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 . . nearby settlements . nearby is the small hamlet of little braunston . also close to the village are the three lost settlements of braunston cleves or fawcliff , braunstonbury and wolfhampcote . an inventory of archaeological sites in north west northamptonshire , page 22 , fig 27 . . twin village . the village is twinned with quincy-voisins in france . gallery . image : braunston marina.jpg the marina at braunston image : braunston windmill 26g07.jpg the former windmill in braunston image : braunston sign near london.jpg sign next to canal leading to braunston . references . further reading . at the heart of the waterways : the story of the canals in the village of braunston , northamptonshire , by david blagrove , third edition , buchebroc press , 2003 , . images of old braunston , braunston history society , beaublade limited , 2006 . braunston yesterday and today , braunston history society , 2010 . external links . village website gazetteer entry from 1870 & ndash ; 72