Poetry analysis

overview . '' the destruction of sennacherib '' , by lord byron . similarly , one can derive pleasure louise bogan , 'the pleasures of formal poetry ' , in reginald gibbons ( ed . ) , the poet ’ s work : 29 poets on the origins and practice of their art ( chicago and london : university of chicago press , 1979 ) from two of the most fundamental tools in the poet 's toolbox—meter and rhyme—without necessarily knowing a lot of terminology , as in this , the first stanza of byron 's '' the destruction of sennacherib '' : : the assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold , : and his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold ; : and the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea , : when the blue wave rolls nightly on deep galilee . byron 's use of meter and rhyme is especially evident and rewarding when one reads the lines out loud . the lines have a powerful , rolling , and very evident rhythm , and they rhyme in a way that is impossible to ignore . in other words , the physicality of the language—how it sounds and feels—accounts for a large measure of the poem 's effect . the poem does not have a deep , hidden , symbolic meaning . rather , it is simply pleasurable to read , say , and hear . critical terminology becomes useful when one attempts to account for why the language is pleasurable , and how byron achieved this effect . the lines are not simply rhythmic : the rhythm is regular within a line , and is the same for each line . a poem having a regular rhythm ( not all poems do ) is said to follow a certain meter . in '' the destruction of sennacherib '' , each line has the basic pattern of two unstressed syllables followed by a third stressed syllable , with this basic pattern being repeated four times in a line . those basic patterns are called feet , and this particular pattern ( weak weak strong ) is called an anapest . a line with four feet is said to be in tetrameter ( tetra- , from the greek for four ) . this poem has a pleasurable and appropriate rhythm , and that rhythm has a name : this poem is written in anapestic tetrameter . ( this process of analyzing a poem 's rhythms is called scansion . ) the poem also rhymes ( not all poems do ) , and the rhymes follow a pattern ( they do not have to ) . in this case , the rhymes come right next to each other , which emphasizes them , and therefore emphasizes the sound , the physical nature , of the language . the effect of the poem 's language derives in part from byron 's choice of an appropriate pattern of rhyme ( or rhyme scheme ) : these adjacent , rhyming lines are called couplets . the sound , the physical nature , of the language is also emphasized by alliteration , as in the repetition of s sounds in the third line : '' and the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea '' . tools . poetic forms . poems can have many forms . some forms are strictly defined , with required line counts and rhyming patterns , such as the sonnet or limerick . such poems exhibit closed form . others ( which exhibit open form ) have less structure or , indeed , almost no apparent structure at all . this appearance , though , is deceptive : successful open form poems are informed throughout by organic structure which may resist formal description but is nonetheless a crucial element of the poem 's effect on the reading mind . closed forms . a poet writing in closed form follows a specific pattern , a specific design . some designs have proven so durable and so suited to the english language that they survive for centuries and are renewed with each generation of poets ( sonnets , sestinas , limericks , and so forth ) , while others come into being for the expression of one poem and are then set aside ( frost 's '' stopping by woods on a snowy evening '' is a good example ) . of all closed forms in english prosody , none has demonstrated greater durability and range of expression than blank verse , which is verse that follows a regular meter but does not rhyme . in english , iambic pentameter is by far the most frequently employed meter . among the many exemplary works of blank verse in english are milton 's paradise lost and most of the verse passages from shakespeare 's plays , such as this portion of a famous soliloquy from hamlet : : to be , or not to be—that is the question . : whether 't is nobler in the mind to suffer : the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune , : or to take arms against a sea of troubles : and by opposing end them . to die , to sleep — : no more , and by a sleep to say we end : the heartache and the thousand natural shocks : that flesh is heir to . 't is a consummation : devoutly to be wished . to die , to sleep , : to sleep—perchance to dream . aye , there 's the rub . note that shakespeare does not rigidly follow a pattern of five iambs per line . rather , most lines have five strong syllables , and most are preceded by a weak syllable . the meter provides a rhythm that informs the line : it is not an invariable formula . rhymed pairs of iambic pentameter lines form the heroic couplet . two masters of the form are alexander pope and john dryden . the form has proven especially suited to conveying wit and sardonic humor , as in the opening of pope 's an essay on criticism . : ’ tis hard to say , if greater want of skill : appear in writing or in judging ill ; : but , of the two , less dang ’ rous is th ’ offence , : to tire our patience , than mislead our sense . : some few in that , but numbers err in this , : ten censure wrong for one who writes amiss ; : a fool might once himself alone expose , : now one in verse makes many more in prose . fourteen lines of iambic pentameter arranged in a more elaborate rhyme scheme form a sonnet . there are two major variants . the form originated in italy , and the word derives from '' sonetto '' , which is italian for '' little song '' . the italian sonnet or petrarchan sonnet follows a rhyme scheme of abba abba cde cde , abba abba cd cd cd , abba abba cce dde , or abba abba cdd cee . in each of these , a group of eight lines ( the octave ) is followed by a group of six ( the sextet ) . typically , the octave introduces a situation , idea , or problem to which the sestet provides a response or resolution . for example , consider henry wadsworth longfellow 's '' the sound of the sea '' : : the sea awoke at midnight from its sleep , : and round the pebbly beaches far and wide : i heard the first wave of the rising tide : rush onward with uninterrupted sweep ; : a voice out of the silence of the deep , : a sound mysteriously multiplied : as of a cataract from the mountain 's side , : or roar of winds upon a wooded steep . : so comes to us at times , from the unknown : and inaccessible solitudes of being , : the rushing of the sea-tides of the soul ; : and inspirations , that we deem our own , : are some divine foreshadowing and foreseeing : of things beyond our reason or control . the octave presents the speaker 's experience of the sound of the sea , coming to him from some distance . in the sestet , this experience mutates into a meditation on the nature of inspiration and man 's connection to creation and his experience of the numinous . english has ( proportionally ) far fewer rhyming words than italian . recognizing this , shakespeare adapted the sonnet form to english by creating an alternate rhyme scheme : abab cdcd efef gg . the poet using this , the english sonnet or shakespearean sonnet form , may use the fourteen lines as single unit of thought ( as in '' the silken tent '' above ) , or treat the groups of four rhyming lines ( the quatrains ) as organizational units , as in shakespeare 's sonnet 73 : : that time of year thou mayst in me behold : when yellow leaves , or none , or few do hang : upon those boughs which shake against the cold : bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang . : in me thou seest the twilight of such day : as after sunset fadeth in the west , : which by and by black night doth steal away , : death 's second self , which seals up all in rest . : in me thou seest the glowing of such fire : that on the ashes of his youth doth lie , : as the deathbed whereon it must expire , : consumed with that which it was nourished by . : this thou perceiv'st , which makes thy love more strong , : to love that well which thou must leave ere long . in lines 1–4 , the speaker compares his time of life to autumn . in lines 5–8 , the comparison is to twilight ; in lines 9–12 , the comparison is to the last moments of a dying fire . each quatrain presents a shorter unit of time , creating a sense of time accelerating toward an inevitable end , the death implied in the final couplet . at the '' high end '' of closed forms are the sestina and villanelle . at the '' low end '' are forms such as the limerick , which follows a metrical pattern of two lines of anapestic trimeter ( three anapests per line ) , followed by two lines of anapestic dimeter ( two anapests per line ) , followed by one line of anapestic trimeter . ( the beginning of the metrical foot does not have to coincide with the beginning of the line . ) any poem following this metrical pattern would generally be considered a limerick , however most also follow an aabba rhyme scheme . most limericks are humorous , and many are ribald , or outright obscene ( possible rhymes that could follow an opening like '' there once was a man from nantucket '' are left as an exercise for the reader ) . nonetheless , the form is capable of sophisticated and playful expression : : titian was mixing rose madder . : his model posed nude on a ladder . : :her position to titian : :suggested coition : so he nipped up the ladder and had her . open forms . in contrast , a poet using free verse ( sometimes called '' open form '' ) seeks to find fresh and uniquely appropriate forms for each poem , letting the structure grow out of the poem 's subject matter or inspiration . a common perception is that open form is easier and less rigorous than closed form ( frost likened it to '' playing tennis with the net down '' address at milton academy , massachusetts ( 17 may 1935 ) , but such is not necessarily the case ( skeptics should try playing tennis without a net ) : success with the open form requires great sensitivity to language and a particular type of adaptable understanding . in the best open form poems , the poet achieves something that is inaccessible through closed form . as x . j . kennedy has said , '' should the poet succeed , then the discovered arrangement will seem exactly right for what the poem is saying '' ( 582 ) . the metre of ‘ classical ’ poetry is replaced in open verse by cadence in rhythm , line indentation , with pauses implied by the syntax , thus the limiting factor of one human breath was naturally incorporated in the poetry , essential to an oral art form , composed to be read aloud . sounds aloud walt whitman was an important innovator of open form , and he demonstrates its merits in '' a noiseless patient spider '' . : a noiseless patient spider , : i marked where on a little promontory it stood isolated , : marked how to explore the vacant vast surrounding , : it launched forth filament , filament , filament , out of itself , : ever unreeling them , ever tirelessly speeding them . : and you o my soul where you stand , : surrounded , detached , in measureless oceans of space , : ceaselessly musing , venturing , throwing , seeking the spheres to connect them , : till the bridge you will need to be formed , till the ductile anchor hold , : till the gossamer thread you fling catch somewhere , o my soul . the long , rolling lines—unified , held together like strong cords , by alliteration and assonance—partake of the same nature as the spider 's filaments and the soul 's threads . two balanced stanzas , one describing a spider , the other the speaker 's soul , perfectly frame the implicit comparison , with neither being privileged over the other . just as the spider and the soul quest outward for significance , the two stanzas throw links to each other with subtly paired words : isolated/detached , launched/fling , tirelessly/ceaselessly , surrounding/surrounded . in this poem , whitman uses synonyms and antonyms to give structural integrity to a poem comprising two yoked stanzas , much like ( but not exactly like ) the way poets working within closed forms use meter and rhyme to give structural integrity to their poems . the poem has form , but the form was not imposed by previous conventions . it has open form . . imagery and symbolism . most poetry can be read on several levels . the surface is not necessarily the essence of the poem although in some cases ( notably , the works of william mcgonagall ) there is little beyond the immediate . allegory , connotation and metaphor are some of the subtler ways in which a poet communicates with the reader . before getting seduced into explorations of subtle nuance , however , the reader should establish the theme of the poem . what is the 'story ' that is being told ? not the literal story but the heart of the poem . for example : '' another '' tells of a buried child ; '' the destruction of sennacherib '' tells of the annihilation of an assyrian army by divine intervention ; '' the silken tent '' compares a woman to a tent . part of this involves recognising the voice of the poem ( who is speaking ) , and the rest of kipling 's just so stories : the events in the poem ; when these occur ; where is the 'speaker ' and where do the events occur ; why does the speaker speak ? william harmon has suggested that starting an analysis with : '' this poem dramatizes the conflict between . '' is a key technique . george herbert in his poem jordan ( i ) herbert pp . 68–69 . asks if poetry must be about the imaginary . the poem opens : : who sayes that fictions onely and false hair : become a verse ? is there in truth no beautie ? : is all good structure in a winding stair ? : may no lines passe , except they do their dutie : not to a true , but painted chair ? he was railing against the prevalent enthusiasm for pastoral poetry above all other forms ( as becomes apparent in subsequent verses ) . curiously , this verse uses metaphors to challenge the use of indirect approaches to their subject . false hair and a painted chair are decorations of the mundane . the winding stair is obstructive concealment of meaning . herbert is criticising the overuse of allegory , symbolism or elaborate language . for most poets—even the plain-speaking herbert—metaphor is the fundamental means of communicating complexity succinctly . some metaphors become so widely used that they are widely recognised symbols and these can be identified by using a specialist dictionary . allegorical verse uses an extended metaphor to provide the framework for the whole work . it was particularly prevalent in seventeenth century english but a more recent example is charles williams ' the masque of the manuscript , in which the process of publishing is a metaphor for the search for truth . ingraham allegories are usually readily apparent because of the heavy use of metaphor within them . the symbolism used in a poem may not always be as overt as metaphor . often the poet communicates emotionally by selecting words with particular connotations . for example , the word '' sheen '' in the destruction of sennacherib has stronger connotations of polishing , of human industry , than does the similar '' shine '' . the assyrians did not simply choose shiny metal ; they worked to make it so . the word hints at a military machine . other tropes that may be used to increase the level of allusion include irony , litotes , simile , and metonymy ( particularly synecdoche ) . meter and rhythm . english language poetic meter depends on stress , rather than the number of syllables . it thus stands in contrast to poetry in other languages , such as french , where syllabic stress is not present or recognized and syllable count is paramount . this often makes scansion ( the analysis of metrical patterns ) seem unduly arcane and arbitrary to students of the craft . in the final analysis , the terms of scansion are blunt instruments , clumsy ways of describing the infinitely nuanced rhythms of language . nonetheless , they provide a tool for discerning and describing the underlying structure of poems ( especially those employing closed form ) . the terms fall into two groups : the names of the different feet , and the names of the varying line lengths . the most common feet in poetry written in english are the iamb ( weak strong ) , the anapest ( weak weak strong ) , the trochee ( strong weak ) , and the dactyl ( strong weak weak ) . the iamb and anapest are known as rising meters ( they move '' up '' from weak to strong syllables ) ; the trochee and dactyl are falling meters ( they move '' down '' from strong to weak ) . less common , but frequently important for the variety and energy they bring to a line , are the monosyllabic foot ( weak ) and the spondee ( strong strong ) . the terms for line length follow a regular pattern : a greek prefix denoting the number of feet and the root '' meter '' ( for '' measure '' ) : monometer , dimeter , trimeter , tetrameter , pentameter , hexameter , heptameter , and octameter ( lines having more than eight feet are possible but quite rare ) . another useful term is caesura , for a natural pause within a line . meter and line length are not formulas for successful lines of poetry . they are rough forms of notation for the many satisfying and variable rhythms of language . slavish adherence to meter produces doggerel . skillful poets structure their poems around a meter and line length , and then depart from it and play against it as needed in order to create effect , as robert browning does in the first line of '' my last duchess '' : : that 's my last duchess painted on the wall . the opening spondees , which throw the iambic line out of pattern , gives the duke 's words a certain virulent energy : he 's spitting the words out . gerard manley hopkins took this idea of poetric energy through departure from meter to its extreme , with his theory and practice of sprung rhythm , an approach to poetry in which the language constantly frustrates the reading mind 's expectation of a regular meter . sound , tone , diction , and connotation . analyzing diction and connotation—the meanings of words as well as the feelings and associations they carry—is a good place to start for any poem . the use of specific words in the poem serve to create a tone—an attitude taken towards the subject . for example , consider the words '' slither '' and '' sneak . '' when used in a poem , the words conjure up images of a snake . the sibilant s sound reinforces the image . the connotations of the words suggest something surreptitious and undercover . from the tone , one can infer that the author is suspicious or fearful of the subject . a detached tone , or an opposite tone than the reader would expect , are sometimes purposely employed to elicit more of a response . in the opening lines of '' the love song of j . alfred prufrock '' , t . s . eliot quickly sets a certain tone , and then creates effect by juxtaposing it with a very different tone : : let us go then , you and i , : when the evening is spread out against the sky : like a patient etherized upon a table . visual and concrete poetry . poets such as e . e . cummings experiment with punctuation and the words ' layout on a page . in doing so , they venture into a realm of poetry that really can not be read aloud : it can only be experienced through the eye . : l ( a : le : af : fa : ll : s ) : one : l : iness cummings has fractured language into its most atomic elements . to analyze the poem , the reader must first reassemble these into meaningful units : a brief , evocative image— '' a leaf falls '' —appearing , like an unbidden thought , in the middle of a word , '' loneliness '' . a single falling leaf is by itself a fine image for the feeling of loneliness , but in order to fully experience the poem , the reader must then put the elements of language back into the visual form in which cummings arranged them : a vertical line ( like a leaf falling to the ground ) , followed by a horizontal series of letters ( like a leaf laying flat on the ground ) . the vertical line is dominated by the word '' one '' ( an absolutely appropriate expression of loneliness ) and by the letter '' l '' ( which , on the page , looks like the numeral 1 . it looks like '' one '' ) . numerous other poets , including george herbert , lewis carroll , william blake , wyndham lewis , and john hollander have used the layout of words , letters , and images on the page to create effect in their poems . an analytic reader of poetry must attend to the eye as well as the ear and the mind . approaches . schools of poetry . there are many different 'schools ' of poetry : oral , classical , romantic , modernist , etc . and they each vary in their use of the elements described above . schools of poetry may be self-identified by the poets that form them ( such as imagism ) , or defined by critics who see unifying characteristics of a body of work by more than one poet ( for example the movement ) . to be a 'school ' a group of poets must share a common style or a common ethos . a commonality of form is not in itself sufficient to define a school ; for example , edward lear , george du maurier and ogden nash do not form a school simply because they all wrote limericks . schools of criticism . poetry analysis is almost as old as poetry itself , with distinguished practitioners going back to figures such as plato . at various times and places , groups of like-minded readers and scholars have developed , shared , and promoted specific approaches to poetry analysis . the new criticism dominated england and american literary criticism from the 1920s to the early 1960s . the new critical approach insists on the value of close reading and rejects extra-textual sources . the new critics also rejected the idea that the work of a critic or analyst is to determine an author 's intended meaning ( a view formalized by w.k . wimsatt and monroe beardsley as the intentional fallacy ) . the new critics prized ambiguity , and tended to favor works that lend themselves to multiple interpretations . reader-response criticism developed in germany and the united states as a reaction to new criticism . it emphasises the reader 's role in the development of meaning . reception theory is a development of reader-response criticism that considers the public response to a literary work and suggests that this can inform analysis of cultural ideology at the time of the response . reading poetry aloud . all poetry was originally oral , it was sung or chanted ; poetic form as we know it is an abstraction therefrom when writing replaced memory as a way of preserving poetic utterances , but the ghost of oral poetry never vanishes . hollander , john rymes reason – a gude to english verse , yale university press , new haven 1981 poems may be read silently to oneself , or may be read aloud solo or to other people . although reading aloud to oneself raises eyebrows in many circles , few people find it surprising in the case of poetry . in fact , many poems reveal themselves fully only when they are read aloud . the characteristics of such poems include ( but are not limited to ) a strong narrative , regular poetic meter , simple content and simple form . at the same time , many poems that read well aloud have none of the characteristics exhibited by t . s . eliot 's '' journey of the magi '' , for example . poems that read aloud well include : '' the frog '' , by jean dao '' one art '' , by elizabeth bishop '' the tyger '' , by william blake '' meeting at night '' , by robert browning '' she walks in beauty '' , by byron '' the song of the western men '' , by robert stephen hawker '' november in england '' , by thomas hood '' dream variations '' , by langston hughes '' the ingoldsby legends '' , by thomas ingoldsby '' to put one brick upon another '' , by philip larkin '' paul revere 's ride '' , by henry wadsworth longfellow '' adventures of isabel '' , by ogden nash '' nothing but death '' , by pablo neruda translated by robert bly '' a small elegy '' , by jirí orten translated by lynn coffin '' ozymandias '' , by percy bysshe shelley '' the cat in the hat '' , by dr . seuss '' sea surface full of clouds '' , by wallace stevens '' silver '' , by walter de la mare '' how to tell a story '' , by robert penn warren '' on westminster bridge '' , by william wordsworth . poetry in different cultures . this article is focused on poetry written in english and reflects anglophone culture . other cultures have other poetic forms and differ in their attitudes towards poetry . references . bibliography . auden , w.h . and norman holmes ( eds . ) restoration and augustan poets : milton to goldsmith . ( new york : viking press , 1950 ) cummings , e . e . complete poems : 1913–1962 . ( new york : harcouth brace jovanovich , 1968 ) . harrison , g . b . ( ed . ) . shakespeare : the complete works . ( new york : harcourt brace jovanovich , 1968 ) hirsch , edward . how to read a poem and fall in love with poetry . ( new york : harcourt brace , 1999 ) kennedy , x . j . literature : an introduction to fiction , drama , and poetry . ( 4th ed . ) ( boston : little , brown , & co . 1987 ) roberts , edgar v . & henry jacobs ( eds . ) . literature : an introduction to reading and writing 6th edition . ( upper saddle creek , nj : prentice hall , 2000 ) wallace , robert . writing poems . ( boston : little , brown , & co . , 1982 ) . further reading . olderr , steven . symbolism : a comprehensive dictionary ( jefferson nc : mcfarland , 1986 ) olderr , steven . reverse symbolism dictionary : symbols listed by subject ( jefferson nc : mcfarland , 1992 ) strand , brian . sounds aloud open form poetic verse ( kindle ebook asin b008qvudk2 ) 2012 bowen , neil . how to analyse poetry – art of poetry : volumes ones and two ( pushmepress.com ) . external links . glossary of poetry terms the close reading of poetry : a practical introduction and guide to explication online poem analyzer appreciation of poem the planners poem appreciation , workshop of various classes