1902 in literature

events . january 5 the political drama danton 's death ( dantons tod , completed and published in 1835 ) by georg büchner ( died 1837 ) , is first performed at the belle-alliance-theater in berlin by the vereins neue freie volksbühne . george bernard shaw 's controversial 1893 play mrs . warren 's profession receives its first performance at a private london club . january 23 – the first example of a sherlockian game – a study of inconsistencies of dates in arthur conan doyle 's the hound of the baskervilles ( the serialisation of which in the strand magazine concludes in april ) by publisher frank sidgwick – appears in the cambridge review . april – mark twain buys a home in tarrytown , new york . on june 4 he receives an honorary doctorate of literature from the university of missouri . june 16 – bertrand russell writes to gottlob frege about the mathematical problem to become known as russell 's paradox . july 1 – the romanian language literary review luceafărul begins publication in budapest . september 9 – p . g . wodehouse leaves his job at the hongkong and shanghai banking company in london to become a freelance writer . on september 18 , his first published novel , the st . austin 's school story the pothunters , is published in london by a & c black , as a truncation of the version in their public school magazine from january to march . early october – beatrix potter 's self-illustrated children 's book the tale of peter rabbit ( originally published privately a year earlier ) appears in its first commercial edition with frederick warne & co in london . it had sold 28,000 copies by the end of the year . october 5 – thousands attend the funeral of the french novelist émile zola at the cimetière de montmartre , paris . they include alfred dreyfus , given special permission by mme zola to attend . november 4 – j . m . barrie 's comedy the admirable crichton is first performed , at the duke of york 's theatre in london , starring h . b . irving , henry kemble and irene vanbrugh . it runs for 828 performances . december 5 – leo tolstoy 's drama the power of darkness ( « власть тьмы » , vlast ' t'my , written in 1886 ) is premièred at the moscow art theatre by konstantin stanislavski with some success , although he is self-critical . december 18 – maxim gorky 's drama the lower depths ( « на дне » , na dne ) is first performed , at the moscow art theatre , as a first major success for konstantin stanislavsky as director and star . unknown date – the poet ștefan petică 's cycle fecioara în alb is published , marking a maturing of romanian symbolism . . new books . fiction . azorín – la voluntad ( volition ) jane barlow – the founding of fortunes pío baroja – camino de perfección ( pasión mística ) ( road to perfection ) edward harold begbie ( as caroline lewis ) – clara in blunderland arnold bennett anna of the five towns the grand babylon hotel rhoda broughton – lavinia joseph conrad typhoon ( serialized in the pall mall magazine january–march and us book publication ) youth : a narrative , and two other stories , incorporating youth : a narrative ( 1898 ) and heart of darkness ( first 1899 ) the end of the tether marie corelli – temporal power : a study in supremacy miguel de unamuno – amor y pedagogía ramón del valle-inclán – : es : sonatas ( valle-inclán ) ( sonatas : the pleasant memories of the marquis of bradomín – autumn sonata ) arthur conan doyle – the hound of the baskervilles paul laurence dunbar – the sport of the gods hamlin garland – the captain of the gray-horse troop andré gide – the immoralist ellen glasgow – the battle-ground annie french hector – kitty costello theodor herzl – the old new land violet jacob – the sheepstealers w . w . jacobs – the lady of the barge ( short stories , including '' the monkey 's paw '' ) henry james – the wings of the dove alfred jarry – supermale ( le surmâle : roman moderne ) mary johnston – audrey olha kobylianska – zemlya ( land ) liang qichao – xin zhongguo weilai ji ( 新中國未來記 , the future of new china ; unfinished ) jack london – a daughter of the snows george barr mccutcheon – brewster 's millions charles major – dorothy vernon of haddon hall a . e . w . mason – the four feathers w . somerset maugham – mrs craddock dmitri merejkowski – the romance of leonardo da vinci arthur morrison – the hole in the wall frank norris – the pit ( serialization ) luigi pirandello – il turno w . heath robinson – the adventures of uncle lubin saki – the westminster alice percy sykes – ten thousand miles in persia jules verne – the kip brothers ( les frères kip ) eduard vilde – mahtra sõda ( the war in mahtra ) edith wharton – the valley of decision owen wister – the virginian . children and young people . l . frank baum – the life and adventures of santa claus j . m . barrie – the little white bird ( includes the story '' peter pan in kensington gardens '' ) edith ogden harrison – prince silverwings and other fairy tales william dean howells – the flight of pony baker rudyard kipling – just so stories for little children bessie marchant – fleckie : a story of the desert , etc . e . nesbit – five children and it beatrix potter – the tale of peter rabbit edward stratemeyer – the young volcano explorers mrs george de horne vaizey – a houseful of girls charles norris williamson – the lightning conductor : the strange adventures of a motor-car p . g . wodehouse – the pothunters . drama . j . m . barrie – the admirable crichton gaston arman de caillavet and robert de flers – le cœur a ses raisons clyde fitch – the girl with the green eyes maxim gorky – the lower depths haralamb lecca – septima . câiniĭ maurice maeterlinck – monna vanna frank wedekind – king nicolo w . b . yeats – cathleen ní houlihan . poetry . edwin james brady – the earthen floor walter de la mare ( as walter ramal ) – songs of childhood ștefan petică – fecioara în alb . non-fiction . jane addams – democracy and social ethics james allen – as a man thinketh hilaire belloc – the path to rome euclides da cunha – os sertões ( translated as rebellion in the backlands ) arthur conan doyle – the war in south africa : its cause and conduct michael fairless ( pseudonym of margaret barber ) – the roadmender john a . hobson – imperialism ( hobson ) william james – the varieties of religious experience vilfredo pareto – les systèmes socialistes bertrand russell – a free man 's worship william wynn westcott – collectanea hermetica ( finishes publication ) . births . january 5 – stella gibbons , english novelist ( died 1989 ) january 20 – nazim hikmet , turkish lyricist and dramatist ( died 1963 ) january 30 – nikolaus pevsner , german-born architectural historian ( died 1983 ) february 1 – langston hughes , african-american poet and novelist ( died 1967 ) february 16 – ion călugăru , romanian novelist , short story writer and journalist ( died 1956 ) february 19 – kay boyle , american writer , educator and political activist ( died 1992 ) february 27 – john steinbeck , american novelist and journalist ( died 1968 ) march 10 – stefan inglot , polish historian ( died 1994 ) march 29 – marcel aymé , french novelist and short-story writer ( died 1967 ) april 2 – jan tschichold , german-born typographer ( died 1974 ) april 6 – julien torma , french poet and dramatist ( died 1933 ) april 9 – lord david cecil , english literary critic and biographer ( died 1986 ) april 23 – halldór laxness , icelandic novelist ( died 1998 ) june 5 – hugo huppert , austrian poet , writer and translator ( died 1982 ) july 10 – nicolás guillén , afro-cuban poet ( died 1989 ) july 8 – gwendolyn b . bennett , african american writer and artist ( died 1981 ) july 27 - yaroslav halan , ukrainian playwright , translator , and publicist ( died 1949 ) august 15 – katharine brush , american short story writer ( died 1952 ) august 16 – georgette heyer , english novelist ( died 1974 ) august 19 – ogden nash , american poet and humorist ( died 1971 ) august 24 felipe alfau , spanish-american fiction writer , poet and translator ( died 1999 ) fernand braudel , french historian ( died 1985 ) september 21 – luis cernuda , spanish poet ( died 1963 ) october 13 – arna bontemps , african american poet ( died 1973 ) october 23 – dadie rylands ( george rylands ) , english shakespeare scholar ( died 1999 ) october 26 – beryl markham ( beryl clutterbuck ) , english-born kenyan adventurer and memoirist ( died 1986 ) october 31 – carlos drummond de andrade , brazilian poet ( died 1987 ) november 1 – nordahl grieg , norwegian poet and author ( killed in action 1943 ) november 2 hu feng ( 胡风 ) , chinese novelist ( died 1985 ) gyula illyés , hungarian author ( died 1983 ) november 29 – carlo levi , italian writer ( died 1975 ) december 7 – n . crevedia , romanian poet , novelist and journalist ( died 1978 ) . december 20 – jolán földes , hungarian novelist and playwright ( died 1963 ) . deaths . january 7 – wilhelm hertz , german poet and translator ( born 1835 ) april 6 – gleb uspensky , russian writer ( born 1843 ) april 20 – frank r . stockton , american writer and humorist ( born 1834 ) may 6 – bret harte , american author and poet ( born 1836 ) june 10 – jacint verdaguer , catalan poet ( born 1845 ) june 18 – samuel butler , english novelist ( born 1835 ) july 10 – annie french hector ( pseudonym mrs alexander ) , irish-born novelist ( born 1825 ) august 31 – mathilde wesendonck , german poet ( born 1828 ) september 11 – ernst dümmler , german historian ( born 1830 ) september 19 – masaoka shiki ( 正岡 子規 ) , japanese haiku poet ( pott 's disease , born 1867 ) september 29 william mcgonagall , scottish doggerel poet ( born 1825 ) émile zola , french novelist ( carbon monoxide poisoning , born 1840 ) october 7 – george rawlinson , english historian ( born 1812 ) october 13 – john george bourinot , canadian historian ( born 1836 ) october 25 – frank norris , american novelist ( peritonitis , born 1870 ) november 16 – g . a . henty , english historical novelist ( born 1832 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : christian mommsen . references .