Yukaghir people

geographic distribution . the tundra yukaghirs live in the lower kolyma region in the sakha republic ; the taiga yukaghirs in the upper kolyma region in the sakha republic and in srednekansky district of magadan oblast . by the time of russian colonization in the 17th century , the yukaghir tribal groups occupied territories from the lena river to the mouth of the anadyr river . the number of the yukaghirs decreased between the 17th and 19th centuries due to epidemics , internecine wars and tsarist colonial policy which may have included genocide against the sedentary hunter-fisher anaouls . some of the yukaghirs have assimilated with the yakuts , evens , and russians . currently , yukaghirs live in the sakha republic and the chukotka autonomous okrug of the russian federation . according to the 2002 census , their total number was 1,509 people , up from 1,112 recorded in the 1989 census . according to the latest 2001 all ukrainian census , 12 yukaghirs are living in ukraine . only 2 of them indicated yukaghir as their native language . for the remaining others ( 6 ) it is russian and for 1 it is some other tongue . . genetics . genetically , yukaghirs exhibit roughly equal frequencies of the y-dna haplogroups n1c , q1 , and c2 ( formerly c3 ) . investigating the prehistory of tungusic peoples of siberia and the amur-ussuri region with complete mtdna genome sequences and y-chromosomal markers according to another study , out of 11 yukaghir males 3 turned out to belong to the y-haplogroup n1c ( different subclade from the one found in yakuts ) , another 4 - to the y-haplogroup c2 ( former c3 ; for the most part , the same subclade that 's also found in koryaks ) , one more - to the y-haplogroup o , and the rest 3 exhibit apparent russian genetic influence ( two individuals belonging to the y-haplogroup r1a , and one more - to the y-haplogroup i2a ) . the study also found no similarities between yukaghirs and chukchis in regards to mitochondrial dna . autosomal and uniparental portraits of the native populations of sakha ( yakutia ) : implications for the peopling of northeast eurasia . subethnic groups . the 13 tribes that once constituted the yukaghir group are : vadul-alais , odul , chuvan , anaoul , lavren , olyuben , omok , penjin , khodynts , khoromoy , shoromboy , yandin , and yandyr . the surviving three tribes are the odul of nelemnoe , the vadul of andryushkino and the chuvan of the anadyr river area . of the extinct groups , the most important were the khodynts , the anaoul ( both of the anadyr river area ) , and the omok ( north of the chuvan ) . sometimes the chuvan are considered a separate tribe . the chuvantsy language has been extinct since the early 20th century . in 2002 , 1,087 identified themselves as chuvan compared to more than 1,300 in 1989 . the vadul are mainly involved in reindeer herding while the odul ( kogime ) are mostly hunter-gatherers . the vadul are also known as tundra yukaghir . the odul are also known as taiga yukaghir or kolyma yukaghir . the vadul and odul languages are as different as german is from dutch . both are nearing extinction , and odul is in a much weaker state compared to vadul . in the 1989 census , more than 700 of the yukaghirs identified as vadul while fewer than 400 were odul . the yukaghir are one of the oldest peoples in north-eastern asia . originally they lived over a huge territory from lake baikal to the arctic ocean . by the time of the first encounter with russians , yukaghir were divided into twelve tribes with around 9,000 people . the yukagir ethnonym is odul or vadul , which means “ mighty ” . tribal divisions among the yukaghir are fading now , although in every census from 1926 , significant number of tribesmen identified themselves with tribal divisions like anaoul , odul and vadul rather than describing themselves as yukaghir . the soviet government actively discouraged this tendency and now only the most elderly identify this way . in the 2002 census , out of the 1,509 yukaghirs , 51 identified themselves as omok , 40 as alais , 21 as odul , 17 as vadul , 6 as khangait and 4 as detkil . clan system . the head of every clan was an elder called a ligey shomorokh . his was the final word in all aspects of life . hunting leaders were khangitche , and war leaders were tonbaia shomorokh ( '' the mighty man '' ) . women and teenagers had equal voices with men . the internal life of the community was under the control of the older women . their decisions in those matters were indisputable . in the beginning of every summer all clans gathered for the sakhadzibe festival , where mutual yukaghir questions were discussed . in the yakut-sakha republic there are three nomadic extended family communities . these are tchaila in nizhnekolymsky district , teki odulok in verkhnekolymsky district and ianugail in ust-yansky district . the head of ianugail is i . i . tomsky . the community 's main activities are deer hunting and fishing . tchaila is the biggest of the three . its head is s . i . kurilov . they have 4000 domesticated reindeer , 200 horses , and 20 cows . the community also hunts deer and polar foxes . there is also a shop where traditional skin and fur garments are made . the head of teki odulok is n . i . shalugin . their base is the village of nelemnoe . this community is in the most difficult situation . due to the “ creative interpretation ” of various perestroika and privatization laws by the local and district administration and so-called businessmen , the community has lost all their reindeer , cows and even part of its land . all they have left are about 50 horses . they have no money for supplies for hunting and fishing . 80 % of all adult population is de facto unemployed . the highest forum for yukagir is the all-people gathering suktuul . culture . the main traditional activity is nomadic and semi-nomadic hunting of deer , moose , wild sheep , and sable , as well as fishing . reindeer are bred mostly for transportation . horses are known among the yukaghir as '' domestic reindeer of yakuts '' ( yoqod ile in tundra yukaghir or yaqad āçə in kolyma yukaghir ) . a yukaghir house is called a chum . the decline of traditional economic activities , the unfavorable environmental situation of the yukaghir 's traditional lands and waters , and the absence of local and federal laws and executive mechanisms protecting indigenous peoples in russia , have not aided the welfare and continuation of traditional yukaghir communities . the average life span for men is 45 years , and 54 years for women . child mortality is the highest in the yakut-sakha republic . in addition , one expedition made to the yukaghir found that most had no knowledge of traditional yukaghir culture . language . the yukaghir languages are a small language family of two closely related languages , tundra yukaghir and kolyma yukaghir , although there used to be more . they are unclassified languages : their origin and relation to other languages are unknown ; some scholars consider them distantly related to the uralic languages , but this classification is not accepted by the majority of specialists in uralic linguistics . the languages are regarded as moribund , since less than 370 people can speak either yukaghir language . most yukaghirs today speak yakut and russian . religion . alongside russian orthodox beliefs , yukaghirs still practice shamanism . the dominant cults are ancestral spirits , the spirits of fire , sun ( pugu ) , hunting , earth , and water , which can act as protectors or as enemies of people . the most important is the cult of pugu , the sun , who is the highest judge in all disputes . the spirits of the dead go to a place called aibidzi . every clan had a shaman called an alma . after death every alma was treated as a deity , and the body of the dead alma was dismembered and kept by the clan as relics . the yukaghir still continue traditions stemming from their origins as nomadic reindeer-hunters : they practice dog sacrifice and have an epic poem based around crows . the animal cult was especially strong in the elk cult . there was a number of rituals and taboos connected with elk and deer hunting . inside the new russia ( 1994 ) : yukagirs . see also . paleosiberian languages uralic–yukaghir languages uralic eurasiatic nostratic . references . notes . also free online available audio materials ( tales , songs ) . . footnotes . . external links . yukaghir portal in arctic megapedia modern culture : irina duskulova - '' chakhadan '' ( live , w/ english subtitles ) irina duskulova - '' ulegen nume '' ( music video ) concert 5th yukaghir congress ( 20 march 2016 )