Allan Kardec

early life . rivail was born in lyon in 1804 and raised as a roman catholic . he pursued interests in philosophy and the sciences , and became an acolyte and colleague of johann heinrich pestalozzi . eliane rezende garcia . a educação : saber e sabor na relação entre sujeitos ( in portuguese ) . ponto-e-vírgula , 10 : 282-285 , 2011 . puc-sp . issn 1982-4807 . rivail completed a number of educational courses including a bachelor of arts degrees in science kardec , a . ( 1860b ) . formation de la terre . théorie de l'incrustation planétaire . revue spirite - journal d ’ études psychologiques he was a member of several scholarly societies , including the historic institute of paris ( institut historique ) , society of natural sciences of france ( société des sciences naturelles de france ) , society for the encouragement of national industry ( société d'encouragement pour l'industrie nationale ) , and the royal academy of arras ( académie d'arras , société royale des sciences , des lettres et des arts ) . he organized and taught free courses for the underprivileged . textos - allan kardec , espirito.org.br ; accessed 30 october 2015 . rivail 's work with pestalozzi helped lay the foundations for the teaching model in schools in france and germany . for several decades he helped advance pestalozzi 's pedagogy in france , founding schools and working as a teacher , educational writer and translator . . family . on february 6 , 1832 , he married amélie gabrielle boudet . in 1839 , with a new partner , mr . maurice delachatre , a merchant , he created a so-called '' exchange '' bank , which aimed to facilitate commercial transactions and thus create new opportunities for trade and industry , in order to support in default of pecuniary resources for the natural products . the duration of the trading bank was fixed by the chamber of commerce and industry at ten years . according to “ my predictions concerning spiritualism ” as he himself described in his manuscript written between 1855 and 1856 , '' in may 1855 , he met a certain mr . fortier , a magnetizer , who took him to madame de plainemaison , a medium who lived in the rue de la grange bateliere in paris , just a step away from the opera house . in the presence of other guests for the session , he entered into communication with a spirit named zephyr , who gave him the mission of being the spokesman of the dead . for him , it was a revelation . he was there , for the first time , witnessing the phenomenon of turntables jumping and running '' . spiritism . rivail was in his early 50s when he became interested in séances , which were a popular entertainment at the time . strange phenomena attributed to the action of spirits were considered a novelty , featuring objects that moved or '' tapped '' , purportedly under the control of 'spirits ' . in some cases , this was alleged to be a type of communication : the supposed spirits answered questions by controlling the movements of objects so as to pick out letters to form words , or simply indicate '' yes '' or '' no '' . mario dos ventos . ( 2008 ) . sea el santisimo : a manual for misa espiritual & mediumship development . nzo quimbanda exu ventania . p . 13 . a possible explanation for these movements is the ideomotor phenomenon . at the time , franz mesmer 's theory of animal magnetism had become popular . when confronted with the phenomena described , some researchers , including rivail , pointed out that animal magnetism might explain them . rivail , however , after seeing a demonstration , dismissed animal magnetism as insufficient to explain his observations . the medium 's book , chapters 8 & 14 . as a result of these influences , rivail began his own investigation of psychic phenomena , mainly mediumship . during his initial investigation , he stated that before accepting a spiritual or paranormal cause for some phenomena , it would be necessary first to test if ordinary material causes could explain them . he proposed that fraud , hallucination and unconscious mental activity might explain many phenomena regarded as mediumistic , and also proposed that telepathy and clairvoyance may be responsible . kardec 1860 he compiled over one thousand questions concerning the nature and mechanisms of spirit communications , the reasons for human life on earth , and aspects of the spiritual realm . he asked those questions to ten mediums , all purportedly unknown to each other , and documented their responses . from these , he concluded that the best explanation was that personalities that had survived death were the source of at least some mediumistic communications . kardec 1986 , 1996 , 1999 ; moreira-almeida 2008 he became convinced that the mediums : provided accurate information unknown to themselves or others present ( e.g . personal information about deceased individuals ) ; demonstrated unlearned skills such as writing by illiterate mediums , handwriting similar to the alleged communicating personality , and speaking or writing in a language unknown to the medium ( xenoglossy and xenography ) ; accurately portrayed a range of personality characteristics of deceased individuals . he compiled the mediums ' responses that were consistent and adapted them into a philosophy that he called spiritism , which he initially defined as '' a science that deals with the nature , origin , and destiny of spirits , and their relation with the corporeal world . '' kardec 1868 , p . 12 spiritism and mental health : practices from spiritist centers and spiritist psychiatric hospitals in brazil . jessica kingsley publishers . rivail wrote under the name '' allan kardec '' , allegedly following the suggestion of a spirit identified as truth . posthumous works ] ( 26th ed . feb , pp . 273-75 ) on 18 april 1857 , rivail ( as allan kardec ) published his first book on spiritism , the spirits book , comprising a series of answered questions ( 502 in the first edition and 1,019 in later editions ) exploring matters concerning the nature of spirits , the spirit world , and the relationship between the spirit world and the material world . this was followed by a series of other books , including the medium 's book , the gospel according to spiritism , heaven and hell and the genesis according to spiritism , and by a periodical , the revue spirite , which kardec published until his death . collectively , the books became known as the spiritist codification . kardec 's research influenced the psychical research of charles richet , camille flammarion and gabriel delanne . brady brower . unruly spirits . the science of psychic phenomena in modern france , urbana : university of illinois press , 2010 . pp . 17 . banque des savoirs . histoire des sciences - camille flammarion : la passion des étoiles à la portée de tous , savoirs.essonne.fr ; accessed 12 july 2014 . gabriel dellane . le spiritisme devant la science , paris , e . dentu , 1885 . . memorial . after his death caused by aneurysm , kardec was buried at the père lachaise cemetery . raymond buckland . ( 2005 ) . the spirit book : the encyclopedia of clairvoyance , channeling , and spirit communication . visible ink press . p . 210 ; . writings . cours pratique et théorique d ’ arithmétique ( 1824 ) plan proposé pour l ’ amélioration de l ’ éducation publique ( 1828 ) catéchisme grammatical de la langue française ( 1848 ) le livre des esprits ( the spirits book ) , 1857 le livre des médiums ( 'the book on mediums ) , 1861 l ’ évangile selon le spiritisme ( the gospel according to spiritism ) , 1864 le ciel et l ’ enfer ( heaven and hell ) , 1865 la genèse ( the genesis according to spiritism ) , 1868 . notes . references . external links . the spirits ' book by allan kardec ( pdf ) the book on mediums by allan kardec ( pdf ) the gospel according to spiritism by allan kardec ( pdf ) heaven and hell by allan kardec ( pdf ) genesis by allan kardec ( pdf ) allan kardec educational society allan kardec : free pdf spiritist books in several languages kardec a 2019 film . u.s . spiritist council allan kardec biographic information the spirits ' book by allan kardec divulgacion de espiritismo en argentina de allan kardec libros de espiritismo de allan kardec british union of spiritist societies works by allan kardec at domínio público