Abraham-Louis Breguet

life . breguet was born in neuchâtel to jonas-louis breguet and suzanne-marguerite bollein . breguet 's father died in 1758 , when he was ten , and his formal schooling ended when he was 12 . breguet 's mother remarried to joseph tattet , who came from a family of watchmakers . tattet had a showroom in paris ; the family tried for some time to entice the young breguet into the trade , to no avail , but he eventually took to it with great interest and in 1762 , aged 15 , he was sent to be apprenticed to an unknown versailles master watchmaker . at this time the court had a great influence on the trade and the best watchmakers established themselves around versailles . the young breguet soon '' astonished '' his master with his aptitude and intelligence , and to further his education he took evening classes in mathematics at the collège mazarin under abbé marie , who became a friend and mentor to the young watchmaker . through his role as tutor to the dukes of angoulême and de berri , abbé marie was able to arrange for breguet to be introduced to king louis xvi of france , and the king 's interest in mechanics led to many royal commissions for the rising watchmaker , including a perpetuelle ( automatic watch ) , with which the king was especially pleased . salomons , 1921 , p.11 unfortunately , marie met a tragic end , either through murder or suicide , and soon after breguet lost both his mother and his step-father , leaving him to support himself and his younger sister . how he managed this in the period between his parents ' deaths and the establishment of his business is unknown . david salomons , breguet 1747-1823 , ( london , 1921 , privately published ) , p.9-10 breguet was allowed to marry in 1775 after finishing his apprenticeship . he and his bride , cécile marie-louise l'huillier , set up their home and the breguet watchmaking company ; its first known address was at 51 , quai de l'horloge in the île de la cité in paris ( by the 1920s this location was designated as 39 ) . ca . 1812 the firm 's address was 79 , quai de l'horloge du palais , although salomons speculated that this might have been merely a change of number and name , not of actual location . by the year of breguet 's death in 1823 the firm also had a shop at 4 , place de la bourse , which is known because both addresses appear on the label of watch 4004 . the firm later moved to rue de la paix and in the early 20th century to 2 , rue édouard-vii . salomons , 1921 , p.8 breguet invented innovative escapements , including the tourbillon , automatic winding mechanisms , pages 110-121 , 362-370 . and the overcoil ( an improvement of the balance spring with a raised outer coil ) . within ten years breguet had commissions from the aristocratic families of france and even the french queen , marie-antoinette . cécile died in 1780 . he met abraham-louis perrelet in switzerland and became a master clockmaker in 1784 . in 1787 abraham-louis established a partnership with xavier gide , which lasted until 1791 . ca . 1792 the duke of orléans went to england and met john arnold , europe 's leading watch and clockmaker . the duke showed arnold a clock made by breguet , who was so impressed that he immediately travelled to paris and asked breguet to accept his son as an apprentice . salomons , 1921 , p.10 as breguet 's fame gradually increased he became friendly with revolutionary leader jean-paul marat , who also hailed from neuchâtel . salomons ' biography records that marat and breguet were at the house of a mutual friend one day when an angry crowd gathered outside , shouting '' down with marat ! '' , but breguet contrived their escape by disguising marat as an old woman , and they left the house arm in arm , unmolested . in 1793 marat discovered that breguet was marked for the guillotine , possibly because of his friendship with abbé marie ( and/or his association with the royal court ) ; in return for his own earlier rescue , marat arranged for a safe-pass that enabled breguet to escape to switzerland , from where he travelled to england . he remained there for two years , during which time he worked for king george iii . when the political scene in france stabilised , breguet returned to paris . in 1795 breguet returned to paris with many ideas for innovations in watch and clock making . he set up business again in quai de l'horloge and quickly established a reputation among the new wealthy classes in the empire . breguet did not staff his workshops in the traditional way , with unskilled apprentices , but instead sought out the finest available watchmakers in paris , whom he employed to make watches to his own designs . at the 1798 exposition des produits de l'industrie française breguet was given an honorable distinction , the highest award , for '' a free escapement with constant force , applicable to the improvement of both astronomical clocks and longitude clocks . this clock has the very singular effect of resetting the time in a watch . '' circa 1807 breguet brought in his son , antoine-louis ( born 1776 ) as a business partner , and from this point the firm became known as breguet et fils salomons , 1921 , p.7 breguet had previously sent his son to london to study with the great english chronometer maker , john arnold , and such was the mutual friendship and respect between the two men that arnold , in turn , sent his son , john roger , to spend time with breguet . breguet met another watchmaker louis moinet , recognised his worth at once , and the two men worked closely together . from 1811 on , moinet became breguet 's personal adviser . breguet became a member of the bureau des longitudes in 1814 and the following year gained an official appointment as chronometer-maker to the french navy . he entered the french academy of sciences in 1816 as a full member , and received the légion d'honneur from the hands of louis xviii in 1819 . breguet 's name is one of the the 72 names on the eiffel tower . in 1822 the future engineer isambard kingdom brunel , then aged sixteen , studied for some months with breguet in paris . brunel had a french father so he spoke perfect french . according to salomons ' biography , breguet was known for his kindness and good humour . it is recorded that if a workman came to breguet with a finished piece of work and an invoice for payment , and breguet was satisfied with the work , then if the invoice ended in a zero , breguet would add a tail to the zero to make it a ' 9 ' , thereby enabling the workman to be paid nine francs more than he had asked for . he was also known for his encouragement of his young apprentices , often advising them '' do not be discouraged , or allow failure to dishearten you . '' salomons , 1921 , p.11 the business grew from strength to strength , and when abraham-louis breguet died in 1823 it was carried on by louis-antoine . after antoine-louis retired in 1833 ( he died in 1858 ) the business continued under abraham-louis ' grandson louis-françois-clement breguet ( 1804–1883 ) ; his great-grandson louis antoine ( 1851–1882 ) was the last of the breguet family to run the business . although he had two sons and a daughter , they did not enter the business , so he took on noted english watchmaker edward brown of clerkenwell to look after the paris factory . brown eventually became his partner and , after breguet 's death , the owner and head of the company . his sons edward and henry brown headed the firm into the 20th century and after edward retired in the early 1900s , henry became the sole proprietor . salomons , 1921 , pp.7-8 . works and influence . breguet made three series of watches , and the highest numbering of the three reached 5120 , so in all it is estimated that the firm produced around 17,000 timepieces during breguet 's life . because of his minute attention to detail and his constant experimentation , no two breguet pieces are exactly alike . following his introduction to the court , queen marie-antoinette developed a fascination for breguet 's unique self-winding watch and louis xvi of france bought several pieces . mike disher , '' breguet at the louvre '' , watchtime.com , 29 july 2009 his achievements soon attracted a wealthy and influential clientele that comprised a veritable '' who 's who '' of the period : louis xvi and his queen marie antoinette , napoleon , joséphine de beauharnais , louis xviii , alexander i of russia , george iv of the united kingdom , arthur wellesley , 1st duke of wellington . legend has it that it was the ill-fated french queen herself who commissioned breguet 's masterpiece , the '' marie antoinette '' ( no . 160 ) , which is now widely regarded as one of the most important and valuable timepieces ever made . in fact , it was commissioned in 1783 by a member of the marie-antoinette guards , possibly as a gift for the queen , and it took almost twenty years to complete—work stopped for around seven years ( 1789–1795 ) during the period of breguet 's exile—and it was not finished until around 1802 . even by the standards of the day it was an astronomically expensive piece ; the commission specifically called for every watch function and complication known at that time and the use of the most valuable materials ( including gold , platinum , rubies and sapphires ) , with no limit placed on time or cost . breguet company records indicate that the factory costs eventually came to the colossal sum of 30,000 francs – more than six times the cost of breguet 's other major work , ( no . 92 ) , which was sold to the duc de preslin for 4800 francs . the '' marie antoinette '' remained in the possession of the breguet company until it was sold to sir spencer brunton in 1887 , eventually finding its way into the collection of breguet expert david lionel goldsmid-stern-salomons in the 1920s . david salomons , breguet 1747-1823 ( privately published , 1921 ) , p.46 breguet 's most remarkable piece anticipated the wristwatch by a century ; he designed this , together with his friend john arnold , for caroline bonaparte , queen of naples , in 1810 . many honours recognised his enormous contribution to horology . each watch from his workshops demonstrated the latest horological improvements in an original movement , mostly fitted with lever or ruby-cylinder escapements that he perfected . breguet took refuge in switzerland from the excesses of the french revolution . he returned to paris overflowing with the ideas that produced the breguet balance-spring , his first carriage clock ( sold to house of bonaparte ) , the sympathique clock and its dependent watch , the tact watch , and finally the tourbillon , patented in 1801 . although breguet is probably best known for his luxury watches and carriage clocks , he also made a number of important scientific clocks . in 1818 lieutenant-general thomas brisbane , a keen amateur astronomer , purchased a breguet mean-time regulator clock ( no . 3180 , 1815–1820 ) . it is thought that breguet originally made the clock for the french commission of longitude , but sold it to brisbane for use in his observatory at largs in scotland . it cost brisbane the considerable sum of 2,500 francs , and the fact he chose to buy french rather british , even in the nationalistic political climate of the early nineteenth century , gives some idea of how well regarded breguet was internationally . brisbane brought the clock to australia in 1821 and it was installed in australia 's first astronomical observatory at parramatta . the new south wales government purchased the clock from brisbane when he returned to england in 1825 and it remained in use there until the parramatta observatory closed in 1847 . it was put into storage for a decade before being reinstalled in the new government observatory at the rocks , and was one of the few instruments that the new government astronomer , rev . w . scott , felt was good enough to use in the new observatory . it remained in use there for another 70 years , until it was replaced in 1912 . the clock is now part of the collection of the powerhouse museum in sydney . powerhouse museum , breguet mean-time regulator clock , 1815–1820 . the salomons collection . british philanthropist , scientist and mp sir david lionel goldsmid-stern-salomons ( 1851–1925 ) developed a lifelong passion for horology and he became one of the leading authorities on breguet and his timepieces . in 1921 he published the seminal volume , breguet 1747–1823 , the first major book on the subject , which included a biography , an analysis of breguet 's key inventions , listings of major pieces , and a detailed timeline of production , using examples from his own unique collection for illustrations . over his lifetime , salomons amassed the world 's largest private breguet collection , which ultimately grew to 124 pieces , including what are considered to be the two greatest examples of breguet 's watchmaking work – the '' marie antionette '' and the double-faced '' duc de praslin '' watches . in 1924 salomons donated the '' duc de praslin '' ( pictured at left ) to the musée des techniques du conservatoire national des arts et métiers in paris , but it was subsequently stolen . fortunately , after three months of tinkering with the watch , the thief was apprehended when he took it to a renowned parisian watch specialist for repair . after salomons ' death in 1925 , his daughter vera donated 57 of his best breguet pieces , including the '' marie antoinette '' and a '' sympathiques '' clock to the l.a . mayer institute for islamic art in jerusalem , which was founded by her brother . salomons left the remainder of the collection to his wife , who eventually sold them at auction , although according to one account , she was initially rebuffed when she approached sotheby 's , because the staffer with whom she dealt could not believe that someone '' off the street '' could possibly have amassed such a collection . in 1980 , british master horologist george daniels ( widely regarded as the most important watchmaker since breguet ) catalogued the breguet watches and clocks in the museum , and published a study on them . three years later , on the night of 15 april 1983 , the mayer institute was burgled and 106 rare timepieces , including the entire salomons collection , were stolen . the audacious multimillion-dollar theft was israel 's largest-ever robbery – by this time , the '' marie antoinette '' alone was valued at us 30 & nbsp ; million . there was a substantial insurance payout , but the case remained unsolved until august 2006 , when the perpetrator was revealed as namaan diller , a notorious israeli burglar who had fled to the usa after the break-in . just before he died in 2004 , diller had confessed his crime to his wife , nili shamrat , and in august 2006 she attempted to sell a batch of the stolen items ( including the '' marie antoinette '' watch and a breguet '' sympathique '' clock ) back to the museum , although her initial asking price of 2 & nbsp ; million was eventually cut down to just us 35,000 . when police searched the couple 's los angeles home , more of the missing items were found , and documents recovered led them to safes and storage units in france , the netherlands and israel ; by 2008 all but ten of the items diller stole from the mayer museum had been recovered . aron heller , '' police solve 25-year-old mystery of marie antoinette 's watch '' , the guardian , 5 november 2008 sarna , igal ( 21 november 2008 ) . '' the strange story of marie antoinette 's self-winding watch '' , the week '' museum theft - woman convicted in case of stolen antoinette watch '' , museum security network , 3 march 2010 . 2011 montre à tact discovery . in 2011 a member of the public brought in a pocket watch to be assessed by the experts of the bbc tv series antiques roadshow at blair castle in perthshire , scotland . roadshow expert richard price stated that the timepiece was an early breguet montre à tact ( '' tactile watch '' ) , dating from 1801 . the watch was enclosed on both sides by discs covered with a blue translucent enamel over a guilloché base machined in a chevron pattern . the front face was fitted with a single arrow-shaped hand in silver , encrusted with small diamonds , and the case was surrounded by twelve large diamonds enclosed by a wavy gold band , which was faced with lighter blue enamel . the enameled back hinged open to reveal a gold cover plate and a smaller two-handed watch face . the mechanism cover bore the engraved signature of breguet and also bore the mark of recordon , his london agent at the time ( suggesting that it was originally made for an english client ) . the gold cover plate protected the mechanism , which bore another signature by breguet , and the watch number . price then revealed that a similar watch , in much worse condition and with all the gems stripped from it , had recently sold for over uk£20,000 . he declared the newly discovered breguet to be the greatest watch he had ever seen in his 28 years with the programme , and assessed its value as at least uk£50,000 , although it may be worth considerably more – another example sold for us 288,000 , while a montre à tact of very similar design , commissioned by napoleon 's wife joséphine de beauharnais for her sister hortense , was sold by christie 's in geneva for us 1.3 & nbsp ; million in 2007 . breguet invented the montre à tact in 1799 . although these single-hand '' tact '' watches are sometimes called '' blind man 's watches '' , few blind people of that era could have afforded such luxury items , and these timepieces were designed for breguet 's wealthiest clients . the montre à tact ( touch watch ) enabled them to tell the time without removing the watch from their pocket because , in that period , it was considered highly impolite to consult one 's watch during a social gathering . the device also enabled owners to tell the time in the dark . this was done by turning the front disc clockwise until it went no further ( because of the cam inside ) and then feeling at which hour marker ( indicated by the surrounding circle of jewels ) the watch hand was positioned . in the case of the 2011 discovery , the 12 o'clock position was marked by the chain attachment . the watch was also fitted with a small internal dial with two normal hands so that the exact time could be read when the case was opened . '' the timeless beauty of breguet '' , lumbers jewellers . timeline of breguet 's works . 1775–1780 improved the automatic winding mechanism – his perpetual watch . 1783 invented the gong for repeater watches ( bells were used until then ) . 1783 designed the apple-shaped ( aiguilles à pomme ) hands , known as 'breguet ' hands . these hollow , eccentric '' moon '' tip hands are a variant of the hands first used by jean-antoine lépine , the only difference is that lépine 's hands were not eccentric . since their invention , breguet hands have graced watch and clock dials alike until today . 1787 adopted and improved the lever escapement . abraham-louis breguet used it in its definitive form from 1814 ( this form is still in use ) . 1793 developed a small watch showing the equation of time . 1790 invented the 'pare-chute ' anti-shock device . 1794 invented a retrograde display mechanism . 1795 invented the breguet spiral ( flat spiral balance spring with overcoil ) . 1795 invented the '' sympathique '' ( 'sympathetic ' ) clock , a master carriage clock which rewinds and sets to time a detachable pocket watch . 1799 invented the montre a tact ( '' tact '' ) watch that could be read by feel in the pocket or the dark . 1801 patented the tourbillon escapement , developed circa 1795 . 1802 invented the echappement naturel , a double-escape wheeled chronometer escapement that needed no oil . 1821 developed the '' inking '' chronograph , in partnership with frédérick louis fatton . generally speaking , abraham-louis breguet was distinguished by the highest attention paid to aesthetic watch design . in 2009 the louvre in paris presented a major exhibition of breguet 's work , arranged chronologically , with 146 exhibits in eight sections that covered every phase of his career . highlights included some of breguet 's most complicated watches : no . 45 , which displays both the gregorian and the republican '' decimal '' calendars ( breguet made only three republican calendar timepieces ) no . 1160 , the replica of the famous no . 160 '' marie-antoinette '' , perpétuelle self-winding watches multiple original tourbillons , including an unusual large-scale demonstration tourbillon later purchased by king george iv of the united kingdom examples of the '' pare-chute '' shock-protection system , constant force escapements a superb sympathique watch and clock set from the personal collection of queen elizabeth ii .