Richard Porson

early life . richard porson was born at east ruston , near north walsham , norfolk , the eldest son of huggin porson , parish clerk . his mother was the daughter of a shoemaker from the neighbouring village of bacton . he was sent first to the bacton village school , kept by john woodrow , and then to that of happisburgh , kept by mr summers , where his extraordinary powers of memory and aptitude for arithmetic were discovered . his literary skill was partly due to the efforts of summers , who long afterwards stated that in fifty years of scholastic life he had never come across boys so clever as porson and his two brothers . he was well grounded in latin by summers , remaining with him for three years . his father also took pains with his education , making him repeat at night the lessons he had learnt in the day . he would frequently repeat perfectly a lesson he had learnt one or two years before and never seen in the interval . for books he had only what his father 's cottage supplied – a book or two of arithmetic , james greenwood 's an essay towards a practical english grammar , jewell 's apology , an odd volume of the chambers ' cyclopaedia picked up from a wrecked coaster , and eight or ten volumes of the universal magazine . . education . when porson was eleven , the curate of east ruston took charge of his education . mr hewitt taught him with his own boys , taking him through julius caesar , terence , ovid and virgil ; he had already made great progress in mathematics . in addition , hewitt brought him to the notice of john norris of witton park , who sent him to cambridge to be examined by james lambert , the two tutors of trinity college , cambridge ( thomas postlethwaite and collier ) , and the mathematician george atwood , then assistant tutor ; the result was so favourable that norris decided in 1773 to provide for his education . it was impossible to get him into charterhouse school and he was entered at eton college in august 1774 . porson did not care for eton , but he was popular there ; two dramas he wrote for performance in long chamber ( the scholars ' dormitory ) were remembered . his memory was noticed ; but he seems not to have lived up to expectations , as his composition was weak , and he fell behind through gaps in his knowledge . he went to eton too late to have any chance of a scholarship at king 's college , cambridge . in 1777 his patron john norris died ; but contributions from etonians helped fund his maintenance at the university , and he found a new patron in sir george baker , then president of the college of physicians . with his help porson entered trinity college , cambridge , as a pensioner ( i . e . a student who paid for his tuition and board , rather than a sizar or scholar ) on 28 march 1778 , matriculating in april . what first set his mind towards literary criticism was the gift of a copy of jonathan toup 's longinus by the headmaster of eton ; but it was richard bentley and richard dawes to whom he looked as his immediate masters . porson became a scholar of trinity in 1780 , won the craven university scholarship in 1781 , and took his degree of ba in 1782 , as third senior optime ( i . e . with the third best result of those achieving a second-class degree in that year ) , obtaining soon afterwards the first chancellor 's medal for classical studies . the same year he was elected a fellow of trinity , an unusual appointment for a junior bachelor of arts , under a regulation which lasted until 1818 . porson graduated ma in 1785 . early published work . his first appearance in print was in a short notice of c . g . schütz 's aeschylus in paul henry maty 's review , written in 1783 . this review contains several other essays by him , including those on richard françois brunck 's aristophanes , stephen weston 's hermesianax , and george isaac huntingford 's apology for the monostrophics . he also began a correspondence with david ruhnken , the veteran scholar of leiden , requesting fragments of aeschylus that ruhnken had come across in his collection of unpublished lexicons and grammarians , and sending him his restoration of a corrupt passage in the supplices ( 673–677 ) , with the help of a nearly equally corrupt passage of plutarch 's eroticus . the cambridge press was proposing a new edition of thomas stanley 's aeschylus , and the editorship was offered to porson ; but he declined to reprint stanley 's corrupt text and incorporate the variorum notes . he was especially anxious that the medicean manuscript at florence should be collated for the new edition , and offered to undertake the collation ; but the syndics refused the offer , the vice-chancellor john torkington , master of clare hall ( the then name of clare college ) , observing that porson might collect his manuscripts at home . in 1786 , a new edition of thomas hutchinson 's anabasis of xenophon was called for , and porson was asked by the publisher to supply notes , which he did in conjunction with walter whiter . these are a good example of the terse style of latin notes he practised . they also show his acquaintance with his two favourite authors , plato and athenaeus , and a familiarity with eustathius of thessalonica 's commentary on homer . the following year porson wrote his notae breves ad toupii emendationes in suidam , though this treatise did not appear until 1790 in the new edition of jonathan toup 's book published at oxford . these first made porson 's name known as a scholar and carried his fame beyond england . the letters he had from christian gottlob heine and johann gottfried jakob hermann were preserved in the library of trinity college . during 1787 he wrote three letters on john hawkins 's life of johnson for the gentleman 's magazine , which were reprinted by thomas kidd in his tracts and criticisms of porson , and in a volume of porson 's correspondence . they are specimens of dry humour , and allude to english dramatists and poets . in the same periodical during 1788 and 1789 appeared the letters to archdeacon travis against george travis , on a debated biblical verse called the comma johanneum ( 1 john 5:7 ) . letters to archdeacon travis , against george travis ; the letters were collected in 1790 into a volume . edward gibbon 's verdict on the book was that it was '' the most acute and accurate piece of criticism since the days of bentley . '' but it was then the unpopular side : the publisher is said to have lost money on the book ; and one of his early friends , mrs turner of norwich , cut down a legacy she had left porson to £30 on being told that he had written a book against the bible . after 1787 porson continued to contribute to the leading reviews , writing in the monthly review the articles on joseph robertson 's parian chronicle , thomas edwards 's plutarch on education , plutarchi de educatione liberorum liber , graece et latine ( 1791 ) ; and richard payne knight 's essay on the greek alphabet . he gave assistance to william beloe in one or two articles in the british critic , and probably wrote also in the analytical review and the critical review . loss of fellowship . in 1792 his fellowship ceased to be tenable by a layman ; and porson decided not to take holy orders . the master , thomas postlethwaite , who had the nomination to one of the two permanent lay fellowships , used his privilege to nominate john heys , his nephew . porson was without means of support , but a subscription was got up among his friends to provide an annuity ; cracherode , cleaver banks , burney and samuel parr took the lead , and enough was collected to produce about £100 a year . he accepted it on the condition that he should receive the interest during his lifetime and that the principal should be returned to the donors on his death . when this occurred , part of the sum was used to found the porson prize in 1816 at cambridge , and remainder for the foundation of the porson scholarship , first awarded in 1855 . he continued chiefly to reside in london , in chambers in essex court , temple — occasionally visiting his friends , such as joseph goodall at eton college and samuel parr at hatton , warwickshire . it was at goodall 's house that the letters to travis were written . at hatton , in the evenings , he would collect the young men of the house about him and pour forth from memory torrents of literature . in 1792 the regius greek professorship at cambridge became vacant with the resignation of william cooke . porson was elected without opposition and held the chair until his death . the duties consisted of taking a part in the examinations for the university scholarships and classical medals . it was said he wished to give lectures ; but lecturing was not in fashion in those days . later work . porson worked mainly on the tragedians , aristophanes , athenaeus , and the lexicons of suda , hesychius and photius . this last he twice transcribed ( the first transcript was destroyed by a fire at james perry 's house ) from the original among the gale manuscripts in the library of trinity college , cambridge . he was pleased when he found how often in aristophanes he had been anticipated by bentley , and when niels iversen schow 's collation of the unique manuscripts of hesychius appeared and proved him right in some instances . in 1795 there appeared from foulis 's press at glasgow an edition of aeschylus in folio , printed with the same type as the glasgow homer , without a word of preface or any clue to the editor . many new readings were inserted in the text with an asterisk affixed , while an obelus was used to mark many others as corrupt . it was at once recognised as porson 's work ; he had superintended the printing of a small edition in two octavo volumes , but this was kept back by the printer and not issued till 1806 , still without the editor 's name . it was printed from a copy of jan cornelis de pauw 's edition corrected , which is preserved in the library of trinity college . soon after , in 1797 , appeared the first instalment of what was intended to be a complete edition of euripides–an edition of the hecuba . reception . porson 's work did not escape attack . gilbert wakefield had published a tragoediarum delectus . conceiving himself slighted , as there was no mention of his work in the new hecuba , he wrote a diatribe extemporalis against it . gottfried hermann of leipzig had also written a work on greek metres and issued an edition of the hecuba , in which porson 's theories were attacked . porson at first took no notice of either , but went on with his euripides , publishing the orestes in 1798 , the phoenissae in 1799 and the medea in 1801 , the last printed at the cambridge press , and with the editor 's name on the title page . but there are many allusions to his antagonists in the notes ; and in the medea he holds hermann to scorn by name in caustic language . hermann 's attack may have provoked the supplement to the preface to the hecuba , in the second edition published at cambridge in 1802 . there the laws of the iambic metre are fully explained . a third edition of the hecuba appeared in 1808 , and he left corrected copies of the other plays , of which new editions appeared soon after his death ; but these four plays were all that was finished of the projected edition of the poet . porson lived six years after the second edition of the hecuba was published , but he put off the work . he found time , however , to execute his collation of the harleian manuscript of the odyssey , published in the grenville homer in 1801 , and to present to the society of antiquaries his conjectural restoration of the rosetta stone . later life and death . in 1806 , when the london institution was founded in old jewry , porson was appointed principal librarian , with a salary of £200 a year and a suite of rooms . this assured him financial ease in his latter years . among his intimate friends was james perry , editor of the morning chronicle . he married perry 's sister , mrs lunan , in november 1796 . porson then drank less ; but she died a few months after her marriage ( 12 april 1797 ) , and he returned to his chambers in the temple and his old habits . perry 's friendship induced him to spend his time in writing for the morning chronicle . for some months before his death he had appeared to be failing : his memory was not what it had been , and he had some symptoms of intermittent fever , but on 19 september 1808 he was seized in the street with a fit of apoplexy , and after partially recovering , died on the 25th . he was buried in trinity college , close to the statue of newton , at the opposite end of the chapel to the remains of bentley . legacy . porson did not discriminate between the manuscripts he used or point out the relative value of early copies . thus he collates minutely lascaris 's edition of the medea , mentioning even misprints in the text . his most brilliant emendations are convincing . his library was divided into two parts , one of which was sold by auction , while the other , containing the transcript of the gale photius , his books with his notes , and some letters from foreign scholars , was bought by trinity college for 1000 guineas . his notebooks were careful ; they have been rearranged , and illustrate his penmanship . much remains unpublished . james henry monk , his successor as greek professor , and charles james blomfield edited the adversaria , consisting of the notes on athenaeus and the greek poets , and his prelection on euripides ; peter paul dobree , afterwards greek professor , the notes on aristophanes and the lexicon of photius . besides these , from other sources , thomas gaisford edited his notes on pausanias and suidas , and thomas kidd collected his scattered reviews . when thomas burgess attacked his literary character over his letters to travis , thomas turton came forward to defend him . for the first thirty years of the 19th century , he was often regarded as the author of a very popular poem , the devil 's thoughts ( later entitled the devil 's walk ) . it was actually written by robert southey and samuel taylor coleridge . . works . the dates of porson 's published works are these : notae in xenophontis anabasin ( 1786 ) appendix to toup ( 1790 ) letters to travis ( 1790 ) aeschylus ( 1795 , 1806 ) euripides ( 1797–1802 ) collation of the harleian manuscript of the odyssey ( 1801 ) adversaria ( monk and blomfield , 1812 ) tracts and criticisms ( kidd , 1815 ) aristophanica ( dobree , 1820 ) notae in pausaniam ( gaisford , 1820 ) photii lexicon ( dobree , 1822 ) notae in suidam ( gaisford , 1834 ) correspondence ( h . r . luard , edited for the cambridge antiquarian society , 1867 ) dr . turton 's vindication appeared in 1827 . see also . porson ( typeface ) . notes . . further reading . luard , h . r . , 'porson ' , cambridge essays contributed by members of the university , london : j . w . parker & son ( 1857 ) naiditch , p . g . , the library of richard porson . s.l . : xlibris , 2011 . bishop , morris . english eccentrics , new york : minton , balch & company ( 1928 ) , pp . 227‑244 . external links .