João de Barros

early years . educated in the palace of manuel i of portugal , he composed , at the age of twenty , a romance of chivalry , the chronicle of the emperor clarimundo , in which he is said to have had the assistance of prince john ( later king john iii ) . upon ascending the throne , king john iii awarded barros the captaincy of the elmina castle , to which he proceeded in 1524 . in 1525 , he obtained the post of treasurer of the india house , which he held until 1528 . to escape from an outbreak of bubonic plague in 1530 barros moved from lisbon to his country house near pombal , where he finished a moral dialogue , rho pica pneuma , which was cheered by juan luís vives . on his return to lisbon in 1532 the king appointed barros factor of the casa da índia— a position of great responsibility and importance at a time when lisbon was the european center for the trade of the east . barros proved a good administrator , displaying great industry and an honesty rare at the time , with the result that he made little profit compared to his predecessors , who had amassed fortunes . the failed captaincy in brazil and shipwreck . thumb at this time , john iii , wishing to attract settlers to brazil , divided it into captaincy and attributed to barros that of maranhão . barros , along with two partners , prepared an armada of ten vessels , carrying nine hundred men each , which set sail in 1539 . owing to the ignorance of the pilots , the whole fleet was shipwrecked , which entailed serious financial loss to barros . as a gesture of goodwill , barros subsequently paid the debts of those who had perished in the expedition . during these years he had continued his studies in his leisure hours , and shortly after the brazilian disaster he offered to write a history of the portuguese in india , the décadas da ásia , which the king accepted . he began work forthwith , but , before printing the first part , he published a portuguese grammar ( 1539 ) in full , ❧ grammatica da lingua portuguesa com os mandamentos da santa mádre igreja . ( '' grammar of the portuguese language with the commandments of holy mother church '' ) and some further moral dialogues . decades of asia . the first of the décadas da ásia ( '' decades of asia '' ) appeared in 1552 , and its reception was such that the king straightway charged barros to write a chronicle of king manuel . his many occupations , however , prevented him from undertaking this book , which was finally composed by damião de góis . the second decade came out in 1553 and the third in 1563 , but he died before publishing the fourth decade . the latter was published posthumously in 1615 at madrid by the cosmographer and chronicler-royal joao baptista lavanha , who edited and compiled barros ' scattered manuscript . his decades contain the early history of the portuguese in india and asia and reveal careful study of eastern historians and geographers , as well as of the records of his own country . they are distinguished by clearness of exposition and orderly arrangement . they are also lively accounts , for example describing the king of viantana 's killing of the portuguese ambassadors to malacca with boiling water and then throwing their bodies to the dogs . diogo de couto continued the décadas , adding nine more , and a modern edition of the whole appeared in lisbon in 14 vols . in 1778—1788 as da asia de joão de barros , dos feitos que os portuguezes fizeram no descubrimento e conquista dos mares e terras do oriente . the edition is accompanied by a volume containing a life of barros by the historian manoel severim de faria and a copious index of all the decades . later years . in january 1568 barros retired from his remunerative appointment at the india house , receiving the rank of fidalgo together with a pension and other pecuniary emoluments from king sebastian , and died on 20 october 1570 . works . ( 1520 ) chronica do emperador clarimundo , donde os reys de portugal descendem , tirada da linguagem ungara em a nossa portugueza . coimbra : joão da barreira . ( 1532 ) rhopica pneuma , ou mercadoria espiritual . lisbon ( 1539 ) cartinha para aprender a ler , lisbon : l . rodrigues . ( 1540 ) grammatica da lingua portuguesa , lisbon : l . rodrigues . ( 1540 ) dialogo da viciosa vergonha , lisbon : l . rodrigues . ( 1540 ) dialogo de preceitos moraes com pratica delles em modo de jogo . lisbon : l . rodrigues . ( 1552 ) primeira década da ásia , dos feitos que os portugueses fizeram no descobrimento dos mares e terras do oriente , lisbon : germão galherde ( 1553 ) segunda década da ásia & c . lisbon : germão galherde ( 1562 ) italian translation of dec . i & dec . ii by alfonso ulloa , l'asia del s . giovanni di barros consigliero del christianissimo re di portugallo de fatti de ' portughesi nello scropimento , e conquista de ' mari , e terre di oriente . venice : vicenzo , valgrisio ( 1563 ) terceira década da ásia & c . , lisbon : joão da barreira . ( 1613 ) quarta década da ásia & c . ( as edited and reworked by cosmógrafo-mor joão baptista lavanha ) , madrid : imprensa real . ( 1628 ) new edition of dec.i-iii . lisbon : jorge rodrigues . ( 1777–78 ) da ásia de joão de barros e diogo do couto , dos feitos que os portugueses fizeram no descobrimento dos mares e terras do oriente , lisbon : régia officina typografica . ( 24 volumes ; vols . 1-8 are reprints of dec . i-iv of joão de barros ; vol . 9 general index for barros ; vol . 10-23 are reprints of dec . iv-xii of diogo do couto , vol . 24 general index for couto . online ( pdfs ) . notes . references . manoel severim de faria '' vida de joão de barros '' , 1778 , in vol . 9 of 'da ásia de joão de barros e diogo do couto , lisbon . additional reading . . external links . portuguese site about joão de barros containing information about his life and work - by bruno figueiredo barros : decadas da ásia … - links to scans of all 4 barros-written , and most of the other 20 ( post-barros ) volumes of décadas da ásia . for the first two décadas , both the original ( 1553 ) edition and the '' modernized '' 1778-1788 edition are available ; for the rest , only the latter edition . décadas da ásia ( several chapters , about the early exploration ) - nead.unama.br décadas da ásia ( 2nd decade , 1st part ) - google books ( book 1 : tristão da cunha 's expedition to india ; books 2 , 3 , 4 : alfonso de albuquerque in the arabian sea ( ormuz ) and india ; book 5 : conquest of goa ) décadas da ásia ( 3nd decade , 1st part , books 1-5 ) ( even though google books description mistakenly says this is the 5th decade ! ) décadas da ásia ( 11th decade ) - google books partial text of the 3rd década , book 2 , chapter vii , '' in which is described the land of china , and are related certain things of it , and especially of the city of canton , which fernão pires de andrade has discovered '' - one of the earliest european descriptions of the ming china . re-typeset in a modern font , with a slightly modernized orthography .