Gawsworth Old Hall

history . the original house on the site dated from the norman era . the earliest documentary reference is the granting of a licence for the administration of a chapel within the house in 1365 . the house was then owned by thomas fitton , who had inherited it by marriage in 1316 , and it remained in the possession of the fitton family until 1611 . the original house was replaced in the 15th and 16th & nbsp ; centuries . building started in 1480 , and continued in stages until about 1600 . since then , parts of the house have been demolished , and others have been considerably altered . it is considered by the architectural historians peter de & nbsp ; figueiredo and julian treuherz that the site of the house was originally moated , and that its plan was that of a quadrangle , forming a courtyard house . in 1579 the house was inherited by sir edward fitton iii on the death of his father , sir edward fitton ii . sir edward iii was the father of mary fitton , a maid of honour to queen elizabeth and a candidate for the '' dark lady '' of shakespeare 's sonnets . following the death of sir & nbsp ; edward fitton , 2nd & nbsp ; baronet in 1643 , the estate passed to sir & nbsp ; charles gerard , later the first earl of macclesfield . there was a dispute about the legal ownership of the estate between sir & nbsp ; charles and his cousin alexander fitton , which was resolved in sir charles 's favour in 1663 . demolition of parts of the house took place in about 1700 , and it is thought by de & nbsp ; figueiredo and treuherz that the west range was removed , possibly including the gatehouse . at the beginning of the 18th & nbsp ; century the dispute between the fittons and the gerards resurfaced , culminating in a duel in hyde park , london , in 1712 between the rival claimants : lord mohun , from the gerard family , and the 4th & nbsp ; duke of hamilton , from the fittons . both of the combatants were killed . the estate remained with the gerards , until it was bought by william stanhope , who later became the first earl of harrington , and it remained with this family until 1935 . the house was owned by the cheshire antiquary raymond richards until his death in 1978 . richards collected items from historic buildings that were being demolished in the 1960s , either incorporating them into the house or displaying them in the grounds . the house is still owned and run by the richards family . . architecture . exterior and plan . gawsworth old hall is a timber-framed house in the cheshire black-and-white tradition , roofed in kerridge sandstone . it has been estimated that the weight of the roof may be in excess of . alec clifton-taylor , building materials , in the house is in mainly in two storeys . in the north range , and on the south front , the timber frame has been encased in brick , with timbering applied to its outer surface . internally the roof trusses have been retained . its plan is that of a u-shape with its open side facing the west , towards what was the courtyard . the main entrance is in the north range , leading into the entrance hall . to the west of this is the library , and to the east , the morning room . the entrance hall leads into the longest range , the eastern range , consisting of the long hall , at the north end , and the dining room . the long hall was originally the great hall , and was open to the roof , but is now divided into two floors . to the east of the range extend the kitchen and the chapel . the dining room leads into a room now known as the green room , which is canted ten degrees to the east . this was also originally open to the roof , but was not a great hall . de & nbsp ; figueiredo and treuherz are of the opinion that this was originally a larger , separate structure , probably a barn , and incorporated into the main building when the east range was built . little of the south range remains . it originally contained domestic apartments , which formerly extended to join the now-demolished west range . in the angle between the dining room and what remains of the south range is the drawing room . the special feature of this room is a canted bay window on the north side , extending upwards for three storeys . the only dated item in the building is the fitton coat of arms on the north front , which was carved by richard rany in 1570 . . interior . many of the original features have been lost as a consequence of the many changes that have taken place over the centuries . additional features have been added to the interior by raymond richards , such as the doorcase around the entrance . the entrance hall has retained its medieval shape and low ceiling . it contains the coat of arms of the richards family and items of weaponry , including a decorative suit of armour dating from the 19th & nbsp ; century and moved here from scarisbrick hall . to the west of the entrance hall is the library . this is in the shape of a double cube , measuring by . its major item is a richly carved tudor chimneypiece . the bookcases were designed by a . & nbsp ; w . & nbsp ; n . & nbsp ; pugin . both of these items were moved here by raymond richards , the bookcases coming from scarisbrick hall . the bookcases contain a comprehensive collection of books relating to cheshire . in a corner cabinet is a flint axe head dating from about 2000 bc . this was discovered in the park nearby in 1912 . to the south of the entrance hall is the long hall . this has retained the fireplace and ceiling introduced in the tudor era . the hall contains items of antique furniture , and paintings by david wilkie , j . m . w . turner and john constable . to the south of the long hall is the principal staircase , which was remodelled in 1920 . the area around the staircase contains a waterford glass chandelier dating from about 1780 , and a portrait of the first earl of harrington by allan ramsay . from this area , a door leads into the chapel . this is the third or fourth chapel in the house , and was dedicated to thomas more when he was canonised in 1935 . much of the woodwork in it dates from 1803 . many of the ornaments in the chapel were brought here by richards from a redundant church in ipswich . two marble plaques in the chapel are by thomas thornycroft , a sculptor born in the nearby village . alongside the chapel is an ambulatory or baptistry which contains a font and items of stained glass , made by morris & co . and designed by edward burne-jones . these were obtained by richards from all saints church , birkenhead . they depict the crucifixion , and saints agnes , george , stephen and alban . the south door contains fragments of ancient glass from plas newydd that were originally in a medieval church . adjacent to the chapel is a sunroom containing marble sculptures by john warrington wood . to the south of the long hall is the dining room , which is little changed since the tudor era . its contents include a 16th-century refectory table , an oak escritoire from about 1650 , and items of wedgwood majolica ware made in about 1830 . the dining room leads to the small guard room , which contains two 17th-century chairs and an 18th-century blunderbuss . to the west of this is the drawing room , the principal living room of the hall , which has been little altered since the middle of the 16th & nbsp ; century . to the south of the drawing room is a small room known as the gold room . this room has retained a frieze dating from the early 16th & nbsp ; century , including carvings of tudor roses , flowers and birds . also in the room is a bust of charles gerard . in the southeast corner of the hall is the green room . this contains a painting of gawsworth rectory by charles tattershall dodd , and a complete set of a dinner service by minton , comprising 120 & nbsp ; pieces . a staircase from the east of the guard room leads to the gallery on the upper floor , to the south side of which is the solar , containing a 16th-century four-poster bed known as the boswell bed . it was formerly in lympne castle , kent . the house 's principal bedroom is the hall room , much of which has survived from the early 16th & nbsp ; century . it contains a four-poster bed from the era of william and mary and a portrait by zuccaro of members of the fitton family , which was formerly in brereton hall . a room next to the hall room has been converted into a modern bathroom , next to which is mary fitton 's bedroom , which contains an old plaster frieze . the other rooms on floor are the french room , containing an 18th-century french bed , and a small bedroom known as the griffin room . adjacent to this is the billiard room , which has exposed roof timbers . as well as the billiard table , the room contains a marble sculpture of echo by alfred gatley and a bust of john milton . . grounds . gardens . associated with the house is an inner garden of about surrounded by a parkland of about ; both are enclosed by walls . to the south of the hall the inner garden comprises a modern formal garden occupying the site of the original 16th-century formal garden . beyond this , in the parkland , are the earthworks of an earlier garden . the parkland is almost square in shape , with a section curving out from the south border . it consists of '' one huge grassed area '' with '' lumps and bumps '' . the cheshire historian george ormerod , writing in 1819 , considered that this area contained a tilting ground for jousting . quoted in groves ( 2004 ) . that claim is repeated in the hall 's official guidebook , which goes on to suggest that it was created in the hope that elizabeth i of england would visit the hall on her royal entry , but she never did so . there is some doubt regarding the dating of the creation of the garden , but it is generally accepted that it comprised an elizabethan pleasure garden . a raised mound of earth in the southwest corner of the garden would have been used to view the garden from an elevated position . a corresponding mound at the southeast corner was removed during the second world war . to the west of the hall a wooded area known as the rookery contains mature lime trees . limited excavation work carried out in 1989–90 discovered , inter alia , a filled-in canal running north–south down the centre of the garden . the excavations provided '' a tremendous insight into the past , although not enough to date it with certainty '' . to the north of the hall are four fish ponds . . structures . four structures in the grounds around the hall are recorded in the national heritage list for england as a designated grade & nbsp ; ii listed buildings ; grade & nbsp ; ii listing means that a building or structure is considered to be '' of special interest '' . the 17th-century gatehouse is constructed in brick with ashlar dressings and a stone slate roof , in two storeys and three bays . the gate piers date from the late 17th or early 18th & nbsp ; century . they are in painted ashlar surmounted by 20th-century ball finials . the garden walls were built in the 16th & nbsp ; century , with later additions and alterations . they are constructed in brick with ashlar dressings . at the southern end is a large rectangular enclosure . in nearby woodland are the grave and memorial to samuel '' maggoty '' johnson , a playwright said to have been the last professional jester in england , who lived in the hall and died in 1773 aged 82 . a table tomb over the grave consists of an inscribed stone slab on a brick plinth . adjacent to it is another inscribed stone slab , dating from the 19th & nbsp ; century . . present day . gawsworth old hall is south of the village of gawsworth , southeast of macclesfield . immediately to the west is the grade & nbsp ; i listed church of st james , to the north beyond a fish pond is the grade & nbsp ; ii listed gawsworth new hall , and nearby is the grade & nbsp ; i listed gawsworth old rectory . the old hall was listed grade & nbsp ; i on 25 & nbsp ; july 1952 . grade & nbsp ; i listing is granted to buildings of '' exceptional interest , sometimes considered to be internationally important '' , and encompasses only 2.5 & nbsp ; percent of all listed buildings . the grounds have been designated grade & nbsp ; ii in the national register of historic parks and gardens . designation as grade & nbsp ; ii means that the site is '' particularly important , of more than special interest '' . the hall is open to the general public at advertised times . a series of events is held in the grounds and in the hall during the year . there is a licensed tea room in the grounds , and the hall is also licensed for civil weddings . ceremonies are conducted in the long hall , and receptions can be held in a marquee in the grounds . during the summer months plays , concerts and other entertainments take place in the open-air theatre close to the hall . . see also . grade i listed buildings in cheshire east listed buildings in gawsworth . references . citations sources . further reading . . external links . gawsworth hall – official site photographs by craig thornber information about the stained glass in the gatehouse from the corpus vitrearum medii aevi ( cvma ) of great britain discovercheshire ( gawsworth hall circular walk page ) .