IEEE-488

origins . in the late 1960s , hewlett-packard this part of hp was later ( c . 1999 ) spun off as agilent technologies , and in 2014 agilent 's test and measurement division was spun off as keysight technologies . manufactured various automated test and measurement instruments , such as digital multimeters and logic analyzers . they developed the hp interface bus ( hp-ib ) to enable easier interconnection between instruments and controllers ( computers and other instruments ) . the bus was relatively easy to implement using the technology at the time , using a simple parallel bus and several individual control lines . for example , the hp 59501 power supply programmer and hp 59306a relay actuator were both relatively simple hp-ib peripherals implemented in ttl , without the need for a microprocessor . hp licensed the hp-ib patents for a nominal fee to other manufacturers . it became known as the general purpose interface bus ( gpib ) , and became a de facto standard for automated and industrial instrument control . as gpib became popular , it was formalized by various standards organizations . standards . in 1975 , the ieee standardized the bus as standard digital interface for programmable instrumentation , ieee & nbsp ; 488 ; it was revised in 1978 ( producing ieee & nbsp ; 488-1978 ) . , p . & nbsp ; iii the standard was revised in 1987 , and redesignated as ieee & nbsp ; 488.1 ( ieee & nbsp ; 488.1-1987 ) . these standards formalized the mechanical , electrical , and basic protocol parameters of gpib , but said nothing about the format of commands or data . in 1987 , ieee introduced standard codes , formats , protocols , and common commands , ieee & nbsp ; 488.2 . it was revised in 1992 . ieee & nbsp ; 488.2 provided for basic syntax and format conventions , as well as device-independent commands , data structures , error protocols , and the like . ieee & nbsp ; 488.2 built on ieee & nbsp ; 488.1 without superseding it ; equipment can conform to ieee & nbsp ; 488.1 without following ieee & nbsp ; 488.2 . while ieee & nbsp ; 488.1 defined the hardware and ieee & nbsp ; 488.2 defined the protocol , there was still no standard for instrument-specific commands . commands to control the same class of instrument , e.g . , multimeters , varied between manufacturers and even models . the united states air force , project mate in 1985 and later hewlett-packard , recognized this as a problem . in 1989 , hp developed their tml language which was the forerunner to standard commands for programmable instrumentation ( scpi ) , introduced as an industry standard in 1990 . scpi added standard generic commands , and a series of instrument classes with corresponding class-specific commands . scpi mandated the ieee & nbsp ; 488.2 syntax , but allowed other ( non-ieee & nbsp ; 488.1 ) physical transports . the iec developed their own standards in parallel with the ieee , with iec & nbsp ; 60625-1 and iec & nbsp ; 60625-2 ( iec & nbsp ; 625 ) , later replaced by iec & nbsp ; 60488 . national instruments introduced a backward-compatible extension to ieee & nbsp ; 488.1 , originally known as hs-488 . it increased the maximum data rate to 8 mbyte/s , although the rate decreases as more devices are connected to the bus . this was incorporated into the standard in 2003 ( ieee & nbsp ; 488.1-2003 ) , over hp 's objections . in 2004 , the ieee and iec combined their respective standards into a '' dual logo '' ieee/iec standard iec & nbsp ; 60488-1 , standard for higher performance protocol for the standard digital interface for programmable instrumentation - part 1 : general , replaces ieee & nbsp ; 488.1/iec & nbsp ; 60625-1 , and iec & nbsp ; 60488-2 , part 2 : codes , formats , protocols and common commands , replaces ieee & nbsp ; 488.2/iec & nbsp ; 60625-2 . . characteristics . ieee & nbsp ; 488 is an 8-bit , electrically parallel bus which employs sixteen signal lines — eight used for bi-directional data transfer , three for handshake , and five for bus management — plus eight ground return lines . the bus supports 31 five-bit primary device addresses numbered from 0 to 30 , allocating a unique address to each device on the bus . the standard allows up to 15 devices to share a single physical bus of up to total cable length . the physical topology can be linear or star ( forked ) . active extenders allow longer buses , with up to 31 devices theoretically possible on a logical bus . control and data transfer functions are logically separated ; a controller can address one device as a '' talker '' and one or more devices as '' listeners '' without having to participate in the data transfer . it is possible for multiple controllers to share the same bus , but only one can be the '' controller in charge '' at a time . in the original protocol , transfers use an interlocked , three-wire ready–valid–accepted handshake . the maximum data rate is about one megabyte per second . the later hs-488 extension relaxes the handshake requirements , allowing up to 8 & nbsp ; mbyte/s . the slowest participating device determines the speed of the bus . . connectors . ieee & nbsp ; 488 specifies a 24-pin amphenol-designed micro ribbon connector . micro ribbon connectors have a d-shaped metal shell , but are larger than d-subminiature connectors . they are sometimes called '' centronics connectors '' after the 36-pin micro ribbon connector centronics used for their printers . one unusual feature of ieee & nbsp ; 488 connectors is they commonly use a '' double-headed '' design , with male on one side , and female on the other . this allows stacking connectors for easy daisy-chaining . mechanical considerations limit the number of stacked connectors to four or fewer , although a workaround involving physically supporting the connectors may be able to get around this . they are held in place by screws , either uts ( now largely obsolete ) or metric m3.5×0.6 threads . early versions of the standard suggested that metric screws should be blackened to avoid confusion with the incompatible uts threads . however , by the 1987 revision this was no longer considered necessary because of the prevalence of metric threads . the iec & nbsp ; 60625 standard prescribes the use of 25-pin d-subminiature connectors ( the same as used for the parallel port on ibm pc compatibles ) . this connector did not gain significant market acceptance against the established 24-pin connector . capabilities . more information see tektronix . . use as a computer interface . hp 's designers did not specifically plan for ieee & nbsp ; 488 to be a peripheral interface for general-purpose computers ; the focus was on instrumentation . but when hp 's early microcomputers needed an interface for peripherals ( disk drives , tape drives , printers , plotters , etc . ) , hp-ib was readily available and easily adapted to the purpose . hp computer products which used hp-ib included the hp series 80 , hp 9800 series , the hp 2100 series , and the hp 3000 series . hp computer peripherals which did not utilize the rs-232 communication interface often used hp-ib including disc systems like the hp 7935 . some of hp 's advanced pocket calculators of the 1980s , such as the hp-41 and hp-71b series , also had ieee & nbsp ; 488 capabilities , via an optional hp-il/hp-ib interface module . other manufacturers adopted gpib for their computers as well , such as with the tektronix 405x line . the commodore pet ( introduced 1977 ) range of personal computers connected their peripherals using the ieee & nbsp ; 488 bus , but with a non-standard card edge connector . commodore 's following 8-bit machines utilized a serial bus whose protocol was based on ieee & nbsp ; 488 . bagnall , brian ( 2006 ) . on the edge : the spectacular rise and fall of commodore , variant press . page 221 . commodore marketed an ieee & nbsp ; 488 cartridge for the vic-20 commodore drawing for vic-1112 - drawing no . 1110010 rev : a and the commodore 64 . reverse-engineered schematics for commodore c64 ieee interface several third party suppliers of commodore 64 peripherals made a cartridge for the c64 that provided an ieee & nbsp ; 488-derived interface on a card edge connector similar to that of the pet series . link to schematic for one such converter . eventually , faster , more complete standards such as scsi superseded ieee & nbsp ; 488 for peripheral access . comparison with other interface standards . electrically , ieee & nbsp ; 488 used a hardware interface that could be implemented with some discrete logic or with a microcontroller . the hardware interface enabled devices made by different manufacturers to communicate with a single host . since each device generated the asynchronous handshaking signals required by the bus protocol , slow and fast devices could be mixed on one bus . the data transfer is relatively slow , so transmission line issues such as impedance matching and line termination are ignored . there was no requirement for galvanic isolation between the bus and devices , which created the possibility of ground loops causing extra noise and loss of data . physically , the ieee & nbsp ; 488 connectors and cabling were rugged and held in place by screws . while physically large and sturdy connectors were an advantage in industrial or laboratory set ups , the size and cost of the connectors was a liability in applications such as personal computers . although the electrical and physical interfaces were well defined , there was not an initial standard command set . devices from different manufacturers might use different commands for the same function . early devices might respond to an id command with an identification string ; later standards had devices respond to the id command . some aspects of the command protocol standards were not standardized until standard commands for programmable instruments ( scpi ) in 1990 . implementation options ( e.g . end of transmission handling ) can complicate interoperability in pre-ieee & nbsp ; 488.2 devices . more recent standards such as usb , firewire , and ethernet take advantage of declining costs of interface electronics to implement more complex standards providing higher bandwidth . the multi-conductor ( parallel data ) connectors and shielded cable were inherently more costly than the connectors and cabling that could be used with serial data transfer standards such as rs-232 , rs-485 , usb , firewire or ethernet . very few mass-market personal computers or peripherals ( such as printers or scanners ) implemented ieee & nbsp ; 488 . see also . standard commands for programmable instruments ( scpi ) pci extensions for instrumentation ( pxi ) lan extensions for instrumentation ( lxi ) virtual instrument software architecture ( visa ) hp series 80 rocky mountain basic cbm-bus , a proprietary serial bus by commodore . references . external links . gpib / ieee 488 multiple page tutorial