Electronika BK

overview . first released in 1984 ( developed in 1983 ) , they are based on the к1801вм1 ( soviet lsi-11-compatible cpu ) and were the only '' official '' government approved and accounted for in economic planning soviet home computer design in mass production . they sold for about 600–650 rubles . this was expensive , the average soviet wage was about 150 rubles per month at the time . but marginally affordable , so they became one of the most popular home computer models in the soviet union , despite the fact that they had numerous problems . later , in the 1990s , their powerful cpu and straightforward , easy-to-program design made them popular as demoscene . bk ( бк ) is a russian abbreviation for – domestic ( or home ) computer . the machines were also used for a short time as cash registers , for example , in the gum department store . although bk-0010 was one of the cheapest soviet pcs , and in speed ( as well as memory , graphics , and so on ) differs little from the simple 8-bit models , it was one of the first fully 16-bit home computers in the world ( in contrast to the ti-99/4a , bk had controllers with the same data bus-width ) . the intellivision used a very similar , fully 16-bit cpu , the general instrument cp1600 , and with the keyboard component or ecs expansions , it was turned into a fully 16-bit home computer . the ibm pc and pcjr were 8/16-bit computers , as their 8088 cpu has an 8-bit data bus and a 16-bit internal bus . software . the bk series was essentially a barebones machine , without any peripherals or development tools . the only software available at the launch ( except rom firmware ) was an included magnetic tape with several programming examples ( both for basic and focal ) , and several tests . the rom firmware includes a simple program to enter machine codes , basic and focal interpreters . while the bk was somewhat compatible with larger and more expensive dvk professional model microcomputers and industrial minicomputers like the sm evm series , its 32 kib memory - of which only 16 kib was generally available to programmers - ( an extended memory mode supported 28 kib , but limited video output to a quarter of the screen ) generally precluded direct use of software for the more powerful machines . the dvk became a popular development platform for bk software , and when the bk memory was later extended to 128 kib , most dvk software could be used directly with minimal changes . homebrew developers quickly filled this niche , porting several development tools from dvk and uknc . this led to an explosion of homebrew software , from text editors and databases to operating systems and games . most bk owners expanded the built-in ram to at least 64 kib , which not only allowed easier software porting from more '' grownup '' systems , but as these upgrades often included floppy drive controllers , creating a one 's own disk operating system became something of a competitive sport in the bk scene . games and demo communities also flourished , as its anemic graphics were offset by a powerful cpu . one of the operating systems was andos , although officially the computer was shipped with os bk-11 , a modification of rt-11 . hardware . the machine is based on a powerful ( for the time ) 16-bit single-chip k1801vm1 cpu , clocked generally at 3 & nbsp ; mhz . it is relatively easy to overclock the cpu , but slow dram made overclocking difficult . the most popular '' turbo '' speed is 5 mhz . it is almost perfectly compatible with digital equipment corporation 's lsi-11 line , though it lacks eis and further instruction set extensions . the manufacturer also closely copied the pdp-11 's internal architecture . each model has one free card slot which is electrically , but not mechanically , compatible with q-bus . the first versions has 32 kib onboard dram , half of which was used as video memory . that is extended to 128 kib in later models , with video memory extended to two 16 kib pages . video output on all models is provided by the k1801vp1-037 vdc , a rather spartan chip . it is actually a standard 600-gate ula with a vdc program that allows for two graphic video modes , high-res ( 512×256 , monochrome ) and low-res ( 256×256 , 4 colors ) , and supported hardware vertical scrolling . later models has 16 hardwired 4-color sets selectable from 64 color palette . it does not support text modes , but simulates two via bios routines : 32×25 and 64×25 . some operating systems such as andos have managed to output text in 80×25 mode when displaying documents imported from ibm pc , by placing characters more densely . output is through two separate 5-pin din connectors for a monochrome tv or color tv/monitor . sound on all models is initially through a simple programmable counter connected to an onboard piezo speaker . later , the general instrument ay-3-8910 became a popular aftermarket addition . all models also has a 16-bit universal parallel port with separate input and output buses for connecting peripherals such as printers ( eastern bloc printers used the incompatible ifsp interface instead of the more popular ieee 1284 port , so centronics printers needed an adapter ) , mice or covox dacs for sound output , and tape recorder port for data storage . later models includes a manufacturer-supplied floppy drive controller ( that can be plugged into a q-bus slot ) by default . it was available for earlier models as an aftermarket part , but homebrew ones ( that also often extends rather anemic 16k memory of original bk ) are more popular . a cottage industry for such peripherals and mods flourished . versions . thumb . electronika bk-0010 . is the first model ( originally released in 1983 , the serial production since mid-1984 ) . it has a pseudo-membrane keyboard ( an array of mechanical microswitches without keycaps , covered by flexible overlay ) , 32 kib ram , 8 kib rom with bios ( chip k1801re2-017 ) , 8 kib rom with focal interpreter ( k1801re2-018 ) , 8 kib rom with debugger ( k1801re2-019 ) and one free rom slot , and its cpu is clocked at 3 & nbsp ; mhz . a tape recorder is used for data storage in the factory configuration . this model was criticized for its uncomfortable keyboard – while mechanical in nature , lack of keycaps lead to the same unsatisfactory tactile response , that was seen as unacceptable when the machine was used in home or educational settings , although such keyboard could be easily sealed completely , so this version found widespread use as an industrial computers . other points of criticism included the archaic focal programming language supplied by default and the complete lack of peripherals and software . while all hardware was well documented and easy to work with , the machine was delivered without any programming tools . electronika bk-0010.01 . the follow-up version , бк-0010.01 ( sometimes referred to as -0010-01 ) , is essentially the same machine , but with a conventional full-travel keyboard and a vilnius basic p-code compiler in the rom , correcting the weakest points of its predecessor . while the basic dialect used is quite powerful and well-optimized ( it is actually a somewhat scaled-down clone of msx basic ) , the keyboard is a mixed blessing . while it is much more comfortable to work with , its quality left much to be desired , and the keys were prone to sticking , significant bounce and wore quickly , though a model with a further improved keyboard became available later . the focal interpreter was not dropped but instead shipped on an external rom cartridge that could be inserted into the q-bus slot . electronika bk-0010sh . is a model intended specially for school use . it can be either the −0010 or −0010.01 model but was supplied with a special current loop network adapter rated at 19200 bps , which can be inserted into the q-bus slot . based on ula chip k1801vp1-035 ( and later on k1801vp1-065 ) , the adapter is compatible to dec dl-11 and kl-11 serial interfaces , but without modem control bits . it also includes a monitor ( usually a modified yunost ' compact tv ) , since in school setting it could n't be expected to be connected to household tv . electronika bk-0011 . bk-0011 was released in 1989 . it has 128 kib of ram divided into 16 kib pages , its cpu is clocked at 4 & nbsp ; mhz by default ; it includes a newer version of basic in rom and 16 selectable video palettes , which were almost universally criticized by users for their odd color combinations . it has a floppy controller , but the drive was still sold separately . electronika bk-0011m . some changes in the bk-0011 , while minor , made it incompatible with earlier -0010 models . in particular , it can not load 0010 programs from a cassette tape . even if it could have loaded them , crucial subsystems , such as sound , are still incompatible . public outcry forced the manufacturer to redesign the machine , restoring compatibility with earlier models . the resulting model , the bk-0011m , quickly went into production , and most bk-0011 series computers are actually bk-0011ms . since the modifications were minor , most of the handful of -0011 models that made it to market were upgraded to -0011m models by enthusiasts . mods . it was not uncommon among owners to install one or two switch that made using the computer more convenient . some of the common mods were : reset button . programs often hung . also , some games did not have a properly implemented exit function . without this button , the computer had to be reset by power cycling , which eventually led to a worn out power switch on the external power supply . the reset interrupt can be caught by the operating system , so under such systems ( for example , andos , mk-dos ) , the reset button exits to the os 's file manager . pause switch . this switch activated hardware suspension of instruction execution in the processor . the pause switch was useful for pausing games , most of which did not have a break key . a few games , however , did not behave gracefully after being returned from suspension , because the programmable hardware timer built into the processor chip is still running while the instruction execution was suspended . the bk also has a software key combination for pause . clock speed switch ( '' turbo '' switch ) . this changes the processor clock rate from the standard 3 & nbsp ; mhz ( bk-0010 series ) to 4 or 6 & nbsp ; mhz , or from the standard 4 & nbsp ; mhz ( bk-0011 series ) to 3 or 6 & nbsp ; mhz . not all processor samples work reliably at 6 & nbsp ; mhz ; the possibility of such overclocking has to be determined experimentally for each sample . switching the clock speed changes the pace of dynamic games . the turbo switch usually has to be installed together with the pause switch , because the simplest circuit for switching the clock speed produces bad shapes in the clock signal due to contact bounce when the mechanical switch was flipped , running the risk of hanging the software execution unless the processor is in the suspended state . sound on/off switch , or sound volume knob , which adjusts the loudness of the internal piezoelectric speaker using a potentiometer . at this same time as adding this , the modder can replace the speaker with a louder one . these modifications are relatively simple and can be carried out by users who knew how to handle a soldering iron . most of the people in the program sales cottage industry can also do the mods for a small fee . enthusiasts also managed to connect more advanced devices to bk series computers : they developed a hard disk controller , and 2.5 '' hdds were successfully used with bk computers . other popular enhancements are ay-3-8912 sound chips and covox speech thing . emulators . there are various software emulators of bk for modern ibm pc compatible computers . an emulator is able to run at a much higher speed than the original bk . there are also fairly complete re-implementations of the bk for fpga-based systems , such as the mist . . see also . heathkit h11 . references . external links . electronika bk0010 ( -01 ) & bk0011 ( m ) ussr pc pdp-11 bk0010 russian computer emul . v1.6 w/src archive software and documentation for soviet computers uk-nc , dvk and bk0010 .