River Etherow

course . rising in the redhole spring and wike head area of pikenaze moor in derbyshire , the river broadens into the longdendale chain of reservoirs in the peak district . it emerges again in tintwistle , derbyshire , at the foot of bottoms reservoir dam and passes ardotalia in gamesley , where it is joined by glossop brook . this brook takes in waters from the shelf brook , hurst brook and others . the etherow enters the borough of tameside at hollingworth in greater manchester , passing into stockport where it passes through etherow country park . it flows into the river goyt at brabyns park near marple . the modern accepted start of the river mersey is at the confluence of the tame and goyt , in central stockport , downstream . however , older definitions , and many older maps , place its start at the confluence of the etherow and goyt ; for example the 1911 encyclopædia britannica states '' it is formed by the junction of the goyt and the etherow a short distance below marple in cheshire on the first-named stream . '' john stockdale 's map published on 12 april 1794 shows the mersey river extending to at least mottram , and forming the boundary between cheshire and derbyshire . john stockdale , 1794 , map of the environs of mottram-in-longdendale . natural history . the upper reaches of the river etherow pass through peat moorland , inhabited by red foxes , voles and an introduced population of mountain hare . red grouse , ring ouzel , wheatear and golden plover may be seen . kestrels , merlins and short-eared owls nest here . the reservoirs attract mallards , and also teal , pochard , common sandpipers , black-headed gulls and canada geese . the woodlands are home to redstart , great spotted woodpecker , and spotted flycatcher . water rail have been recorded at etherow country park . . geology . longdendale is a steep-sided v-shaped valley that is glacier in origin . longdendale is in the dark peak , where a thick blanket of peat overlies the millstone grit sandstone , formed on a bed of shale through which flows the etherow . directly beneath the upper valley lie areas of carboniferous millstone grit , shales and sandstone . it is on the edge of the peak district dome , at the southern edge of the pennine anticline . the variscan uplift has caused much faulting and glossopdale was the product of glacial action in the last glaciation period that exploited the weakened rocks . the steep-sided valleys of the cloughs cause significant erosion and deposition . the layers of sandstone , mudstones and shale in the bedrock act as an aquifer to feed the springs . the valley bottoms have a thin deposit of boulder clay . the brooks are fed by the peaty soils of the moors and are , therefore , acidic ( ph5.5–7.0 ) . . history . the etherow valley was an important trans-pennine route , and in ad 78 the romans under agricola built the fort of ardotalia ( later known as melandra or melandra castle ) to defend it . the mercians settled at hollingworth about 650 ad . many placenames of the area date from this period ; for example , mottram and glossop . at the time of domesday ( 1086 ) the river was firmly established as the boundary between cheshire and derbyshire , but the name edrow or etherow applied to this upper reach of the mersey can not be dated earlier than c.1772 . the editor of stockport 's advertiser notes and queries vol . 4 ( 1884 ) , p.97a , in a discussion of the origins and hydronymy of the mersey , says that he has not found the name etherow applied to this water earlier than rev . john watson 's description of melandra castle in archeologia , vol . 3:236 , siting the castle '' on the south side of the river mersey ( or , as some call it the edrow ) near woolley bridge , in the parish of glossop '' . the editor surmises ( p.99a ) that the use of etherow '' has been strengthened by the necessity of the localisation of this portion of the river , in consequence of its having been adopted by the manchester corporation for its water supply '' . a packhorse route ( known as a saltway ) was maintained from the middle ages onwards to allow the export of salt from the cheshire towns of nantwich , northwich and middlewich across the pennines . the saltway followed the etherow to ladyshaw , and at salters brook it forked , with one route leading to wakefield and another to barnsley . on-site information board . water was an important source of power for industry , and the etherow and its tributaries were fast flowing and constant . watermills were used to grind meal and to full woollen cloth ( littlemoor 1781 ) . wool was transported along the turnpike road ( 1731 ) that ran from ashton-under-lyne , stalybridge , mottram , woodhead and lady 's cross to sheffield , to be woven on hand-looms in the dale . from 1782 to 1820 , water-powered cotton mills were built along many brooks feeding the etherow , including six on the glossop side of the river . with the adoption of steam to power the ever-larger mills , built closer to the coal fields , the river assumed a new role as a source of water for manchester and salford . in 1844 john frederick bateman advised manchester corporation that the river etherow , which rose at the highest point of the pennine chain , could provide water , collected in purpose-built reservoirs , '' nearly as pure as if it comes from the heavens . '' this led to the construction of the longdendale chain of reservoirs , the first scheme of its type in the world . three reservoirs were built on the etherow to impound drinking water , with another two to provide compensation water for the mills downstream . . etymology . the name etherow could be of common brittonic origin and derived from the ancient term ador , meaning '' watercourse , channel '' . the settlement-name tintwistle , however , implies that etherow may be an old english replacement for an earlier name of the tin- type ( see river tyne ) , derived from the hydronym edre , which is possibly related to ēdre , '' vein '' . . economy . the longdendale chain of reservoirs comprises three impounding reservoirs , woodhead reservoir , torside reservoir and rhodeswood reservoir , supplying of water a day by gravity to manchester and salford , and to hyde and denton through the mottram tunnel . valehouse reservoir and bottoms reservoir are compensating reservoirs which have a combined holding capacity of . woodhead railway line . the woodhead line , which followed the river from hadfield to the woodhead tunnel portal , was an important cross-pennine route built in 1844 by the sheffield , ashton-under-lyne and manchester railway . three tunnels of were dug , connecting woodhead with dunford bridge on the river don . though now closed to railway traffic , one tunnel is used to route electricity cables for the national grid , with work in progress to use a second tunnel for a new cable , thus preventing the re-establishment of rail traffic . recreation . walking and cycling . following the closure of the railway line , the trackbed was taken up and the longdendale trail constructed along its route . this is now part of the trans-pennine trail , sustrans national cycle route 62 . this , in its turn , is part of the european walking route e8 from liverpool to istanbul . the pennine way crosses longdendale , descending from bleaklow to the south and ascending black hill to the north . the youth hostel at crowden is a traditional stop after the first day 's walking , from edale . the circular walk known as 'the longdendale edges ' takes in the high ground ( at about the - level ) on both sides of the valley . it is about long and is 'not recommended in doubtful weather ' . the detailed route , clockwise from crowden youth hostel , is given in peak district walking guide no.2 , published by the peak park planning board . sailing . torside reservoir is home to glossop & district sailing club and etherow country park is the home to etherow country park sailing club . glossop saling club home page retrieved on 7 december 2008 . country park . etherow country park , in compstall , close to the mouth of the etherow , opened in 1968 as one of the uk 's first country parks . originally it was an industrial area incorporating a mine , a mill and a mill pond . the river etherow flows through the park and is the source for the mill pond . etherow country park is associated with many local groups , including a small local community group , the friends of etherow , anglers , the afore-mentioned sailing club , and a model boat club . compstall nature reserve is a region of the park which is designated a site of special scientific interest ( sssi ) . the area was given the designation in 1977 for its biological interest , in particular its wide range of habitats , including open water , tall fen , reed bed , carr and mixed deciduous woodland . . tributaries and route map . the etherow has no major tributaries ; it is fed by numerous brooks and streams from the cloughs flowing off kinder scout , bleaklow and black hill . minor left tributaries are : black clough shining clough wildboar clough torside clough glossop brook : shell brook : hurst brook : gnats hole brook chisworth brook mortin clough minor right tributaries are : salters brook heyden brook crowden brook hollingworth brook : arnfield brook : ogden brook gigg brook . see also . rivers of the united kingdom list of mills in longdendale and glossopdale . references . notes . . bibliography . . external links . the united kingdom acid waters monitoring network site number 12