Electrical element

types . circuit elements can be classified into different categories . one is how many terminals they have to connect them to other components : one-port elementsthese represent the simplest components , that have only two terminals to connect to . examples are resistances , capacitances , inductances , and diodes . multiport elementsthese have more than two terminals . they connect to the external circuit through multiple pairs of terminals called ports . for example , a transformer with three separate windings has six terminals and could be idealized as a three-port element ; the ends of each winding are connected to a pair of terminals which represent a port . two-port elementsthese are the most common multiport elements , which have four terminals consisting of two ports . elements can also be divided into active and passive : active elements or sourcesthese are elements which can source electrical power ; examples are voltage sources and current sources . they can be used to represent ideal batteries and power supply . dependent sourcesthese are two-port elements with a voltage or current source which is proportional to the voltage or current at a second pair of terminals . these are used in the modelling of amplifier components such as transistors , vacuum tubes , and op-amps . passive elementsthese are elements which do not have a source of energy , examples are diodes , resistances , capacitances , and inductances . another distinction is between linear and nonlinear : linear elementsthese are elements in which the constituent relation , the relation between voltage and current , is a linear function . they obey the superposition principle . examples of linear elements are resistances , capacitances , inductances , and linear dependent sources . circuits with only linear elements , linear circuits , do not cause intermodulation distortion , and can be easily analysed with powerful mathematical techniques such as the laplace transform . nonlinear elementsthese are elements in which the relation between voltage and current is a nonlinear function . an example is a diode , in which the current is an exponential function of the voltage . circuits with nonlinear elements are harder to analyse and design , often requiring circuit simulation computer programs such as spice . one-port elements . only nine types of element ( memristor not included ) , five passive and four active , are required to model any electrical component or circuit . each element is defined by a relation between the state variables of the network : current , i ; voltage , v , charge , q ; and magnetic flux , \phi . two sources : current source , measured in amperes – produces a current in a conductor . affects charge according to the relation dq -i\ , dt . voltage source , measured in volts – produces a potential difference between two points . affects magnetic flux according to the relation d\phi v\ , dt . : : \phi in this relationship does not necessarily represent anything physically meaningful . in the case of the current generator , q , the time integral of current , represents the quantity of electric charge physically delivered by the generator . here \phi is the time integral of voltage but whether or not that represents a physical quantity depends on the nature of the voltage source . for a voltage generated by magnetic induction it is meaningful , but for an electrochemical source , or a voltage that is the output of another circuit , no physical meaning is attached to it . : :both these elements are necessarily non-linear elements . see non-linear elements below . three passive elements : resistance r , measured in ohms – produces a voltage proportional to the current flowing through the element . relates voltage and current according to the relation dv r\ , di . capacitance c , measured in farads – produces a current proportional to the rate of change of voltage across the element . relates charge and voltage according to the relation dq c\ , dv . inductance l , measured in henries – produces the magnetic flux proportional to the rate of change of current through the element . relates flux and current according to the relation d\phi l\ , di . four abstract active elements : voltage-controlled voltage source ( vcvs ) generates a voltage based on another voltage with respect to a specified gain . ( has infinite input impedance and zero output impedance ) . voltage-controlled current source ( vccs ) generates a current based on a voltage elsewhere in the circuit , with respect to a specified gain , used to model field-effect transistors and vacuum tubes ( has infinite input impedance and infinite output impedance ) . the gain is characterised by a transfer conductance which will have units of siemens . current-controlled voltage source ( ccvs ) generates a voltage based on an input current elsewhere in the circuit with respect to a specified gain . ( has zero input impedance and zero output impedance ) . used to model trancitors . the gain is characterised by a transfer impedance which will have units of ohms . current-controlled current source ( cccs ) generates a current based on an input current and a specified gain . used to model bipolar junction transistors . ( has zero input impedance and infinite output impedance ) . : :these four elements are examples of two-port elements . non-linear elements . in reality , all circuit components are non-linear and can only be approximated to linear over a certain range . to more exactly describe the passive elements , their constitutive relation is used instead of simple proportionality . from any two of the circuit variables there are six constitutive relations that can be formed . from this it is supposed that there is a theoretical fourth passive element since there are only five elements in total ( not including the various dependent sources ) found in linear network analysis . this additional element is called memristor . it only has any meaning as a time-dependent non-linear element ; as a time-independent linear element it reduces to a regular resistor . hence , it is not included in lti system theory circuit models . the constitutive relations of the passive elements are given by ; ljiljana trajković , '' nonlinear circuits '' , the electrical engineering handbook ( ed : wai-kai chen ) , pp.75–77 , academic press , 2005 resistance : constitutive relation defined as f ( v , i ) 0 . capacitance : constitutive relation defined as f ( v , q ) 0 . inductance : constitutive relation defined as f ( \phi , i ) 0 . memristance : constitutive relation defined as f ( \phi , q ) 0 . : where f ( x , y ) is an arbitrary function of two variables . in some special cases the constitutive relation simplifies to a function of one variable . this is the case for all linear elements , but also for example , an ideal diode , which in circuit theory terms is a non-linear resistor , has a constitutive relation of the form v f ( i ) . both independent voltage , and independent current sources can be considered non-linear resistors under this definition . the fourth passive element , the memristor , was proposed by leon chua in a 1971 paper , but a physical component demonstrating memristance was not created until thirty-seven years later . it was reported on april 30 , 2008 , that a working memristor had been developed by a team at hp labs led by scientist r . stanley williams . eetimes , 30 april 2008 , 'missing link ' memristor created , eetimes , 30 april 2008 engineers find 'missing link ' of electronics – 30 april 2008 researchers prove existence of new basic element for electronic circuits – 'memristor ' – 30 april 2008 with the advent of the memristor , each pairing of the four variables can now be related . there are also two special non-linear elements which are sometimes used in analysis but which are not the ideal counterpart of any real component : nullator : defined as v i 0 norator : defined as an element which places no restrictions on voltage and current whatsoever . these are sometimes used in models of components with more than two terminals : transistors for instance . . two-port elements . all the above are two-terminal , or one-port , elements with the exception of the dependent sources . there are two lossless , passive , linear two-port elements that are normally introduced into network analysis . their constitutive relations in matrix notation are ; ; transformer : : \begin the transformer maps a voltage at one port to a voltage at the other in a ratio of n . the current between the same two port is mapped by 1/n . the gyrator , on the other hand , maps a voltage at one port to a current at the other . likewise , currents are mapped to voltages . the quantity r in the matrix is in units of resistance . the gyrator is a necessary element in analysis because it is not reciprocal . networks built from the basic linear elements only are obliged to be reciprocal and so can not be used by themselves to represent a non-reciprocal system . it is not essential , however , to have both the transformer and gyrator . two gyrators in cascade are equivalent to a transformer but the transformer is usually retained for convenience . introduction of the gyrator also makes either capacitance or inductance non-essential since a gyrator terminated with one of these at port 2 will be equivalent to the other at port 1 . however , transformer , capacitance and inductance are normally retained in analysis because they are the ideal properties of the basic physical components transformer , inductor and capacitor whereas a practical gyrator must be constructed as an active circuit . wadhwa , c.l . , network analysis and synthesis , pp.17–22 , new age international , . herbert j . carlin , pier paolo civalleri , wideband circuit design , pp.171–172 , crc press , 1998 . vjekoslav damić , john montgomery , mechatronics by bond graphs : an object-oriented approach to modelling and simulation , pp.32–33 , springer , 2003 . . examples . the following are examples of representation of components by way of electrical elements . on a first degree of approximation , a battery is represented by a voltage source . a more refined model also includes a resistance in series with the voltage source , to represent the battery 's internal resistance ( which results in the battery heating and the voltage dropping when in use ) . a current source in parallel may be added to represent its leakage ( which discharges the battery over a long period of time ) . on a first degree of approximation , a resistor is represented by a resistance . a more refined model also includes a series inductance , to represent the effects of its lead inductance ( resistors constructed as a spiral have more significant inductance ) . a capacitance in parallel may be added to represent the capacitive effect of the proximity of the resistor leads to each other . a wire can be represented as a low-value resistor current sources are more often used when representing semiconductors . for example , on a first degree of approximation , a bipolar transistor may be represented by a variable current source that is controlled by the input current . see also . transmission line . references . ar : عنصر كهربائي