Ballot

etymology . the word ballot comes from italian ballotta , meaning a “ small ball used in voting ” or a “ secret vote taken by ballots ” in venice , italy . . history . in ancient greece , citizens used ostracon to scratch in the name of the candidate in the procedures of ostracism . the first use of paper ballots to conduct an election appears to have been in rome in 139 bc , following the introduction of the lex gabinia tabellaria . in ancient india , around 920 ad , in tamil nadu , palm leaves were used for village assembly elections . the palm leaves with candidate names were put inside a mud pot for counting . this was called kudavolai system . the first use of paper ballots in america was in 1629 within the massachusetts bay colony to select a pastor for the salem church . jones , douglas w . a brief illustrated history of voting . university of iowa department of computer science . paper ballots were pieces of paper marked and supplied by voters . before the introduction of the secret ballot , american political parties distributed ballots listing their own candidates for party supporters to deposit in ballot boxes . file:0 - stoà of attalus museum - ostraka for ostracism - photo by giovanni dall'orto , nov 9 2009.jpg ancient greek ostraca , 5th century bc , ancient agora museum in athens , housed in the stoa of attalus . file : athenian secret ballot.jpg ancient greek bronze secret ballots used to cast a juror 's vote on a case , 3rd century bc , ancient agora museum in athens , housed in the stoa of attalus file : national union ticket- lincoln & johnson ( 4360135844 ) . jpg 1864 ballot of the national union party ( united states ) . types of voting systems . depending on the type of voting system used in the election , different ballots may be used . ranked ballots allow voters to rank candidates in order of preference , while ballots for first-past-the-post systems only allow voters to select one candidate for each position . in party-list systems , lists may be open or closed . design . ballot design can aid or inhibit clarity in an election . poor designs lead to confusion and potentially chaos if large numbers of voters spoil or mismark a ballot . the '' butterfly ballot '' used in the palm beach county , florida 2000 u.s . presidential election ( a ballot paper that has names down both sides , with a single column of punch holes in the center , which has been likened to a maze ) led to widespread allegations of mismarked ballots . dershowitz , supreme injustice , pp . 22–28 . file : kalpi israel 18.jpg ballots may be tickets rather than forms , as in israel . file : butterfly voters view.jpg perspective view of a 2000 palm beach county , florida '' butterfly ballot '' . file : butterfly ballot , florida 2000 ( large ) . jpg top view of the same 2000 florida '' butterfly ballot '' . file : bulleten gosduma 2011.jpg russian ballot to the 2011 state duma elections with list of political parties . methods . in a jurisdiction using a paper system , voters choose by marking a ballot or , as in the case of israel and france , picking one premarked ballot from among many . in most jurisdictions the ballots are preprinted with names of candidates and the text of the referendums . the philippines ( until 2007 ) and japan are an exception . there , voters must write the names of their candidates on the ballot . election officials manually count the ballots after the polls close and may be recounted in the event of a dispute . in a jurisdiction using an optical scan voting system , voters choose by filling an oval or by completing an arrow on the printed ballot next to their chosen candidate or referendum position . voters with disabilities may be provided with electronic ballot marking devices . optical scan technology has also been used by many standardized tests . tabulating machines count the ballots either after the polls close or as the voters feed the ballots into the machine , in which case the results are not known until after the polls close . officials often will manually count any ballots that can not be read or with a write-in candidate and may recount the ballots in the event of a dispute . in a jurisdiction using a punched card system , voters choose by removing or '' punching out '' a perforated chad from the ballot next each choice , sometimes with tools as simple as a pin , but usually with a ballot marking device such as the votomatic . the ballot may be preprinted with candidates and referendums , or may be a generic ballot placed under a printed list of candidates and referendums . tabulating machines count ballots after the polls close . officials may manually count the ballots in the event of a dispute . punched card voting systems are being replaced by other voting systems because of a high rate of inaccuracy related to the incomplete removal of the perforated chad and the inaccessibility to voters with disabilities . in a jurisdiction using a mechanical voting system , often called a '' voting machine '' , voters choose by pulling a lever next to their choice . there is a printed list of candidates , parties and referendums next to the levers indicating which lever is assigned to which choice . when the voter pulls a lever , it turns a connected gear in the machine , which turns a counter wheel . each counter wheel shows a number , which is the number of votes cast using that lever . after the polls close , election officials check the wheels ' positions and record the totals . no physical ballot is used in this system , except when the voter chooses to write-in a candidate . other systems are replacing mechanical voting systems because they are inaccessible to disabled voters , do not have a physical ballot and are getting old . in a jurisdiction using an electronic dre voting machine ( dre ) , voters choose by pushing a button next to a printed list of candidates and referendums , or by touching the candidate or referendums box on a touchscreen interface . as the voter makes a selection , the dre creates an electronic ballot stored by in the memory components of the system . after the polls close , the system counts the votes and reports the totals to the election officials . many dres include a communication device to transmit vote totals to a central tabulator . the touchscreen systems remind people of an automated teller machine and often are described as such . see also . ballot box chad ( paper ) direct democracy electoral fraud list of democracy and elections-related topics ostracism sample ballot secret ballot vote counting systems . references . further reading . . external links .