Proof (play)

plot . the play concerns catherine , the daughter of robert , a recently deceased mathematical genius in his fifties and professor at the university of chicago , and her struggle with mathematical genius and mental illness . catherine had cared for her father through a lengthy mental illness . upon robert 's death , his ex-graduate student hal discovers a paradigm-shifting proof about prime numbers in robert 's office . the title refers both to that proof and to the play 's central question : can catherine prove the proof 's authorship ? along with demonstrating the proof 's authenticity , the daughter also finds herself in a relationship with 28-year-old hal . throughout , the play explores catherine 's fear of following in her father 's footsteps , both mathematically and mentally and her desperate attempts to stay in control . ; act i the play opens with catherine sitting alone in the backyard of her large , old house . robert , her father , approaches her with a bottle of champagne to celebrate her 25th birthday . catherine complains that she has n't done any worthwhile work in the field of mathematics , at least not to the same level as her father , a well-known math genius . he reassures her that she can still do good work as long as she stops lying in bed till all hours and wasting time reading magazines . catherine confesses she 's worried about inheriting robert 's inclination towards mental instability . he begins to comfort her but then alludes to a '' bad sign '' when he points out that he is , in fact , dead . he died a week ago . robert disappears as catherine dozes off . she awakens when hal , one of robert 's students , exits the house . he 's been studying the hundreds of notebooks robert left behind after his death , looking for any work that could be published . catherine assures him that the notebooks are filled with scribbles and nonsense since her father wrote them when he was at his most delusional . hal , attempting to flirt , invites her to go see his band later that night . catherine becomes suspicious of him and demands to see what 's in his backpack . she roots through it to find nothing but becomes infuriated when a notebook falls out of hal 's jacket . she dials the police while accusing him of trying to steal her father 's work and pass it off as his own . he admits that he was sneaking it away but only to give it back to her later as a birthday present . he opens to a page that robert wrote during a time when he was lucid . in it , robert writes it 's a '' good day '' and thanks to catherine for taking care of him and expresses hope for the future . hal leaves catherine with the notebook . she begins to cry until she hears police sirens . the next day claire , catherine 's sister who just flew in from new york , is setting up a large brunch for them in the backyard . catherine enters and claire tries to goad her into idle chitchat as catherine quietly seethes . claire declares she 's getting married and invites catherine to stay with her and her fiance in new york . catherine assures her she 'll come in january for the wedding , but claire keeps pressing her to go earlier . when catherine demands to know why claire is inundating her with questions , claire tells her the police came over earlier to check in on catherine . catherine admits to calling the police the previous night and tries to explain her altercation with hal but only ends up sounding unhinged to the dubious claire . hal appears and asks to continue his work sorting the notebooks . catherine lets him inside and claire drops a hint for catherine to try flirting with hal by offering a bagel . catherine storms into the house . later that night , after the funeral , claire holds a party in the house for her friends as well as hal and robert 's students . catherine escapes to the porch where hal finds her and offers her a beer . hal confesses that he 's not so sure about his own mathematical abilities since he considers math to be a '' young man 's game '' . catherine tries to reassure him with a quote from gauss . hal responds by kissing her , much to catherine 's surprise . he apologizes for trying to steal the notebook and she apologizes for calling the police . they kiss again and hal asks catherine if she remembers meeting him years earlier . she says she does and recalls she thought he was '' not boring '' . they continue to kiss . the next morning catherine sits outside . hal exits the house and tells her he 'd like to spend the rest of the day with her . catherine gives him a key to robert 's desk and tells him to look inside . he goes into the house . a moment later , claire comes into the backyard , extremely hungover . catherine , now in a good mood , tries to make nice with claire . claire takes the opportunity to continue to push catherine to moving to new york . catherine asks why she would move to new york to which claire confesses that she 's selling the house . catherine becomes enraged at the idea and she accuses claire of abandoning her to take care of their sick father alone . claire insists that the reason she did so was to keep working to pay for the house as well as catherine 's education . catherine reveals that she had to quit school to tend to robert and then accuses claire of trying to have her committed . claire admits that she 's researched doctors and facilities for catherine but insists that she was n't planning on having her committed . in the middle of the row , hal appears clutching a notebook , barely containing his excitement . he tells claire that catherine is in possession of one of robert 's notebooks which holds a very important proof . claire asks catherine where she found it and catherine tells them she did n't find it . she wrote it . ; act ii we flashback to years earlier , with robert sitting in the backyard . catherine tells him she thinks he 's getting better and he agrees . she blurts out that she 's decided to go to college in a couple months , funded by claire , but promises she 'll be only a short drive away if he were to need her again . robert protests and demands to know why she waited so long to tell him . when she points out that he had n't been well until recently and was , at one point , trying to decode extraterrestrial messages in library books , he becomes upset . hal interrupts , much to his embarrassment , to present his final dissertation to robert . robert assures him they 'll work out the problem points together , then suddenly realizes he 's forgotten catherine 's birthday . he apologizes and offers to take her out to dinner . catherine invites hal along but he says he ca n't go . catherine shows hal out and robert sits down to write a notebook entry , declaring it to be a '' good day '' . we flash forward to where act i left off . catherine declares she was the one who wrote the proof and is met with incredulity by both hal and her sister . the handwriting is very much like robert 's and hal questions catherine 's mathematical abilities given that she only had a few months ' education at northwestern . catherine tells him that her real education was living with robert . when hal offers to show it to other math experts to confirm the authenticity of the proof , catherine refuses . she tells hal she trusted him and then accuses him of having no talent and being past his prime . hal storms off and catherine begins to rip the notebook apart . claire gets it away from her and catherine runs into the house . later , hal attempts to visit catherine and apologize for his behavior . claire stops him and tells him catherine wo n't talk to her , let alone hal . claire accuses him of sleeping with catherine despite her being unstable . hal argues that he had no bad intentions and insists catherine is stronger than claire thinks . he requests to have the notebook to verify its authenticity with fellow mathematicians . claire gives it to him and tells him she 's taking catherine with her to new york the next day . she expresses concern for catherine 's future mental stability . we flashback to robert in the backyard , sitting in the cold and writing furiously . catherine enters and reprimands him for sitting in the cold with no jacket . robert tells her it 's too hot in the house and that the cold is better for helping him work . catherine is shocked that he 's working again and he assures her that he 's sharper than ever . she 's ecstatic that his previous mental instability has passed and asks to see his work . he says he 'd love for her to take a look and asks if she 'd like to take time off school to work with him . before she decides , robert insists she look at his latest idea and thrusts a notebook into her hands . catherine glances at it and becomes quiet . she tells him they need to go inside and robert explodes with fury . he yells at her to read what he 's written . she reads aloud , a nonsensical , rambling paragraph about winter and books and the cold . it 's obvious that robert 's mind is deteriorating as it had been before . catherine begins to cry as robert descends into confusion and begins to shiver uncontrollably . catherine tries to take him inside when he asks her not to leave . she promises she wo n't . we flash forward to claire in the backyard . catherine enters with her suitcase . she asks claire about life in new york . claire mentions potential schools or jobs for catherine but catherine is quick to mock her by making ridiculous demands for a freudian psychiatrist who will listen as she blames all her problems on claire . claire begins to cry and throws catherine 's plane ticket in front of her before storming off . hal enters and tells catherine that the proof checks out and apologizes for not believing her . catherine tells him there 's no proof that she wrote it and he can claim it as his own if he wants . hal tells her he believes she 's the one who wrote it and offers to read through it with her . catherine admits she knows she 's like her father but is terrified of becoming like her father . hal reassures her that maybe she 'll be better . catherine opens the proof and begins to talk through it with hal . characters . catherine – a young woman , 25 years old , who inherited much of her father 's mathematical genius and , she fears , his '' instability '' as well ; she gave up her life and schooling to take care of her father until his recent death . claire – catherine 's older sister , a practical and business-minded woman who has been comfortably successful in her work and relationships . she left robert and catherine behind , distancing herself from the run-down family home of her youth . she left the family to make a new life for herself in new york city . robert – a recently deceased mathematician praised for his groundbreaking work in his youth , but whose later years were plagued by delusional mental illness ; he is seen in catherine 's imagination and in flashbacks . harold ( hal ) dobbs – one of robert 's last ph.d . students during the one year his idol and mentor 's illness went into remission , at least enabling robert to teach , if not continue his own creative mathematical work . production history . originally produced by the manhattan theatre club , opening on may 23 , 2000 , the play transferred to broadway at the walter kerr theatre on october 24 , 2000 . directed by daniel j . sullivan , the production starred mary-louise parker as catherine , larry bryggman as robert , ben shenkman as hal , and johanna day as claire . '' 'proof ' listing , boadway '' playbillvault.com , accessed august 31 , 2015 later during the broadway run , jennifer jason leigh ( september 13 , 2001 to june 30 , 2002 ) jones , kenneth . '' jennifer jason leigh adds its up in bway 'proof ' beginning sept . 13 '' playbill , september 13 , 2001 and anne heche ( july 02 , 2002-january 05 , 2003 ) jones , kenneth . '' anne heche to return to broadway 'proof ' for july 5 evening show '' playbill , july 5 , 2002 , took over the lead role . josh hamilton jones , kenneth . '' josh hamilton and seana kofoed join bway 'proof ' sept . 11 '' playbill , august 16 , 2001 and neil patrick harris subsequently played the role of hal . mary-louise parker won the tony award for her performance , and daniel sullivan won the tony award , best direction of a play . the play closed on january 5 , 2003 after 917 performances . proof premiered in the west end at the donmar warehouse in may 2002 , to june 15 , 2002 . directed by john madden , the cast starred gwyneth paltrow as catherine , with ronald pickup as robert , sara stewart as claire , and richard coyle as hal . billington , michael . '' review . 'proof ' '' the guaedian , may 16 , 2002 , london 's menier chocolate factory produced the play from march 13 , 2013 , to april 27 , 2013 . shenton , mark . '' london 's menier chocolate factory to revive david auburn 's 'proof ' '' playbill , january 14 , 2013 it featured mariah gale in the role of catherine , and polly findlay directed . the play premiered in australia at the sydney opera house in 2003 starring jacqueline mckenzie and barry otto and directed by george ogilvie as a sydney theatre company production . in april and may 2013 , a new production by the whitmore eclectic theater group opened in los angeles at the hayworth theatre for a limited run . james whitmore jr . , son of the award-winning iconic actor james whitmore , starred ; and his daughter aliah whitmore directed . a production in may 2013 opened at carolina actors studio theatre in charlotte , north carolina . in september to october 2013 , proof was directed by emily mann at the mccarter theatre in princeton , new jersey . gans , andrew . '' michael braun , kristen bush , jessica dickey and michael siberry star in mccarter 's 'proof ' , beginning sept . 6 '' playbill , september 6 , 2013 london 's tabard theatre produced the play from 29 september to 24 october 2015 , directed by sebastien blanc ( son of raymond blanc ) . it featured tim hardy ( royal shakespeare company marat/sade ) as robert , julia papp as catherine , mary-ann cafferkey as claire and ian charleson awards nominee kim hardy as hal . a seattle production opened in january 2017 at strawberry theatre workshop with three tps gregory award winning actors , anastasia higham , charles leggett , and allison standley in principal roles . proof was directed by greg carter on the mainstage at 12th ave arts . it was the first professional production in seattle since 2004 . film adaptation . a proof ( 2005 film ) was directed by john madden , starring gwyneth paltrow as catherine , along with anthony hopkins , hope davis , and jake gyllenhaal . adapted by rebecca miller , the film version added more characters ( in minor supporting roles ) , whereas the play has only four . awards and nominations . ; awards 2001 drama desk award for best new play 2001 drama desk award , outstanding actress in a play , mary louise parker 2001 lucille lortel award for outstanding play 2001 new york drama critics ' circle best play 2001 pulitzer prize for drama '' pulitzer prize for drama '' pulitzer.org , accessed august 31 , 2015 2001 tony award for best play 2001 tony award for best actress in a play , mary louise parker 2001 tony award for best direction of a play , daniel sullivan . references . further reading . university of chicago interview with david auburn about the genesis of proof . external links .