Human skeleton

skeletal divisions . axial skeleton . the axial skeleton ( 80 bones ) is formed by the vertebral column ( 32–34 bones ; the number of the vertebrae differs from human to human as the lower 2 parts , sacral and coccygeal bone may vary in length ) , a part of the rib cage ( 12 pairs of ribs and the sternum ) , and the skull ( 22 bones and 7 associated bones ) . the upright posture of humans is maintained by the axial skeleton , which transmits the weight from the head , the trunk , and the upper extremities down to the lower extremities at the hip joints . the bones of the spine are supported by many ligaments . the erector spinae muscles are also supporting and are useful for balance . appendicular skeleton . the appendicular skeleton ( 126 bones ) is formed by the pectoral girdles , the upper limbs , the pelvic girdle or pelvis , and the lower limbs . their functions are to make locomotion possible and to protect the major organs of digestion , excretion and reproduction . functions . the skeleton serves six major functions : support , movement , protection , production of blood cells , storage of minerals and endocrine regulation . support . the skeleton provides the framework which supports the body and maintains its shape . the pelvis , associated ligaments and muscles provide a floor for the pelvic structures . without the rib cages , costal cartilages , and intercostal muscles , the lungs would collapse . movement . the joints between bones allow movement , some allowing a wider range of movement than others , e.g . the ball and socket joint allows a greater range of movement than the pivot joint at the neck . movement is powered by skeletal muscles , which are attached to the skeleton at various sites on bones . muscles , bones , and joints provide the principal mechanics for movement , all coordinated by the nervous system . it is believed that the reduction of human bone density in prehistoric times reduced the agility and dexterity of human movement . shifting from hunting to agriculture has caused human bone density to reduce significantly . . protection . the skeleton helps to protect our many vital internal organs from being damaged . the skull protects the brain the vertebrae protect the spinal cord . the rib cage , spine , and sternum protect the lungs , heart and major blood vessels . blood cell production . the skeleton is the site of haematopoiesis , the development of blood cells that takes place in the bone marrow . in children , haematopoiesis occurs primarily in the marrow of the long bones such as the femur and tibia . in adults , it occurs mainly in the pelvis , cranium , vertebrae , and sternum . . storage . the osteon can store calcium and is involved in calcium metabolism , and bone marrow can store iron in ferritin and is involved in iron metabolism . however , bones are not entirely made of calcium , but a mixture of chondroitin sulfate and hydroxyapatite , the latter making up 70 % of a bone . hydroxyapatite is in turn composed of 39.8 % of calcium , 41.4 % of oxygen , 18.5 % of phosphorus , and 0.2 % of hydrogen by mass . chondroitin sulfate is a sugar made up primarily of oxygen and carbon . endocrine regulation . bone cells release a hormone called osteocalcin , which contributes to the regulation of blood sugar ( glucose ) and body fat . osteocalcin increases both the insulin secretion and sensitivity , in addition to boosting the number of beta cell and reducing stores of fat . . sex differences . anatomical differences between human males and females are highly pronounced in some soft tissue areas , but tend to be limited in the skeleton . the human skeleton is not as sexual dimorphism as that of many other primate species , but subtle differences between sexes in the morphology of the skull , dentition , long bones , and pelvis are exhibited across human populations . in general , female skeletal elements tend to be smaller and less robust than corresponding male elements within a given population . it is not known whether or to what extent those differences are genetic or environmental . skull . a variety of gross morphological traits of the human skull demonstrate sexual dimorphism , such as the nuchal lines , mastoid processes , supraorbital margin , supraorbital ridge , and the chin . . dentition . human inter-sex dental dimorphism centers on the canine tooth , but it is not nearly as pronounced as in the other hominidae . long bones . long bones are generally larger in males than in females within a given population . muscle attachment sites on long bones are often more robust in males than in females , reflecting a difference in overall muscle mass and development between sexes . sexual dimorphism in the long bones is commonly characterized by morphometric or gross morphological analyses . pelvis . the human pelvis exhibits greater sexual dimorphism than other bones , specifically in the size and shape of the pelvic cavity , ilia , greater sciatic notches , and the sub-pubic angle . the phenice method is commonly used to determine the sex of an unidentified human skeleton by anthropologists with 96 % to 100 % accuracy in some populations . women 's pelvises are wider in the pelvic inlet and are wider throughout the pelvis to allow for child birth . the sacrum in the women 's pelvis is curved inwards to allow the child to have a '' funnel '' to assist in the child 's pathway from the uterus to the vagina . clinical significance . there are many classified skeletal disorders . one of the most common is osteoporosis . also common is scoliosis , a side-to-side curve in the back or spine , often creating a pronounced '' c '' or '' s '' shape when viewed on an x-ray of the spine . this condition is most apparent during adolescence , and is most common with females . arthritis . arthritis is a disease of the joints . it involves inflammation of one or more joints . when affected by arthritis , the joint or joints affected may be painful to move , may move in unusual directions or may be immobile completely . the symptoms of arthritis will vary differently between types of arthritis . the most common form of arthritis , osteoarthritis , can affect both the larger and smaller joints of the human skeleton . the cartilage in the affected joints will degrade , soften and wear away . this decreases the mobility of the joints and decreases the space between bones where cartilage should be . osteoporosis . osteoporosis is a disease of bone where there is reduced bone mineral density , increasing the likelihood of fractures . osteoporosis is defined by the world health organization in women as a bone mineral density 2.5 standard deviations below peak bone mass , relative to the age and sex-matched average , as measured by dual energy x-ray absorptiometry , with the term '' established osteoporosis '' including the presence of a fragility fracture . osteoporosis is most common in women after menopause , when it is called '' postmenopausal osteoporosis '' , but may develop in men and premenopausal women in the presence of particular hormonal disorders and other chronic diseases or as a result of smoking and medications , specifically glucocorticoids . osteoporosis usually has no symptoms until a fracture occurs . for this reason , dexa scans are often done in people with one or more risk factors , who have developed osteoporosis and be at risk of fracture . osteoporosis treatment includes advice to stop smoking , decrease alcohol consumption , exercise regularly , and have a healthy diet . calcium supplements may also be advised , as may vitamin d . when medication is used , it may include bisphosphonates , strontium ranelate , and osteoporosis may be one factor considered when commencing hormone replacement therapy . . history . sushruta , a famous medical scholar from india born in 600 bc , wrote the suśruta-saṃhitā . in its extant form , its 184 chapters contain descriptions of 1,120 illness , 700 medicinal plant , 64 mineralogy and 57 animal product . the text discusses such surgical techniques as making incisions , probing , foreign body , cauterization , tooth extraction , excisions , and trocar , hydrocele , prostate gland , urethral stricture , vesicolithotomy , hernia , caesarian , haemorrhoid , fistula , laparotomy and intestinal obstruction , perforated intestine and the principles of bone fracture , viz . , traction , manipulation , apposition and stabilization including some measures of rehabilitation and prosthetics . it enumerates six types of dislocations , twelve varieties of fractures , and classification of the bone and their reaction to the injuries , and gives a classification of eye diseases including cataract . the study of bones in ancient greece started under ptolemaic kings due to their link to egypt . herophilos , through his work by studying dissected human corpses in alexandria , is credited to be the pioneer of the field . his works are lost but are often cited by notable persons in the field such as galen and rufus of ephesus . galen himself did little dissection though and relied on the work of others like marinus of alexandria , as well as his own observations of gladiator cadavers and animals . according to katherine park , in medieval europe dissection continued to be practiced , contrary to the popular understanding that such practices were taboo and thus completely banned . the practice of holy autopsy , such as in the case of clare of montefalco further supports the claim . alexandria continued as a center of anatomy under islamic rule , with ibn zuhr a notable figure . chinese understandings are divergent , as the closest corresponding concept in the medicinal system seems to be the meridians , although given that hua tuo regularly performed surgery , there may be some distance between medical theory and actual understanding . the renaissance . leonardo da vinci , among his many talents , also contributed to the study of the skeleton , albeit unpublished in his time . many artists , antonio pollaiuolo being the first , performed dissections for better understanding of the body , although they concentrated mostly on the muscles . vesalius , regarded as the founder of modern anatomy , authored the book de humani corporis fabrica , which contained many illustrations of the skeleton and other body parts , correcting some theories dating from galen , such as the lower jaw being a single bone instead of two . various other figures like alessandro achillini also contributed to the further understanding of the skeleton . see also . list of bones of the human skeleton distraction osteogenesis . references .