Woodstock '94

performers and notable events during the festival . friday , august 12 . . north stage . roguish armament with rekk master of none 3 futu futu abba rage lunchmeat the paul luke band peacebomb the goats huffamoose orleans blues traveler jackyl del amitri live james king 's x sheryl crow collective soul candlebox violent femmes . ravestock . aphex twin deee-lite dj spooky doc martin frankie bones kevin saunderson little louie vega the orb orbital soul slinger dj scotto . notable events : day 1 . jackyl took the stage early on friday . lead singer , jesse james dupree , took the stage with a bottle of whiskey and poured alcohol onto the crowd . he then started smoking marijuana and on a close up he shotgunned the joint into the camera with copious amounts of smoke filling the screens and the stage , at which point which the crowd cheered . the lead singer then lit a stool on fire onstage and cut it up with a chainsaw . he also pulled out a rifle and started firing into the air but cut his hand , which started bleeding , and as he wiped his forehead a streak of blood was left across his head . at this point security dragged him off the stage . aphex twin 's performance was cut short when promoters '' disconnected '' him mid-show for signing a fake name on a contract , which would forfeit polygram 's rights to his performance . . saturday , august 13 . . north stage . joe cocker blind melon cypress hill rollins band melissa etheridge crosby , stills , & nash featuring john sebastian nine inch nails metallica aerosmith . south stage . nenad bach the cranberries zucchero youssou n'dour the band featuring hot tuna , bruce hornsby , roger mcguinn , rob wasserman , and bob weir primus featuring jerry cantrell salt ' n pepa vinx as mc . notable events : day 2 . nine inch nails had the largest crowd density at the event , overshadowing many of the other performers . just before going on stage they wrestled each other in the mud and went on to perform completely wet and covered in mud . in the interview after their performance , nine inch nails frontman trent reznor claimed he thought his band 's performance was '' terrible '' due to technical difficulties on stage . reznor admitted that while he disliked playing at such a large show , it was done for the money : '' to be quite frank , it 's basically to offset the cost of the tour we 're doing right now . '' their performance of '' happiness in slavery '' at the festival won the grammy award for best metal performance in 1996 . aerosmith 's joey kramer , joe perry and steven tyler were all at the original woodstock festival in 1969 . aerosmith performed around 3 to 4 a.m . , right after an extensive fireworks display from metallica . tyler said on the liner notes for the album during their set : '' it rained like a cow pissing on a flat rock '' . during primus ' performance of the song '' my name is mud '' the audience responded by pelting the band with mud , which singer/bassist les claypool ended by informing the crowd that '' you know , when you throw things on stage , it 's a sign of small and insignificant genitalia . '' claypool claims that he still has mud in his bass cabinets as late as 2014 . les claypool interviewed by billboard : exclusive : primus ' les claypool talks woodstock 94 ' 20 years later . sunday , august 14 . . north stage . country joe mcdonald sisters of glory featuring thelma houston , cece peniston , phoebe snow , mavis staples , and lois walden arrested development the allman brothers band traffic spin doctors porno for pyros bob dylan red hot chili peppers peter gabriel . south stage . john sebastian and the j-band country joe mcdonald gil scott-heron womad xalam the justin trio geoffrey oryema hassan hakmoun & zahar green day paul rodgers rock and blues revue featuring slash , neal schon , andy fraser , and jason bonham neville brothers santana featuring eric gales jimmy cliff 's all star reggae jam featuring rita marley , eek a mouse and shabba ranks . notable events : day 3 . woodstock '94 has also been referred to as mudstock , or mudstock '94 , partly due to the rainy weather that resulted in mud pits and the aforementioned performances of nine inch nails and primus . this culminated with green day 's performance , during which guitarist and lead vocalist billie joe armstrong started a mudfight during their song , “ paper lanterns ” , with the crowd . in the documentary behind the music , bassist mike dirnt was mistaken for one of the fans jumping on stage , and was spear-tackled by a security guard , knocking out one of his teeth . it was this incident that caused dirnt to need emergency orthodontia . a gag order was put in place regarding this incident . due to the now-famous mud-fight and dirnt 's injury , woodstock quickly propelled green day 's then recently released album , dookie , into success . after being injured in a traffic accident in 1966 , and his subsequent disappearance from the popular music scene , bob dylan declined to go to the original woodstock festival of 1969 , even though he lived in the area at the time and the festival had been put in his backyard to try to get him to come out and play . he set off for the isle of wight festival the day the woodstock festival started , and performed at woodside bay on 31 august 1969 . dylan , however , did accept an invitation to perform at woodstock '94 , and was introduced with the phrase : '' we waited twenty-five years to hear this . ladies and gentlemen , mr . bob dylan '' . veoh.com : bob dylan woodstock '94 according to various critics , dylan 's performance was one of the greater moments of the festival , and represented the beginning of another new phase in his lengthy career . uncharacteristically for the time , dylan played lead guitar in a more rock-oriented electric set . the red hot chili peppers performed in lightbulb costumes for the first song of their set . later in the set they would all dress up as jimi hendrix had at the original woodstock . the lightbulb costumes are now on display at the hard rock hotel & casino in las vegas , nevada . peter gabriel headlined the north stage on the last night and closed woodstock '94 . ram.org : woodstock 1994 concert review . other notes on performers . several of the artists , including green day and cypress hill , skipped at least one lollapalooza tour date in order to appear at woodstock '94 . performers from the original woodstock appearing at woodstock '94 were the band , santana , joe cocker , country joe mcdonald , john sebastian , surviving members of sweetwater , and crosby , stills , & nash . additionally , jorma kaukonen and jack casady of jefferson airplane/hot tuna , and bob weir of the grateful dead , all woodstock alumni , also appeared , performing with the band on guitar , bass , and guitar and vocals , respectively . declined invitations or missed connections . guns n ' roses were asked to appear at the festival , but the band declined due to internal problems as well as feeling the concert was too 'commercial . ' however , lead guitarist slash made an appearance with paul rodgers . rumors circulated during the festival that the rolling stones were to make a surprise appearance because they were scheduled to play a concert in new york that weekend . johnny cash , the only living person at that time to be inducted into both the country music hall of fame and the rock and roll hall of fame , was also invited to perform , but after learning that he would not be performing on the main stage , declined to appear . alice in chains were on the initial bill of the festival . however , the band pulled out due to the continuing drug problems of lead singer layne staley . guitarist jerry cantrell made a special guest appearance with primus on the song '' harold of the rocks '' . todd rundgren had a multimedia performance in the festival 's '' surreal field '' several times during the course of the entire festival . promoters pursued nirvana to perform at the festival . at the time , the band pulled out of lollapalooza due to singer kurt cobain health . cobain later died by suicide on april 5 , 1994 . . broadcast and recordings . the woodstock '94 festival was shot using the early analog hd 1125-line hi-vision system in a 16:9 aspect ratio . the footage would be used for later home packages and a planned theatrical documentary about the event . the hd footage was mixed live into standard definition 4:3 ntsc for cable tv broadcast . the woodstock ‘ 94 festival was broadcast live on mtv via pay per view in the u.s . and canada . in the u.k , audio from the event was broadcast on bbc radio 1 . commercial releases . highlights from the concert were later released as a double album set on november 4 , 1994 , on cd and cassette . the film about the event , directed by bruce gowers , was also released straight to video the same year on vhs and laserdisc . currently , there is no dvd , blu-ray or digital media release . since the release of the official album , various recordings of songs performed have been released officially ; however , complete performances of entire sets have only been released unofficially as bootlegs . in 2019 , live ! woodstock '94 of green day performance was released for record store day , making this one of the first official releases of an entire woodstock '94 set . video and discography . – a film directed by bruce gowers with the highlights of performances woodstock 94 – a live album released by a & m records live ! woodstock '94 - green day ( 587282-1 ) - a 2019 record store day vinyl release of their set . see also . woodstock festival ( 1969 ) woodstock '79 ( 1979 ) woodstock '89 ( 1989 ) przystanek woodstock ( 1995– ) woodstock '99 ( 1999 ) woodstock '09 ( 2009 ) . references . external links . woodstock summer of 94 documentary woodstock '94 the well notes and messages from festival attendees , generated on-site in 1994 . woodstock museum woodstock nation saugerties , ny – town where woodstock '94 was held