Proposal for the Province of Toronto

causes . arguments posited for toronto or gta provincehood include those stating that the area 's residents are politically and economically exploited by the rest of the province . another argument presented is the urban issues faced by toronto not present in other cities or rural areas of ontario , including the delivery of public services to large numbers of immigrants and visible minorities , gun control , and differences in the delivery of education and health care to its residents . a federal political issue is the greater toronto area 's under-representation in the house of commons . murdoch 's proposal was motivated by a contrary sentiment , that the rural areas of ontario have little clout in the legislative assembly of ontario compared to toronto . andrew steele , in an editorial in the globe and mail , stated that murdoch was instead speaking to the rural base of voters in his constituency and calling for the separation of rural ontario from toronto . another argument sometimes presented to support a split of toronto from the province is that politicians from other cities in the province are concerned about their influence on provincial politics . glen murray has stated that canadian cities must rely on property taxes , as they have no ability to enact other taxes or collect income or consumption taxes . history . the province of toronto was first proposed as the name of the province of ontario during the debates leading to canadian confederation in 1867 . british imperial officials considered the name after noting that quebec city was the capital of quebec , and hence toronto should be the capital of a similarly named province . the idea had little traction and was dismissed in favour of using the same name for the province as the lake adjacent to its capital city , lake ontario . the provincehood movement idea has been supported by the urban activist jane jacobs and urban planner joe berridge . jacobs viewed toronto as a region , which was split into multiple jurisdictions as an artefact of historical politics . in the 1970s , paul godfrey presented to the royal commission on metropolitan toronto , as chairman of metropolitan toronto , arguments that the region should have the capability to set policy as does a provincial government . in 1991 academic and future member of parliament ted mcwhinney argued before a parliamentary committee that if quebec separatism ontario would need to be broken up to rebalance confederation . according to mcwhinney , splitting off toronto would be the most sensible option , pointing to germany where hamburg and berlin have their own states as an example . mel lastman proposed toronto provincehood in 1999 while attending the mayors summit of the americas in miami , florida ; he later retracted his comments , but by then , they had already spurred discussion of the idea in the media . lastman was panned in an editorial by the hamilton spectator for not having considered all the consequences of provincehood . debate flourished , as various proposals were presented , including one for the creation of the province of southern ontario the committee for the province of toronto was formed to seek a constitutional amendment enabling the formation of a new province . on 9 february 1999 , councillor michael walker presented a notice of motion to toronto city council on behalf of the committee . lastman also considered issuing a plebiscite to the residents of toronto about toronto provincehood . these debates faded , but did result in negotiation between the city of toronto government and the government of ontario about greater autonomy for toronto , which eventually resulted in new legislation '' the stronger city of toronto for a stronger ontario act '' , after he succeeded jean chrétien as prime minister of canada . while nobody took lastman seriously , his musings tapped into a growing sentiment in cities across canada for a '' new deal '' from senior governments . -- > tooker gomberg who placed second to lastman in the 2000 mayoral election , also favoured the idea . in november 2000 , just before the election , he stated that '' the province of toronto idea , though it 's a long shot and a long-term solution , is something i favour . it 's a compelling idea whose time has not quite come . '' at a meeting of the bruce county federation of agriculture in 2010 , a member of provincial parliament from central ontario , bill murdoch , suggested that the city of toronto become its own province , but the other parts of the gta ( also known as the 905 ) would remain in ontario , proposing its new capital to be london . david miller , mayor of toronto , responded by issuing a message via twitter , stating '' province of toronto . an idea whose time has come ? '' , and his spokesman stuart green indicated that miller would consider a public debate about the possible secession of toronto from ontario , and murdoch stated that he received an email from miller also indicating he was agreeable to a discussion about it . murdoch had considered presenting a private member 's bill to the legislative assembly of ontario about this proposal . thunder bay mayor lynn peterson opposed murdoch 's proposal , stating that one of the perceived issues was inconsequential , specifically that policies defined in the ontario legislature are not toronto-centric . michael gravelle , the minister of northern development and mines , said '' i look at it from the perspective of would this be good for northern ontario . and i don ‘ t think it would be '' . in 2018 , some activists revived the proposal again , after ontario premier doug ford introduced legislation to reduce toronto city council from 47 to 25 seats , months after the 2018 municipal election was already underway . '' 9 questions about toronto secession you were too embarrassed to ask '' . toronto star , 3 august 2018 . . constitutional amendment . for any part of toronto and the surrounding region to secede from ontario to create a new province would require an amendment to the constitution of canada . the constitutional amendment would require resolutions from the house of commons of canada and the senate of canada , and resolutions from the legislative bodies of 7 of the provinces representing at least 50 % of the population . however , it has also been suggested that such an amendment may not be necessary if the federal and provincial government agree to split the province . . by the numbers . with 2.6 million residents , the city of toronto is more populous than six provinces — manitoba , new brunswick , newfoundland and labrador , nova scotia , prince edward island , and saskatchewan ; with a population of over 6 million , the greater toronto area is more populous than those six , as well as alberta and british columbia . the province of toronto would become the second smallest in canada by area , larger only than prince edward island , whose area is 5,660 & nbsp ; km 2 , but would become the third most populous province in canada only after quebec and the resized ontario . . political party . registration for the province of toronto party was accepted by elections ontario on 18 june 2001 , and became effective on 1 july that year . one of its founding members was david vallance . members of the party contested for the mayorship of toronto in the 2003 and 2006 municipal elections . paul lewin 's campaign in the 2003 mayoral election used the slogan '' free 416 '' , referring to the regional use of the city 's area code as a nickname , while advocating a province of toronto . he was 36 years old at the time . see brian borzykowski and james cowan , '' they would be king '' , national post , 4 october 2003 , to11 . he fared poorly in the municipal election . david vallance was the 2006 candidate for the mayoral election in toronto . he has written several letter to the editor over the years on various matters , including the state of toronto 's provincial tax burden . he was a vocal opponent of the amalgamation of the old city of toronto with neighbouring municipalities in 1997 , and led the group taxpayers against megacity . he had previously campaigned for city council in the 1997 municipal election as an extension of his anti-megacity campaign , and also advocated property tax reforms . in 2006 , he argued that torontonians should '' take control of our own taxes and control our own destiny '' . . see also . proposal for the province of montreal . references . external links . a strategy for secession ( toronto star article )