Dust

atmospheric . atmospheric or wind-borne fugitive dust , also known as aeolian dust , comes from arid and dry regions where high velocity winds are able to remove mostly silt-sized material , deflating susceptible surfaces . this includes areas where grazing , ploughing , vehicle use , and other human activities have further destabilized the land , though not all source areas have been largely affected by anthropogenic impacts . one-third of the global land area is covered by dust-producing surfaces , made up of desert like the sahara which covers 0.9 billion hectares , and drylands which occupy 5.2 billion hectares . dust in the atmosphere is produced by saltation and sandblasting of sand-sized grains , and it is transported through the troposphere . this airborne dust is considered an aerosol and once in the atmosphere , it can produce strong local radiative forcing . saharan dust in particular can be transported and deposited as far as the caribbean and the amazon basin , and may affect air temperatures , cause ocean cooling , and alter rainfall amounts . . middle east . dust in the middle east has been a historic phenomenon . recently , because of climate change and the escalating process of desertification , the problem has worsened dramatically . as a multi-factor phenomenon , there is not yet a clear consensus on the sources or potential solutions to the problem . in iran , the dust is already affecting more than 5 million people directly , and has emerged as a serious government issue in recent years . in the province of khuzestan it has led to the severe reduction of air quality . the amount of pollutants in the air has surpassed more than 50 times the normal level several times in a year . recently , initiatives such as project-dust have been established to directly study dust in the middle east . roads . dust kicked up by vehicles traveling on roads may make up 33 % of air pollution . road dust consists of deposits of exhaust gas , particles from tire and brake dust , dust from paved roads or potholes , and dust from construction sites . road dust is a significant source contributing to the generation and release of particulate into the atmosphere . control of road dust is a significant challenge in urban areas , and also in other locations with high levels of vehicular traffic upon unsealed roads , such as mines and landfill dumps . road dust may be suppressed by mechanical methods like street sweeper vehicles equipped with vacuum cleaners , vegetable oil sprays , or with water sprayers . calcium chloride can be used . improvements in automotive engineering have reduced the amount of pm10s produced by road traffic ; the proportion representing re-suspension of existing particulates has increased as a result . coal . coal dust is responsible for the lung disease known as pneumoconiosis , including black lung disease that occurs among coal miners . the danger of coal dust resulted in environmental legislation regulating work place air quality in some jurisdictions . in addition , if enough coal dust is dispersed within the air in a given area , in very rare circumstances , it can create an explosion hazard under certain circumstances . these circumstances are typically within confined spaces . control . atmospheric . most governmental epas , including the united states environmental protection agency ( epa ) mandate that facilities that generate fugitive dust , minimize or mitigate the production of dust in their operation . the most frequent dust control violations occur at new residential housing developments in urban areas . united states federal law requires that construction sites obtain permits to conduct earth moving , clearing of areas , to include plans to control dust emissions when the work is being carried out . control measures include such simple practices as spraying construction and demolition sites with water , and preventing the tracking of dust onto adjacent roads . some of the issues include : reducing dust related health risks that include allergic reactions , pneumonia and asthmatic attacks . improving visibility and road safety . providing cleaner air , cleaner vehicles and cleaner homes and promoting better health . improving crop productivity in agriculture . reducing vehicle maintenance costs by lowering the levels of dust that clog filters , bearings and machinery . reducing driver fatigue , maintenance on suspension systems and improving fuel economy . increasing cumulative effect - each new application builds on previous residuals reducing re-application rate while improving performance . us federal laws require dust control on sources such as vacant lots , unpaved parking lots , and unpaved roads . dust in such places may be suppressed by mechanical methods , including paving or laying down gravel , or stabilizing the surface with water , vegetable oils or other dust abatement , or by using water misters to suppress dust that is already airborne . domestic . dust control is the suppression of solid particles with diameters less than 500 micrometers . dust poses a health threat to children , '' dust mites in the humid atmosphere of bangalore trigger around 60 % of asthma '' older people , and those with respiratory illnesses . house dust can become airborne easily . care is required when removing dust to avoid causing the dust to become airborne . a feather duster tends to agitate the dust so it lands elsewhere . certified hepa ( tested to mil std 282 ) can effectively trap 99.97 % of dust at 0.3 micrometers . not all hepa ( type/media ) filters can effectively stop dust ; while vacuum cleaners with hepa ( type/media ) filters , water , or cyclones may filter more effectively than without , they may still exhaust millions of particles per cubic foot of air circulated . central vacuum cleaners can be effective in removing dust , especially if they are exhausted directly to the outdoors . air filtering appliances differ greatly in their effectiveness . laser particle counters are an effective way to measure filter effectiveness , medical grade instruments can test for particles as small as 0.3 micrometers . in order to test for dust in the air , there are several options available . pre weighted filter and matched weight filters made from polyvinyl chloride or mixed cellulose ester are suitable for respirable dust ( less than 10 micrometers in diameter ) . . dust resistant surfaces . a dust resistant surface is a state of prevention against dust contamination or damage , by a design or treatment of materials and items in manufacturing or through a repair process . a reduced tacticity of a synthetic layer or covering can protect surfaces and release small molecules that could have remained attached . a panel , container or enclosure with seams may feature types of strengthened rigidity or sealant to vulnerable edges and joins . outer space . cosmic dust is widely present in space , where gas and dust clouds are the primary precursors for planetary systems . the zodiacal light , as seen in a dark night sky , is produced by sunlight reflected from particles of dust in orbit around the sun . the tails of comets are produced by emissions of dust and ionized gas from the body of the comet . dust also covers solid planetary bodies , and vast dust storms can occur on mars which cover almost the entire planet . interstellar dust is found between the stars , and high concentrations produce diffuse nebulae and reflection nebulae . dust is widely present in the galaxy . ambient radiation heats dust and re-emits radiation into the microwave band , which may distort the cosmic microwave background power spectrum . dust in this regime has a complicated emission spectrum , and includes both thermal dust emission and spinning dust emission . dust samples returned from outer space may provide information about conditions in the early solar system . several spacecraft have sought to gather samples of dust and other materials . among these craft was stardust , which flew past comet wild 2 in 2004 , and returned a capsule of the comet 's remains to earth in january 2006 . in 2010 the japanese hayabusa spacecraft returned samples of dust from the surface of an asteroid . atmospheric gallery . image : dust over southeast australia.jpg dry , windy weather sends clouds of dust across south-eastern australia . image : spring bloom and dust off argentina.jpg a pale brown plume of dust sweeps out of argentina ’ s pampas . image : dust extends from saudi arabia to iran.jpg a thick dust plume over kuwait and the north-western tip of the persian gulf . . dust mites . house dust mites are present indoors wherever humans live . positive tests for dust mite allergies are extremely common among people with asthma . dust mites are microscopic arachnids whose primary food is dead human skin cells , but they do not live on living people . they and their feces and other allergens which they produce are major constituents of house dust , but because they are so heavy they are not suspended for long in the air . they are generally found on the floor and other surfaces until disturbed ( by walking , for example ) . it could take somewhere between twenty minutes and two hours for dust mites to settle back down out of the air . dust mites are a nesting species that prefers a dark , warm , and humid climate . they flourish in mattresses , bedding , upholstered furniture , and carpets . their feces include enzymes that are released upon contact with a moist surface , which can happen when a person inhales , and these enzymes can kill cells within the human body . house dust mites did not become a problem until humans began to use textiles , such as western style blankets and clothing . matthew j . colloff , dust mites