De minimis

examples of application of the de minimis rule . taxation . under u.s . tax rules , the de minimis rule governs the treatment of small amounts of market discount . under the rule , if a bond is purchased with a small amount of market discount ( an amount less than 0.25 % of the face value of : a bond times the number of complete years between the bond 's acquisition date and its maturity date ) the market discount is considered to be zero . if the market discount is less than the de minimis amount , the discount on the bond is generally treated as a capital gain upon disposition or redemption rather than as ordinary income . securities industry and financial markets association – investing in bonds the de minimis rule retrieved on 29 july 2007 . under internal revenue service guidelines , the de minimis rule can also apply to any benefit , property , or service provided to an employee that has so little value that reporting for it would be unreasonable or administratively impracticable ; for example , use of a company photocopier to copy personal documents – see de minimis fringe benefit . cash is not excludable , regardless of the amount . society for human resource management de minimis rule retrieved on 28 july 2007 . specifically in u.s . state income tax , de minimis refers to the point at which withholdings should be initiated for a nonresident working in a state which taxes personal income . not all u.s . states levy income taxes , and there 's little consistency among nonresident de minimis standards for those that do . some states base de minimis on the number of days worked ( although the definition of what counts as a workday has been controversial new york state updates guidance on 14-day withholding threshold . retrieved on 25 july 2012 . ) , others on the dollars earned or a percentage of total income derived from work in the state , still others using a combination of methods . these inconsistencies have led to repeated attempts to pass the so-called mobile workforce state income tax simplification act 114th congress : hr 2315 / s 386 . retrieved on 14 september 2015 . without success . european union usage . the european union de minimis '' state aid '' regulation allows for aid of up to €200,000 to be provided from public funds to any business enterprise over a rolling three-year period . under european union competition law , some agreements infringing article 101 ( 1 ) of the treaty on the functioning of the european union ( formerly article 81 ( 1 ) of the ec treaty ) are considered to be de minimis and therefore accepted . horizontal agreement , that is one between competitors , will usually be de minimis where the parties ' market share is 10 % or less , and a vertical agreement , between undertakings operating at different levels of the market , where it is 15 % or less . procurement of low value contracts is subject to limited regulation when its value falls below certain low thresholds . cheshire east council , eu procurement thresholds as at 1 january 2018 , accessed 29 may 2018 . criminology and crime . in criminology , the de minimis or minimalist approach is an addition to a general harm principle . the general harm principle fails to consider the possibility of other sanctions to prevent harm , and the effectiveness of criminalization as a chosen option . those other sanctions include civil courts , laws of tort and regulation . having criminal remedies in place is seen as a '' last resort '' since such actions often infringe personal liberties & ndash ; incarceration , for example , prevents the freedom of movement . in this sense , law making that places a greater emphasis on human rights , such as the european convention on human rights , falls into the de minimis category . most crimes of direct action ( murder , rape , assault , for example ) are generally not affected by such a stance , but do require greater justification in less clear cases . the de minimis rule in north american drug law requires a usable quantity of the substance in question before charges can be brought , known as the minority rule . in canada , de minimis is often used as a standard of whether a criminal offence is made out at a preliminary stage . for a charge of second degree murder , the test being : '' could the jury reasonably conclude that accused actions were a contributing cause , beyond de minimis , of the victim 's death . '' . risk assessment . in risk assessment , it refers to the highest level of risk that is still too small to be concerned with . therefore , only risk levels above this de minimis level must be addressed and managed . some refer to this as a '' virtually safe '' level . it has application in the fields of auditing , modeling , and engineering , and may refer to situations of low ( negligible ) risk . it can be verified in asa 1 . copyright . courts will occasionally not uphold a copyright on modified public domain material if the changes are deemed to be de minimis . similarly , courts have dismissed copyright infringement cases on the grounds that the alleged infringer 's use of the copyrighted work ( such as sampling ) was so insignificant as to be de minimis . for example , the nba 2k video games that included copyrighted tattoos in the recreation of the players ' likenesses were found to be in de minimis and not copyright-violating . however , in bridgeport music , inc . v . dimension films , such a ruling was overturned on appeal , the us appeals court explicitly declining to recognize a de minimis standard for digital sampling . . in india . the principle of de minimis non curat lex can be used as defense in india in cases of copyright infringement . the important issue is that whether de minimis principle could be used as separate defence than fair use under section 52 of indian copyright act . in india tv independent news service pvt . ltd . and ors . v yashraj films pvt . ltd . , the court discussed the applicability of de mininims principle at length . before this case the position was not very clear with regard to the applicability . the facts of the case were that five words were copied from a song of five stanzas . after applying the five well-known factors commonly considered by courts in applying de minimis , the court reached the conclusion that the infraction is trivial and attracts the defence of de minimis . andrew inest , '' a theory of de minimis and a proposal for its application in copyright '' , 21 berkeley technology law journal , 945 ( 2006 ) . education . in endrew vs . douglas county school district , the u.s . supreme court unanimously ruled , on march 22 , 2017 , that the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) requires more than de minimis efforts to provide equivalent educational opportunity to students with disabilities . endrew vs . douglas county school district the decision reversed a previous decision by the u.s . court of appeals for the tenth circuit . miscellaneous examples . following bus deregulation in great britain in 1986 , small contracts for supplementary local bus services could be let by local authorities without competitive tendering . the department for transport 's '' guidance on new de minimis rules for bus subsidy contracts '' ( 2005 ) notes that '' the transport act 1985 ( as amended by the transport act 2000 ) introduced the provisions which govern the duties of local passenger transport authorities to secure local bus services where these would not otherwise be met . in the majority of cases these services have to be secured through competitive tender . the service subsidy agreements ( tendering ) regulations provided local authorities with the scope to let any individual bus subsidy contract in any one year up to a certain maximum value without the need to competitively tender ( the de minimis limits ) . there was also a maximum value that de minimis contracts could be let with any one operator in any one year . '' under the de minimis provision of the world trade organization 's agreement on agriculture there is no requirement to cap trade-distorting domestic support in any year during which the value of support does not exceed a certain percentage ( 5–10 % ) of the national production value per product or of all products taken together if the support is not attributable to any specific product category .