America's Promise

history . the presidents ’ summit for america ’ s future in 1997 – a national summit held in philadelphia to promote a civic response to many of the country ’ s problems , particularly the challenges facing at-risk youth cnn , clinton kicks off volunteer summit , april 27 , 1997 – led to the creation of america ’ s promise alliance . presidents bill clinton and george h . w . bush convened the summit , and gen . colin l . powell , usa ( ret ) served as the event ’ s general chairman . focusing specifically on helping the nation ’ s young people , gen . powell agreed to lead a three-year campaign called america ’ s promise – the alliance for youth , which set out to improve the lives of 2 million of the nation ’ s 15 million at-risk youth by 2000 . cnn , clinton kicks off volunteer summit , april 27 , 1997 sun sentinel , volunteer recruitment falls short but powell effort deserves respect , may 3 , 1998 in 2000 , the target end-date of the campaign , general powell determined that america ’ s promise should continue its work and continue to operate as a nonprofit organization . ending the work now , he said , would be “ kind of like saying we 'll be out of bosnia in a year . '' education week , after 3 years , '' america 's promise '' continues , april 26 , 2000 early in its history , america ’ s promise drew criticism for not being able to prove it had achieved its goals . new york times , charity led by general powell comes under heavy fire , accused of inflating results , october 8 , 1999 a later analysis from the national 4-h council , the nation ’ s largest youth development organization , agreed that while the organization ’ s impact was difficult to document , “ much of the increased focus on youth and positive youth development…can be attributed to the visibility , energy , and funding america ’ s promise brought to youth work . ” floyd , d . and sauer , r . ( n.d . ) , america ’ s promise : a catalyst for youth issues , university of minnesota digital conservancy in the years since , the work of america ’ s promise has grown to encompass awareness building ( see gradnation campaign below ) , academic research ( see center for promise ) , cross-sector collaboration ( see alliance partners ) , and events that bring people together ( see gradnation campaign ) . presidents ' summit for america 's future . in july 1995 , former michigan governor george romney ( and father of 2012 republican presidential candidate mitt romney ) outlined his vision of “ a summit at which all living presidents and leaders from all sectors of society would gather to support citizen service and show it was not a partisan issue . ” cnn , clinton kicks off volunteer summit , april 27 , 1997 wofford , harris , can national service become integral to our culture ? democracy journal , summer 2004 . only four days after completing this outline , romney died of natural causes . cnn , clinton kicks off volunteer summit , april 27 , 1997 before his death , however , romney shared his vision of this bipartisan summit focused on volunteerism with former u.s . senator harris wofford , who had recently become ceo of the corporation for national and community service and bob goodwin , president of bush ’ s points of light foundation . wofford and goodwin agreed to enlist their organizations in fulfilling romney ’ s plans for the summit , so romney “ died knowing that the summit would go forward . ” in his 1997 state of the union address , president bill clinton laid out the overarching theme and goal of the summit : '' to mobilize america 's citizen power in a united effort to solve our common problems , especially those that threaten our young people . '' three months later , presidents clinton and george h . w . bush officially co-convened the presidents ’ summit for america ’ s future in philadelphia . sun sentinel , volunteer recruitment falls short but powell effort deserves respect , may 3 , 1998 retired gen . colin powell served as the chairman of the event , baltimore sun , a penny saved is good , but donating it is fine , too finances : american benefactor reports on a couple of failures , and new age journal discusses living within modest means , july 13 , 1997 and four out of the five living presidents attended , with nancy reagan representing her husband ronald reagan . wofford , harris , can national service become integral to our culture ? democracy journal , summer 2004 . more than 20 governors , nearly 100 mayors , 145 community delegations , and many prominent business leaders and celebrities also attended the summit . philly.com , the focus is on youth five goals are designed to rescue at-risk children stars will fall on philly during special days with the official slogan , “ two million by 2000 , ” the summit encouraged business , government , nonprofit , and community leaders across the country to work together to improve the lives of 2 million of the nation ’ s 15 million at-risk youth by 2000 . powell , stewart m . , clinton , volunteers clean up inner city , april 28 , 1997 in 1998 , gen . powell responded to criticism that the summit and ensuing america ’ s promise campaign were little more than symbolic gestures and reported that , as a result of the summit , among other things , big brothers and big sisters amassed a 22 percent increase in adults enlisting as mentors ; boys and girls clubs of america added 100,000 new members ; the u.s chamber of commerce committed to helping 3 million young people find summer jobs ; and the lenscrafters company gave 100,000 free eye exams to children from low-income families . sun sentinel , volunteer recruitment falls short but powell effort deserves respect , may 3 , 1998 . notable leaders . gen . colin l . powell , usa ( ret ) served as the founding chair of america ’ s promise and remained board chair until 2001 , when he stepped down to become u.s . secretary of state . former governor of montana marc racicot took over as chair , followed by former u.s . senator harris wofford in 2002 . youth today , racicot out , wofford in at america ’ s promise , february 1 , 2002 alma powell , a respected audiologist and general powell ’ s wife , became chair in 2004 . she published two children ’ s books in 2003 , america ’ s promise and my little wagon . in 2004 , america ’ s promise – the alliance for youth changed its name to america ’ s promise alliance to place a greater emphasis on the strength of alliance partners ( see alliance partners ) . '' we see ourselves as a convener , a catalyst for action , and we help our partners and communities that focus on the measurable goals , '' said then-ceo marguerite kondracke . points of light foundation , points of light institute ceo and handson network co-founder michelle nunn featured in the nonprofit times article kondracke retired as president and ceo in 2012 and was replaced by john s . gomperts , whose “ association with america ’ s promise began when he served as chief of staff to harris wofford , the ceo of the corporation for national & community service and one of the key conveners of the summit for america ’ s future . ” americaspromise.org , america ’ s promise alliance announces appointment of john s . gomperts as new president and ceo , march 8 , 2012 gomperts remains ceo and mrs . powell continues to chair the board of directors , which includes notable members such as miami foundation president javier soto , former first lady of kentucky jane beshear , former philadelphia mayor rev . dr . wilson goode , and ncta – the internet and television association president , and general and mrs . powell ’ s son , michael k . powell . the america ’ s promise board of directors also includes three full voting youth members . youth members must be between the ages of 18-24 and agree to serve two-year terms , operating as '' a critical and necessary component to the america ’ s promise leadership teams , '' according to mrs . powell . americaspromise.org , three new youth voices join america ’ s promise alliance ’ s leadership , october 5 , 2016 for a full list of board members , visit the america ’ s promise alliance website . americaspromise.org board of directors . the five promises . the presidents ’ summit for america ’ s future , the 1997 event that launched america ’ s promise alliance , included a summit declaration signed by presidents clinton , ghw bush , carter , ford , and nancy reagan on behalf of her husband . usa today , obama 's day : america 's promise summit declaration , september 22 , 2014 the summit declaration pledged to fulfill the “ promise of america ” for every child , which remains the core objective of america ’ s promise . specifically , the declaration outlined five essential resources the presidents agreed all children need to develop into successful adults , referred to as the five promises , which form the basis of america ’ s promise efforts and initiatives . president gerald ford , general colin powell , mrs . nancy reagan , and vice president al gore the five promises are : caring adults to guide and encourage them ; safe places , both physical and psychological , in which students can safely develop ; a healthy start in the form of proper nutrition and exercise ; effective education that prepares them for work and life ; and opportunities to help others and foster a sense of community , self-respect and service . cnn , text of summit declaration , april 28 , 1997 americaspromise.org , the five promises in july 2001 , president george w . bush added his signature , and president barack obama signed the declaration in september 2014 . usa today , obama 's day : america 's promise summit declaration , september 22 , 2014 . alliance partners . one of the greatest strengths of america ’ s promise alliance , one organizational analysis noted , is its ability to coordinate the national response to youth development by collaborating with its many partners , who “ provide the arms and legs with which to carry out the five promises . ” floyd , d . and sauer , r . ( n.d . ) , america ’ s promise : a catalyst for youth issues . university of minnesota digital conservancy , 2012 america ’ s promise counts nearly 400 national partners in its multi-sector alliance . corporate partners include target corporation and state farm ; foundation partners include usher ’ s new look foundation and the ford foundation ; nonprofit partners include boys & girls clubs of america , the ymca , and big brothers big sisters of america ; education partners include the council of chief state school officers ( ccsso ) , ascd , and the education commission of the states ; faith-based partners include catholic charities usa and faith leaders for community change . america ’ s promise alliance has the full list of its partners available on its website . americaspromise.org america 's promise alliance . gradnation campaign . in 2006 , two america ’ s promise alliance partner organizations , civic enterprises and the bill and melinda gates foundation , released the study , the silent epidemic : perspectives of high school dropouts . the report revealed that nearly one third of public high school students were failing to graduate high school with their class . the research also explored the reasons why so many students were dropping out of school and drew national attention to the “ silent epidemic ” of high school dropouts . civic enterprises , the silent epidemic : perspectives of high school dropouts , march 2006 spurred by the urgency to end this dropout crisis , america ’ s promise launched the dropout prevention campaign in 2008 , philanthropy news digest , america 's promise alliance launches campaign to combat dropout crisis , april 2 , 2008 later named the gradnation campaign , and hosted 105 dropout prevention summits in all 50 states from april 2008 until 2010 . americaspromise.org , dropout prevention campaign ] the summits worked to increase awareness about the dropout crisis , encourage collaboration between different sectors and organizations , and facilitate action in states and communities to improve their graduation rates . americaspromise.org , america 's promise celebrates 15 years , april 19 , 2012 overall , more than 33,000 educators , business leaders , nonprofit leaders , policymakers , families , and youth attended these summits . an analysis from duke university found that these summits helped raise public awareness about the high school dropout crisis and inspired the creation of new programs and collaborative efforts . gifford , b . and evans , k . , america ’ s promise alliance dropout prevention summits : mobilizing action to address the high school dropout crisis across the nation , duke university in early 2009 , america ’ s promise alliance commissioned grad nation : a guidebook to help communities tackle the dropout crisis , written by robert balfanz and joanna hornig fox of the everyone graduates center at johns hopkins university and john m . bridgeland and mary mcnaught from civic enterprises , grad nation : a guidebook to help communities tackle the dropout crisis civic enterprises , grad nation : a guidebook to help communities tackle the dropout crisis , 2009 to provide communities with research and best practices to raise graduation rates at the local level . in 2010 , america ’ s promise partnered with the alliance for excellent education , civic enterprises , and the everyone graduates center at johns hopkins university to set the gradnation campaign goal of achieving a 90 percent on-time national high school graduation rate and increasing postsecondary enrollment by 2020 . americaspromise.org , america 's promise celebrates 15 years , april 19 , 2012 president obama joined u.s . secretary of education arne duncan and general and mrs . powell for the announcement at the u.s . chamber of commerce . u.s . chamber of commerce foundation , president obama champions education at the u.s . chamber of commerce , march 3 , 2010 ] state farm was a lead sponsor of the campaign , which also pledged to focus on reducing the country ’ s number of “ dropout factories , ” or schools where “ less than 60 percent of students who started as freshmen remain enrolled four years later . ” the associated press , november 10 , 2015 state farm , better opportunities mean brighter futures for the past few years , researchers , governors , and president obama have drawn attention to the steady increase in the national on-time high school graduation rate . npr , the high school graduation rate reaches a record high — again , october 17 , 2016 “ just 10 years ago , the nation 's on-time high school graduation rate was hovering around 70 percent , where it had been stuck for decades , ” ceo john s . gomperts wrote in education week in 2016 . in october 2016 , president obama announced that the on-time high school graduation rate had again reached a record high for the fifth year in a row , npr , the high school graduation rate reaches a record high — again , october 17 , 2016 this time at 83.2 percent . the white house , fact sheet : president obama announces high school graduation rate has reached new high , october 17 , 2016 “ the greatest credit goes to students , families and teachers who are putting in the work and showing great determination and resolve , sometimes in the face of great challenge , ” gomperts wrote in september 2016 . americaspromise.org , five reasons i ’ m optimistic about the class of 2020 , september 8 , 2016 . building a grad nation . in 2010 , the campaign ’ s leading organizations worked together to release the building a grad nation report , research that analyzes the progress and challenges of raising the national high school graduation rate . u.s . secretary of education arne duncan spoke at the launch of the report , calling it “ required reading for those who believe that the high school dropout problem is too intractable to successfully take on . ” u.s . department of education , secretary arne duncan 's remarks at the release of america ’ s promise alliance report , “ building a grad nation ” , november 30 , 2010 the four organizations – america ’ s promise alliance , the alliance for excellent education , civic enterprises , and the everyone graduates center – have released the report every year since 2010 . '' americaspromise.org , building a grad nation report in 2013 , america ’ s promise committed to helping community partners across the nation convene 100 gradnation community summits over three years . srq , gradnation summit comes to sarasota county , september 21 , 2016 modeled after the dropout prevention summits , the community summits were designed to inspire local collaboration and action to raise high school graduation rates . americaspromise.org , community activation summits have been hosted in major cities like chicago , boston , sampan.org , boston gradnation focuses on increasing high school graduation rate , october 18 , 2016 and philadelphia , as well as smaller cities and rural areas in north carolina , the news & observer , wake county high school students urge more guidance counselors , april 29 , 2016 northwest indiana , and tennessee . times free press , gradnation summit to be held to increase high-school graduation rate , july 12 , 2015 in 2015 , america ’ s promise launched the gradnation state activation initiative , an effort to increase high school graduation rates at the state level . inside philanthropy , can pearson salvage its reputation as an education funder ? , july 7 , 2015 the three-year initiative provides funding to state organizations that encourage statewide innovation and collaboration , shares that knowledge , and develops successful models all states can replicate . organizations in arizona , massachusetts , and minnesota were each awarded with 200,000 grants . americaspromise.org , state activation . the center for promise . in 2012 , america ’ s promise partnered with tufts university school of arts and sciences to open the center for promise , an applied research institute studying what helps “ create the conditions so that all young people in america have the opportunity to succeed in school and life . ” americaspromise.org , america ’ s promise alliance launches the center for promise at tufts university school of arts and sciences , december 13 , 2012 in 2014 , the center produced the report , do n't call them dropouts : understanding the experiences of young people who leave high school before graduation , which drew national attention washington post , at-risk students need more help from us , not washington , august 29 , 2014 to the challenging life and socioeconomic factors that cause many students to drop out of high school . salon , paul ryan ’ s dropout delusion : here ’ s the real reason kids don ’ t graduate , may 21 , 2014 similar to the silent epidemic study , do n't call them dropouts focused heavily on youth perspective and analysis . “ rather than merely boredom or lack of motivation , young people who drop out are likely growing up in ‘ toxic environments ’ with unstable families , violent neighborhoods , and unsafe schools , ” an education week article said of the report . “ some students are caregivers for parents , siblings , or their own children . others are homeless or the victims of abuse . ” education week , report gives glimpse into why high school students do n't finish , may 20 , 2014 in 2015 , the center for promise moved from tufts university to the boston university school of education . that same fall , the center produced a follow-up study to do n't call them dropouts that examined the role that relationships with adults play in keeping students in school called do n't quit on me : what young people who left school say about the power of relationships . americaspromise.org , special report : do n't quit on me , september 6 , 2015 the center ’ s 2016 study , who 's minding the neighborhood ? the role of adult capacity in keeping young people on a path to graduation examined how adult-to-youth ratios in neighborhoods impact educational outcomes , the first study to do so . adding seven adults to a neighborhood , researchers concluded , results in one fewer student dropping out of high school . usa today , study : to raise graduation rates , increase number of adults in community , october 10 , 2016 also released in 2016 : barriers to wellness : voices and views from young people in five cities , a youth-led assessment that provides insight into the obstacles to wellness young people of color face in five cities . other initiatives . the youth opportunity fund . in 2015 , america ’ s promise partnered with the citi foundation to launch the youth opportunity fund , a 3 million initiative to support programs that prepare urban youth for the workforce . it awarded 250,00 grants to each of 12 organizations in 10 u.s . cities : boston , chicago , dallas , los angeles , miami , new york city , newark , st . louis , san francisco and washington , d.c . pr newswire , citi foundation and america 's promise alliance announce youth opportunity fund grant recipients in 10 u.s . cities , august 26 , 2015 the program announced a second round of funding in 2016 , providing an additional 3 million for 12 more organizations in the same cities , or a total of 6 million to support 24 organizations—including communities in schools , year up , café momentum , and per scholas—and reach more than 7,000 youth . pr newswire , citi foundation and america 's promise alliance announce 2016 youth opportunity fund grant recipients in 10 u.s . cities , august 4 , 2016 . promise of america awards . america ’ s promise recognizes people making extraordinary contributions to the lives of children and youth with the “ promise of america ” award , the highest honor conferred by america 's promise . pr newswire , america 's promise alliance hosts first annual promise night awards , april 15 , 2015 past recipients include u.s . senator lamar alexander , magic johnson enterprises ceo and founder and nba star magic johnson , and corporation for public broadcasting president and ceo patricia de stacey harrison .