Battle of Höchstädt (1800)

background . although the first coalition forces achieved several initial victories at verdun , kaiserslautern , neerwinden , mainz , amberg and würzburg , the efforts of napoleon bonaparte in northern italy pushed austrian forces back and resulted in the negotiation of the peace of leoben ( 17 & nbsp ; april 1797 ) and the subsequent treaty of campo formio ( october 1797 ) . timothy blanning , the french revolutionary wars , new york , oxford university press , pp . 41–59 . this treaty proved difficult to administer . austria was slow to give up some of the venetian territories . a congress convened at rastatt for the purposes of deciding which southwestern german states would be mediatised to compensate the dynastic houses for territorial losses , but was unable to make any progress . supported by french republican forces , swiss insurgents staged several uprisings , ultimately causing the overthrow of the swiss confederation after 18 & nbsp ; months of civil war . blanning , pp . 200–280 . by early 1799 , the french directory had become impatient with stalling tactics employed by austria . an uprising in naples raised further alarms , and recent gains in switzerland suggested the timing was fortuitous for the french to venture on another campaign in northern italy and southwestern germany . blanning , p . 200 . at the beginning of 1800 , the armies of france and austria faced each other across the rhine . feldzeugmeister pál kray led approximately 120,000 troops . in addition to his austrian regulars , his force included 12,000 men from the electorate of bavaria , 6,000 troops from the duchy of württemberg , 5,000 soldiers of low quality from the archbishopric of mainz , and 7,000 militiamen from the county of tyrol . of these , 25,000 men were deployed east of lake constance to protect the vorarlberg . kray posted his main body of 95,000 soldiers in the l-shaped angle where the rhine changes direction from a westward flow along the northern border of switzerland to a northward flow along the eastern border of france . unwisely , kray set up his main magazine at stockach , near the northwestern end of lake constance , only a day 's march from french-held switzerland . james r . arnold , marengo and hohenlinden : napoleon 's rise to power , pen & sword military , 2005 , pp . 197–199 . general of division jean victor marie moreau commanded a modestly-equipped army of 137,000 french troops . of these , 108,000 troops were available for field operations while the other 29,000 watched the swiss border and held the rhine fortresses . napoleon bonaparte offered a plan of operations based on outflanking the austrians by a push from switzerland , but moreau declined to follow it . rather , moreau planned to cross the rhine near basel where the river swung to the north . a french column would distract kray from moreau 's true intentions by crossing the rhine from the west . bonaparte wanted claude lecourbe 's corps to be detached to italy after the initial battles , but moreau had other plans . arnold , 199–201 through a series of complicated maneuvers in which he flanked , double flanked , and reflanked kray 's army , moreau 's forces lay on the eastern slope of the black forest , while portions of kray 's army was still guarding the passes on the other side . w.m . sloane , life of napoleon . france , 1896 , p . 109 . battle of stockach ( 1800 ) were fought on 3 may 1800 between the moreau 's and kray 's armies . the fighting near engen resulted in a stalemate with heavy losses on both sides . however , while the two main armies were engaged at engen , claude lecourbe captured stockach from its austrian defenders under the joseph , prince of lorraine-vaudemont . the loss of this main supply base at stockach compelled kray to retreat north to meßkirch , where his army enjoyed a more favorable defensive position . it also meant , however , that any retreat by kray into austria via switzerland and the vorarlberg was cut off . sloane , 109 on 4 and 5 may , the french launched repeated and fruitless assaults on the meßkirch . at nearby sauldorf , where the austrians also had the superiority of position and force , the 1st demi-brigade took the village and the heights around it , which gave them a commanding aspect over meßkirch . subsequently , kray withdrew his forces to sigmaringen , followed closely by the french . fighting at nearby biberach an der ris ensued on 9 may ; action principally consisted of the 25,000 man-strong french '' center '' , commanded by laurent de gouvion saint-cyr against a habsburg force of similar size . sloane , pp . 109–110 . again , on 10 may , the austrians withdrew with heavy losses , this time to ulm . digby smith , napoleonic wars databook . london : greenhill press , 1998 , p . 178 . . order of battle . french . sources are unclear which forces were present . certainly , it was approximately 40,000 troops , and possibly 60,000 , well above the 10,000–30,000 total austrian and württemberg numbers . contemporary accounts place the 94th demi-brigade at the center of action in gremheim , a village between höchstädt and donauwörth , about half a mile ( 800m ) from blindheim . history , p . 183 . this suggests the presence of general claude jacques lecourbe 's corps , including the forces of generals laval , molitor , jardon , and vandamme . smith , p . 177 . this is also confirmed in an extract of moreau 's dispatch to the french minister of war , published in the london chronicle , 10 june 1800 . '' the 6th chasseurs , 13th cavalry , 4th hussars and 11th chasseurs distinguished themselves in this affair . the rest of the division , and that of leclere , passed rapidly the danube . general grenier was equally well prepared . '' '' extract of a letter from gen . moreau to the minister of war , neresheim , june 20 . '' the london chronicle vol . 87 . , found in willem lodewyk , van-es , the life of napoleon buonaparte . : with a concise history of the events w . day , 1810 – france , pp . 31–35 . in his art of war , baron antoine-henri jomini also refers to general dedon-duclos as having a key role in the french success at höchstädt . baron antoine-henri jomini , the art of war , wilder publications , 2008 , p . 173 . originally published in english in 1862 . . austrian . the allied force included approximately 20,000 habsburg regulars and württemberg 's contingent of troops raised for the war : smith , 178 . fzm count anton sztáray , commanding fml von ferdinand august freiherr von hügel 's württemberg contingent , including general beulwitz , infantry regiment beulwitz , seckendorf and seeger ( 1 battalion each ) füss-jägers ( three companies ) ; garde du corps ( 1 squadron ) 3 squadrons of light horse contingent regiments commanded by von zobel , von mylius , and von oberniz ( 1 battalion each ) 20 guns austrian regulars royal regiment albert , number 3 ( 6 squadrons ) hohenzollern number 8 ( 6 squadrons ) hussar regiment vécsey number 4 ( 8 squadron ) blankenstein number 6 ( 8 squadron ) total austrian/württemberg force : 20,000 men . . dispositions . kray assumed that moreau would follow him to fortress at ulm , on the danube , where he arrayed most of the austrian regulars and württemberg contingent and supplies . this position gave him ready access to both shores of the river and effectively , he assumed , blocked moreau 's path into bavaria . at several points east on the danube , he posted modest forces to protect the river crossings there , and to dismantle , if necessary , the stone bridges across the river . several bridges crossed the river between ulm and donauwörth , which lay downstream to the east , and each presented a strategic point at which to rupture kray 's potential line of march into bavaria : leipheim , günzburg , gundelfingen , lauingen , dillingen , höchstädt , gremheim , and elchingen . extract of a letter from gen . moreau . according to moreau 's narrative , he intended to force kray to either come to battle outside ulm , or to abandon the city . ulm obstructed unfettered french access into bavaria , and blocked the main force of the army of the rhine . to keep his forces secure , accepted military wisdom required that moreau secure at least half of the crossings of the river , and that his troops follow a line of march perpendicular to the river . this would prevent them from having to fight a battle ( or a skirmish ) with their backs to the river . the more bridges his force could take , the more secure the approach on ulm . jomini , p . 173 . . general engagement . moreau appeared to march toward ulm , which lay some twenty miles east of sigmaringen and biberach an der ris , where his army and kray 's had engaged a few days earlier . instead of striking directly at the well-fortified and supplied city , however , his force suddenly veered to the east and struck at the smaller forces posted between ulm and donauwörth . david eggenberger , '' höchstädt ii '' , an encyclopedia of battles , dover publications , 2014 , p . 193 . lecourbe first secured posts in landsberg and augsburg , and left sufficient rearguard troops to protect himself from prince reuss-plauen , who remained in the tyrol guarding mountain access to vienna . he then approached dettingen , blindheim ( blenheim ) and höchstädt . the corps of general grenier has been posted with their right flank to the danube and gunzburg , and their left flank at kinsdorf . general richepanse protected both shores of the iller , covering the road from ulm south to memmingen , and secured communication with switzerland ; there , he withstood considerable skirmishing with the austrians . three divisions of reserve remained at the hamlets of kamlack and mindel , to support the attack made by general lecourbe on ulm , in a case it should succeed , or grenier 's attack upon gunzburg , in case lecourbe should not succeed . lecourbe made several feints on the bridge at dillingheim , but his reconnaissance suggested instead that he focus on the bridges at gremsheim , blindheim and höchstädt , which he did the next day . a small group of 80 or so men from the 94th demi-brigade managed a spectacular crossing of the river . after stripping their clothing and weapons , and loading them into a small raft , the naked men swam the river , pulling their weapons on rafts behind them . once reaching the other side , they took possession of several guns and some ammunition , wood , and materials . here they held their position until some artillery men managed to scramble across the wreck of the bridge at gremsheim and support them . the pioneers and bridge builders reconstructed the bridges under austrian fire , allowing the remainder of the 94th crossed the river . '' höchstädt '' , history of the wars of the french revolution : including sketches of the civil history of great britain and france , from the revolutionary movements , 1788 , to the restoration of a general peace , 1815 , kuhl , france , 1820 , p . 181 . this accomplishment seemed to mark the turning point of the action , at least it did to moreau , who mentioned it at length in his dispatch . a full austrian corps maintained a stand at höchstädt , but were dislodged by repeated attacks of carabiners , cuirassiers and hussars , who took about 2,000 of the austrians and würtembergers as prisoners , along with some cannons and standards . . aftermath . once the french had secured the downstream shores of the danube , kray had no choice but to evacuate his corps from ulm , leaving only a small garrison behind . the french invested the fortress at ulm immediately , and on the 20th , the 6th chasseurs captured a convoy of 300 wagons loaded with grain . a few days later , a general armistice halted all fighting . emperor francis ii dismissed pál kray and appointed his brother , the 18-year-old archduke john , to command the austrian army . to bolster the inexperienced archduke , the emperor named franz von lauer as deputy commander and oberst ( colonel ) franz von weyrother as chief of staff . arnold , pp . 205 , 213 . the campaign culminating in kray 's evacuation of ulm was one of moreau 's most resounding triumphs . napoleon bonaparte had given moreau specific instructions about the conduct of the campaign , all of which moreau had ignored . regardless , their combined efforts damaged habsburg military operations . in spring 1800 , while moreau wrecked austrian defenses in germany , massena and desaix ran into stiff austrian offensives in northern italy . napoleon brought in the reserve corps and defeated the austrians at marengo . the battle near höchstädt , five days after the austrian disaster at marengo , allowed the french to take munich . the combined efforts forced the habsburgs to accept an armistice ended hostilities for the rest of the summer , but the french extracted massive levies on the bavarians . despite these significant losses—both of them decisive—the austrians were reluctant to accept disadvantageous peace terms . in mid-november , the french ended the truce and moreau inflicted another significant and decisive defeat at hohenlinden on 3 december 1800 . gregory fremont barnes . napoleon bonaparte . osprey publishing , 2012 , p . 73 . the subsequent peace of lunéville stripped austria of much of her italian territories , obliged the habsburgs to recognize the french satellites in the low countries , switzerland , and northern italy , and laid the groundwork for the mediatization of the small independent ecclesiastical and secular imperial polities by the duchies of baden and württemberg , and the electorate of bavaria . rothenberg , pp . 43–44 . . see also . ulm campaign battle of blenheim also called second battle of höchstädt first battle of höchstädt . notes . sources . books and encyclopedia . arnold , james r . marengo & hohenlinden . barnsley , south yorkshire , uk : pen & sword , 2005 . barnes , gregory fremont . napoleon bonaparte . osprey publishing , 2012 . t . c . w . blanning . the french revolutionary wars , new york , oxford university press , 1996 . eggenberger , david . '' höchstädt ii '' , an encyclopedia of battles , dover publications , 2014 . herold , j . christopher . the age of napoleon . houghton mifflin company , 1963 . history of the wars of the french revolution : including sketches of the civil history of great britain and france , from the revolutionary movements , 1788 , to the restoration of a general peace , 1815 , kuhl , france , 1820 . antoine-henri jomini . the art of war , wilder publications , 2008 , p . & nbsp ; 173 . originally published in english in 1862 . gunther e . rothenberg . the art of warfare in the age of napoleon . indiana university press , 1980 . sloane , w.m . life of napoleon . france , 1896 ( reprint , 1910 ) , p . & nbsp ; 109 . digby smith . the napoleonic wars data book . london : greenhill , 1998 . van ess-lodewyk , willem . extract of a letter from gen . moreau to the minister of war , neresheim , june 20 . the london chronicle . w . day , 1810 .