Genesis Nomad

history . the sega genesis was sega 's entry into the 16-bit era of video game consoles . in japan , sega released the mega jet , a portable version of the mega drive for use on japan airlines flights . the mega jet requires a connection to a television screen and a power source , and so outside of airline flights can only be used in cars equipped with a television set and cigarette lighter receptacle . on planes , the mega jet was connected into armrest monitors . it had a limited consumer release in japanese department stores in 1994 , but did not see success . planning to release a new handheld console to succeed the game gear , sega originally intended to produce a system with a touchscreen interface two years before the game.com handheld by tiger electronics . however , touchscreen technology was expensive at the time , so sega instead released the genesis nomad , a handheld version of the genesis . the development codename was '' project venus '' . sega hoped to capitalize on the genesis 's popularity in north america . at the time , the genesis nomad was the only handheld console that could connect to a television . the nomad was released in october 1995 in north america only . the release was five years into the market span of the genesis , with an existing library of more than 500 genesis games . while sega technical institute 's the ooze was originally planned as a launch game , it was not included . according to former sega of america research and development head joe miller , the nomad was not intended to replace the game gear , and sega of japan had few plans for the new handheld . sega was supporting five different consoles : saturn , genesis , game gear , pico , and the master system , as well as the sega cd and 32x add-ons . in japan , the mega drive had never been successful and the saturn was more successful than sony 's playstation , so sega enterprises ceo hayao nakayama decided to focus on the saturn , resulting in the end of support for the genesis and genesis-based products . additionally , the game boy , nintendo 's handheld console that had been dominant in the market , became even more dominant with the release of pokémon red and blue . this meant the nomad was not successful . by 1999 , the nomad was being sold at less than a third of its original price . . technical specifications . similar to the genesis and the mega jet , the nomad 's main cpu is a motorola 68000 . possessing similar memory , graphics , and sound capabilities , the nomad is nearly identical to the full-size console ; the only variation is that it is completely self-sufficient . however , due to the smaller screen size it suffers from screen blurring , particularly during fast scrolling . the nomad has a 3.25 inch diagonal backlit color lc display and an a/v output that allows the nomad to be played on a television screen . design elements of the handheld were made similar to the game gear , but included six buttons for full compatibility with later genesis releases . also included were a red power switch , headphone jack , volume dial , and separate controller input for multiplayer games . the controller port functions as player 2 , so single-player games can not be played with a genesis controller . the nomad could be powered by an ac adapter , a battery recharger known as the genesis nomad powerback , or six aa battery , which provide a battery life of two to three hours . the nomad consumed more power ( dc 9v , 3.5w ) than sega 's earlier portable gaming console , the game gear ( dc 9v , 3w ) . the nomad is fully compatible with several genesis peripherals , including the sega activator , team play adaptor , mega mouse , and the sega channel and xband network add-ons . however , the nomad is not compatible with the power base converter , sega cd , or 32x . this means the nomad can only play genesis games , whereas the standard genesis can also play master system , sega cd , and 32x game with the respective add-ons . . game library . the nomad does not have its own game library , but instead plays genesis games . at the time of its launch , the nomad had over 500 games available for play . however , no pack-in game was included . the nomad can boot unlicensed , homebrew , and bootleg games made for the genesis . some earlier third-party games have compatibility issues when played on the nomad , but can be successfully played through the use of a game genie . likewise , due to its lack of compatibility with any of the genesis ' add-ons , it is unable to play any games for the sega master system , sega cd , or sega 32x . the nomad employs two different regional lockout methods , physical and software , but methods have been found to bypass these . . reception and legacy . reviewing the nomad shortly after launch , game players considered the price '' a bit steep '' , but said it was the best portable system on the market , and recommended it over the stock genesis since it could play all the same games in a portable format . in a 1997 year-end review , a team of four electronic gaming monthly editors gave the nomad scores of 8.0 , 6.5 , 7.0 , and 7.5 . they praised its support for the entire genesis library , but criticized its hefty battery usage and noted that despite a recent price drop , it was still expensive enough to discourage interested consumers . while they generally complimented the screen display , they remarked that its small size makes it difficult to play certain games . sushi-x declared the nomad the best portable gaming system then on the market , while his three co-reviewers had more misgivings , saying it has merits but might not be a worthwhile buy . blake snow of gamepro listed the nomad as fifth on his list of the '' 10 worst-selling handhelds of all time '' , criticizing its poor timing into the market , inadequate advertising , and poor battery life . scott alan marriott of allgame placed more than simply timing into reasons for the nomad 's lack of sales , stating , '' the reason for the nomad 's failure may have very well been a combination of poor timing , company mistrust and the relatively high cost of the machine ( without a pack-in ) . genesis owners were too skittish to invest in another 16-bit system . '' stuart hunt of retro gamer , however , praised the nomad , saying in a retrospective that nomad was '' the first true 16-bit handheld '' and declared it the best variant of the genesis . he noted the collectability of the nomad , due to its low production , and stated , '' had sega cottoned on to the concept of the nomad before the mega drive 2 , and rolled it out as a true successor to the mega drive . then perhaps sega may have succeeded in its original goal to prolong the life of the mega drive in the u.s . '' in 2017 a mod was developed to allow the nomad to charge power using usb devices . . see also . vmu comparison of handheld game consoles . references .