A Staircase in Surrey

the series . the books , in order of publication , are : the gaudy ( 1974 ) young patullo ( 1975 ) a memorial service ( 1976 ) the madonna of the astrolabe ( 1977 ) full term ( 1978 ) . plot . the narrator and central character is playwright duncan patullo , son of lachlan patullo , a noted scottish artist specializing in landscapes but occasionally painting portraits . he is educated in edinburgh , at a school clearly intended to recall fettes , and then at the unnamed college in oxford ( of which surrey is one of the quadrangles ) as the john ruskin scholar . in the first novel of the sequence , the gaudy , patullo returns to his oxford college , after a long absence ( and a successful career as a playwright , including extended residence abroad ) , and encounters a number of old friends , including albert talbert , his former tutor in english literature ; lord marchpayne , formerly tony mumford ( an undergraduate contemporary who lived in the set of rooms opposite his ) ; fellow scot and schoolmate ranald mckechnie , now regius professor of greek at the college ( mckechnie 's wife , janet , is duncan 's first love ) ; cyril bedworth ( now the college 's senior tutor but formerly an undergraduate friend who lived at the top of patullo 's staircase ) ; and robert damien ( college doctor , but also a contemporary of patullo 's who embarrassed him by replacing the sketch for a famous painting that he owned with a bawdy picture of mumford 's at exactly the point when the great and the good had assembled to view it ) . the second novel , young patullo , tells the story of their former relationships and patullo 's undergraduate career . in a memorial service patullo is instrumental in resolving the crisis caused by the academic insufficiency and aggressively anti-institutional behaviour of ivo mumford , his friend tony 's son , and begins a tentative involvement with his cousin fiona petrie , a don at one of the women 's colleges , as well as rekindling a friendship with janet mckechnie . the title refers obliquely to the character of paul lusby , who committed suicide in the first novel as a result of a foolish wager proposed by ivo mumford , and whose brother peter is seeking admission to the college , partly in memory of his brother . in the madonna of the astrolabe patullo has to cope with his ex-wife and her sexual designs on current undergraduates , the undergraduates ' production of tamburlaine , and the problems of raising enough money for the urgently needed restoration of the crumbling great tower ( modelled on tom tower ) . the discovery of a lost masterpiece by piero della francesca proves crucial to the college 's future fortunes , and patullo is able to help when it is stolen . full term takes up patullo 's emotional conflicts but focuses on the scandalous , and apparently treasonous , behaviour of the college 's physics tutor , william watershute , which are dramatically resolved at the end . background . the college , which is not named in the novels , is very clearly based on one of stewart 's own colleges , christ church , where he was student ( i.e . fellow and tutor ) from 1949 until 1973 , and university reader in english . surrey is modelled on peckwater quadrangle , which houses the college library as the novels suggest , but does not have a statue of a former head of house ( in the middle of surrey there is a statue of provost harbage ) . the character of the provost ( head of the college ) is based on that of henry chadwick , dean of christ church , oxford during stewart 's own time there . rowan williams , obituary—henry chadwick—he was a leading anglican scholar and strove for ecumenicalism , the guardian ' , 19 june 2008 . retrieved 2008-06-26 . his name is taken from that of edward pococke ( 1604-91 ) , seventeenth century regius professor of hebrew ( 1648-91 ) , after whom the pococke tree ( the inspiration for lewis carroll 's jabberwocky ) and the pococke garden in christ church are named . fantasy writer and oxford don j . r . r . tolkien appears ( or is remembered ) as the elderly '' professor j . b . timbermill '' in all the novels . the character of arnold lempriere , an ancient and semi-retired history don at the college , is based on the eccentric christ church censor r . h . dundas . tony mumford 's title '' marchpayne '' is obviously both a nod to the marquess of marchmain , a character in evelyn waugh 's brideshead revisited ( another novel partly set in christ church , oxford ) , but also a joke on '' marchpane '' , an old name for marzipan . stewart makes an oblique reference to himself in full term : 'the other new fellow , bald and abraded , was understood to have escaped in middle age from some professorial assignment in the antipodes ' ( p . 37 ) – stewart had been jury professor of english at the university of adelaide before obtaining his post in christ church . evaluation . stewart 's sequence of novels is much appreciated for his learned allusiveness and the sheer polish of his narrative style , for his command of irony , and for his remarkable gift for accompanying dialogue with an acute psychological commentary on the contextual motivation for what is said . the quintet is unashamedly nostalgic for an era of oxford manners that was in the 1970s waning if not already gone , and this has put some readers off ( whilst probably attracting others ) . he reproduces authentic views held by the community he evokes about society , sex , politics , race and education that are by no means widely held nowadays . few readers will now acquiesce in many of the assumptions made or implied in these areas by the characters or even the narrator . stewart narrates a world in which privilege and snobbery are normal ; he critiques this , but he does not transcend it . in the story about ivo mumford 's parachuting out of a rape charge a modern reader will surely regret any meaningful reflection on the situation of the victim . the sense that '' boys will be boys '' abounds in these novels , and there is a simplistic acceptance ( on a narrative level ) of the normality of class distinction and the way this impacts upon educational opportunity and success . nevertheless , there is much sensitivity shown towards students who encounter problems . the novels are valuable above all for their insight into the social and intellectual dynamics of academic communities . in this respect stewart is much more insightful than c.p . snow , some of whose '' strangers and brothers '' novels from a previous era focus on similar bodies of people , and he is no less successful in plot-construction than his cambridge counterpart . references .