Roger Mellie

background . vizs founder and main contributor chris donald has said that the character of roger mellie was inspired by the off-screen behaviour of rod griffith , a 1980s tyne tees television presenter but that mellie is nothing like griffith and other presenters have been worked into the character , including look north presenter mike neville . one issue gave roger 's name as '' roger michael neville mellie '' . an animated tv series was released on vhs and also broadcast on channel 4 in 1991 , with peter cook providing the voice of roger , and harry enfield doing all of the other voices . roger also appeared in the 1991 viz : the game as the commentator for all the races . it was said on a few occasions that roger drove a suzuki swift 1.3gti . fictional biography . born roger edward paul mellie in 1937 in north shields , roger was educated at fulchester mixed infants , bartlepool grammar school , and the oxford remand centre . he began his broadcasting career as a cub reporter on the news with robert dougall and shot to fame doing genital mutilation routines at the london palladium . recruited by fulchester television he became a popular tv personality and established his own production company , mellievision . he often stays at his favourite lap dance club until gone three in the morning but lives in fulchester with his 17-year-old thai wife and 15 staffordshire bull terriers . he has had five previous wives ( two 'accidentally ' murdered ) and is a convicted rapist , undischarged bankrupt , a hopeless alcoholic , extremely sexist , very right-wing , a bigot and a recovering cocaine addict . roger 's double act is tom , in early strips , a director or producer , later a portmanteau figure , an agent for roger or a television executive , to suit the script . in one issue , he has a sign reading 'tom - straight man ' . one of roger 's defining features is that he will always arrive very late , regardless of if its to a job or simply a meeting despite tom making desperate attempts to make sure he understands the importance of being on time ( leading to tom 's catchphrase of 'where the hell is roger ? ' ) . roger usually arrives announcing 'sorry i 'm late , tom ' . in one strip , tom imagines roger has arrived on time only to discover that it is a life-size cardboard cut-out . roger and tom have crossed over into the billy the fish strip occasionally before realising they are in the wrong page . they are used in other viz strips when a reporter or narrator is needed and on these occasions roger is generally ( although not always ) without his usual lecherous and/or violent behaviour . on one occasion in 2006 , while requiring a liver transplant ( due to chronic alcoholism ) , roger became a hit-and-run driver : he ran over and killed a motorcyclist without stopping , later receiving the dead man 's liver for himself , then celebrating the successful liver transplant with a booze-up at the nearest pub . sometimes the strip follows current or recent events : in a parody of the kidnapping of alan johnston , roger is kidnapped in beirut but after eight days it turns out to be an attempt to seek publicity . tom discovers that the bbc is in on the deception and reluctantly takes part by being a fake phone-in contestant on bbc radio 4 . in 2011 ( due to recent news stories revolving around celebrities taking out super injunctions in an attempt to protect themselves from scandal ) , roger goes to his crooked solicitor attempting to silence his ex-wife from releasing a book about their violent marriage which also details roger 's 'questionable ' hobbies . however it emerges he is n't trying to quiet his wife to protect himself , but is actually releasing this information himself in a new autobiography and he does n't want her to cash in before him . in 2015 , following the high amount of media attention following jeremy clarkson punching a producer ( memorably referred to as a 'fracas ' ) , the strip showed roger entering his office just before he is due to renegotiate his contract to present roger mellie 's skidmarks and punching tom in the face . as tom attempts to recover , roger organizes the ensuing scandal and his recovery to ensure a lucrative contract . when meeting the director general of ftv in the cafeteria , roger turns up drunk and is delighted to be told his show is being recommissioned for five years alongside a huge salary increase . however roger then is told there is no hot food available ( another reference to the incident with clarkson ) , causing him to fly into a rage and then punch the director general too . in another strip , roger finally finds mainstream success by presenting bargain hunt only to have it ruined when a michael barrymore . however , despite whatever misfortunes and/or scandals might befall him , roger never learns his lesson and his tv career always remains intact . roger has also appeared in several other parodies of real tv shows , including a stint as presenter of springwatch whilst bill oddie was in hospital ( roger had accidentally shot him ) . roger 's version of the show consisted of him launching live rabbits from a catapult for jack charlton and ted nugent to shoot . usually roger has little success hosting mainstream shows but often suggests pornographic reworkings of well-known shows which against all odds prove a success . . selected tv shows . ( note that the links direct to the genuine show on which roger 's version was based . ) bargain hunt blind shag blue peter blankety blank pimp my ride call my muff challenge roger the crystal maze cuntdown the cook report celebrity bumhole whose line is it now ? marbles up their arseholes farting about with mellie celebrity shit in a bucket teletubbies look north fuck a duck blowing the lid off britain 's brothels who wants to be a millionaire ? derren brown russian roulette 'roger ' , daytime show jackass uk the naked chef panorama who do you think you are ? celebrity genital mutilation the girls next door the news in black and white roger 's big-game show dirtbox jury britain 's got piles jim 'll fix it roger mellie 's skidmarks . tv series . the 1991 animated tv series had 4 episodes . episode 1 , celebrity bumhole : roger has been asked by the bbc to present the antiques roadshow , but arrives late as he claimed that there is some sort of 'fucking jumble sale ' outside : tom tells him that its part of the programme . after being introduced to the antiques expert , they look at a vase , but roger breaks one of its handles off . then , they look at an old wooden chair which roger sits on and breaks to pieces due to his weight . next , he is in the office with the boss who gives him one more chance to change his behavior . the next day , at ftv studios , roger presents a kids ' tv show called blue roger ( a parody of blue peter ) along with a ginger-haired kid . they have a look at some puppies and roger exclaims that one of them has a 'little penis ! ' tom then asks roger to go to the producer 's office , where he is fired . at the bar , roger has an idea for a game show and the head of bbc1 's early evening programmes hires him for £500,000 a year . the next day , he presents blinkety blank ( a parody of blankety blank ) but this ends after he punches one of the contestants ( paul daniels ) . later at the bar , roger tells tom that he is writing an autobiography called they do n't call me roger for nothing , but is told that he can not publish it because it is disgusting , although someone from the news of the world says that they will publish his book in their newspaper and pay him £50,000 . he then tells roger that they have job vacancies for tv presenters on sky tv . episode 2 , celebrity golf : on sunday morning , tom phones roger from the golf club to remind him about participating in ftv 's first annual celebrity golf tournament . roger tells him he will be there in 20 minutes , but he finally arrives in a golf cart two hours later . tom tells him that it is for charity and that they are 4 hours behind schedule . tom introduces roger to jimmy tarbuck and bruce forsyth , and roger tries to dodge off to the clubhouse for a drink to avoid playing golf for nothing . during the game , roger tries to tell tarbuck a rude joke , but tom reassures him that it is a family show . then roger breaks one of brucie 's drivers while taking his shot . while brucie takes his shot , roger is trying to find his 'bastard ball ! ' and when brucie 's ball lands in a bunker , he finds roger 'having a dump ' on it . eventually , on the green , brucie and tarbuck have putted and after roger is finished , he goes off to the clubhouse for a drink , but tom tells him that it was only the first hole and there is still another 17 to go . however , roger carries on regardless as he can not be bothered to play anymore . they have to carry on without him and 17 holes later , the winner is brucie . a very drunk roger congratulates brucie for winning the tournament and vomits on him . episode 3 , challenge roger : roger ( who is between jobs ) is at home watching the tv when challenge anneka comes on ; this gives him an idea to make his own version of the programme , called challenge roger . the next day , in his office , he tells tom about his show which is for charity . roger gets a tracksuit , camera , mobile phone and an old yellow van with challenge roger in red lettering . the plan is to build a swimming pool in just 24 hours ( for the orphaned kids and old folks ) at roger 's house . roger tries to phone a builder using his mobile phone which goes on the blink , and they have to find a phone box . on the way , they stop at an off-licence in an attempt to get some free lager and cigarettes , but the salesman says that he can only sell them and roger insults him in front of the camera . eventually , they finally find a phone box and when they finally get an irish builder called mr . murphy to do the job , they only have 18 hours left to build the pool . as the builder starts the job , roger and tom head down to the pub for a few drinks and after telling the barman that he will mention his pub on the telly , he gives them the drinks free of charge . when they return , the builder is finished with about a minute to spare . after thanking him for the job , roger says that they will flog the programme to the bbc and keep the money for themselves . episode 4 , the crook report : one morning , at ftv , challenge roger has been such a success and roger is asked to present the crook report ( a parody of the cook report ) after roger cook gets beaten up , but before rushing into it , tom tells him to be calm , sympathetic and tactful at all times . soon in tom 's car , they arrive in a poor area to investigate the slumlord who owns a block of flats . in one flat lives mrs parker . she is 84 and lives alone . she is very frightened because the landlord has been trying to evict her . roger tries to interview mrs parker but she wants him to go away . however , roger breaks the door down and scares her to death . next , they have a word with the landlord , mr mckenzie . roger tries to refresh his memory about the tenants but is told to talk to his solicitor . then , the police arrive but they arrest roger instead of mr mckenzie . the next day , in tom 's office , roger is fined £250 by the police but tom tells him to forget it . kenneth spanner has had to drop out of whose line is it now ? ( a parody of whose line is it anyway ? ) to undergo a heart bypass operation , and roger is asked to replace him . then , on the show , roger wants to see the script but tom tells him that there is no script as it is spontaneous improvisation . roger gets annoyed with the contestant beside him ( a parody of whose line panelist john sessions ) , and after being asked by clive anderson to do a poem about changing a light bulb , he does it in the style of muhammad ali . however , this ends with him punching the contestant beside him and calling him a '' scottish twat ! '' . references . external links . roger 's profanisaurus online at vizs website flash scan of strip from viz website : roger mellie : the man on the telly