Collusion

definition . in the study of economics and market competition , collusion takes place within an industry when rival companies cooperate for their mutual benefit . collusion often takes place within an oligopoly market structure , where there are few firms and agreements have significant impacts on the entire market or industry . to differentiate from a cartel , collusive agreements between parties may not be explicit ; however , the implications of cartels and collusion are the same . collusion which is covert is known as tacit collusion , and is considered legal . adam smith in the wealth of nations explains that since the masters ( business owners ) are fewer in numbers , it is easier to collude to serve common interests among those involved , such as maintaining low wages , whilst it is difficult for the labour to coordinate to protect their own interests due to their vast numbers . hence , business owners have a bigger advantage over the working class . nevertheless , according to adam smith , the public rarely hear about coordination and collaborations that occur between business owners as it takes place under informal settings . . variations . according to neoclassical economics and game theory , the independence of suppliers forces prices to their minimum , increasing efficiency and decreasing the price-determining ability of each individual firm . however if all firms collude to increase prices , loss of sales will be minimized , as consumers lack alternative choices at lower prices and must decide between what is available . this benefits the colluding firms , as they generate more sales , at the cost of efficiency to society . one variation of this traditional theory is the theory of kinked demand . firms face a kinked demand curve if , when one firm decreases its price , other firms are expected to follow suit in order to maintain sales . when one firm increases its price , its rivals are unlikely to follow , as they would lose the sales ' gains that they would otherwise receive by holding prices at the previous level . kinked demand potentially fosters supra-competitive prices because any one firm would receive a reduced benefit from cutting price , as opposed to the benefits accruing under neoclassical theory and certain game-theoretic models such as bertrand competition . collusion may also occur in auction markets , where independent firms coordinate their bids ( bid rigging ) . . antecedents . scholars in economics and management have tried to identify factors explaining why some firms are more or less likely to be involved in collusion . some have noted the role of the regulatory environment and the existence of leniency programs . others , drawing upon the literature in criminology and misconduct , have suggested that firms conduct a costs/benefits analysis to assess their participation in collusion . . indicators . practices that suggest possible collusion may include one or more actions such as : price fixing and setting of an unjustified high or an unjustified low price kickbacks and blanket referral agreements between competing businesses dividing territories and market allocation tying ( commerce ) and anticompetitive product bundling ( although , not all product bundling is anticompetitive ) refusal to deal and exclusive dealing dumping ( pricing policy ) vertical restraints horizontal territorial allocation bid rigging . examples . collusion is illegal in the united states , canada and most of the eu due to antitrust laws , but implicit collusion in the form of price leadership and tacit understandings still takes place . several examples of collusion in the united states include : market division and price-fixing among manufacturers of heavy electrical equipment in the 1960s , including general electric . an attempt by major league baseball owners to baseball collusion in the mid-1980s . the sharing of potential contract terms by nba free agents in an effort to help a targeted franchise circumvent the salary cap . price fixing within food manufacturers providing cafeteria food to schools and the military in 1993 . market division and output determination of livestock feed additive , called lysine , by companies in the us , japan and south korea in 1996 , archer daniels midland being the most notable of these . hunter-gault , charlayne ( october 15 , 1996 ) . '' adm : who 's next ? '' . macneil/lehrer newshour ( pbs ) . retrieved on 2007-10-17 . chip dumping in poker t . hayes , '' collusion strategy and analysis for texas hold'em '' , 2017 or any other card game played for money . ben & jerry 's and häagen-dazs collusion of products in 2013 : ben and jerry 's makes chunkier flavors with more treats in them , while häagen-dazs sticks to smoother flavors . sullivan , christopher john . three essays on product collusion . diss . university of michigan , 2016 . the google and apple against employee poaching collusion case in 2015 , in which it was revealed that both companies agreed not to hire employees from one another in order to halt the rise of wages . in the eu : the illegal collusion between the giant german automakers bmw , daimler and volkswagen , discovered by the european commission in 2019 , to hinder technological progress in improving the quality of vehicle emissions in order to reduce the cost of production and maximize profits . there are many ways that implicit collusion tends to develop : the practice of stock analyst conference calls and meetings of industry participants almost necessarily results in tremendous amounts of strategic and price transparency . this allows each firm to see how and why every other firm is pricing their products . if the practice of the industry causes more complicated pricing , which is hard for the consumer to understand ( such as risk-based pricing , hidden taxes and fees in the wireless industry , negotiable pricing ) , this can cause competition based on price to be meaningless ( because it would be too complicated to explain to the customer in a short advertisement ) . this causes industries to have essentially the same prices and compete on advertising and image , something theoretically as damaging to consumers as normal price fixing . barriers . there can be significant barriers to collusion . in any given industry , these may include : the number of firms : as the number of firms in an industry increases , it is more difficult to successfully organize , collude and communicate . cost and demand differences between firms : if costs vary significantly between firms , it may be impossible to establish a price at which to fix output . cheating : there is considerable incentive to cheat on collusion agreements ; although lowering prices might trigger price wars , in the short term the defecting firm may gain considerably . this phenomenon is frequently referred to as '' chiseling '' . potential entry : new firms may enter the industry , establishing a new baseline price and eliminating collusion ( though anti-dumping laws and tariffs can prevent foreign companies entering the market ) . economic recession : an increase in average total cost or a decrease in revenue provides incentive to compete with rival firms in order to secure a larger market share and increased demand . anti-collusion legal framework and collusive lawsuit .