Fret

explanation . pressing the string against the fret reduces the vibrating length of the string to that between the bridge and the next fret between the fretting finger and the bridge . this is damped if the string were stopped with the soft fingertip on a fretless fingerboard . frets make it much easier for a player to achieve an acceptable standard of intonation , since the frets determine the positions for the correct notes . furthermore , a fretted fingerboard makes it easier to play chords accurately . a disadvantage of frets is that they restrict pitches to the temperament defined by the fret positions . a player may still influence intonation , however , by pulling the string to the side to increase string tension and raise the pitch . this technique ( commonly called 'bending ' ) is often used by electric guitarists of all genres , and is an important part of sitar playing . on instruments with frets that are thicker off the fingerboard , string tension and pitch vary with finger pressure behind the fret . sometimes a player can pull the string toward the bridge or nut , thus lowering or raising the string tension and pitch . however , except for instruments that accommodate extensive string pulling , like the sitar , much less influence on intonation is possible than on unfretted instruments . since the intonation of most modern western fretted instruments is equal tempered , the ratio of the distances of two consecutive frets to the bridge is \sqrt12 ( the twelfth root of two ) , or approximately 1.059463 . theoretically , the twelfth fret should divide the string in two exact halves . to compensate for the increase in string tension when the string is pressed against the frets , the bridge position is adjusted slightly so the 12th fret plays exactly in tune . image : saz frets.jpg thumb right frets tied on to the neck of a saz ; note microtone frets between semitones . many instruments ' frets are not spaced according to the semitones of equal temperament , including the appalachian dulcimer ( with frets in a diatonic scale ) , the turkish saz ( with frets spaced according to the makam system of turkish folk music ) , the arabic buzuq ( with frets spaced according to the arabic maqam system ) , and the persian setar and tar ( with frets spaced according to the persian dastgah system ) , and the turkish tanbur ( with as many as 5 frets per semitone , to cover all of the commas of the turkish makam system ) . variations . fan frets ( also fanned frets , slanted frets ) , or multi-scale : while frets are generally perpendicular to the instrument 's neck centerline and parallel to each other , on a '' fanned '' fretboard , the frets are angled ( spread like a fan ) with only one center fret perpendicular to the neck ’ s centerline . this gives the lower-pitched strings more length and the higher strings shorter length ( comparable to a piano or a harp where heavier strings have different lengths ) . the idea is to give more accurate tuning and deeper bass . some think that fanned frets might be more ergonomic . fanned frets first appeared on the 16th century orpharion , a variant of the cittern , tuned like a lute . john starrett revived the idea in the late seventies on his innovative instrument , the starrboard . rickenbacker employed a slanted fret , but it was not multi scale , or fanned . novax guitars among others offers such guitars today . the appearance of angled frets on these modern instruments belies the antiquity of this technique . scalloped fretboard : scalloping involves removing some of the wood between some or all of the fret . this is intended to allow a lighter touch for more precise fingering , while easing bends or vibratos ( since there 's no contact between the fingertips and the wooden surface of the fingerboard ) . it has some popularity with musicians playing heavy metal music , although the concept can also be seen in ancient instruments such as the sitar . scalloped fretboards have not found widespread popularity because tonally accurate play requires a much lighter fretting hand than most guitarists can achieve , and often significantly heavier strings as well . fat frets : on older guitars ( especially the fender stratocaster ) , frets were typically made out of thin wire , and some electric guitar players replaced that with thicker wire , for '' fat frets '' or '' jumbo frets '' . fat frets make bending easier , and they change the feel of the guitar . as well , large frets , offering more metal , remain playable much longer than thin frets . a side effect of a thicker fret is a less precise note , since the string is held over a wider surface , causing a slight inaccuracy of pitch , which increases in significance as frets wear . . semi-fretted instruments . it is also possible to find semi-fretted instruments ; examples include the malagasy kabosy and the afghan rubab . semi-fretted versions of guitars and other fretted string instruments , however , are usually one-off , custom adaptations made for players who want to combine elements of both types of sound . one arrangement is for the frets to extend only part of the way along the neck so that the higher notes can be played with the smooth expression possible with a fretless fingerboard . another approach is the use of frets that extend only partway across the fretboard so that some courses of strings are fretted and others fretless , for example ryszard latecki 's latar . fret intonation . instruments with straight frets like guitars require a special compensation on the saddle and nut . every time a string is fretted it is also stretched , and as it stretches the string rises in pitch , making all fretted tones sound sharp . when the saddle is positioned properly , however , the fretted tones all sound sharp to the same degree as long as the distances between the frets are correct . with the right nut compensation , the pitch of the unfretted string can be raised by the same amount . as a result , when the tension of the strings is lowered , the pitches of all notes , both fretted and unfretted , becomes correct . fret wear . on instruments equipped with steel strings , such as folk guitars and electric guitars , frets are eventually bound to wear down as the strings cut grooves into them . when this happens , the instrument may need refretting ( the frets are removed and replaced ) or , in less severe cases , '' fret dressing '' ( the frets are leveled , polished , and possibly recrowned ) . often , a few fret dressings can be performed on a guitar before it requires complete refretting . tied gut frets , used on instruments such as the lute or viol , wear quickly , and must be replaced regularly . fret buzz . fret buzz is one of the many undesirable phenomena that can occur on a guitar or similar stringed instrument . fret buzz occurs when the vibrating part of one or more strings physically strikes the frets that are higher than the fretted note ( or open note ) . this causes a '' buzzing '' sound on the guitar that can range from a small annoyance , to severe enough to dampen the note and greatly reduce sustain . sometimes , fret buzz can be so minimal that there is only a small change in the tone ( timbre ) of the note , without any noticeable buzzing . fret buzz can be caused by different things : low action improperly installed frets strings too loose improper relief of guitar neck fret buzz is evident in some famous recordings ; an example is '' friends '' by led zeppelin ( although this example is undoubtedly caused by alternate open tunings that reduce string tension ) . in some songs , such as '' my last serenade '' by killswitch engage , the guitars are tuned to dropped c and the low tension of the strings is used to create fret buzz by the bass player in order to create a dirty sound . see also . open chord . references . external links . konrad schwingenstein : intonation of stringed instruments with straight frets , calculating fret positions – an article on calculating fret positions for any equal tempered instrument on the liutaio mottola lutherie information website . how to replace frets – photo story installing the frets in a fretted stringed musical instrument an article on fret installation for a new instrument on the liutaio mottola lutherie information website . dressing the frets in a fretted stringed musical instrument an article on fret dressing on the liutaio mottola lutherie information website . fix guitar string buzz article about guitar string buzz problems and fixes on the guitar repair bench website . re-fret bound and unbound fretboards article about removing , installing , leveling , crowning , and dressing guitar frets on the guitar repair bench website .