Manos Hatzidakis

biography . manos hatzidakis was born on 23 october 1925 in xanthi , greece to lawyer georgios hatzidakis , who came from the village of mirthios , agios vasileios in the rethymno prefecture in crete ; and aliki arvanitidou , who came from edirne . his musical education began at the age of four and consisted of piano lessons from the armenian pianist altunian . at the same time , he learned to play the violin and the accordion . after the separation of his parents , hatzidakis moved permanently to athens in 1932 with his mother . a few years later in 1938 , his father died in an aircraft accident . this event , in combination with the beginning of world war ii , brought the family into a difficult financial situation . the young hatzidakis earned his livelihood as a docker at the port , an ice seller at the fix factory , an employee in megalokonomou 's photography shop and as an assistant nurse at the 401 military hospital . at the same time , he expanded his musical knowledge by studying advanced music theory with menelaos pallandios , in the period 1940-1943 . at the same time , he studied philosophy at the university of athens . however , he never completed this course . during this period , he met and connected with other musicians , writers and intellectuals . among these were nikos gatsos , george seferis , odysseas elytis , angelos sikelianos and the artist yannis tsarouchis . during the last period of the axis occupation of greece , he was an active participant in the greek resistance through membership of the united panhellenic organization of youth ( epon ) , the youth branch of the major resistance organisation eam , where he met mikis theodorakis with whom he soon developed a strong friendship . he had made a statement against the entrance of greece in european union in the late years of his life he disclaimed his work that was written of the greek cinema . career . his very first work was the tune for the song '' paper moon '' ( '' χάρτινο το φεγγαράκι '' ) , from tennessee williams ' a streetcar named desire staged by karolos koun 's art theatre of athens , a collaboration which continued for 15 years . his first piano piece , '' for a little white seashell '' ( '' για μια μικρή λευκή αχιβάδα '' ) , came out in 1947 and in 1948 he shook the musical establishment by delivering his legendary lecture on rembetika , the urban folk songs that flourished in greek cities , mainly piraeus , after the asia minor refugee influx in 1922 and until then had heavy underworld and cannabis use connections and were consequently looked down upon . hatzidakis focused on the economy of expression , the deep traditional roots and the genuineness of emotion displayed in rembetika , and exalted the likes of composers like markos vamvakaris and vassilis tsitsanis . putting theory to practice , he adapted classic rembetika in his 1951 piano work , six popular pictures ( έξι λαϊκές ζωγραφιές ) , which was later also presented as a folk ballet . in 1949 he co-founded the greek dance theatre company with the choreographer rallou manou . hatzidakis 's biodata at this point he began writing immensely popular '' pop '' songs and movie soundtracks alongside more serious works , such as 1954 's the c.n.s . cycle ( o kyklos tou c.n.s . ) , a song cycle for piano and voice recalling the german lied in its form , if not in style . in 1955 he wrote the score for michael cacoyannis ' film stella , with actress melina mercouri , singing the movie 's trademark song '' love that became a double-edged knife '' ( '' αγάπη που 'γινες δίκοπο μαχαίρι '' ) . hatzidakis always maintained that he wrote his serious pieces for himself and his less serious ones to make a living . in 1958 , hatzidakis met nana mouskouri , his first '' ideal interpreter '' , a skilled vocalist who shaped the sounds of his music . it was 1960 that brought him international success , as his song '' never on sunday '' ( '' τα παιδιά του πειραιά '' ) , from jules dassin 's film never on sunday ( ποτέ την κυριακή ) , won him an academy award and became a worldwide hit . in 1962 , he produced the musical street of dreams ( οδός ονείρων ) and completed his score for aristophanes ' birds ( όρνιθες ) , another art theater production which caused an uproar over karolos koun 's revolutionary direction . the score was also used later by maurice béjart 's ballet of the 20th century . he also wrote the music for a song which arthur altman added english lyrics to and gave to brenda lee . the song was '' all alone am i '' . in 1964 he released the album 15 vespers ( δεκαπέντε εσπερινοί ) with the famous song '' mr antonis ( '' ο κυρ αντώνης '' ) . in 1965 , his lp gioconda 's smile ( το χαμόγελο της τζιοκόντας ) was released on minos-emi . in 2004 , it was re-released , digitally remastered as an audiophile lp and a cd in the emi classics collection . in 1966 he travelled to new york city for the premiere of illya darling , a broadway musical based on never on sunday , which starred mercouri . he did not return to greece until 1972 due to his opposition to greece 's military dictatorship . in exile . while in the united states he completed several more major compositions , including rhythmology ( rythmologia ) for solo piano , his compilation , gioconda 's smile ( produced by quincy jones ) , and the song cycle , magnus eroticus ( megalos erotikos ) , in which he used ancient ( sappho , euripides ) , medieval ( stanzas from folk songs and george hortatzis ' romance erophile ) and modern ( dionysios solomos , constantine cavafy , odysseus elytis , nikos gatsos ) greek poems , as well as an excerpt from the old testament book '' song of songs '' . his lp reflections with the new york rock & roll ensemble contained several of his most beautiful songs , either in orchestral form or with english lyrics written by the band – a record that preceded fusion trends by several decades . later years . hatzidakis returned to greece in 1972 and recorded magnus eroticus with opera-trained alto fleury dantonaki and singer dimitris psarianos . following the junta 's overthrow , he became active in public life and assumed a number of positions in the athens state orchestra ( koa ) , the national opera ( els ) , and the national radio ( ert ) . in 1985 he launched his own record company '' seirios '' ( sirius ) . in 1988 he helped foivos delivorias get started in his singing career . in 1989 he founded and directed the orchestra of colours ( orchestra ton chromaton ) , a small symphonic orchestra . death . he died on 15 june 1994 in athens at the age of 68 , from acute pulmonary edema . in 1999 the city of athens dedicated technopolis in his memory . he was buried in paiania . musical scores . adoulotoi sklavoi - unsubdued slaves – us title ( 1946 ) kokkinos vrahos ( 1949 ) dyo kosmi – the two worlds ( 1949 ) nekri politeia – dead city – us title ( 1951 ) o grousouzis – the grouch – us title ( 1952 ) agni tou limaniou - lily of the harbour – us title ( 1952 ) stella - στέλλα ( 1955 ) the counterfeit coin - η κάλπικη λίρα ( 1955 ) o drakos – the ogre of athens – us title ( 1956 ) one street organ , one life ( 1958 ) never on sunday ( ποτέ την κυριακή ) ( 1960 ) woe to the young ( 1961 ) it happened in athens ( 1962 ) the 300 spartans ( 1962 ) america america ( 1963 ) topkapi ( 1964 ) gioconda 's smile ( το χαμόγελο της τζοκόντας ) ( 1965 ) illya darling ( 1967 ) – broadway theatre blue ( 1968 ) reflections ( 1969 ) – performed by the new york rock & roll ensemble the invincible six ( 1970 ) the pedestrian ( 1973 ) sweet movie ( 1974 ) faccia di spia ( 1975 ) memed , my hawk ( 1984 ) reflections ( 2005 ) – performed by raining pleasure . special appearance by meriam performing the song '' kemal '' amorgos ( 2006 ) six popular pictures op.5 -ballet for piano based on greek popular melodies for a little white seashell op.1- preludes and dances for the piano ( 1948 ) . references . . external links . imdb page official website