Bernardus Silvestris

biography . little is known about bernardus 's life . in the nineteenth century , it was assumed that bernardus was the same person as bernard of chartres , but scholarly consensus now agrees that the two were different people . kauntze , mark , authority and imitation : a study of the 'cosmographia ' of bernardus silvestris , mittellateinische studien und texte , 47 ( leiden : brill , 2014 ) , p . 13 . for example , a contemporary of bernardus , john of salisbury , who was bishop of chartres , quotes from works attributed to bernardus but does not know the author by name . he also quotes from bernard of chartres and knows him as a separate author . there is little evidence connecting bernardus to chartres , yet his work is consistent with the scholarship associated with chartres in the twelfth century and is in that sense '' chartrian '' . kauntze , pp.15–16 . bernardus dedicated his cosmographia to thierry of chartres , who became chancellor of chartres in 1141 ; he most likely wrote the letter in order to win the favour of a powerful figure , known for his interest in science . andré vernet , who edited bernardus ' cosmographia , believed that he lived from 1085 to 1178 . the most secure date in his life is 1147–48 , when the cosmographia was supposedly read to pope eugene iii , kauntze , p . 12 . though it could have been finished before then , perhaps between 1143 and 1148 . stock , brian ( 1972 ) . myth and science in the twelfth century : a study of bernard silvester . princeton : princeton university press . there is some evidence that bernardus was connected to spanish schools of philosophy , but it seems likely that he was born and taught in tours , because of the intimate descriptions of the city and the surrounding area found in the cosmographia . later medieval authors also associated him with that city . kauntze , pp . 16–18 . . works . bernardus ' greatest work is the aforementioned cosmographia , a prosimetrum on the creation of the world , told from a 12th-century platonist perspective . the poem influenced chaucer and others with its pioneering use of allegory to discuss metaphysical and scientific questions . bernardus also wrote the poem mathematicus and probably the poem experimentarius as well as some minor poems . among the works attributed to bernardus later in the middle ages were a commentary on virgil 's aeneid ( bernardus ' authorship of which has been questioned by modern scholars ) and a commentary on martianus capella 's de nuptiis philologiae et mercurii . the commentary on the aeneid is the longest medieval commentary on that work , although it is incomplete , ending about two-thirds of the way through book six . so-called silvestris commentary . julian ward jones , jr . , in his article '' the so-called silvestris commentary on the aeneid and two other interpretations '' , attempts to clear up the issue of the authorship of the aeneid commentary by distinguishing two distinct positions : the first by e . r . smits , and the second by christopher baswell . smits 's account is rejected by jones , who says that baswell 's account is mostly correct but requires some modification . jones , julian ward , jr . ( 1989 ) . '' the so-called silvestris commentary on the aeneid and two other interpretations '' . speculum 64:4 . pp . 835-848 . stable url : ( accessed october 23 , 2010 ) . e . r . smits , like andré vernet ( 1938 ) , hypothesizes that carnotensis ( the pen-name of the commentary ) is bernard of chartres – the individual who silvestris is most confused for . vernet says that silvestris , for whom this confusion was normally detrimental , probably gained from this particular confusion , as he is most often credited for the commentary on vergil 's aeneid . smits and vernet attribute bernard of chartres 's authorship of the aeneid commentary to a number of similarities and differences between this work and other texts . what needs to be asked here though is why is vernet still turned to for answers on silvestris , when he wrote on the subject in 1938 ? it seems as though we do not have a choice , because even more modern writers , such as jones , continue to cite him because there is no one else to look to . vernet still has authority on the subject matter . on the other hand , christopher baswell attempts to interpret the aeneid commentary through comparison to a commentary in cambridge manuscript peterhouse 158 , seeing this as an important link between manuscripts of the commentary and the silvestris commentary . by placing the passages in two columns it is clear to the reader as it is to baswell that the interpretations are congruent , although the notes in the peterhouse ms appear to be shortened and simpler versions of notes in the silvestris commentary . baswell wants here to conclude that the peterhouse ms represents the earlier work of silvestris . jones sets this conclusion aside to continue to exhibit differences that occur – which in his opinion are more important than the striking similarities . by pointing to differences in organization among other things , jones casts doubt on baswell 's earlier hypothesis . what becomes clear is that there is agreement between baswell and jones in that they both see silvestris as the aeneid commentator , but jones can not agree with the connection to the peterhouse ms . the commentary on the aeneid is the longest medieval commentary on that work , although it is incomplete , ending about two-thirds of the way through book six . it is also viewed as the most elaborate commentary from the middle ages . . impact and contributions . the cosmographia influenced chaucer and others with its pioneering use of allegory to discuss metaphysical and scientific questions . theodore silverstein praises silvestris ’ poems for their imaginative prose , as well as for positioning himself well in literature based on the time and place—particularly in the writing of the cosmographia during the 12th-century controversies of evolution . silverstein , theodore ( november 1948 ) . '' the fabulous cosmogony of bernardus silvestris '' . modern philology 46:2 . pp . 92-116 . stable url : ( accessed october 23 , 2010 ) . in the catholic encyclopedia , william turner wrote that there was a '' pantheistic drift '' to his philosophy . there is evidence of influence in the works of medieval and renaissance authors , including hildegard of bingen , vincent of beauvais , dante , chaucer , nicolas of cusa , and boccaccio . in the modern era , bernardus silvestris has been referred to in the nonfiction and science fiction work of c . s . lewis . lewis , c . s . the allegory of love ; lewis , c . s . ( 1938 ) . out of the silent planet . london : harpercollins . . editions and translations . : :for editions and translations of the cosmographia , see cosmographia ( bernard silvestris ) editions and translations . mathematicus , ed . and trans . deirdre m . stone , archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen âge 63 ( 1996 ) : 209–83 . experimentarius , ed . charles burnett , in '' what is the experimentarius of bernardus silvestris ? : a preliminary survey of the material , '' archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen âge 44 ( 1977 ) : 62–108 . reprinted in burnett , magic and divination in the middle ages ( aldershot : variorum , 1996 ) . the commentary on the first six books of the aeneid of virgil commonly attributed to bernardus silvestris , ed . julian ward jones and elizabeth frances jones ( lincoln : university of nebraska press , 1977 ) . the commentary on the first six books of virgil 's aeneid , trans . earl g . schreiber and thomas e . maresca ( lincoln : university of nebraska press , 1979 ) . references and notes . bibliography . desmond , marilynn , '' bernardus silvestris and the corpus of the aeneid , '' in the classics in the middle ages , ed . aldo s . bernardo and saul levin ( binghamton : centre for medieval and early renaissance studies , 1990 ) . dronke , peter , fabula : explorations into the uses of myth in medieval platonism ( leiden : brill , 1974 ) . ——— , '' bernard silvestris : nature and personification , '' in intellectuals and poets in medieval europe ( rome : edizioni di storia e letteratura , 1992 ) . jeauneau , édouard , '' bernard silvestre , '' in dictionary of scientific biography , vol . 2 ( new york : scribner 's , 1970 ) : 21–22 . jones , julian ward , '' the so-called silvestris commentary on the aeneid and two other interpretations , '' speculum 64 ( 1989 ) : 838-48 . kauntze , mark , authority and imitation : a study of the 'cosmographia ' of bernardus silvestris , mittellateinische studien und texte , 47 ( leiden : brill , 2014 ) . stock , brian , myth and science in the twelfth century : a study of bernard silvester ( princeton : princeton university press , 1972 ) . wetherbee , winthrop , platonism and poetry in the twelfth century : the literary influence of the school of chartres ( princeton : princeton university press , 1972 ) . see also . allegory in the middle ages