Lignum vitae

name . lignum vitae is latin for '' wood of life '' . the plant derives its name from its medicinal uses ; lignum vitae resin has been used to treat a variety of medical conditions from coughs to arthritis , and chips of the wood can also be used to brew a tea . other names for lignum vitae include palo santo ( spanish for '' holy wood '' ) , aura palo santo and '' bastard greenheart '' ( not to be confused with true greenheart chlorocardium rodiei , a popular wood in shipbuilding , cabinetry , and woodturning but a completely different timber ) . lignum vitae is also one of the numerous hard , dense woods loosely referred to as '' ironwood '' . description . wood products . lignum vitae is hard and durable , and is also the densest wood traded ( average dried density : ~79 & nbsp ; lbs/ft 3 or ~1260 & nbsp ; kg/m 3 ) ; it will easily sink in water . on the janka hardness test , which measures hardness of woods , lignum vitae ranks highest of the trade woods , with a janka hardness of 4500 & nbsp ; lbf ( compared with olneya at 3260 & nbsp ; lbf , african blackwood at 2940 & nbsp ; lbf , hickory at 1820 & nbsp ; lbf , red oak at 1290 & nbsp ; lbf , yellow pine at 690 & nbsp ; lbf , and balsa at 100 & nbsp ; lbf ) . the densest of all woods is allocasuarina luehmannii . krugiodendron typically has a higher density , among many other woods that vary by sample . various other hardwoods may also be called lignum vitae and should not be confused with it . the best-known come from bulnesia arborea and bulnesia sarmientoi ( in the same subfamily as guaiacum ) and are known as bulnesia or argentina lignum vitae ; they are somewhat similar in appearance and working qualities as genuine lignum vitae . some hardwoods from australasia ( e.g . , vitex lignum-vitae and some species of acacia and eucalyptus ) are also referred to as lignum vitae . description . the tree is slow-growing and relatively small in stature , even when mature and old . it bears small , purplish-blue flowers which result in paired orange dehiscent fruits . the bark is mottled . uses . due to the density of the wood , cricket bails , in particular '' heavy bails '' used in windy conditions , are sometimes made of lignum vitae . it is also sometimes used to make bowls , croquet mallets , and skittles balls . the wood also has seen widespread historical usage in mortar and pestle and for wood carvers ' mallets . it was the traditional wood used for the british police truncheon until recently , due to its density ( and strength ) , combined with the relative softness of wood compared to metal , thereby tending to bruise or stun rather than simply cut the skin . the belaying pins and deadeyes aboard uss constitution and many other sailing ships were made from lignum vitae . due to its density and natural oils , they rarely require replacement , despite the severity of typical marine weathering conditions , and also resisted jamming in their mortise holes . the sheaves of blocks on sailing vessels were made of lignum vitae until the introduction of modern synthetics . due to lignum vitae 's toughness , it can also be used as a lap in the process of cutting gems . the wood is covered with powdered industrial diamond , attached to a spindle , and used to smooth rough surfaces of gems . master clockmaker john harrison used lignum vitae in the bearings and gears of his pendulum clocks and his first three marine chronometers ( all of which were large clocks rather than watches ) , since the wood is self-lubricating . the use of lignum vitae eliminates the need for horology lubricating oil ; 18th-century horological oil would become viscous and reduce the accuracy of a timepiece under unfavourable conditions ( including those that prevail at sea ) . for the same reason it was widely used in water-lubricated shaft bearings for ships and hydro-electric power plants , and in the stave bearings of ship propeller shafts '' fitting ships with wooden bearings '' . popular mechanics , april 1952 , pp . 156–157 until the 1960s saw the introduction of sealed white metal bearings . according to the san francisco maritime national park association website , the shaft bearings on the wwii submarine were made of this wood . the aft main shaft strut bearings for , the world 's first nuclear-powered submarine , were composed of this wood . also , the bearings in the original 1920s turbines of the conowingo hydroelectric plant on the lower susquehanna river were made from lignum vitae . the shaft bearings on the horizontal turbines at the pointe du bois generating station in manitoba are made from lignum vitae . other hydroelectric plant turbine bearings , many of them still in service , were fabricated with lignum vitae and are too numerous to list here . discussions with various utilities operating these plants , beginning with an affiliate of the nebraska public power district in 1976 . in 1976 , nppd affiliates were still using lignum vitae when turbine bearing replacements were needed . some of those replacements are likely to still be in service . lignum vitae bearings are also found in larger units at several dams in the pacific northwest . the united railroads of san francisco ( an ancestor of the san francisco municipal railway ) began installing insulators made of composite materials to support the heavy 600-volt dc feeder wires for their trolley system in 1904 . these lines were damaged , along with most everything else , during the 1906 earthquake and the fires that followed . rebuilding the trolley system and expanding it to replace cable car routes destroyed in the quake created a huge demand for insulators , a demand manufacturers further east were unable to meet . the properties of lignum vitae , namely its ability to withstand high stress ( from heavy cables on long spans and the strain of lines rounding corners ) and high temperature ( due to the feeder cables becoming very hot during peak operating hours ) , and its ready availability from the holds of the ships in the harbor ( used as dunnage and ballast ) made it an ideal 'temporary ' solution . many remained into service well into the 1970s , with the last few pieces replaced in the 2000s in favor of an underground feeder system . s . l . foster ( june 9 , 1917 ) , '' taking care of corner stresses from large d.c . feeders '' , the electric railway journal , vol . xlix , no . 23 , pages 1051–1053 . this cites it was also used extensively in the manufacture of british railways mark 1 rolling stock , as a 'bump stop ' in the bogies ( the 'frame ' that carries the wheels ) . lore . pioneering calypsonian/vaudeville sam manning recorded a song titled '' lignum vitae '' in the 1920s . his reference was doubly salacious , referring to both the bark tea 's contraceptive qualities and the phallic symbolism of the hard wood . benvenuto cellini recounts using lignum vitae ( presumably in tea form ) to cure himself of a venereal disease ( the so-called '' french evil '' ) that had impaired his eyesight . according to t . h . white 's version of the king arthur story the once and future king , lignum vitae , from which the wand of merlin is made , has magical powers . gabriel garcía márquez 's novel love in the time of cholera includes a bathtub made of this wood in one of the main characters ' homes . his novel chronicle of a death foretold also refers to the use of this wood in making a cane for the blind poncio vicario . american folksinger pete seeger fashioned the neck of his trademark banjo from lignum vitae . in charles dickens ' novel bleak house , one of the characters , matthew bagnet is referred to as lignum vitae , '' . in compliment to the extreme hardness and toughness of his physiognomy . '' image : lignumvitaeplane.jpg a hand plane with a lignum vitae sole , likely bulnesia , and a pearwood body image : panamarr rail spike tie.jpg example of the original construction 53 & nbsp ; lb/yd ( 26 & nbsp ; kg/m ) inverted '' u '' rail aka '' bridge '' rail , '' screw '' spike , and lignum vitae tie used to build the panama railroad from 1851 to 1855 . . see also . lignum nephriticum . references .