Magnetoencephalography

history . left left meg signals were first measured by university of illinois physicist david cohen in 1968 , before the availability of the squid , using a copper induction coil as the detector . to reduce the magnetic background noise , the measurements were made in a magnetically shielded room . the coil detector was barely sensitive enough , resulting in poor , noisy meg measurements that were difficult to use . later , cohen built a much better shielded room at mit , and used one of the first squid detectors , just developed by james e . zimmerman , a researcher at ford motor company , to again measure meg signals . this time the signals were almost as clear as those of eeg . this stimulated the interest of physicists who had been looking for uses of squids . subsequent to this , various types of spontaneous and evoked megs began to be measured . at first , a single squid detector was used to successively measure the magnetic field at a number of points around the subject 's head . this was cumbersome , and , in the 1980s , meg manufacturers began to arrange multiple sensors into arrays to cover a larger area of the head . present-day meg arrays are set in a helmet-shaped vacuum flask that typically contain 300 sensors , covering most of the head . in this way , megs of a subject or patient can now be accumulated rapidly and efficiently . recent developments attempt to increase portability of meg scanners by using serf ( serf ) magnetometers . serf magnetometers are relatively small , as they do not require bulky cooling systems to operate . at the same time , they feature sensitivity equivalent to that of squids . in 2012 , it was demonstrated that meg could work with a chip-scale atomic magnetometer ( csam , type of serf ) . more recently , in 2017 , researchers built a working prototype that uses serf magnetometers installed into portable individually 3d-printed helmets , which they noted in interviews could be replaced with something easier to use in future , such as a bike helmet . the basis of the meg signal . neural synchronization induce weak magnetic fields . the brain 's magnetic field , measuring at 10 femtotesla ( ft ) for cortical activity and 10 3 ft for the human alpha rhythm , is considerably smaller than the ambient magnetic noise in an urban environment , which is on the order of 10 8 ft or 0.1 μt . the essential problem of biomagnetism is , thus , the weakness of the signal relative to the sensitivity of the detectors , and to the competing environmental noise . 250pxthe meg ( and eeg ) signals derive from the net effect of ionic currents flowing in the dendrites of neurons during synapse transmission . in accordance with maxwell 's equations , any electrical current will produce a magnetic field , and it is this field that is measured . the net currents can be thought of as dipole , i.e . currents with a position , orientation , and magnitude , but no spatial extent . according to the right-hand rule , a current dipole gives rise to a magnetic field that points around the axis of its vector component . to generate a signal that is detectable , approximately 50,000 active neurons are needed . since current dipoles must have similar orientations to generate magnetic fields that reinforce each other , it is often the layer of pyramidal cells , which are situated perpendicular to the cortical surface , that gives rise to measurable magnetic fields . bundles of these neurons that are orientated tangentially to the scalp surface project measurable portions of their magnetic fields outside of the head , and these bundles are typically located in the sulci . researchers are experimenting with various signal processing methods in the search for methods that detect deep brain ( i.e . , non-cortical ) signal , but no clinically useful method is currently available . it is worth noting that action potentials do not usually produce an observable field , mainly because the currents associated with action potentials flow in opposite directions and the magnetic fields cancel out . however , action fields have been measured from peripheral nerves . magnetic shielding . since the magnetic signals emitted by the brain are on the order of a few femtoteslas , shielding from external magnetic signals , including the earth 's magnetic field , is necessary . appropriate magnetic shielding can be obtained by constructing rooms made of aluminium and mu-metal for reducing high-frequency and low-frequency noise , respectively . left . magnetically shielded room ( msr ) . a magnetically shielded room ( msr ) model consists of three nested main layers . each of these layers is made of a pure aluminium layer plus a high-permeability ferromagnetic layer , similar in composition to molybdenum permalloy . the ferromagnetic layer is supplied as 1 & nbsp ; mm sheets , while the innermost layer is composed of four sheets in close contact , and the outer two layers are composed of three sheets each . magnetic continuity is maintained by overlay strips . insulating washers are used in the screw assemblies to ensure that each main layer is electrically isolated . this helps eliminate radio frequency radiation , which would degrade squid performance . electrical continuity of the aluminium is also maintained by aluminium overlay strips to ensure ac eddy current shielding , which is important at frequencies greater than 1 & nbsp ; hz . the junctions of the inner layer are often electroplated with silver or gold to improve conductivity of the aluminium layers . . active shielding system . active systems are designed for three-dimensional noise cancellation . to implement an active system , low-noise fluxgate magnetometers are mounted at the center of each surface and oriented orthogonally to it . this negatively feeds a dc amplifier through a low-pass network with a slow falloff to minimize positive feedback and oscillation . built into the system are shaking and degaussing wires . shaking wires increase the magnetic permeability , while the permanent degaussing wires are applied to all surfaces of the inner main layer to degauss the surfaces . moreover , noise cancellation algorithms can reduce both low-frequency and high-frequency noise . modern systems have a noise floor of around 2–3 & nbsp ; ft/hz 0.5 above 1 & nbsp ; hz . source localization . the inverse problem . the challenge posed by meg is to determine the location of electric activity within the brain from the induced magnetic fields outside the head . problems such as this , where model parameters ( the location of the activity ) have to be estimated from measured data ( the squid signals ) are referred to as inverse problems ( in contrast to forward problems where the model parameters ( e.g . source location ) are known and the data ( e.g . the field at a given distance ) is to be estimated . ) the primary difficulty is that the inverse problem does not have a unique solution ( i.e . , there are infinite possible '' correct '' answers ) , and the problem of defining the '' best '' solution is itself the subject of intensive research . possible solutions can be derived using models involving prior knowledge of brain activity . the source models can be either over-determined or under-determined . an over-determined model may consist of a few point-like sources ( '' equivalent dipoles '' ) , whose locations are then estimated from the data . under-determined models may be used in cases where many different distributed areas are activated ( '' distributed source solutions '' ) : there are infinitely many possible current distributions explaining the measurement results , but the most likely is selected . localization algorithms make use of given source and head models to find a likely location for an underlying focal field generator . one type of localization algorithm for overdetermined models operates by expectation-maximization : the system is initialized with a first guess . a loop is started , in which a forward model is used to simulate the magnetic field that would result from the current guess . the guess is adjusted to reduce the discrepancy between the simulated field and the measured field . this process is iterated until convergence . another common technique is beamforming , wherein a theoretical model of the magnetic field produced by a given current dipole is used as a prior , along with second-order statistics of the data in the form of a covariance matrix , to calculate a linear weighting of the sensor array ( the beamformer ) via the backus–gilbert method . this is also known as a linearly constrained minimum variance ( lcmv ) beamformer . when the beamformer is applied to the data , it produces an estimate of the power in a '' virtual channel '' at the source location . the extent to which the constraint-free meg inverse problem is ill-posed can not be overemphasized . if one 's goal is to estimate the current density within the human brain with say a 5mm resolution then it is well established that the vast majority of the information needed to perform a unique inversion must come not from the magnetic field measurement but rather from the constraints applied to the problem . furthermore , even when a unique inversion is possible in the presence of such constraints said inversion can be unstable . these conclusions are easily deduced from published works . . magnetic source imaging . the source locations can be combined with magnetic resonance imaging ( mri ) images to create magnetic source images ( msi ) . the two sets of data are combined by measuring the location of a common set of fiducial points marked during mri with lipid markers and marked during meg with electrified coils of wire that give off magnetic fields . the locations of the fiducial points in each data set are then used to define a common coordinate system so that superimposing the functional meg data onto the structural mri data ( '' coregistration '' ) is possible . a criticism of the use of this technique in clinical practice is that it produces colored areas with definite boundaries superimposed upon an mri scan : the untrained viewer may not realize that the colors do not represent a physiological certainty , because of the relatively low spatial resolution of meg , but rather a probability cloud derived from statistical processes . however , when the magnetic source image corroborates other data , it can be of clinical utility . dipole model source localization . a widely accepted source-modeling technique for meg involves calculating a set of equivalent current dipoles ( ecds ) , which assumes the underlying neuronal sources to be focal . this dipole fitting procedure is non-linear and over-determined , since the number of unknown dipole parameters is smaller than the number of meg measurements . automated multiple dipole model algorithms such as multiple signal classification ( music ) and msst ( multistart spatial and temporal ) modeling are applied to the analysis of meg responses . the limitations of dipole models for characterizing neuronal responses are ( 1 ) difficulties in localizing extended sources with ecds , ( 2 ) problems with accurately estimating the total number of dipoles in advance , and ( 3 ) dependency on dipole location , especially depth in the brain . distributed source models . unlike multiple-dipole modeling , distributed source models divide the source space into a grid containing a large number of dipoles . the inverse problem is to obtain the dipole moments for the grid nodes . as the number of unknown dipole moments is much greater than the number of meg sensors , the inverse solution is highly underdetermined , so additional constraints are needed to reduce ambiguity of the solution . the primary advantage of this approach is that no prior specification of the source model is necessary . however , the resulting distributions may be difficult to interpret , because they only reflect a '' blurred '' ( or even distorted ) image of the true neuronal source distribution . the matter is complicated by the fact that spatial resolution depends strongly on several parameters such as brain area , depth , orientation , number of sensors etc . . independent component analysis ( ica ) . independent component analysis ( ica ) is another signal processing solution that separates different signals that are statistically independent in time . it is primarily used to remove artifacts such as blinking , eye muscle movement , facial muscle artifacts , cardiac artifacts , etc . from meg and eeg signals that may be contaminated with outside noise . however , ica has poor resolution of highly correlated brain sources . use in the field . in research , meg 's primary use is the measurement of time courses of activity . meg can resolve events with a precision of 10 milliseconds or faster , while functional mri ( fmri ) , which depends on changes in blood flow , can at best resolve events with a precision of several hundred milliseconds . meg also accurately pinpoints sources in primary auditory , somatosensory , and motor areas . for creating functional maps of human cortex during more complex cognitive tasks , meg is most often combined with fmri , as the methods complement each other . neuronal ( meg ) and hemodynamic ( fmri ) data do not necessarily agree , in spite of the tight relationship between local field potentials ( lfp ) and blood oxygenation level-dependent ( bold ) signals . meg and bold signals may originate from the same source ( though the bold signals are filtered through the hemodynamic response ) . meg is also being used to better localize responses in the brain . the openness of the meg setup allows external auditory and visual stimuli to be easily introduced . some movement by the subject is also possible as long as it does not jar the subject 's head . the responses in the brain before , during , and after the introduction of such stimuli/movement can then be mapped with greater spatial resolution than was previously possible with eeg . psychologists are also taking advantage of meg neuroimaging to better understand relationships between brain function and behavior . for example , a number of studies have been done comparing the meg responses of patients with psychological troubles to control patients . there has been great success isolating unique responses in patients with schizophrenia , such as auditory gating deficits to human voices . meg is also being used to correlate standard psychological responses , such as the emotional dependence of language comprehension . recent studies have reported successful classification of patients with multiple sclerosis , alzheimer 's disease , schizophrenia , sjögren 's syndrome , chronic alcoholism , facial pain and thalamocortical dysrhythmias . meg can be used to distinguish these patients from healthy control subjects , suggesting a future role of meg in diagnostics . . focal epilepsy . the clinical uses of meg are in detecting and localizing pathological activity in patients with epilepsy , and in localizing eloquent cortex for surgical planning in patients with brain tumors or intractable epilepsy . the goal of epilepsy surgery is to remove the epileptogenic tissue while sparing healthy brain areas . knowing the exact position of essential brain regions ( such as the primary motor cortex and primary sensory cortex , visual cortex , and areas involved in speech production and comprehension ) helps to avoid surgically induced neurological deficits . direct cortical stimulation and somatosensory evoked potentials recorded on ecog are considered the gold standard for localizing essential brain regions . these procedures can be performed either intraoperatively or from chronically indwelling subdural grid electrodes . both are invasive . noninvasive meg localizations of the central sulcus obtained from somatosensory evoked magnetic fields show strong agreement with these invasive recordings . meg studies assist in clarification of the functional organization of primary somatosensory cortex and to delineate the spatial extent of hand somatosensory cortex by stimulation of the individual digits . this agreement between invasive localization of cortical tissue and meg recordings shows the effectiveness of meg analysis and indicates that meg may substitute invasive procedures in the future . fetal . meg has been used to study cognitive processes such as vision , audition , and language processing in fetuses and newborns . . comparison with related techniques . meg has been in development since the 1960s but has been greatly aided by recent advances in computing algorithms and hardware , and promises improved spatial resolution coupled with extremely high temporal resolution ( better than 1 ms ) . since the meg signal is a direct measure of neuronal activity , its temporal resolution is comparable with that of intracranial electrodes . meg complements other brain activity measurement techniques such as electroencephalography ( eeg ) , positron emission tomography ( pet ) , and fmri . its strengths consist in independence of head geometry compared to eeg ( unless ferromagnetic implants are present ) , non-invasiveness , use of no ionizing radiation , as opposed to pet and high temporal resolution as opposed to fmri . meg in comparison to eeg . although eeg and meg signals originate from the same neurophysiological processes , there are important differences . magnetic fields are less distorted than electric fields by the skull and scalp , which results in a better spatial resolution of the meg . whereas scalp eeg is sensitive to both tangential and radial components of a current source in a spherical volume conductor , meg detects only its tangential components . scalp eeg can , therefore , detect activity both in the sulci and at the top of the cortical gyri , whereas meg is most sensitive to activity originating in sulci . eeg is , therefore , sensitive to activity in more brain areas , but activity that is visible in meg can also be localized with more accuracy . scalp eeg is sensitive to extracellular volume currents produced by postsynaptic potentials . meg detects intracellular currents associated primarily with these synaptic potentials because the field components generated by volume currents tend to cancel out in a spherical volume conductor . the decay of magnetic fields as a function of distance is more pronounced than for electric fields . therefore , meg is more sensitive to superficial cortical activity , which makes it useful for the study of neocortical epilepsy . finally , meg is reference-free , while scalp eeg relies on a reference that , when active , makes interpretation of the data difficult .