Daniel Albert Wyttenbach

early life . he was born at bern , of a noble family , and was extremely proud of his lineage , particularly his descent from thomas wyttenbach , professor of theology in basel at the end of the 15th and beginning of the 16th century , who had taught huldrych zwingli and other distinguished pupils . wyttenbach 's own father was also a theological professor of considerable note , first at the university of bern , and then at the university of marburg . he moved to marburg in 1756 , partly because he had studied there under the famous christian wolff , and embodied the philosophical principles of his master in his own theological teaching . young wyttenbach entered the university of marburg at the age of fourteen , and studied there for four years . his parents intended him to be a lutheran pastor . the first two years were given up to general education , principally to mathematics , '' philology '' , philosophy , and history . the professor of mathematics , august gottlieb spangenberg , greatly influenced young wyttenbach . he is said to have taught his subject with great clearness , and with equal seriousness and piety , often referring to god as the supreme mathematician , who had constructed all things by number , measure and weight . '' philology '' in the german universities of that age meant hebrew and greek . these two languages were generally handled by the same professor , and were taught almost solely to theological students . wyttenbach 's university course at marburg was troubled about the middle of the time by mental unrest , due to the fascination exercised over him by john bunyan 's pilgrim 's progress . it was spangenberg who helped him recover . the principal study of the third year was metaphysics , which took wyttenbach entirely captive . the fourth and last year was to be devoted to theology and christian dogma . up to that time , wyttenbach had submitted passively to his father 's wishes concerning his career , but he now turned away from theological lectures , and devoted his leisure to the task of deepening and extending his knowledge of greek literature . he possessed at the time , as he tells us , no more acquaintance with greek than his own pupils at a later time could acquire from him during four months ' study . he had access only to the bare texts of the authors . wyttenbach was undaunted , and four years ' persistent study gave him a knowledge of greek such as few germans of that time possessed . his love for philosophy carried him towards the greek philosophers , especially plato . during this period ruhnken 's notes on the platonic lexicon of timaeus fell into his hands . david ruhnken was for him almost a superhuman being , with whom he imagined himself conversing in the spirit . at twenty-two , he determined to go elsewhere in search of the aids to study which marburg could not afford . his father , realizing the strength of his son 's pure passion for scholarship , permitted and even advised him to seek christian gottlob heine at the university of göttingen . from heine he received the utmost kindness and encouragement , and he was urged to dedicate to ruhnken the first-fruits of his scholarships . wyttenbach set to work on some notes to julian , eunapius and aristaenetus , and heine wrote to ruhnken to obtain his favourable consideration for the work . before it reached him , ruhnken wrote a kind letter to wyttenbach , which the recipient '' read , re-read and kissed , '' and another on receipt of the tract , in which the great scholar declared that he had not expected to find in germany such knowledge of greek , such power of criticism , and such mature judgment , especially in one so young . by heine 's advice , he worked hard at latin , which he knew less thoroughly than greek , and heine praised his progress in latin style to ruhnken and valckenaer . he then wrote to ask their advice about his scheme of coming to the netherlands to follow the profession of a scholar . ruhnken encouraged wyttenbach to follow his own example , for he too had been designed by his parents for the christian ministry in germany , but had settled at leiden on the invitation of tiberius hemsterhuis . valckenaer agreed , but added that wyttenbach 's letter would have been pleasanter to him had it been free from excessive compliments . these letters were forwarded to the elder wyttenbach , with a strong recommendation from heine . the old man had been in leiden in his youth , and admired the scholarship of the netherlands ; so his consent was easily won . academic career . wyttenbach reached leiden in 1770 . he spent a year learning the language of the people , attending the lectures of the great duumviri of leiden , and collating manuscripts of plutarch . at the end of 1771 a professor was wanted at amsterdam for the college of the remonstrants . on the recommendation of ruhnken , wyttenbach obtained the chair , which he held with great success for eight years . his lectures were wide-ranging . those on greek were repeated to the students of the university of amsterdam ( the '' athenaeum '' ) . in 1775 a visit was made to paris , which was fruitful both of new friendships and of progress in study . about this time , on the advice of ruhnken , wyttenbach began issuing his bibliotheca critica , which appeared at intervals for the next thirty years . the methods of criticism were in the main those established by hemsterhuis , and carried on by valckenaer and ruhnken , and the publication was accepted by the learned all over europe . in 1777 the younger burmann ( '' burmannus secundus '' ) retired from his professorship at the athenaeum , and wyttenbach was disappointed not to be chosen to succeed him . only his regard for ruhnken and for dutch freedom ( in his own words ruhnkeni et batavae libertatis cogitatio ) kept him in holland . for fear of losing him , the authorities at amsterdam nominated him professor of philosophy in 1779 . in 1785 , toll , burmann 's successor , resigned , and wyttenbach was appointed to succeed him . his full title was '' professor of history and eloquence and greek and latin literature . '' he had hardly got to work in his new office when valckenaer died , and he received a call to leiden . greatly to ruhnken 's disappointment , he declined to abandon the duties he had so recently undertaken . in 1787 began the internal commotions in holland , afterwards to be aggravated by foreign interference . scarcely during the remaining thirty-three years of wyttenbach 's life was there a moment of peace in the land . about this time two requests were made to him for an edition of the moralia of plutarch , for which a recension of the tract de sera numinis vindicta had marked him out in the eyes of scholars . one request came from the famous societas bipontina , the other from the delegates of the clarendon press at oxford , england . wyttenbach , influenced at once by the reputation of the university , and by the liberality of the oxonians in tendering him assistance of different kinds , declined the offer of the bipontine society — very fortunately , since their press was soon destroyed by the french . the first portion of wyttenbach 's work was safely conveyed to oxford in 1794 . then war broke out fourth anglo-dutch war . randolph , wyttenbach 's oxford correspondent , advised that the next portion should be sent through the british ambassador at hamburg , and the manuscript was duly consigned to him '' in a little chest well protected by pitch . '' after sending randolph a number of letters without getting any answer , wyttenbach in disgust put all thought of the edition from him , but at last the missing box was discovered in a forgotten corner at hamburg , where it had lain for two years and a half . the work was finally completed in 1803 . meanwhile , wyttenbach received invitations from his native city , bern , and from leiden , where vacancies had been created by the refusal of professors to swear allegiance to the new dutch republic set up in 1795 , to which wyttenbach had made submission . but he only left amsterdam in 1799 , when on ruhnken 's death he succeeded him at leiden as professor and 13th leiden university library . even then his chief object in moving was to facilitate an arrangement by which the necessities of his old master 's family might be relieved . his move came too late in life , and he was never so happy at leiden as he had been at amsterdam . before long appeared the ever-delightful life of david ruhnken . though written in latin , this biography deserves to rank high in the modern literature of its class . of wyttenbach 's life at leiden there is little to tell . the continual changes in state affairs greatly disorganized the universities of holland , and wyttenbach had to work in face of much detraction ; still , his success as a teacher was very great . in 1805 he narrowly escaped with his life from the great gunpowder explosion , which killed 150 people , among them the greek scholar jean luzac , wyttenbach 's colleague in the university . one of wyttenbach 's letters gives a vivid account of the disaster . during the last years of his life he suffered severely from illness and became nearly blind . after the conclusion of his edition of plutarch 's moralia in 1805 , the only important work he was able to publish was his well-known edition of plato 's phaedo . many honours were conferred upon him both at home and abroad , and in particular he was made a member of the french institute . shortly before his death , he obtained the licence of the king of holland to marry his sister 's daughter , johanna gallien , who had for twenty years been his housekeeper , secretary and research assistant . the sole object of the marriage was to secure for her a better provision after her husband 's death , because as the widow of a professor she would be entitled to a pension . gallien was a woman of remarkable culture and ability , and wrote works held in great repute at that time . on the festival of the tercentenary of the foundation of the university of marburg , celebrated in 1827 , the degree of doctor was conferred upon her . wyttenbach died of apoplexy in 1820 , and he was buried in the garden of his country house near leiden , which stood , as he noted , within sight of the dwellings of descartes and boerhaave . wyttenbach 's biography was written in a somewhat dry and lifeless manner by mahne , one of his pupils , who also published some of his letters . his opuscula , other than those published in the bibliotheca critica , were collected in two volumes ( leiden , 1823 ) . evaluation . although his work is not on the same level as that of hemsterhuis , valckenaer and ruhnken , he was a very eminent exponent of the sound methods of criticism which they established . these four men , more than any others after richard bentley , laid the foundations of modern greek scholarship . the precise study of grammar , syntax and style , and the careful criticism of texts by the light of the best manuscript evidence , were upheld by these scholars in the netherlands when they were almost entirely neglected elsewhere on the europe , and were only pursued with partial success in england . wyttenbach may fairly be regarded as closing a great period in the history of scholarship . he lived indeed to see the new birth of german classical learning , but his work was done , and he was unaffected by it . wyttenbach 's criticism was less rigorous , precise and masterly , but perhaps more sensitive and sympathetic , than that of his great predecessors in the netherlands . in actual acquaintance with the philosophical writings of the ancients , he has probably never been surpassed . in character he was upright and simple-minded , but shy and retiring , and often failed to make himself appreciated . his life was not passed without strife , but his few friends were warmly attached to him , and his many pupils were for the most part his enthusiastic admirers . further reading . bickert , hans günther and norbert nail ( 2000 ) . daniel jeanne wyttenbach : marburgs erste ehrendoktorin ( 1827 ) ( schriften der universitätsbibliothek marburg , 98 ) marburg . notes . references .