Jean-Charles Pichegru

early life and career . pichegru was born in a peasant family at arbois ( or , according to charles nodier , at les planches-près-arbois , near lons-le-saulnier ) , in the then franche-comté ( now in the jura department of france ) . the friars of arbois were entrusted with his education , and sent him to the military school of brienne-le-château . there , he taught mathematics , and among his pupils was the young napoleon bonaparte . in 1783 , he entered the 1st regiment of artillery , where he rapidly rose to the rank of adjutant-second lieutenant , and briefly served in the american revolutionary war . when the revolution erupted in 1789 , he became leader of the jacobin club in besançon , and , when a regiment of volunteers of the départment of the gard marched through the city , he was elected lieutenant colonel . rhine front . the fine condition of his regiment was noticed in the french revolutionary army section of the rhine , and his organizing ability got him appointed in the headquarters , and then promoted brigadier general . in 1793 , lazare carnot and louis de saint-just were sent to find roturier ( non-aristocratic ) generals who could prove successful ( see : campaigns of 1793 in the french revolutionary wars ) . carnot discovered jean-baptiste jourdan , and saint-just discovered louis lazare hoche and pichegru . at first , pichegru was appointed general of division and commander of the division of the upper rhine . appointed commander-in-chief of the army of the rhine , pichegru attacked the coalition army of dagobert sigmund von wurmser in the battle of haguenau in 1793 . over a period of weeks the coalition forces were driven back step by step in bitter fighting . the intervention of the army of the moselle under hoche at the battle of froeschwiller in late december finally caused wurmser to abandon alsace . for the second battle of wissembourg , pichegru was placed under the command of hoche , who proved to be a difficult superior . nevertheless , the french again won the battle , compelling wurmser to retreat to the east bank of the rhine and the prussian army to withdraw toward mainz . northern front . in december 1793 , hoche was arrested , probably owing to his colleague 's denunciations , and pichegru became commander-in-chief of the army of the rhine and moselle . he was summoned to succeed jourdan in the army of the north in february 1794 , subsequently fighting three major campaigns within the year . the forces of the kingdom of great britain , the dutch republic and habsburg austria held a strong position along the sambre to the north sea . after attempting to break the austrian centre , pichegru suddenly turned their right , and defeated the count of clerfayt at cassel , menen and kortrijk , while his subordinate , joseph souham , defeated prince josias of coburg in the battle of tourcoing in may 1794 . after a lull , during which pichegru feigned a siege of ypres , he again attacked clerfayt , and defeated him at roeselare and hooglede , while jourdan , commanding the newly named army of sambre-et-meuse , withstood austrian attacks in the battle of fleurus ( 27 june 1794 ) , which eventually led to allied evacuation of the low countries . left pichegru began his second campaign by crossing the meuse on 18 october , and , after taking nijmegen , drove the austrians beyond the rhine . the anglo-hanoverian army withdrew behind the waal . then , while pichegru 's troops prepared to go into winter quarters , the convention ordered the army of the north to mount a winter campaign . on 27 december two brigades crossed the meuse on the ice , and stormed the bommelerwaard . on 10 january pichegru 's army crossed the ice of the waal between zaltbommel and nijmegen , then , on 13 january , entered utrecht , which surrendered on the 16th . the anglo-hanoverian army retreated behind the ijssel and then withdrew to hanover and bremen . pichegru , who had successfully penetrated the frozen hollandic water line , arrived in amsterdam on 20 january , after the batavian revolution had taken place . the french occupied the rest of the dutch republic in the next month . this major victory was marked by unique episodes , such as the capture of the dutch fleet at den helder by french hussars , and exceptional discipline of the french battalions in amsterdam , who , although faced with the opportunity of plundering the richest city in europe , showed self-restraint . thermidor and directory . although a former associate of saint-just , pichegru offered his services to the thermidorian reaction , and , after having received the title of sauveur de la patrie ( '' saviour of the fatherland '' ) from the national convention , subdued the sans-culottes of paris , when they rose in insurrection of 12 germinal , year iii ( 1 april ) . pichegru then took command of the armies of the north , the sambre-and-meuse , and the rhine , and , crossing the rhine in force , took mannheim in may 1795 . going over to the royalists . although he had become a hero of the revolution , he allowed his colleague jourdan to be defeated , betrayed all his plans to the enemy , and took part in organizing a conspiracy for the return and crowning of louis xviii as king of france . the plans were suspected , and , when he offered his resignation to the directory in october 1795 , it was promptly accepted ( much to his surprise ) . he retired in disgrace , but secured his election to the council of five hundred in may 1797 as a leader of the royalists . coup attempts and death . pichegru planned a coup d'état during the coup of 18 fructidor , but he was arrested and with fourteen others was deported to cayenne , french guiana in 1797 . he and seven others escaped and fled to paramaribo . the gouverneur de friderici allowed them to get on board a ship to the united states . shortly thereafter , he went to london where he joined thousands of frenchmen who had left france in a mass movement in an effort to save themselves from the violence of the french revolution . there , he served on general alexander korsakov 's staff in the campaign of 1799 . he went to paris in august 1803 with georges cadoudal to head a royalist uprising against the first consul , napoleon . betrayed by a friend , pichegru was arrested on 28 february 1804 , and was later found strangled in prison on the morning of april 6 . the government reported that he had committed suicide , but napoleon has been regularly blamed for orchestrating the murder . however , there is little evidence that napoleon was involved . his supporters often argue that napoleon had nothing to gain from having pichegru murdered , especially after the execution of d'enghein , which infuriated the royalty across europe . pichegru was buried in the cimetière sainte-catherine , a paris cemetery with its entrance in the former rue de fer , and which was closed in 1824 . references . sources . . in turn , it cites as references : alan schom , napoleon bonaparte louis fauche-borel , mémoires j.m . gassier , vie du général pichegru , paris , 1815 comte de montgaillard , mémoires concernant la trahison de pichegru , 1804 g . pierret , pichegru , son prods et sa mon , 1826 anne jean marie rené savary , mémoires sur la mort de pichegru , paris , 1825