Critical mass

explanation of criticality . when a nuclear chain reaction in a mass of fissile material is self-sustaining , the mass is said to be in a critical state in which there is no increase or decrease in power , temperature , or neutron population . a numerical measure of a critical mass is dependent on the effective neutron multiplication factor , the average number of neutrons released per fission event that go on to cause another fission event rather than being absorbed or leaving the material . when k 1 , the mass is critical , and the chain reaction is self-sustaining . a subcritical mass is a mass of fissile material that does not have the ability to sustain a fission chain reaction . a population of neutrons introduced to a subcritical assembly will exponentially decrease . in this case , k 1 . due to spontaneous fission a supercritical mass will undergo a chain reaction . for example , a spherical critical mass of pure uranium-235 ( 235 u ) with a mass of about would experience around 15 & nbsp ; spontaneous fission events per second . the probability that one such event will cause a chain reaction depends on how much the mass exceeds the critical mass . if there is uranium-238 ( 238 u ) present , the rate of spontaneous fission will be much higher . fission can also be initiated by neutrons produced by cosmic rays . changing the point of criticality . the mass where criticality occurs may be changed by modifying certain attributes such as fuel , shape , temperature , density and the installation of a neutron-reflective substance . these attributes have complex interactions and interdependencies . these examples only outline the simplest ideal cases : . varying the amount of fuel . it is possible for a fuel assembly to be critical at near zero power . if the perfect quantity of fuel were added to a slightly subcritical mass to create an '' exactly critical mass '' , fission would be self-sustaining for only one neutron generation ( fuel consumption then makes the assembly subcritical again ) . if the perfect quantity of fuel were added to a slightly subcritical mass , to create a barely supercritical mass , the temperature of the assembly would increase to an initial maximum ( for example : 1 & nbsp ; k above the ambient temperature ) and then decrease back to the ambient temperature after a period of time , because fuel consumed during fission brings the assembly back to subcriticality once again . changing the shape . a mass may be exactly critical without being a perfect homogeneous sphere . more closely refining the shape toward a perfect sphere will make the mass supercritical . conversely changing the shape to a less perfect sphere will decrease its reactivity and make it subcritical . changing the temperature . a mass may be exactly critical at a particular temperature . neutron cross section increase as the relative neutron velocity decreases . as fuel temperature increases , neutrons of a given energy appear faster and thus fission/absorption is less likely . this is not unrelated to doppler broadening of the 238 u resonances but is common to all fuels/absorbers/configurations . neglecting the very important resonances , the total neutron cross-section of every material exhibits an inverse relationship with relative neutron velocity . hot fuel is always less reactive than cold fuel ( over/under moderation in lwr is a different topic ) . thermal expansion associated with temperature increase also contributes a negative coefficient of reactivity since fuel atoms are moving farther apart . a mass that is exactly critical at room temperature would be sub-critical in an environment anywhere above room temperature due to thermal expansion alone . varying the density of the mass . the higher the density , the lower the critical mass . the density of a material at a constant temperature can be changed by varying the pressure or tension or by changing crystal structure ( see allotropes of plutonium ) . an ideal mass will become subcritical if allowed to expand or conversely the same mass will become supercritical if compressed . changing the temperature may also change the density ; however , the effect on critical mass is then complicated by temperature effects ( see '' changing the temperature '' ) and by whether the material expands or contracts with increased temperature . assuming the material expands with temperature ( enriched uranium-235 at room temperature for example ) , at an exactly critical state , it will become subcritical if warmed to lower density or become supercritical if cooled to higher density . such a material is said to have a negative temperature coefficient of reactivity to indicate that its reactivity decreases when its temperature increases . using such a material as fuel means fission decreases as the fuel temperature increases . use of a neutron reflector . surrounding a spherical critical mass with a neutron reflector further reduces the mass needed for criticality . a common material for a neutron reflector is beryllium metal . this reduces the number of neutrons which escape the fissile material , resulting in increased reactivity . use of a tamper . in a bomb , a dense shell of material surrounding the fissile core will contain , via inertia , the expanding fissioning material . this increases the efficiency . a tamper also tends to act as a neutron reflector . because a bomb relies on fast neutrons ( not ones moderated by reflection with light elements , as in a reactor ) , the neutrons reflected by a tamper are slowed by their collisions with the tamper nuclei , and because it takes time for the reflected neutrons to return to the fissile core , they take rather longer to be absorbed by a fissile nucleus . but they do contribute to the reaction , and can decrease the critical mass by a factor of four . serber , robert , the los alamos primer : the first lectures on how to build an atomic bomb , ( university of california press , 1992 ) original 1943 '' la-1 '' , declassified in 1965 , plus commentary and historical introduction also , if the tamper is ( e.g . depleted ) uranium , it can fission due to the high energy neutrons generated by the primary explosion . this can greatly increase yield , especially if even more neutrons are generated by fusing hydrogen isotopes , in a so-called boosted configuration . critical size . the critical size is the minimum size of a nuclear reactor core or nuclear weapon that can be made for a specific geometrical arrangement and material composition . the critical size must at least include enough fissionable material to reach critical mass . if the size of the reactor core is less than a certain minimum , too many fission neutrons escape through its surface and the chain reaction is not sustained . critical mass of a bare sphere . the shape with minimal critical mass and the smallest physical dimensions is a sphere . bare-sphere critical masses at normal density of some actinides are listed in the following table . most information on bare sphere masses is considered classified , since it is critical to nuclear weapons design , but some documents have been declassified . reevaluated critical specifications of some los alamos fast-neutron systems the critical mass for lower-grade uranium depends strongly on the grade : with 20 % 235 u it is over 400 & nbsp ; kg ; with 15 % 235 u , it is well over 600 & nbsp ; kg . the critical mass is inversely proportional to the square of the density . if the density is 1 % more and the mass 2 % less , then the volume is 3 % less and the diameter 1 % less . the probability for a neutron per cm travelled to hit a nucleus is proportional to the density . it follows that 1 % greater density means that the distance travelled before leaving the system is 1 % less . this is something that must be taken into consideration when attempting more precise estimates of critical masses of plutonium isotopes than the approximate values given above , because plutonium metal has a large number of different crystal phases which can have widely varying densities . note that not all neutrons contribute to the chain reaction . some escape and others undergo neutron capture . let q denote the probability that a given neutron induces fission in a nucleus . consider only prompt neutrons , and let ν denote the number of prompt neutrons generated in a nuclear fission . for example , ν ≈ 2.5 for uranium-235 . then , criticality occurs when ν·q 1 . the dependence of this upon geometry , mass , and density appears through the factor q . given a total interaction cross section σ ( typically measured in barns ) , the mean free path of a prompt neutron is \ell^ \sigma where the factor f has been rewritten as f to account for the fact that the two values may differ depending upon geometrical effects and how one defines σ . for example , for a bare solid sphere of 239 pu criticality is at 320 & nbsp ; kg/m 2 , regardless of density , and for 235 u at 550 & nbsp ; kg/m 2 . in any case , criticality then depends upon a typical neutron '' seeing '' an amount of nuclei around it such that the areal density of nuclei exceeds a certain threshold . this is applied in implosion-type nuclear weapons where a spherical mass of fissile material that is substantially less than a critical mass is made supercritical by very rapidly increasing ρ ( and thus σ as well ) ( see below ) . indeed , sophisticated nuclear weapons programs can make a functional device from less material than more primitive weapons programs require . aside from the math , there is a simple physical analog that helps explain this result . consider diesel fumes belched from an exhaust pipe . initially the fumes appear black , then gradually you are able to see through them without any trouble . this is not because the total scattering cross section of all the soot particles has changed , but because the soot has dispersed . if we consider a transparent cube of length l on a side , filled with soot , then the optical depth of this medium is inversely proportional to the square of l , and therefore proportional to the areal density of soot particles : we can make it easier to see through the imaginary cube just by making the cube larger . several uncertainties contribute to the determination of a precise value for critical masses , including ( 1 ) detailed knowledge of fission cross sections , ( 2 ) calculation of geometric effects . this latter problem provided significant motivation for the development of the monte carlo method in computational physics by nicholas metropolis and stanislaw ulam . in fact , even for a homogeneous solid sphere , the exact calculation is by no means trivial . finally , note that the calculation can also be performed by assuming a continuum approximation for the neutron transport . this reduces it to a diffusion problem . however , as the typical linear dimensions are not significantly larger than the mean free path , such an approximation is only marginally applicable . finally , note that for some idealized geometries , the critical mass might formally be infinite , and other parameters are used to describe criticality . for example , consider an infinite sheet of fissionable material . for any finite thickness , this corresponds to an infinite mass . however , criticality is only achieved once the thickness of this slab exceeds a critical value . criticality in nuclear weapon design . until detonation is desired , a nuclear weapon must be kept subcritical . in the case of a uranium bomb , this can be achieved by keeping the fuel in a number of separate pieces , each below the critical size either because they are too small or unfavorably shaped . to produce detonation , the pieces of uranium are brought together rapidly . in little boy , this was achieved by firing a piece of uranium ( a 'doughnut ' ) down a gun barrel onto another piece ( a 'spike ' ) . this design is referred to as a gun-type fission weapon . a theoretical 100 % pure 239 pu weapon could also be constructed as a gun-type weapon , like the manhattan project 's proposed thin man design . in reality , this is impractical because even '' weapons grade '' 239 pu is contaminated with a small amount of 240 pu , which has a strong propensity toward spontaneous fission . because of this , a reasonably sized gun-type weapon would suffer nuclear reaction ( predetonation ) before the masses of plutonium would be in a position for a full-fledged explosion to occur . instead , the plutonium is present as a subcritical sphere ( or other shape ) , which may or may not be hollow . detonation is produced by exploding a shaped charge surrounding the sphere , increasing the density ( and collapsing the cavity , if present ) to produce a prompt critical configuration . this is known as an implosion type weapon . prompt criticality . the event of fission must release , on the average , more than one free neutron of the desired energy level in order to sustain a chain reaction , and each must find other nuclei and cause them to fission . most of the neutrons released from a fission event come immediately from that event , but a fraction of them come later , when the fission products decay , which may be on the average from microseconds to minutes later . this is fortunate for atomic power generation , for without this delay '' going critical '' would be an immediately catastrophic event , as it is in a nuclear bomb where upwards of 80 generations of chain reaction occur in less than a microsecond , far too fast for a human , or even a machine , to react . physicists recognize two points in the gradual increase of neutron flux which are significant : critical , where the chain reaction becomes self-sustaining thanks to the contributions of both kinds of neutron generation , in the description of the soviet equivalent of the cp1 startup at the university of chicago in 1942 , the long waits for those tardy neutrons is described in detail and prompt critical , where the immediate '' prompt '' neutrons alone will sustain the reaction without need for the decay neutrons . nuclear power plants operate between these two points of reactivity , while above the prompt critical point is the domain of nuclear weapons and some nuclear power accidents , such as the chernobyl disaster . a convenient unit for the measurement of the reactivity is that suggested by louis slotin : that of the dollar and cents . see also . criticality accident nuclear criticality safety geometric and material buckling . references .