Thrones, Dominations

background . sayers had charted the developing relationship between lord peter wimsey and harriet vane over four published novels , culminating in busman 's honeymoon , the action of which takes place immediately following the couple 's wedding . the characters appeared thereafter only in a few short stories and other published pieces , revealing only glimpses of their married life . according to sayers ' friend and biographer barbara reynolds , sayers had begun work in 1936 on thrones , dominations , a murder mystery novel in which the wimsey marriage was to be contrasted with those of two other couples . she apparently worked on it for some months during 1936 , but does not appear to have done so thereafter ; it has been suggested that this is due at least in part to the constitutional crisis of that year surrounding edward viii and his relationship with wallis simpson . the events of december 1936 onwards overtook the story , with the abdication altering how sayers ' potential audience would interpret a tale of contrasting marriages . in 1938 , she declared in a letter that she had come to dislike the book , and had '' great difficulty doing anything about it '' . sayers 's notes for the work were found among her papers after her death in 1957 , and were acquired in 1976 by the wade center at wheaton college , illinois . they consisted of a number of complete scenes from the beginning of the story and a few diagrams , including a multi-coloured representation of the interactions of the characters . by 1985 there were plans to publish the manuscript as it stood , together with some of the other short wimsey pieces , both published and unpublished , but these failed due to the death of sayers ' son and heir anthony fleming in that year . in 1996 the literary trustees of the estate approached novelist jill paton walsh and asked her to look at the material with a view to completing the novel . she was also able to refer to a typescript which had been found in a safe at sayers ' former literary agents and which differed in some respects from the manuscript version . the scenes were not ordered or numbered , and had to be arranged in logical order by paton walsh to constitute the first six chapters of the book . the remainder of the story had to be constructed from almost no data , based on what had already been written , but paton walsh has said that sayers ' notes make it clear who the murderer would be . the book was published in february 1998 . jill paton walsh followed it in 2002 with another wimsey/vane novel , a presumption of death , set during world war ii and based on some short wartime writings of sayers known as '' the wimsey papers '' . plot summary . it is 1936 . lord and lady peter wimsey , returned from a european honeymoon , are settling into their new home in london , where daily life is affected by the illness and then death of the king . the couple are personally happy , having resolved many of the problems in their relationship caused by character and circumstance , but must now tackle the practical details of bringing their lives together , including domestic and working arrangements , and social and family obligations . the couple become slightly acquainted with laurence harwell , a wealthy theatrical '' angel '' , and his beautiful wife , whom he has rescued from poverty following her rich father 's disgrace and imprisonment . after two years ' marriage the harwells are famously still devoted to one another , and when she is found dead at their weekend cottage in the country wimsey is asked to help interview the distraught husband , and becomes involved with the investigation . ( he is also asked to undertake sensitive diplomatic duties connected with the problematic behaviour of the new king , and as the 1936 abdication crisis looms , he gloomily predicts the coming war with hitler 's germany . ) suspicion falls on a writer known to have been in love with mrs harwell , and a talented but bohemian painter who had been working on portraits of both harriet and the murdered woman . two men who knew mrs harwell 's father in prison , and who have been blackmailing him with threats to harm her , are also suspected . meanwhile , harriet straightens out her domestic situation , learning how to fulfill her new role whilst keeping her own identity , and finds a practical solution to allow wimsey 's devoted manservant bunter to marry without having to leave the household . harriet 's unorthodox approach infuriates her sister-in-law ( who believes harriet has an obligation to abandon her career , do her duty to the family and produce an heir ) but it allows her to solve most of the practical difficulties that might have stood in the way of a successful and happy marriage . she also discovers she is expecting a baby . after some plot twists , a second murder and a scene involving the hidden rivers and victorian sewers that run under london , it is revealed that harwell unintentionally killed his wife in a jealous rage , in the belief she was preparing to entertain a lover , although ironically her preparations had really been for him . harwell might have gotten off with a manslaughter conviction , except that he later committed the premeditated murder of an actress who was in a position to disprove his alibi and tried to blackmail him . harriet visits harwell in prison to comfort him with the knowledge that his wife had not , after all , been unfaithful . in doing so , she finally banishes the lingering ghosts of her own imprisonment and murder trial , and the effect they have had on her relationship with her own husband . characters . lord peter wimsey – aristocratic amateur detective in his mid-forties . the younger son of a duke , his wealth comes largely from property which he manages with intelligence and responsibility . lady peter wimsey ( née harriet vane ) – successful detective novelist in her early thirties , newly married to lord peter after a stormy courtship . was saved from the gallows by her husband when accused of the murder of a former lover . laurence harwell – independently wealthy investor in plays . married for approximately two years , indulgent of his wife and deeply in love . rosamund harwell – daughter of a wealthy man , reduced to humiliating poverty and employment as a mannequin after her father 's imprisonment for fraud . rescued by her marriage to harwell two years previously – deeply in love , but given to friendly relations with other men and bored because she has little to occupy her days . strikingly beautiful . mr warren – rosamund harwell 's father , once wealthy but now dependent on his daughter and son-in-law after becoming involved in fraudulent transactions and ending up penniless and in prison . damaged by his experiences , proud of his daughter and grateful to harwell . claude amery – talented writer and promising playwright . passionately in love with rosamund harwell , and very jealous of her husband , who offered to stage his first play . gaston chaparelle – society portrait painter . talented artist but an amoral man in the habit of seducing his female sitters . mervyn bunter – wimsey 's manservant for over 16 years . devoted and loyal , but in love and wishing to marry . hope fanshaw – portrait photographer with her own business . object of bunter 's affections . gloria tallant ( née phoebe sugden ) – young actress of small talent but great ambition . acquainted with harwell , and her family home is close to the harwells ' country cottage . duke and duchess of denver – wimsey 's older brother gerald and sister-in-law helen . she has traditional views on class and rank and disapproves of the wimsey marriage , particularly harriet 's attitude to work and children . he is dutiful but unimaginative and in awe of his clever brother , but inclined to like harriet . both increasingly worried by their only son and heir jerry ( styled as lord st . george ) , who is charming but spoiled and unreliable , and hope the wimseys will produce children to ensure the succession of the family lands and estates beyond doubt . honoria , dowager duchess of denver – wimsey 's witty mother who is very pleased with his choice of wife and becomes a friend of harriet 's ; some parts of the novel are presented in the form of humorous letters and diary entries of hers chief inspector charles parker – police officer in charge of the harwell murder case . wimsey 's brother-in-law and close friend . reception . the book attracted considerable media interest , and met with mixed reviews from a variety of high-profile critics . novelist ruth rendell , writing in the sunday times , declared it '' . impossible to tell where dorothy l . sayers ends and jill paton walsh begins '' . a.n . wilson agreed that the joins in the material appeared '' seamless '' to the amateur reader , but found the plot in the main '' rather feeble '' ; he noted paton walsh 's attempt to parody sayers ' style , '' . the really corking snobbery , the p.g.wodehouse banter , and the conceited swapping of obvious quotations '' , but judged it a failure . joyce carol oates in the new york times called the book '' engrossing , intelligent and provocative '' , praised the power of its descriptive passages , and found its darker tone more in keeping with the later wimsey novels than with the '' zest and flashy originality '' of the earlier ones . reviewer barbara fowler noted that '' the original wimsey books were contemporary novels , reflecting social and political situations and outlooks at the time of writing . the present book , except for its beginning , is a historical novel – specifically , a historical whodunnit – carefully reconstructing a historical past time with a lot of hindsight . king edward viii is seen here from a clearly post-wwii perspective , with a reference made to his meeting nazi agents and with wimsey flatly stating that he is not fit to be king . it is extremely unlikely that sayers , had she completed the book at the time itself , would have written anything of the kind , or that her publishers would have risked scandal by unleashing such a book upon the british public ; at the time , it often happened that british papers delicately avoided altogether any mention of the mess in which their king was becoming involved '' . barbara d . fowler , '' that strange creature , historical detective fiction '' , ch.2,3 . references . external links . the dorothy l sayers society