The Quiet Earth

plot summary . alone . john hobson , a geneticist involved in a project concerned with manipulating dna , awakes in his hotel room in thames , new zealand , after a nightmare of falling from a great height . his wristwatch has stopped at 6:12 . upon getting up he finds the electricity off . it is quiet outside , with nobody in sight . hobson checks the time in his car , finding the vehicle 's clock is also frozen at 6:12 . the town 's shops are locked and unattended , with no sign of people . investigating a car sitting at an intersection , hobson sees that the driver 's seatbelt is still fastened . telephones are dead and there is only static on the radio . all humans and animals have disappeared . no watch or clock shows anything other than 6:12 . hobson concludes that some force has altered the clocks to show the same time and then stopped them , suggesting an intelligence behind the event , which hobson dubs '' the effect '' . a garden yields the first sign of life hobson has found – a worm dug up from the soil . the garden is otherwise devoid of fauna . hobson wonders if he has gone mad , but dismisses the idea . during the night , hobson hears sounds from outside approaching . hobson wills the entity to leave , and the sounds retreat . uncertainty as to whether the presence was there , or whether it may have been a stray animal spared from the effect competes in his mind with speculations that the intruder could be a manifestation of the effect . hobson reassures himself that he can keep the entity at bay with mental effort . the next morning hobson procures weapons and supplies , and leaves for auckland , finding the city deserted . hobson seems to be the only human being remaining . he wonders what rendered him immune to the effect . hobson hurries to an apparent smoke signal coming from the north shore , only to find suburban homes destroyed by the impact of a jetliner . the plane was empty when it crashed . hobson travels to the research unit , where he worked to reactivate dormant genes in humans and animals using high-frequency sound waves and radiation . the unit 's head , perrin , believed that awakening the dormant genes would lead to a quantum leap in evolution . hobson finds perrin in a radiation chamber , dead at the controls of the sound wave machine . the machine appears to have short-circuited , but there is no evidence indicating how perrin died . hobson decides he perished before the effect – as dead animal tissue did not vanish . hobson retrieves perrin 's papers , then begins journeying to wellington , hoping to find survivors or clues as to what happened . en route to rotorua , hobson sees a creature in his headlights . the monster is some kind of hybrid of dog and calf . hobson drives off terror-stricken , unsure as to whether the apparition was really there . at rotorua , after realising everyone else is dead , hobson almost commits suicide . when he comes across live fish in a stream , hobson concludes that the effect did not penetrate water . he is startled when an electronic howling noise booms out across lake taupo from the far side . hobson reaches an area of bushland near turangi , his path blocked by a truck . back-tracking , he finds the alternate route also cut off . trying to work around the stalled vehicle , he is confronted by another survivor with a rifle . api . the gunman is apirana maketu , a māori and a lance-corporal in the new zealand army . '' api '' woke up at his barracks in waiouru to find the base deserted . he remained at his post for two days before setting out to find survivors . a search of gisborne and the east coast yielded nothing , and a visit to the power station at tokaanu led him to believe the electrical grid was knocked out by a massive surge . api heard the same sound that hobson heard – albeit earlier in the day and coming from the side of the lake that hobson was standing on . believing it to be a car , api laid the roadblock to catch anyone coming south . api reveals his belief that something hostile is loose in the land . it is present only in certain places , and is stronger at night . the soldier is both relieved and worried to find that hobson has experienced the same dread . the two men seem to already know one other , sharing a flash of recognition upon first meeting . neither can account for this , as they have never encountered each other before . they arrive at the nation 's capital to find it devoid of life . api and hobson set up dwellings in a hotel and hunt for survivors . hobson plans to run tests to see if he can determine the nature of the effect and the reason why he and api survived . api assists hobson with procuring equipment for the scientist 's studies . a radio transceiver is set up , and the duo transmit words and morse code across the world . they receive no response . hobson 's investigations reveal no reason for their exemption from the effect . the men face the prospect that they are alone . api goes skin-diving for shellfish – he pretends to drown as a joke , and hobson reacts unconsciously by holding the other man 's head underwater . there is a moment of hostility when api breaks free , resolved when hobson explains that his son , who was autistic , drowned in a bathtub , and hobson felt api was making fun of this . the death of the child led to the end of hobson 's marriage . both men realise that hobson is not in complete control of his actions . visiting the beehive , api speculates that they could be lab rats on some kind of duplicate earth ; it is they who disappeared . hobson puts no stock in this theory . three weeks after the effect , hobson is left alone while api goes to get a new car . hobson goes into api 's bedroom and finds photographs of api as a private during the vietnam war , posing with the mutilated corpses of viet cong . hobson believes that api is a psychopath . the end is the beginning . hobson feels helpless to prevent his relationship with api from deteriorating further and plans to kill api with hypnotic . after searching for a boat to take them to the south island , during which both men experience an attack of dread from the '' force '' hounding them , api takes hobson for a joyride in his lotus elite . a woman runs into the car 's path . she is taken to the hotel and made comfortable , but neither api nor hobson are medically trained . unless she is less badly hurt than she seems , she will die . the men bicker pointlessly . the woman 's condition worsens , and there is nothing her fellow survivors can do for her . hobson senses the unseen force again , emanating from the empty city . he speculates that the force may have always been a part of the land , and is claiming the earth . api studies the bible , and later wakes hobson to tell him that he has solved the clock enigma . 6:12 relates to the number of the beast , 666 ( 6–12 6 and 6 plus 6 ) and to revelation 6:12 , with the biblical chapter 's talk of men hiding from the face of god . hobson does not believe this , and holds a hidden gun on the deranged soldier . the woman dies , sending api into hysterics . after another argument , a full-scale battle with guns and grenades ensues . hobson kills api , with the soldier seeming to give up . the scientist is now alone . breaking open perrin 's box , hobson realises his colleagues considered him unbalanced and kept him under surveillance . perrin believed that hobson 's dna was altered due to radiation , which caused his child 's autism . hobson believes the effect was his doing . the project he worked on caused the unravelling of animal dna ; only those with the dormant gene pair were spared . flashbacks detail hobson 's last days at the research unit . perrin seizes upon an accident with the sound wave/radiation machine in which hobson set the sound modulator too high and was blasted out of his chair by an invisible energy wave . perrin charges hobson with negligence , as the sample slides for insects and animals in the machine are blank , while the ones for plants are normal . this event cements for hobson his long-growing misgivings about the experiments , and what he believes are perrin 's motives for pursuing them . in a later flashback , hobson relates how he sabotaged the sound wave machine before going on leave to output a much higher level of infrasound than the controls would register . the idea was to put the machine out of action temporarily , ruining perrin 's chance to use hobson 's theories . hobson took what he believed to be a fatal dose of hypnotic on the night before the effect . as he reads perrin 's notes , hobson realises that this sabotage almost certainly caused the effect . his act always had a different purpose – to kill perrin . believing his boss insane and consumed with a desire to play god , hobson subconsciously altered his own memory to hide this fact from himself . this ability to edit his own recollections , and to take refuge in a kind of mental '' super-reality '' , is purely automatic . hobson finally accepts the guilt for letting his son drown . allowing his child to die was his way of destroying himself , a kind of external suicide . the child 's autism mirrored his father 's own emptiness . perhaps hobson caused the effect , or is dreaming all this in a barbiturate coma , or is in hell or purgatory . perhaps the rest of humanity evolved , or is unchanged and wondering where hobson and a handful of others have gone to . with the death of the entire race on his hands , hobson jumps from the hotel . he gathers speed , then wakes up in his motel room in thames . recovering from the nightmare of falling , all he can remember of the dream he was ripped from , he notices that his wrist watch has stopped at 6:12 . references .