Creatures of Light and Darkness

plot introduction . the novel is set in the far future , with humans on many worlds . some have god-like powers , or perhaps are gods & mdash ; the names and aspects of various egyptian gods are used . elements of horror and technology are mixed , and it has points in common with cyberpunk . creatures of light and darkness was originally conceived and written as nothing more than a writing exercise in perspective by roger zelazny . '' . and call me roger '' '' : the literary life of roger zelazny , part 2 , by christopher s . kovacs . in : the collected stories of roger zelazny , volume 2 : power & light , nesfa press , 2009 . he wrote it in present tense , constructed an entire chapter in poetry , and made the concluding chapter into the script of a play . he never intended it to be published , but when samuel r . delany heard about it from zelazny , delany convinced a doubleday editor to demand that zelazny give him the manuscript . '' . and call me roger '' '' : the literary life of roger zelazny , part 2 , by christopher s . kovacs . in : the collected stories of roger zelazny , volume 2 : power & light , nesfa press , 2009 . consequently , zelazny dedicated the novel to delany . unlike other books by zelazny , such as lord of light or the series the chronicles of amber , this novel is more poetic in style , and contains less straightforward action . however , like other novels , zelazny incorporates ancient myth , in this case from egyptian and some greek myth , and weaves ultra-futuristic technology with fantasy elements . plot summary . background . the universe was once ruled by the god thoth , who administered the different forces in the universe to keep things in balance . in time , he delegated this administration to his '' angels '' ( other god-like beings ) , who were each in charge of different '' stations '' , or forces in the universe . such stations included the house of the dead , the house of life , the house of fire , and so on . at some point , thoth had awakened a dormant , malevolent force on a distant planet . this dark force , called the thing that cries in the night , is so powerful and malevolent that it nearly obliterated thoth 's wife and threatens to consume the galaxy . thoth works to contain and destroy the creature , and in so doing , neglects his duties in maintaining the universe . the angels become rebellious and use the power vacuum to fight amongst themselves for dominance . thoth 's son set , who through an anomaly in time is also his father , fights the creature across a devastated planet . just as set is about to destroy the creature , he is attacked by the angel osiris , who unleashes the hammer that smashes suns , a powerful weapon that nearly kills set and the creature . thoth 's brother , typhon , who was helping set in the battle , vanishes without a trace and is presumed dead . ( typhon appears as a black horse-shadow , without a horse to cast it . he contains within himself something called skagganauk abyss , which resembles a black hole , not a term in common use at the time . ) the thing that cries in the night survived the blast , and so thoth , who has meanwhile been utterly overthrown by his angels , has no choice but to contain the dark force until he can find a way to destroy it . he also revives the personality of his wife and keeps her safe on a special world known only to him , where the seas are above the atmosphere , not below them . he also scatters set 's weapons and armor across the universe for safe-keeping in the event that set can ever be found . having been overthrown , he is now dubbed the prince who was a thousand by all in the universe . some of the surviving angels hide among the peoples of the universe as mysterious '' immortals '' , but others—osiris and anubis—take over the house of life and the house of death , respectively . other stations are abandoned , and osiris and anubis are the only two powers in the universe now . osiris cultivates life where he can , while anubis works to destroy it . plenty and famine , proliferation and plague , overpopulation and annihilation , alternate in the worlds of life between the two stations , much to the detriment of those who inhabit them . places . the geography of this universe contains several curious places : the house of life , ruled by osiris , contains a room in which osiris has reduced various people in his past into furnishings . these furnishings can speak ( or scream ) via wall-mounted speakers . a skull ( with brain ) for a paperweight . an enemy whose nervous system is woven into a rug . osiris enjoys jumping on the rug . in the house of the dead , numerous dead people of the six intelligent races lie on invisible catafalques until anubis requires them to go through the motions of pleasure—eating , drinking , dancing , making love—without any real enjoyment . anubis likes to watch . he also stages fights between champions from the six races : sometimes the victor gets a job—and a name . the planet blis is filled to bursting with people who are inexhaustibly fertile and do not know death : the whole planet is covered with 14 interlocking cities . indeed , one man agrees to commit suicide in front of an audience , for money to be given to his family , because most people on blis have never seen a death . he does so by self-immolation , after receiving the possibly proper death litany ( also called the agnostic 's prayer ) . on fog-shrouded d'donori , warlords raid each other solely to capture prisoners , who will be vivisected by the town scrier , or augur . by examining their entrails , he predicts the future and answers questions . on an unnamed planet , the sea is above the atmosphere . here , the prince who was a thousand keeps nephthys , his wife , who was disembodied and can not survive on a normal planet . in a cave , a dog worries a glove that has seen better centuries . the three-headed canine is apparently cerberus . on another planet , drug-maddened spearmen protect and castrated priests worship a pair of old shoes . the agnostic 's prayer . insofar as i may be heard by anything , which may or may not care what i say , i ask , if it matters , that you be forgiven for anything you may have done or failed to do which requires forgiveness . conversely , if not forgiveness but something else may be required to ensure any possible benefit for which you may be eligible after the destruction of your body , i ask that this , whatever it may be , be granted or withheld , as the case may be , in such a manner as to insure your receiving said benefit . i ask this in my capacity as your elected intermediary between yourself and that which may not be yourself , but which may have an interest in the matter of your receiving as much as it is possible for you to receive of this thing , and which may in some way be influenced by this ceremony . amen . this prayer , also called the possibly proper death litany , is uttered by one of the main characters , madrak , to shrive a man about to commit suicide for money ( given to his family ) . the agnostic 's prayer is cited by larry niven in his short story '' what can you say about chocolate-covered manhole covers '' , where it is used as the sacrament in a formal divorce ceremony . reception . algis budrys gave creatures of light and darkness an uneasily positive review , praising its '' rich , satisfactory detail and really moving human interplay , '' but warning that its unusual narrative technique '' will probably baffle and infuriate '' many readers . '' galaxy bookshelf '' , galaxy science fiction , november 1969 , pp.141-42 james blish , however , found the novel '' a flat failure , '' even though '' some parts are evocative in the authentic and unique zelazny manner . '' he particularly faulted zelazny 's decision to end creatures as a scene from a play , but '' a scene which absolutely demands straightforward , standard narrative and for which the playscript is the worst possible choice . '' '' books , '' f & sf , april 1970 , p . 49-51 . publisher 's error . at the time the novel was published , doubleday did not remainder its unsold science fiction when its sales cycle was complete ; instead , it simply destroyed the unsold copies . after creatures of life and darkness was issued in paperback , doubleday mishandled its inventory , causing most of the print run of zelazny 's next novel , the just-published nine princes in amber , to be destroyed in error . '' . and call me roger '' : the literary life of roger zelazny , part 3 , by christopher s . kovacs . in : the collected stories of roger zelazny , volume 3 : this mortal mountain , nesfa press , 2009 . . references . sources . . external links .