Whinchat

taxonomy and systematics . this species represents a fairly basal divergence of the genus saxicola . it retains the supercilium found in many muscicapidae but lost in the more derived saxicola species such as the european stonechat or african stonechat ( s . torquatus ) . wink , m . ; sauer-gürth , h . & gwinner , e . ( 2002 ) : evolutionary relationships of stonechats and related species inferred from mitochondrial-dna sequences and genomic fingerprinting . british birds 95 : 349–355 . pdf fulltext as with other species of saxicola , it was formerly considered a member of the thrush family ( turdidae ) , but is now placed in the old world flycatcher family muscicapidae . pan , q.-w . , lei , f.-m . , yang , s.-j . , yin , z.-h . , huang , y . , tai , f.-d . , & kristin , a . ( 2006 ) . pdf phylogenetic analysis of some turdinae birds based on mitochondrial cytochrome b gene sequences . acta zoologica sinica 52 ( 1 ) : 87 – 98 . it , and similar thrush-like muscicapidae species , are often called chats . the english name is derived from whin , the common gorse and chat referring to the nature of its calls . its scientific name means '' small rock-dweller '' , in reference to its habitat . saxicola derives from latin saxum ( '' rock '' ) + incola ( '' dwelling '' ) ; rubetra is a latin term for a small bird . bto birdfacts whinchat no subspecies are recognised . very rarely , hybridisation occurs between the whinchat and the siberian stonechat ( saxicola maurus ) , with a case being reported in finland in 1997 . lindroos , t . , in anon . , ed . ( 1999 ) . european news . british birds 92 : 77 . it has also been reported to hybridise with the european stonechat in western and southern europe . . description . the whinchat is a short-tailed bird , moving on the ground with small , rapid hops and frequently bobbing and flicking its wings and tail . it is similar in size to its relative the european robin ( erithacus rubecula ) , being long and weighing . both sexes have brownish upperparts mottled darker , a buff throat and breast , a pale buff to whitish belly , and a blackish tail with white bases to the outer tail feathers . the male in breeding plumage has a blackish face mask almost encircled by a strong white supercilium and cheek stripe , a bright orange-buff throat and breast , and small white wing patches on the greater coverts and inner median coverts . the female is duller overall , in particular having browner face mask , pale buffy-brown breast , and a buff supercilium and malar stripe , and smaller or no white wing patches . males in immature and winter plumage are similar to females , except that adult males retain the white wing patches all year round . blasco-zumeta , j . ( undated ) . laboratorio virtual ibercaja 333 whinchat though fairly similar to females and immatures of the european stonechat ( s . rubicola ) , the whinchat can readily be distinguished by its conspicuous supercilium and whiter belly , and also in western europe , by being paler overall than the western european stonechat subspecies s . rubicola hibernans . it also differs structurally in being slightly slimmer and less 'dumpy ' , and having longer wingtips ( an adaptation to its long-distance migration ) . it is more easily confused with female or immature siberian stonechat ( s . maura ) , which ( also being a long-distance migrant ) shares the longer wingtips ; however , siberian stonechat can be distinguished by its conspicuous unmarked pale orange-buff rump ( in whinchat , the rump is the same mottled brown colour as the back ) . its main call is described as a hue-tac-tac , the 'tac ' softer and less grating than that of the european stonechat ; the call is used both for contact between birds and predator alarms . the male has a whistling , crackly but soft song used during the breeding season , consisting of a mixture of soft whistles , tacs and more grating sounds ; it is often mimetic , including phrases from the songs of at least 12 other assorted bird species . it sings from a fence , bush , tree or wire , or occasionally from the ground or in flight , between about april and july . on the wintering grounds , it often gives alarm calls but only occasionally sings , being most likely to do so at the end of winter , when starting spring migration . . distribution and habitat . the whinchat is a migratory species breeding in europe and western asia from ireland and northern portugal east to the ob river basin near novosibirsk , and from northern norway south to central spain , central italy , northern greece , and the caucasus mountains . birds arrive on the breeding grounds between the end of april and mid may , and depart between mid august and mid september ( odd birds lingering to october ) . they winter primarily in tropical sub-saharan africa from senegal east to kenya and south to zambia , arriving in western africa at the start of the dry season in late september to november , and leaving between february and march . small numbers also winter in northwestern africa in morocco , northern algeria and tunisia . available stopover sites are important for the successful migration of whinchat between africa and europe , where they face the barriers of the sahara and mediterranean sea . vagrants have reached northwest of the breeding range to iceland , west on migration to the canary islands and cape verde , and south of the wintering range to northern south africa . during the breeding season in the uk , at the landscape-scale , whinchats favour habitats with high plant species richness and steeper slopes . however , at the territory scale , low-elevation areas with a heterogeneous vegetation structure and high density of perches and tussocks are preferred . border , j . a . , henderson , i . g . , redhead , j . w . and hartley , i . r . ( 2017 ) . habitat selection by breeding whinchats saxicola rubetra at territory and landscape scales . ibis , 159 : 139–151 . doi:10.1111/ibi.12433 whinchats wintering in nigeria have a large breeding range that spreads across continental europe indicating low connectivity , arising from wide migratory dispersal , with high mixing of breeding populations during the non-breeding season . a lone vagrant was sighted for the first time in india by birder r . mohammed saleem during their great indian bird expedition seek2019 at chambal national park . . behaviour and ecology . the whinchat is a largely solitary bird though it may form small family groups in autumn . it favours rough low vegetation habitats such as open rough pasture or similar minimally cultivated grassland with scattered small shrubs such as hawthorn ( crataegus monogyna ) , and bracken ( pteridium aquilinum ) or calluna ( calluna vulgaris ) stands on rock-strewn ground . it also commonly inhabits new and clear-felled conifer plantations until the new tree crop is about five to six years old and a metre or two tall . it always needs at least a few perching points ( shrubs , tall weeds , or fence posts ) to scan from for food and for use as song posts . breeding takes place in late april and may . the nest is built solely by the female , and is made of dried grasses and moss , and lined with hairs and fine bents . it is built on the ground , hidden in dense low vegetation , often at the foot of a bush . the female lays and incubates a clutch of four to seven eggs which hatch after eleven to fourteen days . both parents bring food to the young which leave the nest ten to fourteen days later , while still too young to fly . the chicks fledge at seventeen to nineteen days after hatching and remain largely dependent on the parents for a further two weeks . whinchats are short-lived , typically only surviving two years , to a maximum recorded of just over five years in the wild ; breeding starts when birds are a year old . predators include weasels , stoats , and small raptors such as the merlin and nest predators such as corvidae . nests are also lost due to agricultural operations such as silage cutting ( the main factor in the species ' decline in western europe ) bastian , a . ; bastian , h.-v . ( 1996 ) . das braunkehlchen : opfer der ausgeräumten kulturlandschaft . wiesbaden : aula verlag cited in urquhart & bowley 2002 or trampling by livestock , and are sometimes parasitised by the common cuckoo . whinchats are insectivore , feeding largely ( about 80–90 % ) on insects , but also consume a wide range of other invertebrates including spiders , small snails and worms . they also eat small amounts of fruit such as blackberry , primarily in autumn . the birds like to perch on elevated spots such as shrubs , from where they make sallies to catch insects , mostly taken off the ground , but also flying insects . while so perched , males in particular frequently flick their tail and sometimes their wings to show the white tail and wing flashes , for display or territorial communication signals to other whinchats . adult whinchats have a single complex complete moult in late summer ( late july onward ) after breeding and mainly completed before southbound migration . juveniles have a partial moult at the same time , growing new body feathering but retaining the flight feathers . all ages also have a partial moult in early spring on the wintering grounds before northbound migration . . status and conservation . fairly common across its wide range , the whinchat is classified as a species of '' least concern '' by the international union for conservation of nature . some populations are however in serious decline , particularly in the west of its range in britain , ireland , france , belgium , the netherlands , denmark , and germany , primarily due to intensive farming . in britain it is amber-listed with an unfavourable conservation status ; it had all but disappeared from former lowland breeding areas in the south and east between surveys in 1968–72 and 1988–91 , remaining common only in upland areas of the north and west where low-intensity livestock rearing is the main land use . gibbons , d . w . , reid , j . b . , & chapman , r . a . , eds . ( 1993 ) . the new atlas of breeding birds in britain and ireland : 1988–1991 . t & a d poyser . there has been a similar decline in ireland , where it is now classified as '' rare '' . irish birds vol . 9 p . 543 . references . external links . ageing and sexing ( pdf ; 4.5 mb ) by javier blasco-zumeta & gerd-michael heinze feathers of whinchat ( saxicola rubetra ) xeno-canto : audio recordings of the whinchat