Forging

history . forging is one of the oldest known metalworking processes . traditionally , forging was performed by a smith using hammer and anvil , though introducing water power to the production and working of iron in the 12th century allowed the use of large trip hammers or power hammers that increased the amount and size of iron that could be produced and forged . the smithy or forge has evolved over centuries to become a facility with engineered processes , production equipment , tooling , raw materials and products to meet the demands of modern industry . in modern times , industrial forging is done either with presses or with hammers powered by compressed air , electricity , hydraulics or steam . these hammers may have reciprocating weights in the thousands of pounds . smaller power hammers , or less reciprocating weight , and hydraulic presses are common in art smithies as well . some steam hammers remain in use , but they became obsolete with the availability of the other , more convenient , power sources . advantages and disadvantages . forging can produce a piece that is stronger than an equivalent cast or machined part . as the metal is shaped during the forging process , its internal grain texture deforms to follow the general shape of the part . as a result , the texture variation is continuous throughout the part , giving rise to a piece with improved strength characteristics . additionally , forgings can achieve a lower total cost than casting or fabrication . considering all the costs that are incurred in a product 's life cycle from procurement to lead time to rework , and factoring in the costs of scrap , and downtime and other quality considerations , the long-term benefits of forgings can outweigh the short-term cost savings that castings or fabrications might offer . some metals may be forged cold , but iron and steel are almost always hot forged . hot forging prevents the work hardening that would result from cold forming , which would increase the difficulty of performing secondary machining operations on the piece . also , while work hardening may be desirable in some circumstances , other methods of hardening the piece , such as heat treating , are generally more economical and more controllable . alloys that are amenable to precipitation hardening , such as most aluminium alloys and titanium , can be hot forged , followed by hardening . production forging involves significant capital expenditure for machinery , tooling , facilities and personnel . in the case of hot forging , a high-temperature furnace ( sometimes referred to as the forge ) is required to heat ingots or billets . owing to the size of the massive forging hammers and presses and the parts they can produce , as well as the dangers inherent in working with hot metal , a special building is frequently required to house the operation . in the case of drop forging operations , provisions must be made to absorb the shock and vibration generated by the hammer . most forging operations use metal-forming dies , which must be precisely machined and carefully heat-treated to correctly shape the workpiece , as well as to withstand the tremendous forces involved . processes . image : forgedconrodshowingetchedsection-s.jpg thumb upright a cross-section of a forged connecting rod that has been etched to show the grain flow there are many different kinds of forging processes available ; however , they can be grouped into three main classes : drawn out : length increases , cross-section decreases upset : length decreases , cross-section increases squeezed in closed compression dies : produces multidirectional flow common forging processes include : roll forging , swage , cogging , open-die forging , impression-die forging ( close die forging ) , press forging , cold forging automatic hot forging and upsetting . . temperature . all of the following forging processes can be performed at various temperatures ; however , they are generally classified by whether the metal temperature is above or below the recrystallization temperature . if the temperature is above the material 's recrystallization temperature it is deemed hot forging ; if the temperature is below the material 's recrystallization temperature but above 30 % of the recrystallization temperature ( on an absolute scale ) it is deemed warm forging ; if below 30 % of the recrystallization temperature ( usually room temperature ) then it is deemed cold forging . the main advantage of hot forging is that it can be done more quickly and precisely , and as the metal is deformed work hardening effects are negated by the recrystallization process . cold forging typically results in work hardening of the piece . degarmo , p . 373 degarmo , p . 375 . drop forging . drop forging is a forging process where a hammer is raised and then '' dropped '' onto the workpiece to deform it according to the shape of the die . there are two types of drop forging : open-die drop forging and impression-die ( or closed-die ) drop forging . as the names imply , the difference is in the shape of the die , with the former not fully enclosing the workpiece , while the latter does . open-die drop forging . open-die forging is also known as smith forging . degarmo , p . 391 in open-die forging , a hammer strikes and deforms the workpiece , which is placed on a stationary anvil . open-die forging gets its name from the fact that the dies ( the surfaces that are in contact with the workpiece ) do not enclose the workpiece , allowing it to flow except where contacted by the dies . the operator therefore needs to orient and position the workpiece to get the desired shape . the dies are usually flat in shape , but some have a specially shaped surface for specialized operations . for example , a die may have a round , concave , or convex surface or be a tool to form holes or be a cut-off tool . degarmo , p . 390 open-die forgings can be worked into shapes which include discs , hubs , blocks , shafts ( including step shafts or with flanges ) , sleeves , cylinders , flats , hexes , rounds , plate , and some custom shapes . open-die forging lends itself to short runs and is appropriate for art smithing and custom work . in some cases , open-die forging may be employed to rough-shape ingots to prepare them for subsequent operations . open-die forging may also orient the grain to increase strength in the required direction . advantages of open-die forging reduced chance of voids better fatigue resistance improved microstructure continuous grain flow finer grain size greater strength better response to thermal treatment improvement of internal quality greater reliability of mechanical properties , ductility and impact resistance '' '' is the successive deformation of a bar along its length using an open-die drop forge . it is commonly used to work a piece of raw material to the proper thickness . once the proper thickness is achieved the proper width is achieved via '' edging '' . '' '' is the process of concentrating material using a concave shaped open-die . the process is called '' edging '' because it is usually carried out on the ends of the workpiece . '' '' is a similar process that thins out sections of the forging using a convex shaped die . these processes prepare the workpieces for further forging processes . file : forging-edging.svg edging file : forging-fullering.svg fullering . impression-die forging . impression-die forging is also called '' closed-die forging '' . in impression-die forging , the metal is placed in a die resembling a mold , which is attached to an anvil . usually , the hammer die is shaped as well . the hammer is then dropped on the workpiece , causing the metal to flow and fill the die cavities . the hammer is generally in contact with the workpiece on the scale of milliseconds . depending on the size and complexity of the part , the hammer may be dropped multiple times in quick succession . excess metal is squeezed out of the die cavities , forming what is referred to as '' flash '' . the flash cools more rapidly than the rest of the material ; this cool metal is stronger than the metal in the die , so it helps prevent more flash from forming . this also forces the metal to completely fill the die cavity . after forging , the flash is removed . in commercial impression-die forging , the workpiece is usually moved through a series of cavities in a die to get from an ingot to the final form . the first impression is used to distribute the metal into the rough shape in accordance to the needs of later cavities ; this impression is called an '' edging '' , '' fullering '' , or '' bending '' impression . the following cavities are called '' blocking '' cavities , in which the piece is working into a shape that more closely resembles the final product . these stages usually impart the workpiece with generous bends and large fillets . the final shape is forged in a '' final '' or '' finisher '' impression cavity . if there is only a short run of parts to be done , then it may be more economical for the die to lack a final impression cavity and instead machine the final features . degarmo , p . 392 impression-die forging has been improved in recent years through increased automation which includes induction heating , mechanical feeding , positioning and manipulation , and the direct heat treatment of parts after forging . degarmo , p . 393 one variation of impression-die forging is called '' flashless forging '' , or '' true closed-die forging '' . in this type of forging , the die cavities are completely closed , which keeps the workpiece from forming flash . the major advantage to this process is that less metal is lost to flash . flash can account for 20 to 45 % of the starting material . the disadvantages of this process include additional cost due to a more complex die design and the need for better lubrication and workpiece placement . there are other variations of part formation that integrate impression-die forging . one method incorporates casting a forging preform from liquid metal . the casting is removed after it has solidified , but while still hot . it is then finished in a single cavity die . the flash is trimmed , then the part is quench hardened . another variation follows the same process as outlined above , except the preform is produced by the spraying deposition of metal droplets into shaped collectors ( similar to the osprey process ) . closed-die forging has a high initial cost due to the creation of dies and required design work to make working die cavities . however , it has low recurring costs for each part , thus forgings become more economical with greater production volume . this is one of the major reasons closed-die forgings are often used in the automotive and tool industries . another reason forgings are common in these industrial sectors is that forgings generally have about a 20 percent higher strength-to-weight ratio compared to cast or machined parts of the same material . . design of impression-die forgings and tooling . forging dies are usually made of high-alloy or tool steel . dies must be impact- and wear-resistant , maintain strength at high temperatures , have the ability to withstand cycles of rapid heating and cooling . in order to produce a better , more economical die the following standards are maintained : the dies part along a single , flat plane whenever possible . if not , the parting plane follows the contour of the part . the parting surface is a plane through the center of the forging and not near an upper or lower edge . adequate draft is provided ; usually at least 3° for aluminium and 5° to 7° for steel . generous fillets and radii are used . ribs are low and wide . the various sections are balanced to avoid extreme difference in metal flow . full advantage is taken of fiber flow lines . dimensional tolerances are not closer than necessary . barrelling occurs when , due to friction between the work piece and the die or punch , the work piece bulges at its centre in such a way as to resemble a barrel . this leads to the central part of the work piece to come in contact with the sides of the die sooner than if there were no friction present , creating a much greater increase in the pressure required for the punch to finish the forging . the dimensional tolerances of a steel part produced using the impression-die forging method are outlined in the table below . the dimensions across the parting plane are affected by the closure of the dies , and are therefore dependent on die wear and the thickness of the final flash . dimensions that are completely contained within a single die segment or half can be maintained at a significantly greater level of accuracy . degarmo , p . 394 . see also . casting cold sizing hammerscale thixoforming forging temperature . references . bibliography . doege , e . ; behrens , b.-a . : handbuch umformtechnik : grundlagen , technologien , maschinen ( in german ) , 2nd edition , springer verlag , 2010 , ostermann , f . : anwendungstechnologie aluminium ( in german ) , 3rd edition , springer verlag , 2014 , . external links . glossary of forging terms and definitions evidences of forging history