National Security Entry-Exit Registration System

history . the bush administration started the program in september 2002 . ins no . 2232-02/ag order no . 2612-2002 of september 3 , 2002 : registration and monitoring of certain nonimmigrants from designated countries . agency : immigration and naturalization service of the department of justice . signed by : attorney general john ashcroft . –57033 . published : september 6 , 2002 . effective : september 11 , 2002 . ins no . 2231-02 of september 10 , 2002 : registration and monitoring of certain nonimmigrants ; notice of ports-of-entry for departure of aliens who are subject to special registration . office . agency : immigration and naturalization service of the department of justice . signed by : commissioner of immigration and naturalization service james w . ziglar . –61353 . published : september 30 , 2002 . effective : october 1 , 2002 . a goal of the program was to increase screening of travelers from specific countries . because a majority of these countries were predominantly muslim cultures , the american civil liberties union said the program unjustly targeted individuals based on religion . in january 2003 a justice department spokesperson said nseers helped law enforcement authorities apprehend 330 '' known criminals '' and three '' known terrorists '' ; the spokesperson made these remarks in order to advocate for renewed funding for the program , for which the bush administration was requesting 16.8 million per fiscal year . however , by 1 december 2016 , '' no known terrorism convictions resulted from the program , '' according to a letter from some democratic members of congress and new york attorney general eric schneiderman . by january 2003 , at least 138,000 individuals were registered in nseers , according to testimony by the department of homeland security to congress . as of may 2003 , 82,581 individuals had complied with the domestic portion of the program . of these , at least 13,153 were placed in deportation proceedings . although the program originally included a requirement to re-register annually , the department of homeland security , which gained jurisdiction over the program , eliminated this requirement . immigrant rights advocates such as rabia chaudry criticized the program , particularly the domestic portion of it , for profiling on the basis of ethnicity and religion as well as generally undermining immigrants ' rights . they noted that 24 of the 25 countries included on the list are predominantly muslim , while all of the countries are in asia or africa . the aclu said that the program was ineffective due to it producing no terrorism-related convictions in the 93,000 cases it created . given the large numbers involved and the nature of the requirements , they argued , it was unlikely to find any members of al qaeda . nseers was probed in the documentary film '' aliens among us '' , by martina radwan , for the effect it had on immigrant families of arab origin . . suspension . the system was discontinued in 2011 under the obama administration , whereupon the department of homeland security said that the registration system had become outdated in the wake of new technology . nseers was indefinitely suspended as of april 27 , 2011 , when the us-visit program was instituted as its replacement . the department of homeland security website said , '' because the secretary of homeland security 's authority under the nseers regulations is broader than the manual information flow based on country designation that has now ended , the underlying nseers regulation will remain in place in the event a special registration program is again needed . '' . removal . on november 22 , 2016 , the american-arab anti-discrimination committee submitted a letter co-signed by nearly 200 organizations to president barack obama , calling on his administration to rescind the regulatory framework behind the nseers . the letter was submitted on behalf of nearly 200 civil and human rights , civil liberties , education , social justice , and inter-faith organizations , including the american civil liberties union , the leadership conference on civil human rights , american immigration council , center for american progress , national council of la raza , the national immigration forum , and the southern poverty law center . the letter reads in part , '' as organizations that represent diverse communities and that are committed to civil and immigrant rights , we firmly believe that removal of the nseers framework is a necessary imperative . we ask the administration to immediately take steps to remove the regulatory structure of nseers and stop any future use of the program . '' the registration system was ordered to be removed near the end of the president obama 's second term in 2016 . the removal order occurred after new york attorney general eric schneiderman wrote , '' we ca n't risk giving president-elect trump the tools to create an unconstitutional religious registry . '' however , because the order occurred within the last 60 days of a president 's term , if it is a '' major regulation '' ( major social policy significance or cost of more than 100 million ) , it is subject to congressional review ( see midnight regulations ) and may be voided by congress under the congressional review act . trump 's advisers had suggested keeping the system to track immigrants . the obama administration 's order to remove the system said the program was redundant because it called for manual collection of data that is now captured automatically . . registration . port-of-entry registration was required for nationals of iran , iraq , libya , sudan , and syria ( including those that were born in these countries but have a passport from a different country ) , in addition to any other non-citizen , non-permanent residents determined in advance by the united states department of state or the ins , or as they enter the country by ins inspectors . according to the september 2002 notice signed by attorney general john ashcroft announcing the update to special registration in the federal register , some form of special registration was already in effect for the above countries as early as 1998 . the new system began on september 11 , 2002 . certain non-citizens who were in the united states on or prior to september 10 , 2002 , were required to register in person at an ins office . this procedure was required of males over the age of sixteen who entered the united states legally on particular types of visa ( primarily student , work , and tourist ) from certain countries . countries were named on four occasions : group 1 : iran , iraq , libya , sudan or syria group 2 : afghanistan , algeria , bahrain , eritrea , lebanon , morocco , north korea , oman , qatar , somalia , tunisia , the united arab emirates , yemen group 3 : pakistan , saudi arabia group 4 : bangladesh , egypt , indonesia , jordan , kuwait the deadlines for registration were december 16 , 2002 ( group 1 ) , january 10 , 2003 ( group 2 ) , february 21 , 2003 ( group 3 ) , and march 28 , 2003 ( group 4 ) . the deadlines for group 1 and 2 registration were later extended to february 7 , 2003 . the deadlines for groups 3 and 4 were extended to march 21 , 2003 and april 25 , 2003 .