Optic nerve

structure . the optic nerve has been classified as the second of twelve paired cranial nerves but it is technically part of the central nervous system , rather than the peripheral nervous system because it is derived from an out-pouching of the diencephalon ( optic stalks ) during embryonic development . as a consequence , the fibers of the optic nerve are covered with myelin produced by oligodendrocytes , rather than schwann cells of the peripheral nervous system , and are encased within the meninges . peripheral neuropathy like guillain–barré syndrome do not affect the optic nerve . however , most typically the optic nerve is grouped with the other eleven cranial nerves and is considered to be part of the peripheral nervous system . the optic nerve is ensheathed in all three meninges layers ( dura , arachnoid , and pia mater ) rather than the epineurium , perineurium , and endoneurium found in peripheral nerves . fiber tracts of the mammalian central nervous system have only limited regenerative capabilities compared to the peripheral nervous system . therefore , in most mammals , optic nerve damage results in irreversible blindness . the fibers from the retina run along the optic nerve to nine primary visual nuclei in the brain , from which a major relay inputs into the primary visual cortex . the optic nerve is composed of retinal ganglion cell axons and glial cells . each human optic nerve contains between 770,000 and 1.7 million nerve fibers , which are axons of the retinal ganglion cells of one retina . in the fovea , which has high acuity , these ganglion cells connect to as few as 5 photoreceptor cells ; in other areas of retina , they connect to many thousand photoreceptors . the optic nerve leaves the orbit ( eye socket ) via the optic canal , running postero-medially towards the optic chiasm , where there is a partial decussation ( crossing ) of fibers from the temporal visual fields ( the nasal hemi-retina ) of both eyes . the proportion of decussating fibers varies between species , and is correlated with the degree of binocular vision enjoyed by a species . textbook of veterinary anatomy , 4th edition . dyce , sack and wensing most of the axons of the optic nerve terminate in the lateral geniculate nucleus from where information is relayed to the visual cortex , while other axons terminate in the pretectal nucleus and are involved in reflexive eye movements . other axons terminate in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and are involved in regulating the sleep-wake cycle . its diameter increases from about 1.6 & nbsp ; mm within the eye to 3.5 & nbsp ; mm in the orbit to 4.5 & nbsp ; mm within the cranial space . the optic nerve component lengths are 1 & nbsp ; mm in the globe , 24 & nbsp ; mm in the orbit , 9 & nbsp ; mm in the optic canal , and 16 & nbsp ; mm in the cranial space before joining the optic chiasm . there , partial decussation occurs , and about 53 % of the fibers cross to form the optic tracts . most of these fibers terminate in the lateral geniculate body . based on this anatomy , the optic nerve may be divided in the four parts as indicated in the image at the top of this section ( this view is from above as if you were looking into the orbit after the top of the skull had been removed ) : 1 . the optic head ( which is where it begins in the eyeball ( globe ) with fibers from the retina ; 2 . orbital part ( which is the part within the orbit ) . 3 . intracanicular part ( which is the part within a bony canal known as the optic canal ) ; and , 4 . cranial part ( the part within the cranial cavity , which ends at the optic chiasm ) . from the lateral geniculate body , fibers of the optic radiation pass to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe of the brain . in more specific terms , fibers carrying information from the contralateral superior visual field traverse meyer 's loop to terminate in the lingual gyrus below the calcarine fissure in the occipital lobe , and fibers carrying information from the contralateral inferior visual field terminate more superiorly , to the cuneus . . function . the optic nerve transmits all visual information including brightness perception , color perception and contrast ( visual acuity ) . it also conducts the visual impulses that are responsible for two important neurological reflexes : the light reflex and the accommodation reflex . the light reflex refers to the constriction of both pupils that occurs when light is shone into either eye . the accommodation reflex refers to the swelling of the lens of eye that occurs when one looks at a near object ( for example , when reading the lens adjusts to near vision . the eye 's blind spot is a result of the absence of photoreceptors in the area of the retina where the optic nerve leaves the eye . . clinical significance . disease . damage to the optic nerve typically causes permanent and potentially severe loss of vision , as well as an abnormal pupillary reflex , which is important for the diagnosis of nerve damage . right the type of visual field loss will depend on which portions of the optic nerve were damaged . in general , the location of the damage in relation to the optic chiasm ( see diagram above ) will affect the areas of vision loss . damage to the optic nerve that is anterior , or in front of the optic chiasm ( toward the face ) causes loss of vision in the eye on the same side as the damage . damage at the optic chiasm itself typically causes loss of vision laterally in both visual fields or bitemporal hemianopsia ( see image to the right ) . such damage may occur with large pituitary tumors , such as pituitary adenoma . finally , damage to the optic tract , which is posterior to , or behind the chiasm , causes loss of the entire visual field from the side opposite the damage , e.g . if the left optic tract were cut , there would be a loss of vision from the entire right visual field . injury to the optic nerve can be the result of congenital or inheritable problems like leber 's hereditary optic neuropathy , glaucoma , trauma , toxicity , inflammation , ischemia , infection ( very rarely ) , or compression from tumors or aneurysms . by far , the three most common injuries to the optic nerve are from glaucoma ; optic neuritis , especially in those younger than 50 years of age ; and anterior ischemic optic neuropathy , usually in those older than 50 . glaucoma is a group of diseases involving loss of retinal ganglion cells causing optic atrophy in a pattern of peripheral vision loss , initially sparing central vision . glaucoma is frequently associated with increased intraocular pressure that damages the optic nerve as it exits the eyeball . optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve . it is associated with a number of diseases , the most notable one being multiple sclerosis . the patient will likely experience varying vision loss and eye pain . the condition tends to be episodic . anterior ischemic optic neuropathy is commonly known as '' stroke of the optic nerve '' and affects the optic nerve head ( where the nerve exits the eyeball ) . there is usually a sudden loss of blood supply and nutrients to the optic nerve head . vision loss is typically sudden and most commonly occurs upon waking up in the morning . this condition is most common in diabetic patients 40–70 years old . other optic nerve problems are less common . optic nerve hypoplasia is the underdevelopment of the optic nerve resulting in little to no vision in the affected eye . tumors , especially those of the pituitary gland , can put pressure on the optic nerve causing various forms of visual loss . similarly , cerebral aneurysms , a swelling of blood vessel ( s ) , can also affect the nerve . trauma , of course , can cause serious injury to the nerve . direct optic nerve injury can occur from a penetrating injury to the orbit , but the nerve can also be injured by indirect trauma in which severe head impact or movement stretches or even tears the nerve . ophthalmologists and optometrists can detect and diagnose some optic nerve diseases but neuro-ophthalmologists are often best suited to diagnose and treat diseases of the optic nerve . the international foundation for optic nerve diseases ( ifond ) sponsors research and provides information on a variety of optic nerve disorders . additional images . file : mri of human eye.jpg mri scan of human eye showing optic nerve . file : gray514.png the ophthalmic artery derived from internal carotid artery and its branches . ( optic nerve is yellow ) file : gray682.png superficial dissection of brain-stem . lateral view . file : gray683.png dissection of brain-stem . lateral view . file : gray722.svg scheme showing central connections of the optic nerves and optic tracts . file : gray776.png nerves of the orbit . seen from above . file : gray777.png nerves of the orbit , and the ciliary ganglion . side view . file : gray880.png the terminal portion of the optic nerve and its entrance into the eyeball , in horizontal section . file : three main layers of the eye.png structures of the eye labeled file : three internal chambers of the eye.png this image shows another labeled view of the structures of the eye file : slide17ior.jpg optic nerve.deep dissection.inferior view . file : slide18ior.jpg optic nerve.deep dissection.inferior view . file : optic nerve.jpg optic nerve file : cranial endobasis of a 19-20 weeks foetus.jpg optic nerve file : human brain dura mater ( reflections ) description.jpg human brain dura mater ( reflections ) file : slide1dd.jpg optic nerve file : slide5ee.jpg optic nerve file : slide6uu.jpg optic nerve file : slide3pit.jpg cerebrum.inferior view.deep dissection file : slide2hom.jpg cerebral peduncle , optic chasm , cerebral aqueduct . inferior view . deep dissection . . see also . cranial nerve