Swabian Jura

geology . the geology of the swabian jura is mostly limestone , which formed the seabed during the jurassic period . the sea receded 50 & nbsp ; million years ago . three layers of different limestones are stacked over each other to form the range : black jurassic , brown jurassic , and white jurassic . white jurassic may be as pure as 99 % calcium carbonate . since limestone is soluble in water , rain seeps through cracks everywhere and forms subterranean rivers which flow through a large system of caves until they emerge . thus there are hardly any rivers , lakes or other forms of surface water on the plateau . in some places , former volcanic activity has left traces , such as maars and hills . in the west , the zollerngraben ( a geological depression in a tectonically active region ) sometimes causes mild earthquakes . the nördlinger ries is a large meteorite crater ( 15 & nbsp ; million years old ) . tertiary relicts can be found at the southern part of swabian jura . famous locations are known in the ulm area ( e.g . , turritellenplatte of ermingen ) . j . baier : '' über die tertiärbildungen im ulmer raum '' . documenta naturae , vol . 168 , münchen , 2008 . constant rain and other weather influences are slowly dissolving the entire range . each year , it recedes approximately . some millions of years ago , the mountains reached as far as stuttgart . in some places , the limestone was more resistant to decay and thus the recession of the main range has left small mountains ( called '' zeugenberge '' — '' witness mountains '' or outliers ; e.g . the achalm or the hohenstaufen ) which testify to the former territory of the range . the omnipresent caves are great tourist spots , beautiful and not very crowded . many different types can be found , from dry dripstone caves to caves that can only be entered by boat . sometimes the discharge of the water from subterranean rivers can be spectacular , too , e.g . the blautopf , a source for a tributary of the danube . also because of the porous limestone , the danube nearly disappears near immendingen ( in 1911 , 1921 , 1928 and 1943 it disappeared completely ) , only to reappear several kilometers further down . most of the water lost by the danube resurfaces in the aachtopf , a spring for a tributary to the rhine . the soil is not very fertile , the humus is often as thin as . many small limestone pebbles are found on the surface . landscape . much of the swabian jura consists of gentle to moderate hills often covered with forest or cleared for small-scale agriculture . the traditional landscape was grass fields with juniper . today this has become a comparatively rare sight . however , in certain places it is protected by the government of baden-württemberg . the highest elevations reach just over . they are all in the southwestern part of the jura , in the region of the großer heuberg . lemberg , highest point of the swabian jura ) oberhohenberg hochberg wandbühl rainen montschenloch plettenberg bol hochwald hummelsberg kehlen schafberg . there are many other peaks in the alb , such as the hornau , ochsenberg , and achalm . fossils . fossils can be found everywhere in the swabian jura . many large and important fossils were found here . at holzmaden , outside of weilheim unter teck , a small private museum , called urwelt-museum hauff , provides visitors with the opportunity to '' dig '' for fossils in their shale deposits . the urwelt-museum hauff houses the world 's largest petrified crinoid ( sea-lily ) colony with a size of and an age of about 180 million years . history and culture . prehistoric culture . in a number of caves ( including vogelherd , hohlenstein-stadel , geißenklösterle and hohle fels ) , all just a few kilometers apart , some of the oldest signs of human artifacts were found . ausstellung für älteste kunst der welt . stuttgarter nachrichten online best known are : a mammoth , a horse head , a water bird , and two statues of a lion man all of surprising quality and all more than 30,000 & nbsp ; years old . the oldest known prehistoric music have been found here , too : flutes made from the bones of swans and griffon vultures , some 35,000 & nbsp ; years old , and in 2004 a flute carved from the tusk of a mammoth dating from the ice age , around 37,000 & nbsp ; years ago , and the oldest representation of the human body , the venus of schelklingen . the roman empire . this region , located south of the limes , was part of the roman empire from around the first to third century a.d . a roman road ran along the neckar river and over the plateau . in hechingen-stein a roman outpost along this road was discovered in the 1970s and has been turned into an outdoor museum . the limes actually cuts across the plateau at aalen , which gets its name from the original roman cavalry post , or ala , on the outskirts of the modern town . here too , the roman ruins are being excavated and a museum has been open to the public since the late 1980s . traditional life . life was extremely hard in the swabian jura . the lack of water and the poor quality of the soil made it a backward region . for many villages fetching water required a long journey by horse . since water often needed to be stored over a long time , it was often stagnant . thus disinfection via alcohol was very popular : '' most '' ( cider ) was mixed with water and even given to babies . a modern water supply system ( outstanding for its time ) was built in the late 1880s , which eased the situation . language . locals in the areas speak the distinct german dialect known as swabian german , which varies even throughout the jura and is difficult to understand for speakers of standard german . the dialect at the top of the plateau is markedly different from , and stronger than , even the broadest swabian of the lowland areas . across the whole swabian region , many phrases and grammar are highly localized , even down to the village level ; however , the swabian dialect of the highland regions is characterised by a sing-song melody , and some of the verb forms are also distinct , not only from standard german , but also from those of the rest of swabia . in former times , yiddish , pleißne and romani was also spoken . ( stopper ) : grab josef reinhard . in : schwarzwälder bote vom 28 . februar 2012 . the pleißne was spoken by hawkers selling items such as baskets , brushes , and whips , and belongs to rotwelsch . it was used as a code . zu pleißne burladingen siehe werner metzger : festrede 125 jahre schwäbischer albverein . in : blätter des schwäbischen albvereins 2013 , stuttgart , 4 . mai 2013 . . tradition . the '' swabian–alemannic '' carnival is an important tradition in many of the villages , called variously '' fastnacht '' , '' fasnacht '' , '' fasnet '' , or '' fasching '' . of particular cultural importance is the fasnet celebration in rottweil . typical of the allemannic tradition are the witches and forest- or well-spirits , who typically signify winter or the forces of nature coming to drive winter out . the various roles are often claimed to have been defined in pre-christian times and here the exact traditions vary from village to village , creating a fantastic variety of heroes , villains and good and evil creatures . it is also often the case that , while in one town a strong tradition of celebrating fasnet has survived , the neighboring town will have almost no tradition . this is in many instances linked to the after-effects of the protestant reformation and the later influence of the calvinistic pietists , who more or less strictly opposed such frivolous - even heathen - behaviour . catholic regions to this day tend to have a stronger fasnet tradition . a swabian fasnet celebration in any case has little or nothing in common with the simultaneous celebrations along the middle rhein , which are well known across germany because they are televised every year . swabians generally are expected to go to work as normal on rose monday and fat tuesday , unlike their neighbors to the northwest . industry . image : groz-beckert hochhaus.jpg thumb groz-beckert in ebingen , world leader in needles for textile machines since raising crops was not easy , raising sheep was popular . this yielded the development of a strong textile industry . in the 1950s , reutlingen was the german town with the highest number of millionaires , until the decline of the german textile industry hit them as well . still , many high quality textile companies can be found , such as hugo boss , merz b . schwanen , trigema , reusch , groz-beckert and others ( the town of metzingen is widely known as a '' luxury outlet town '' , with people from all over europe coming to buy expensive clothes cheaper ) . from this , machine building and advanced engineering developed . with the invention of cars and the founding of daimler-benz nearby , the car industry and later also electronics and computer industries developed . the '' neckar-alb '' region is the third largest industrial zone in germany , and the most stable . the best known company is still daimler-benz , today known simply as daimler ag , followed by robert bosch . the region has one of the highest patents-to-population ratios in the world . many products fall into the high-tech category . the small and medium enterprise sector ( 100-5,000 employees ) predominates . perhaps as a result , the unemployment rate is low . in general , products are expensive but compete through high quality . several districts are recognised as especially attractive to business , e.g . reutlingen as the town in germany where it is simplest to open a new business . educational resources are at a high level . the schools and universities of the region all enjoy top rankings within germany . the swabian jura and the neighbouring region have developed from one of the poorest regions of germany to one of its richest within the past 150 & nbsp ; years . climate . in winter it often snows . skiing is sometimes possible ( though the hills are not steep or high ) . often windy and a bit colder than the rest of germany . because of a special micro climate , a small weather station near the town of stetten am kalten markt is known as the '' coldest spot in germany '' . locations . the swabian jura are not densely populated by german standards . most of the larger towns are outside the region , though they are often counted as part of it . these towns often have some of the highest rents in germany , while land on the plateau itself is considered cheap ( by south german standards ) . many town names end in -ingen . there were several military training grounds , some also used by nato troops . on the münsingen training ground which existed for over 100 & nbsp ; years , a biosphere reserve is in the making . the region has several larger and many small nature reserves . important towns . thumb ; on the plateau engstingen münsingen ; in valleys albstadt gammertingen heidenheim ( north-eastern border ) sigmaringen ; in the foreland bad urach balingen göppingen hechingen ( at the north-western escarpment ) reutlingen ( called '' the gate to the swabian jura '' ) rottweil ( oldest town in baden-württemberg ) tübingen ( university town ) ulm ( south-eastern border ) the towns in the foreland of the swabian jura officially do n't belong to it . tourist locations . there are many castles , monasteries , churches , ruins and old towns . here is a small selection . castles . burg hohenzollern schloss lichtenstein schloss sigmaringen burg hohenneuffen hohenstaufen castle ( ruin ) schloss hellenstein burg teck ( ruin ) burg hohenrechberg ( ruin ) . churches and monasteries . zwiefalten abbey ulm ( highest church spire in the world ) beuron abbey . caves . nebelhöhle ( mist cave ) bärenhöhle ( bear cave ) blauhöhle . towns . blaubeuren tübingen heidenheim bad urach . other . blautopf danube sinkhole ( danube disappearing ) nusplingen ( fossil hunting ) schäfbuch forest ( 48.3°n , 9.35°e ) a good way for tourists to get to know the swabian jura is to travel on the schwäbische albstraße , a '' national scenic byway '' , leading from tuttlingen or trossingen to nördlingen or aalen . food and drink . brenntar , was a swabian staple foodstuff , particularly prominent in the swabian jura and in the allgäu . it is made of a specially roasted flour called musmehl . alb-leisa , traditional lentil varieties of this region . note on terminology in english and german . the name ( related to jurassic ) derives from the jura mountains , of which the swabian and franconian plateaux are geographically part . in german , at least outside geological circles , the word alb is used almost universally in place of jura . the origin of the word is uncertain . one theory is that it derives form the latin albus ( '' white '' ) . another is that it is from a pre-indo-european word albhros ( '' hill '' ) . it is related to the german words alpe , alm or alp ( from old high german alpâ ) , meaning an '' alpine pasture '' . jacob grimm , deutsches wörterbuch , s.v . '' albe '' the word alb functions as a proper noun referring more or less exclusively to the swabian and the franconian jura areas however , and as such has no direct translation into most other languages . it is perhaps for this reason that schwäbische alb has sometimes been translated into english as 'swabian alps ' , thus avoiding the lesser-known name jura . however , the area is not part of the alps ( despite its proximity ) , nor is it ever referred to as such in german , the alps being die alpen in german ( plural ) .