Tommaso Campanella

biography . born in stignano ( in the county of stilo ) in the province of reggio di calabria in calabria , southern italy , campanella was a child prodigy . son of a poor and illiterate cobbler , he entered the dominican order before the age of fourteen , ernst , germana , '' tommaso campanella '' , the stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ( fall 2014 edition ) , edward n . zalta ( ed . ) taking the name of fra ' tommaso in honour of thomas aquinas . he studied theology and philosophy with several masters . early on , he became disenchanted with the aristotle orthodoxy and attracted by the empiricism of bernardino telesio ( 1509–1588 ) , who taught that knowledge is sensation and that all things in nature possess sensation . campanella wrote his first work , philosophia sensibus demonstrata ( '' philosophy demonstrated by the senses '' ) , published in 1592 , in defence of telesio . in 1590 he was in naples where he was initiated in astrology ; astrological speculations would become a constant feature in his writings . campanella 's heterodox views , especially his opposition to the authority of aristotle , brought him into conflict with the ecclesiastical authorities . denounced to the roman inquisition , he was arrested in padua in 1594 and cited before the holy office in rome , he was confined in a convent until 1597 . '' tommaso campanella ( 1568-1639 ) '' , the galileo project , rice university after his liberation , campanella returned to calabria , where he was accused of leading a conspiracy against the spain rule in his hometown of stilo . campanella 's aim was to establish a society based on the common ownership and wives , for on the basis of the prophecies of joachim of fiore and his own astrological observations , he foresaw the advent of the age of the spirit in the year 1600 . corrado claverini , tommaso campanella e gioacchino da fiore . '' riaprire il conflitto '' a partire dal pensiero utopico e apocalittico , '' giornale critico di storia delle idee '' 11 , 2014 ( in italian ) betrayed by two of his fellow conspirators , he was captured in 1599 and incarcerated in naples , where he was tortured on the rack . c . dentice di accadia , tommaso campanella , 1921 , pp . 43-44 ( in italian ) even from the confinement of the jail , campanella managed to influence the intellectual history of the early seventeenth century , by maintaining epistolary contacts with european philosophers and scientists , neapolitan cultural circles , and caravaggio 's commissioners . alessandro giardino , the seven works of mercy , 2017 . finally , campanella made a full confession and would have been put to death had he not feigned madness and set his cell on fire . he was tortured further , a total of seven times . crippled and ill , campanella was sentenced to life imprisonment . tommaso campanella biography norman douglas , the death of western culture campanella spent twenty-seven years imprisoned in naples , in various fortresses . during his detention , he wrote his most important works : the monarchy of spain ( 1600 ) , political aphorisms ( 1601 ) , atheismus triumphatus ( atheism conquered , 1605–1607 ) , quod reminiscetur ( 1606 ? ) , metaphysica ( 1609–1623 ) , theologia ( 1613–1624 ) , and his most famous work , the city of the sun ( originally written in italian in 1602 ; published in latin in frankfurt ( 1623 ) and later in paris ( 1638 ) . he defended galileo galilei in galileo 's first trial with his work the defense of galileo ( written in 1616 , published in 1622 ) . apologia pro galileo , published in latin by impensis godefridi tampachii , typis erasmi kemfferi in frankfort , germany . in 1632 , before galileo 's second trial , campanella wrote to galileo : memorie y lettera inedita di galileo galilei , second part , published in modena , 1821 , page 144 . il padre tommaso campanella al galileo . ( libreria nelli ) roma 25 settembre 1632 . con gran disgusto mio ho sentito che si fa congregazione di teologi irati , a proibire i dialoghi di v . s . ; e non ci entra persona . che sappia matematica , nè cose recondite . avverta che mentre v.s . asserisce che fu ben proibita l ’ opinione del moto della terra , non è obbligata a creder che anche e ragioni de ’ contraddicenti sien buone . questa è regola teologica ; e si prova perchè nel concilio niceno secondo fu decretato che angelorum imagines depingi debent , quom ‘ am vere corporei sunt : il decreto è valido , e non la ragione ; giacché tutti i scolastici dicono che gli angeli sono incorporei a tempo nostro . ci son altri fondamenti assai . dubito di violenza di gente che non sa . il padre nostro fa fracassi contra , e dice ex ora papa : ma tu non è informato , nè può pensare a questo . v . s . per mio ‘ avviso faccia scriver dal gran duca , che siccome mettono domenicani e gesuiti e teatini e preti secolari in questa congregazione contro i vostri libri , ammettano anche il padre castelli e me . to my great disgust i have heard that wrathful theologians of the congregation aim to prohibit the dialogues of your excellency , and that no one will be present who understands mathematics or recondite things . be aware that while your excellency does state that it was appropriate to prohibit the theory of the earth 's motion , you are not obliged to believe that the reasons of those who contradicted you are good . this is a theological rule , and is proved by the second council of nicaea which decreed that angelorum imagines depingi debent , quam ‘ am vere corporei sunt ( images of angels must be depicted as they are in the flesh ) : while the decree is valid , the reasoning behind it is not , since all scholars today say angels are incorporeal . there are many other fundamental reasons . i fear violence from people who do not understand this . our pope makes a lot of noise against this and speaks as the pope , but you have n't heard about that , nor can think about it . in my opinion your excellency should write to the grand duke of tuscany , that since they are putting dominicans , jesuits , theatines , and secular priests who are against your books in this council , they should also admit father castelli and me . campanella was finally released from prison in 1626 , through pope urban viii , who personally interceded on his behalf with philip iv of spain . taken to rome and held for a time by the holy office , campanella was restored to full liberty in 1629 . he lived for five years in rome , where he was urban 's advisor in astrological matters . in 1634 , a new conspiracy in calabria , led by one of his followers , threatened fresh troubles . with the aid of cardinal barberini and the french ambassador de noailles , he fled to france , where he was received at the court of louis xiii with marked favour . protected by cardinal richelieu and granted a liberal pension by the king , he spent the rest of his days in the convent of saint-honoré in paris . his last work was a poem celebrating the birth of the future louis xiv ( ecloga in portentosam delphini nativitatem ) . campanella 's de sensu rerum et magia ( 1620 ) partly inspired the first fully-fledged it-narrative in english , charles gildon 's the golden spy ( 1709 ) . j . wu , '' 'nobilitas sola est atq ; unica virtus ' : spying and the politics of virtue in the golden spy ; or , a political journal of the british nights entertainments ( 1709 ) '' , journal for eighteenth-century studies 40:2 ( 2017 ) , 237-253 doi : 10.1111/1754-0208.12412 . see also . utopian and dystopian fiction millennialism . notes . references . . external links . peter forshaw ( 2010 ) 'astrology , ritual and revolution in the works of tommaso campanella ( 1568-1639 ) ' . works in english translations the city of the sun ; a poetical dialogue between a grandmaster of the knights hospitallers and a genoese sea-captain , his guest . translated to english by editor henry morley , project gutenberg . city of the sun ( text derived from ideal commonwealths , p.f . collier & son , new york . 1901 . displayed by ebooks adelaide university of adelaide library , south australia ) ideal commonwealths ; contains excerpts from city of the sun and short biography , by editor : henry morley , professor of english literature at university college , london ; fifth edition , 1890 , project gutenberg . sonnets of michelangelo buonarrotti and tommaso campanella , 1878 ; translated into rhymed english , by john addington symonds , author of renaissance in italy .