Tommy Muñiz

early years . muñiz ramírez was born in ponce , puerto rico on 4 february 1922 , to tomas muñiz and monserrate '' nena '' ramírez . his father , don tomás , was a marketing executive who later became the administrator ( and eventual owner ) of various radio stations , as well as a radio producer . chronicle of his life in primera hora although muñíz was born in ponce , he was raised in the capital city of san juan where he studied . muñíz developed an interest in the entertainment business thanks to his father and to his uncle and godparent félix muñíz , who also produced radio programs . article about his death in primera hora he started by being the messenger of the marketing firm where his father and uncle used to work , and eventually became a radio scriptwriter . radio and television career . radio producer . muñiz was a successful radio producer in puerto rico during the mid- to late 1940s . five of his radio programs -comedies for which he was often the scriptwriter , sometimes with the assistance of sylvia rexach- would consistently earn a strong following , as judged by the attendance to personal presentations of the artists featured in them . he was responsible for introducing more than a dozen new artists to the media . he bought radio luz 1600 ( wluz-am ) a radio station in bayamón , puerto rico garcía , beba , ¡juan , juan , juan ! crónicas de la televisión en los tiempos de don tommy , terranova editores , san juan , 2009 ; pg . 28 . television producer . during the first years of commercial television in puerto rico , and after a brief period during which revenues from his radio productions trickled down , muñiz opted to start producing television programs as well . he was producer or executive producer for dozens of television programs and specials between 1955 and 1995 . at one time in the early 1960s , five programs produced by muñiz were in the top five television rankings in local audience surveys . one of the programs even spawned a 1967 film , '' la criada malcriada '' , starring velda gonzález , shorty castro and muñiz , among others . he is credited for producing most of josé miguel agrelot 's television programs during his career . he is also credited with discovering and promoting other television artists as well , particularly otilio warrington . in the 1970s he was the owner of wrik-tv channel 7 in ponce . other enterprises . at one time or another , muñiz also owned a restaurant ( la campana ) in cayey ) , a pet shop in san juan , a zoo ( monoloro ) in carolina , a thoroughbred stable , and a summer camp for children ( '' camp gualí '' ) . he later delegated many of the administrative functions of his production company as to concentrate in scriptwriting and acting . actors labor dispute . muñiz was persuaded by his executive staff to produce spanish soap operas , known as telenovelas . the lackluster performance of these programs as measured by television ratings contrasted significantly with the enormous success of his comedy productions . as a result , decisions were made to reduce the number of novelas produced and cut the company 's payroll . as a consequence , at least one local actor , jose reymundi , lost his job . as a result , in november 1973 , puerto rico witnessed one of the largest labor disputes between the local actors union and tommy muñiz productions . in solidarity with reymundi , seven actors left muñiz 's productions demanding fringe benefits from the company . production on muñiz 's programs stopped for two weeks , with many unionized technicians joining the protesting actors at the picket line . the actors then formed astra , an actors ' conglomerate inspired by the origins of united artists . astra produced the experimental television programs ahí va eso ( there goes that ) and sin ton ni son ( no tune no beat ) . the conglomerate dissolved shortly after . the strike left a lasting impression in muñiz that sent him into a depression . some of astra 's actors eventually reconciled with muñiz . los garcia : memorable tv hit . in the late 1970s , muñiz revived a comedy format that he had successfully used in three previous radio and television productions , the family sitcom . he produced and acted in a comedy series named los garcía together with his real-life son rafo muñiz , and with longtime friend gladys rodríguez . also starring were william gracia as pepín , gina beveraggi as gini , edgardo rubio as junito , manela bustamante as doña tony , emma rosa vincenty as doňa cayetana , and a number of additional actors in various roles . the show became the most successful television show in puerto rican history , having a mostly successful six-year run and staying for three of those years at the top of local television ratings . media enterprises . during the late 1970s and early 1980s , muñiz was the owner of a radio station ( radio luz wluz ) and a television channel ( wste ) . both were named after his wife , luz maría . in 1988 , he became one of the largest minority owners of another channel , wlii . . film actor . in 1989 , he and rodríguez reunited to act in the movie lo que le pasó a santiago , directed by jacobo morales , a longtime friend of muñíz . the film was nominated for an academy award for best foreign language film becoming the first and only puerto rican film so far to do so . as a consequence of his part in lo que le pasó a santiago , muñiz was selected to act in the 1991 television comedy film crazy from the heart , directed by thomas schlamme and featuring christine lahti and rubén blades . in the movie , muñiz played blades ' father , a mexican peasant with a proclivity for setting billboards on fire as a protest . the movie was eventually broadcast by tnt ( u.s . tv network ) . personal life . muñíz was married to luz maría garcía de la noceda and they had eight children : rafael ( aka rafo ) , ruby , hilda , mario , luzie , tomito , manolo , pedro and félix antonio ( toño ) . rafo and pedro are both well-known actors and producers and toño currently is production manager for various promoters in puerto rico . in the 80 's and 90 's toño was the producer of the yearly top salsa event in the caribbean , '' festival de salsa winston '' ; pedro directed a dramatic film , cayo . manolo was a businessman before his untimely death in july 1995 . tommy muñíz died 15 january 2009 in hato rey , puerto rico . luz maría garcía de la noceda died a day after her 87th birthday , on 21 october 2011 . tommy muñiz 's life is described in two books : an autobiography named '' así he vivido '' ( '' that 's the way i 've lived '' ) and '' ¡juan , juan , juan ! crónicas de la televisión en tiempos de don tommy '' by puerto rican author beba garcía . productions . radio productions el colegio de la alegría ( comedy ) la familia pérez ( comedy ) adelita , la secretaria ( comedy ) gloria y miguel ( comedy ) ¡qué sirvienta ! ( comedy ) las aventuras de andy tenorio ( comedy , based on the archie comic strip ) la novela fab ( drama ) television productions el show de shows ( for which muñiz produced the comedy section only – 1955 ) el colegio de la alegría ( the radio comedy program , moved to television ) a reírse con fab ( first of four different names for the time slot – comedy ) el profesor colgate ( amateur talent contest ) carnaval del monte ( variety show ) la taberna india ( variety show , based on the american show duffy 's tavern ) hogar , dulce hogar ( sitcom ) lotus lo divierte ( variety show – 1956 ) garata deportiva ( sports commentary – 1956 ) el chiste camel ( comedy – 1957 ) telefiesta de la tarde ( variety show – 1957 ) reina por un día ( prize show – 1959 ) desafiando a los genios ( comedy – various inceptions between 1959 and 2004 . this was a personal favorite of pablo casals ) el show del mediodía ( varíety show ) encabuya y vuelve y tira ( comedy / news / community service ) la criada malcriada ( sitcom ) la cámara cómica ( comedy / reality television , based on candid camera – various inceptions ) esto no tiene nombre ( comedy , based on rowan & martin 's laugh-in – various inceptions ) ja , ja , ji , ji , jo , jo con agrelot ( comedy / variety ) gloria y miguel ( sitcom ) viernes de gala ( variety ) el especial de corona ( variety specials ; first appearance by otilio warrington on television , 1967 ) caras y caretas de las mujeres ( comedy ) el show de tommy muñiz ( talk show ) hello , puerto rico ( variety special ) las almas no tienen color ( novela – 1969 ) historia de dos mujeres ( novela – 1970 ) cuando los hijos condenan ( novela – 1970 ) los juanes ( novela – 1971 ) borinquen canta ( folk music / variety show , 1971 ) maría del mar ( novela – 1971 ) el silencio nos condena ( novela , 1972 ) mami santa ( novela , 1972 ) claudia y virginia ( novela , 1973 ) llanto para una mujer ( novela , 1973 ) marta ( novela , 1973 ) casting decisions caused the astra strike against muñiz 's production company los garcía ( sitcom , 1976–1981 ) . honors . there is a statue of muñiz at the parque a los caballeros de la television ( park of the tv gentlemen ) in bayamon , puerto rico . see also . list of puerto ricans . references . external links . chronicle of his life in primera hora article about his death in primera hora