Joachim du Bellay

biography . joachim du bellay was born at the castle of la turmelière , not far from liré , near angers , being the son of jean du bellay , lord of gonnor , first cousin of the cardinal jean du bellay and of guillaume du bellay . his mother was renée chabot , daughter of perceval chabot and heiress of la turmelière ( plus me plaît le séjour qu'ont bâti mes aïeux ) . both his parents died while he was still a child , and he was left to the guardianship of his elder brother , rené du bellay , who neglected his education , leaving him to run wild at la turmelière . when he was twenty-three , however , he received permission to study law at the university of poitiers , no doubt with a view to his obtaining preferment through his kinsman the cardinal jean du bellay . at poitiers he came in contact with the humanism marc antoine muret , and with jean salmon macrin ( 1490–1557 ) , a latin poet famous in his day . there too he probably met jacques peletier du mans , who had published a translation of the ars poetica of horace , with a preface in which much of the program advocated later by la pléiade is to be found in outline . it was probably in 1547 that du bellay met ronsard in an inn on the way to poitiers , an event which may justly be regarded as the starting-point of the french school of renaissance poetry . the two had much in common , and became fast friends . du bellay returned with ronsard to paris to join the circle of students of the humanities attached to jean dorat at the collège de coqueret . while ronsard and jean-antoine de baïf were most influenced by greek models , du bellay was more especially a latinist , and perhaps his preference for a language so nearly connected with his own had some part in determining the more national and familiar note of his poetry . in 1548 appeared the art poétique of thomas sébillet , who enunciated many of the ideas that ronsard and his followers had at heart , though with essential differences in the point of view , since he held up as models clément marot and his disciples . ronsard and his friends dissented violently from sébillet on this and other points , and they doubtless felt a natural resentment at finding their ideas forestalled and , moreover , inadequately presented . the famous manifesto of the pléiade , the défense et illustration de la langue française ( defense and illustration of the french language , 1549 ) , was at once a complement and a refutation of sébillet 's treatise . this book ( inspired in part by sperone speroni 's dialogo delle lingue , 1542 ) was the expression of the literary principles of the pléiade as a whole , but although ronsard was the chosen leader , its redaction was entrusted to du bellay . this work also bolstered french political debate as a means of learned men to reform their country . to obtain a clear view of the reforms aimed at by the pléiade , the defence should be further considered in connection with ronsard 's abrégé d'art poétique and his preface to the franciade . du bellay maintained that the french language as it was then constituted was too poor to serve as a medium for the higher forms of poetry , but he contended that by proper cultivation it might be brought on a level with the classical tongues . he condemned those who despaired of their mother tongue , and used latin for their more serious and ambitious work . for translations from the ancients he would substitute imitations , though he does not in the defense explain precisely how one is to go about this . not only were the forms of classical poetry to be imitated , but a separate poetic language and style , distinct from those employed in prose , were to be used . the french language was to be enriched by a development of its internal resources and by discreet borrowing from italian , latin and greek . both du bellay and ronsard laid stress on the necessity of prudence in these borrowings , and both repudiated the charge of wishing to latinize their mother tongue . the book was a spirited defence of poetry and of the possibilities of the french language ; it was also a declaration of war on those writers who held less heroic views . the violent attacks made by du bellay on marot and his followers , and on sébillet , did not go unanswered . sébillet replied in the preface to his translation of the iphigenia of euripides ; guillaume des autels , a lyonnese poet , reproached du bellay with ingratitude to his predecessors , and showed the weakness of his argument for imitation as opposed to translation in a digression in his réplique aux furieuses defenses de louis meigret ( lyons , 1550 ) ; barthélemy aneau , regent of the collège de la trinité at lyons , attacked him in his quintil horatian ( lyons , 1551 ) , the authorship of which was commonly attributed to charles fontaine . aneau pointed out the obvious inconsistency of inculcating imitation of the ancients and depreciating native poets in a work professing to be a defence of the french language . du bellay replied to his various assailants in a preface to the second edition ( 1550 ) of his sonnet sequence olive , with which he also published two polemical poems , the musagnaeomachie , and an ode addressed to ronsard , contre les envieux fioles . olive , a collection of sonnets modeled after the poetry of petrarch , ariosto , and contemporary italians published by gabriele giolito de ' ferrari , first appeared in 1549 . with it were printed thirteen odes entitled vers lyriques . olive has been supposed to be an anagram for the name of a mlle viole , but there is little evidence of real passion in the poems , and they may perhaps be regarded as a petrarchan exercise , especially as , in the second edition , the dedication to his lady is exchanged for one to marguerite de valois , daughter of henry ii . du bellay did not actually introduce the sonnet into french poetry , but he acclimatized it ; and when the fashion of sonneteering became a mania he was one of the first to ridicule its excesses . about this time du bellay had a serious illness of two years ' duration , from which dates the beginning of his deafness . he had further anxieties in the guardianship of his nephew . the boy died in 1553 , and joachim , who had up to this time borne the title of sieur de liré , became seigneur of gonnor . in 1549 he had published a recueil de poésies dedicated to the princess marguerite . this was followed in 1552 by a version of the fourth book of the aeneid , with other translations and some occasional poems . in the next year he went to rome as one of the secretaries of cardinal du bellay . to the beginning of his four and a half years ' residence in italy belong the forty-seven sonnets of his antiquités de rome , published in 1558 . sonnet iii of the antiquités , '' nouveau venu qui cherches rome en rome , '' has been shown to reflect the direct influence of a latin poem by a renaissance writer named jean or janis vitalis . the antiquités were rendered into english by edmund spenser ( the ruins of rome , 1591 ) , and the sonnet '' nouveau venu qui cherches rome en rome '' was rendered into spanish by francisco de quevedo ( '' a roma sepultada en sus ruinas , '' 1650 ) . these sonnets were more personal and less imitative than the olive sequence , and struck a note which was revived in later french literature by volney and chateaubriand . his stay in rome was , however , a real exile . his duties were those of an attendant . he had to meet the cardinal 's creditors and to find money for the expenses of the household . nevertheless , he found many friends among italian scholars , and formed a close friendship with another exiled poet whose circumstances were similar to his own , olivier de magny . towards the end of his sojourn in rome he fell violently in love with a roman lady called faustine , who appears in his poetry as columba and columbelle . this passion finds its clearest expression in the latin poems . faustine was guarded by an old and jealous husband , and du bellay 's eventual conquest may have had something to do with his departure for paris at the end of august 1557 . in the next year he published the poems he had brought back with him from rome , the latin poemata , the antiquités de rome , the divers jeux rustiques , and the 191 sonnets of the regrets , the greater number of which were written in italy . the regrets show that he had moved away from the theories of the défence . the simplicity and tenderness specially characteristic of du bellay appear in the sonnets telling of his unlucky passion for faustine , and of his nostalgia for the banks of the loire . among them are some satirical sonnets describing roman manners , and the later ones written after his return to paris are often appeals for patronage . his intimate relations with ronsard were not renewed , but he formed a close friendship with the scholar jean de morel , whose house was the centre of a learned society . in 1559 du bellay published at poitiers la nouvelle manière de faire son profit des lettres , a satirical epistle translated from the latin of adrien turnèbe , and with it le poète courtisan , which introduced the formal satire into french poetry . the nouvelle manière is believed to be directed at pierre de paschal , who was elected as royal historiographer , and who had promised to write latin biographies of the great , but who in fact never wrote anything of the sort . both works were published under the pseudonym of j quintil du troussay , and the courtier-poet was generally supposed to be mellin de saint-gelais , with whom du bellay had always , however , been on friendly terms . last works and death . a long and eloquent discours au roi ( detailing the duties of a prince , and translated from a latin original written by michel de l'hôpital , now lost ) was dedicated to francis ii in 1559 , and is said to have secured for the poet a tardy pension , although it was not published until 1567 , after his death . in paris he was still in the employ of the cardinal , who delegated to him the lay patronage which he still retained in the diocese . in the exercise of these functions joachim quarrelled with eustache du bellay , bishop of paris , who prejudiced his relations with the cardinal , less cordial since the publication of the outspoken regrets . his chief patron , marguerite de valois , to whom he was sincerely attached , had gone to savoy . du bellay 's health was weak ; his deafness seriously hindered his official duties ; and on 1 january 1560 he died at the age of 38 . there is no evidence that he was in priest 's orders , but he was a clerk , and as such held various preferments . he had at one time been a canon of notre dame of paris , and was accordingly buried in the cathedral . the statement that he was nominated archbishop of bordeaux during the last year of life is unauthenticated by documentary evidence and is in itself extremely improbable . bibliography . the best edition of his collected works in french is still that produced by henri chamard in six volumes . also , there are the œuvres francaises ( 2 vols . , 1866–1867 ) , edited with introduction and notes by c . marty-laveaux in his pléiade française . his œuvres choisies were published by l . becq de fouquières in 1876 . the chief source of his biography is his own poetry , especially the latin elegy addressed to jean de morel , '' elegia ad janum morellum ebredunensem , pytadem suum , '' printed with a volume of xenia ( paris , 1569 ) . a study of his life and writings by h . chamard , forming vol . viii . of the travaux et mémoires de l'université de lille ( lute , 1900 ) , contains all the available information and corrects many common errors . references . . further reading . sainte-beuve , tableau de la poésie française au xvi siècle ( 1828 ) la défense et illust . de la langue française ( 1905 ) , with biographical and critical introduction by léon séché , who also wrote joachim du bellay -- documents nouveaux et inédits ( 1880 ) , and published in 1903 the first volume of a new edition of the œuvres lettres de joachim du bellay ( 1884 ) , edited by pierre de nolhac walter pater , '' joachim du bellay '' , essay in the renaissance ( 1873 ) pp . & nbsp ; 155–176 george wyndham , ronsard and la pléiade ( 1906 ) hilaire belloc , avril ( 1905 ) arthur tilley , the literature of the french renaissance ( 2 vols . , 1904 ) . ursula hennigfeld , der ruinierte körper . petrarkistische sonette in transkultureller perspektive . königshausen & neuman , würzburg ( 2008 ) . external links . biography , bibliography , analysis university of virginia 's gordon project a 1569 edition of du bellay 's works and background information the first complete translation into english of du bellay 's antiquités de rome since spenser lyrics of the french renaissance : marot , du bellay , ronsard by norman r . shapiro - ( in french and english ) - google books