Nine-point circle

nine significant points . the diagram above shows the nine significant points of the nine-point circle . points d , e , and f are the midpoints of the three sides of the triangle . points g , h , and i are the feet of the altitudes of the triangle . points j , k , and l are the midpoints of the line segments between each altitude 's vertex intersection ( points a , b , and c ) and the triangle 's orthocenter ( point s ) . for an acute triangle , six of the points ( the midpoints and altitude feet ) lie on the triangle itself ; for an obtuse triangle two of the altitudes have feet outside the triangle , but these feet still belong to the nine-point circle . discovery . although he is credited for its discovery , karl wilhelm feuerbach did not entirely discover the nine-point circle , but rather the six-point circle , recognizing the significance of the midpoints of the three sides of the triangle and the feet of the altitudes of that triangle . ( see fig . 1 , points d , e , f , g , h , and i . ) ( at a slightly earlier date , charles brianchon and jean-victor poncelet had stated and proven the same theorem . ) but soon after feuerbach , mathematician olry terquem himself proved the existence of the circle . he was the first to recognize the added significance of the three midpoints between the triangle 's vertices and the orthocenter . ( see fig . 1 , points j , k , and l . ) thus , terquem was the first to use the name nine-point circle . tangent circles . in 1822 karl feuerbach discovered that any triangle 's nine-point circle is externally tangent to that triangle 's three excircles and internally tangent to its incircle ; this result is known as feuerbach 's theorem . he proved that : : . the circle which passes through the feet of the altitudes of a triangle is tangent to all four circles which in turn are tangent to the three sides of the triangle . the triangle center at which the incircle and the nine-point circle touch is called the feuerbach point . other properties of the nine-point circle . the radius of a triangle 's circumcircle is twice the radius of that triangle 's nine-point circle . figure 3 a nine-point circle bisects a line segment going from the corresponding triangle 's orthocenter to any point on its circumcircle . figure 4 the center n of the nine-point circle bisects a segment from the orthocenter h to the circumcenter o ( making the orthocenter a center of dilation to both circles ) : posamentier , alfred s . , and lehmann , ingmar . the secrets of triangles , prometheus books , 2012 . : :on nh . the nine-point center n is one-fourth of the way along the euler line from the centroid g to the orthocenter h : : :hn 3ng . let \omega be the nine-point circle of the diagonal triangle of a cyclic quadrilateral . the point of intersection of the bimedians of the cyclic quadrilateral belongs to the nine-point circle . the nine-point circle of a reference triangle is the circumcircle of both the reference triangle 's medial triangle ( with vertices at the midpoints of the sides of the reference triangle ) and its orthic triangle ( with vertices at the feet of the reference triangle 's altitudes ) . the center of all rectangular hyperbolas that pass through the vertices of a triangle lies on its nine-point circle . examples include the well-known rectangular hyperbolas of keipert , jeřábek and feuerbach . this fact is known as the feuerbach conic theorem . if an orthocentric system of four points a , b , c and h is given , then the four triangles formed by any combination of three distinct points of that system all share the same nine-point circle . this is a consequence of symmetry : the sides of one triangle adjacent to a vertex that is an orthocenter to another triangle are segments from that second triangle . a third midpoint lies on their common side . ( the same 'midpoints ' defining separate nine-point circles , those circles must be concurrent . ) consequently , these four triangles have circumcircles with identical radii . let n represent the common nine-point center and p be an arbitrary point in the plane of the orthocentric system . then : :na 2 +nb 2 +nc 2 +nh 2 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 3r 2 : where r is the common circumradius ; and if : :pa 2 +pb 2 +pc 2 +ph 2 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; k 2 , : where k is kept constant , then the locus of p is a circle centered at n with a radius \scriptstyle \frac . as p approaches n the locus of p for the corresponding constant k , collapses onto n the nine-point center . furthermore the nine-point circle is the locus of p such that : :pa 2 +pb 2 +pc 2 +ph 2 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 4r 2 . the centers of the incircle and excircles of a triangle form an orthocentric system . the nine-point circle created for that orthocentric system is the circumcircle of the original triangle . the feet of the altitudes in the orthocentric system are the vertices of the original triangle . if four arbitrary points a , b , c , d are given that do not form an orthocentric system , then the nine-point circles of abc , bcd , cda and dab concur at a point . the remaining six intersection points of these nine-point circles each concur with the midpoints of the four triangles . remarkably , there exists a unique nine-point conic , centered at the centroid of these four arbitrary points , that passes through all seven points of intersection of these nine-point circles . furthermore because of the feuerbach conic theorem mentioned above , there exists a unique rectangular circumconic , centered at the common intersection point of the four nine-point circles , that passes through the four original arbitrary points as well as the orthocenters of the four triangles . if four points a , b , c , d are given that form a cyclic quadrilateral , then the nine-point circles of abc , bcd , cda and dab concur at the anticenter of the cyclic quadrilateral . the nine-point circles are all congruent with a radius of half that of the cyclic quadrilateral 's circumcircle . the nine-point circles form a set of four johnson circles . consequently the four nine-point centers are cyclic and lie on a circle congruent to the four nine-point circles that is centered at the anticenter of the cyclic quadrilateral . furthermore the cyclic quadrilateral formed from the four nine-pont centers is homothetic to the reference cyclic quadrilateral abcd by a factor of & nbsp ; & minus ; 1 / 2 & nbsp ; and its homothetic center ( n ) lies on the line connecting the circumcenter ( o ) to the anticenter ( m ) where : :on 2nm . the orthopole of lines passing through the circumcenter lie on the nine-point circle . a triangle 's circumcircle , its nine-point circle , its polar circle , and the circumcircle of its tangential triangle are coaxal . trilinear coordinates for the center of the kiepert hyperbola are : : ( b 2 & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; c 2 ) 2 /a : ( c 2 & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; a 2 ) 2 /b : ( a 2 & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; b 2 ) 2 /c trilinear coordinates for the center of the jeřábek hyperbola are : :cos a sin 2 ( b & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; c ) : cos b sin 2 ( c & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; a ) : cos c sin 2 ( a & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; b ) letting x : y : z be a variable point in trilinear coordinates , an equation for the nine-point circle is : : x 2 sin & nbsp ; 2a + y 2 sin & nbsp ; 2b + z 2 sin & nbsp ; 2c & nbsp ; & minus ; & nbsp ; 2 ( yz sin & nbsp ; a + zx sin & nbsp ; b + xy sin & nbsp ; c ) 0 . generalization . the circle is an instance of a conic section and the nine-point circle is an instance of the general nine-point conic that has been constructed with relation to a triangle abc and a fourth point p , where the particular nine-point circle instance arises when p is the orthocenter of abc . the vertices of the triangle and p determine a complete quadrilateral and three '' diagonal points '' where opposite sides of the quadrilateral intersect . there are six '' sidelines '' in the quadrilateral ; the nine-point conic intersects the midpoints of these and also includes the diagonal points . the conic is an ellipse when p is interior to abc or in a region sharing vertical angles with the triangle , but a nine-point hyperbola occurs when p is in one of the three adjacent regions , and the hyperbola is rectangular when p lies on the circumcircle of abc . see also . lester 's theorem poncelet point synthetic geometry . notes .