Apollo/Domain

operating system . the original operating system was apollo 's own product called aegis , which was later renamed to domain/os . the aegis and domain/os system offered advanced features for the time , for example an object oriented filesystem , network transparency , diskless booting , a graphical user interface and , in domain/os , interoperability with bsd , system v and posix . hardware . an apollo workstation resembled a modern pc , with base unit , keyboard , mouse , and screen . early models were housed in short ( about 2 & nbsp ; ft high ) 19 '' rack cabinets that would be set beside a desk or under a table . the dn300 and later dn330 were designed as integrated units with system and monitor in one unit and fit easily on a desk . every apollo system ( even standalones ) had to include at least one network interface . originally the only option was the 12 & nbsp ; mbit/s apollo token ring ( atr ) . over time , 10 & nbsp ; mbit/s ethernet was added as an option . it has been stated that the ibm token ring was an option - this was never available . the atr was generally the best choice , since it was extremely scalable ; whilst the ethernet of the time suffered serious performance loss as extra machines were added to the network , this was not true of atr , which could easily have over a hundred machines on one network . one drawback was that , unlike ethernet , one machine failure ( which could easily happen given a single faulty connector ) stopped the entire network . for this reason , apollo provided an optional ( but strongly recommended ) network cabling system of bypass switches and quick connect boxes which allowed machines to be disconnected and moved without problems . apollo token ring networks used 75 ohm rg-6u coaxial cabling . networking . the network orientation of the systems , together with the atr functionality , made it easy and practicable to boot and run diskless node using another machine 's os . in principle , as many machines could be booted from one host as it could cope with ; in practice , four diskless machines from one host was about the limit . provided the correct machine-specific software was installed on the host ( again , very easy ) , any type of machine could be booted from any other ( one complication being that a dn10000 could only be booted from another dn10000 or a 68k-based system which had '' cmpexe '' compound executables installed ) . some systems could have the graphics card removed so that they could be used as a servers ; in such a case the keyboard and mouse were automatically ignored , and the system accessed either across the network , or via a dumb terminal plugged into the machine 's serial port . such a system was designated '' dsp '' instead of '' dn '' . models . the model naming convention was dn ( for domain node ) with a model number . if the system had no display , it was a dsp ( for domain service processor ) . the first model was the dn416 workstation , later referred to as the dn100 after the green screen was substituted with a black and white screen . this system used two 68000 processors and implemented virtual memory ( which the 68000 was n't theoretically capable of ) by stopping one processor when there was a page fault and having the other processor handle the fault , then release the primary processor when the page fault was handled . later models were based on 68010 , 68020 , 68030 and 68040 processors which had native support for virtual memory . some workstations had bit-slice cpu implementations that were instruction set compatible with the 68000 . the dsp90 was a fileserver built using a standard multibus backplane and i/o controllers . the disk controller could support up to four ( 4 ) 500mb hard drives . a 9-track tape controller was also available . early performance models were the dn560 and dn660 which were housed in desk-side cabinets . these would commonly have color graphics cards with graphics accelerators . right the dn300 and later dn330 were integrated desktop systems not much bigger than the included monitor . in the late 1980s , apollo introduced a new pair of machines . the dn3000 and dn4000 used 68k processors , but were housed in ibm pc style cases of the time and had ibm-at compatible isa expansion slots and pc-compatible disk drives . these became the mainstay of the apollo range in the mid to late 1980s . in principle , a user or third party could install a standard at expansion card , but since this required the writing of a special device driver , in practice this was very rare . however , the size and design of the boxes made installing or replacing components very easy . a typical system could have between 2 & nbsp ; mib and 32 & nbsp ; mib of memory , a 76 & nbsp ; mb , 150 & nbsp ; mb or 330 & nbsp ; mb ( very occasionally 660 & nbsp ; mb ) hard disk , and 32-bit 68020 or 68030 processor running at 12 & nbsp ; mhz to 33 & nbsp ; mhz , depending on model . a half-height expansion bay could take either a 5¼-inch floppy disk drive or a qic-type cartridge tape drive , capacity 30 & nbsp ; mb , 45 & nbsp ; mb , or 60 & nbsp ; mb depending on cartridge . for printer access , the system came with a serial port as standard ; a serial/parallel expansion card could provide a parallel printer port if this was required . the dn3000 and dn4000 were later upgraded to dn3500 and dn4500 with a faster 68030 cpu . the dn3500 was approximately as powerful as the dn4000 . a dn5500 with a 68040 was also produced in limited quantities . a dn2500 workstation was released which was advertised as '' 4 mips , 4 mb of memory , for under 4,000 '' . this was a single integrated motherboard that used pc standard dram dimm modules . this was a significant departure from previous designs and those of the competition which had custom memory modules . the motherboard included a high resolution ( 1280x1024 ) black and white bitmapped display and scsi disk interface . the systems included a single at expansion slot for a network card to allow the system to attach to any of the three supported networks ( apollo token ring , ibm token ring , or ethernet ) after the purchase of apollo computer by hp , a merged line of workstations that could run either domain/os or hp-ux was produced with the name hp/apollo 425t and hp/apollo 433s . the 425t was a '' pizza box '' design with a single network expansion slot . the 433s was a desk-side server systems with multiple expansion slots . compatibility . pc compatibility was possible either through software emulator , using the optional product dpce , or through a plug-in card carrying an intel 80286 processor . a third-party plug-in card with a 386 was also available . an apollo token ring network card could also be placed in a standard pc and network drivers allowed it to connect to a server running a pc smb ( server message block ) file server . usage . although apollo systems were easy to use and administer , they became less cost-effective because the proprietary operating system made software more expensive than unix software . the 68k processors were slower than the new risc chips from sun and hewlett-packard . apollo addressed both problems by introducing the risc-based dn10000 and unix-friendly domain/os operating system . however , the dn10000 , though fast , was extremely expensive , and a reliable version of domain/os came too late to make a difference . the increased speed and falling price of pcs ensured the obsolescence of high end systems such as apollo workstations . acquisition . in 1989 , hewlett-packard acquired apollo . they later released the dn2500 series workstation , a cheap alternative to the dn3x00/4x00 series , and later still the hp 9000 series 400 line , which could run either hp 's own flavor of unix , hp-ux , or domain/os . in this case , the choice had to be made at time of purchase , partly because hp-ux and domain/os functionality required different keyboards and mice . external links . apollo frequently asked questions