NBC Symphony Orchestra

history . tom lewis , in the organization of american historians magazine of history , described nbc 's plan for cultural programming and the origin of the nbc symphony : : david sarnoff , who had first proposed the '' radio music box '' in 1916 so that listeners might enjoy '' concerts , lectures , music , recitals , '' felt that the medium was failing to do this . by 1937 , rca had recovered enough from the effects of the depression for it to make a dramatic commitment to cultural programming . sarnoff proposed to create a radio orchestra and hire arturo toscanini to conduct it . toscanini had recently resigned from the new york philharmonic and was considering retirement ; sarnoff sent samuel chotzinoff as an emissary to italy and he managed to convince the wary toscanini to accept sarnoff 's offer . on christmas night , 1937 , the nbc symphony orchestra gave its first performance with toscanini in an entirely refurbished studio at nbc located in the rca building . '' the national broadcasting company is an american business organization . it has employees and stockholders . it serves their interests best when it serves the public best . '' that christmas night , and whenever the nbc orchestra played over the next 17 years , he was right . lewis , tom . '' ' a godlike presence ' : the impact of radio on the 1920s and 1930s , '' organization of american historians magazine of history 6 , spring 1992 . sarnoff devoted considerable effort and resources to create an orchestra of the first rank for toscanini and nbc . artur rodziński , a noted orchestra builder and musical task master in his own right , was engaged to mold and train the new orchestra in anticipation of the arrival of toscanini . it offered the highest salaries of any orchestra at the time and a 52-week contract . prominent musicians from major orchestras around the country were recruited and the conductor pierre monteux was hired as well to work with the orchestra in its formative months . a new large broadcast studio was built for the orchestra at nbc 's radio city studios in rockefeller center , new york , '' studio 8-h '' . in addition to creating prestige for the network , there has been speculation that one of the reasons nbc created the orchestra was to deflect a congressional inquiry into broadcasting standards . the orchestra 's first broadcast concert aired on november 13 , 1937 , under the direction of monteux . toscanini conducted ten concerts that first season , making his nbc debut on december 25 , 1937 . in addition to weekly broadcasts on the nbc red and blue networks , the nbc symphony orchestra made many recordings for rca victor . televised concerts began in march 1948 and continued until march 1952 . during the summer of 1950 , nbc converted studio 8-h into a television studio ( the broadcast home of nbc 's late-night comedy program saturday night live since 1975 ) and moved the broadcast concerts to carnegie hall , where many of the orchestra 's recording sessions and special concerts had already taken place . harvey sachs , ii toscanini leopold stokowski served as principal conductor from 1941 to 1944 on a three-year contract following a dispute between toscanini and nbc . during this time toscanini continued to lead the orchestra in a series of public benefit concerts for war relief . he returned as stokowski 's co-conductor for the 1942–43 and 1943–44 seasons , resuming full control thereafter . upon toscanini 's retirement in the spring of 1954 , nbc officially disbanded the orchestra , much to toscanini 's distress , though it continued for several years independent of nbc , as the symphony of the air . toscanini 's final broadcast concert with the orchestra took place at carnegie hall on april 4 , 1954 , and he conducted the orchestra for the last time during rca victor recording sessions held june 3 and 5 , 1954 . musicians . some notable musicians who were members of the orchestra include violinists samuel antek , leonid bolotine , henry clifton , felix galimir , josef gingold , daniel guilet ( concertmaster 1952-54 ) , harry lookofsky , mischa mischakoff ( concertmaster 1937-1952 ) , albert pratz , david sarser , oscar shumsky , benjamin steinberg , herman spielberg , boris koutzen and andor toth ; violists carlton cooley , milton katims , william primrose , and tibor serly ; cellists frank miller , leonard rose , harvey shapiro , alan shulman , george koutzen and david soyer ; double bassists homer mensch and oscar g . zimmerman ; flutists carmine coppola , arthur lora and paul renzi ; clarinetists augustin duques , al gallodoro , david weber and alexander williams ; trombonist norberto ( robert ) paolucci ; saxophonist frankie trumbauer ; oboists robert bloom and paolo renzi ; bassoonists elias carmen , benjamin kohon , william polisi , leonard sharrow and arthur weisberg ; french horn players arthur berv , harry berv , jack berv and albert stagliano ; harry glantz , bernard baker , and raymond crisara trumpets and tuba player william bell , among others . not all of the nbc symphony performers were under full-time contracts to nbc . in the early 1950s , for example , only about 55 of these musicians were salaried ; the rest were hired under per-service contracts ( in line with local 802 american federation of musicians wage scales ) to bring the orchestra 's performing and recording strength up to the 85-100 seen in period photographs and video footage . even for the salaried members , nbc symphony duties constituted barely half of their work obligations for nbc ; these musicians played in orchestras for other nbc radio and television programs , with many of the wind players also serving with the cities service '' band of america '' conducted by paul lavalle . meyer , donald carl . '' the nbc symphony orchestra . '' ph.d . dissertation , university of california-davis , 1994 . . sponsorship . in the first several seasons the nbc symphony broadcasts were '' sustaining '' programs , meaning that they were paid for and presented by nbc itself . in later years the broadcasts were commercially sponsored , primarily by general motors . under gm 's sponsorship the nbc symphony broadcasts went out under the title of general motors symphony of the air , not to be confused with the later orchestra of the same name . other sponsors included the house of squibb , the reynolds metals company , and the mobil ( mobil ) . recordings . rca victor began making studio recordings of the nbc symphony for commercial release early in 1938 ; mozart 's symphony no . 40 , haydn 's symphony no . 88 , rossini 's william tell overture and the second and third movements from beethoven 's op . 135 string quartet were among the first works to be recorded . the orchestra recorded initially in studio 8-h , but rca victor producer charles o'connell soon decided to hold most of the studio recording sessions in carnegie hall . however , many live broadcast performances originating in studio 8h were also released on records , and subsequently on cd . the infamous dry acoustics of studio 8-h , designed for broadcasting , were found to be less than ideal for recording . acoustical modifications began in 1939 were thought to have greatly improved the sound of studio 8h ; although most nbc symphony recording sessions were shifted to carnegie hall in 1940 , the orchestra recorded in 8-h sporadically as late as june 1950 , after which the studio was converted for television broadcasting . from the autumn of 1950 until june 1954 , all nbc symphony radio broadcasts and rca victor recording sessions took place in carnegie hall . rca victor released the orchestra 's recordings on its flagship red seal label on the then-standard 78-rpm records . in 1950 , a 1945 recording of ferde grofé 's grand canyon suite became the nbc symphony 's first lp release ( lm-1004 ) . a mainstay of rca victor 's red seal catalog through the 1950s , most of the toscanini/nbc symphony recordings were reissued on the lower-priced rca victrola label to celebrate toscanini 's centenary in 1967 . in the 1980s , rca began digitally remastering recordings of the orchestra for release on compact disc . a complete reissue of all toscanini 's rca victor recordings was released on cd and cassette between 1990 and 1992 and again in 2012 . later advances in digital technology has led rca ( now owned by sony music ) to claim further enhancement of the sound of the magnetic tapes for later reissues , changing original equalization balances and adding acoustical enhancement , but critics are divided in their judgment . rca has only reissued recordings that were personally approved by toscanini , including some broadcast performances such as the seven complete operas he conducted at nbc between 1944 and 1954 ; however , several other labels have released discs taken from off-the-air recordings of nbc broadcast concerts . toscanini 's final two broadcast programs , in the spring of 1954 , were experimentally recorded in stereo , but he did not approve their release ; many years passed before they were finally issued by labels other than rca victor . recorded in rather primitive and '' minimalist '' two-channel sound , the stereo antiphonal effect is striking ( if crude ) ; but unfortunately the complete performance from march 21 , 1954 of the tchaikovsky symphony no . 6 ( '' pathetique '' ) is not entirely stereo as the master 2-track tape of the entire 'allegro molto vivace ' third movement had apparently not survived ; an artificial stereo synthesis is substituted . the missing portion of the stereo recording of the third movement was later found and included in the version now available on youtube . the complete series of ten nbc symphony telecasts has been issued on vhs and laserdisc by rca in 1990 and on dvd by testament in 2006 . while the videos are taken from primitive kinescope films , the sound tracks were carefully synchronized from the highest fidelity transcriptions and tapes that exist . one of the nbc symphony orchestra 's most ambitious projects was the recording of the 13-hour musical score for nbc television 's 1952–53 series victory at sea . robert russell bennett conducted the orchestra in his arrangements of richard rodgers ' musical themes for the 26 documentary programs ( recorded in rockefeller center 's center theatre ) . the series is currently available on dvd . the first rca victor lp of excerpts was recorded by bennett and the nbc so musicians in july 1953 . bennett would later lead stereo recordings of '' volume 2 '' in 1957 , a re-make of '' volume 1 '' in 1959 , and a concluding '' volume 3 '' in 1961 , conducting the '' rca victor symphony orchestra '' ( members of the symphony of the air ) . rca has reissued all of these recordings on cd . in 1954 , shortly after the orchestra 's final concerts with toscanini , stokowski made stereo recordings for rca victor of excerpts from prokofiev 's ballet romeo and juliet and gian carlo menotti 's ballet sebastian . the recordings were originally issued ( monophonically ) as '' leopold stokowski and his orchestra , '' but reissued as '' members of the nbc symphony orchestra . '' on april 6 , 1954 , just two days after toscanini 's final concert with the orchestra , guido cantelli made a recording in carnegie hall of césar franck 's symphony in d minor . though the performance was recorded in stereo , rca victor initially issued the recording in mono . the label finally issued the stereo version in 1978 . symphony of the air . after the nbc symphony orchestra disbanded , some members went on to play with other orchestras , notably frank miller ( principal cello ) and leonard sharrow ( principal bassoon ) with the chicago symphony orchestra . however , many former nbc symphony members , in an attempt to stay together and preserve the orchestra , regrouped as a new ensemble called the '' symphony of the air '' . they made their first recording on september 21 , 1954 , and gave their first public concert at the united nations 9th anniversary celebration on october 24 . mclaughlin , kathleen , '' 9th u.n . birthday widely observed '' , 25 october 1954 , new york times , 1 '' on november 14 they appeared on the acclaimed omnibus tv program in which leonard bernstein , making his first television appearance , discussed beethoven 's fifth symphony , and bernstein led the symphony of the air during its first season . with an asian tour under the auspices of the state department and an attendance of 60,000 at concerts in the catskills that summer , the first season was a huge success . in 1960 , the cbs television network also featured the '' symphony of the air '' in its televised prime-time special spring festival of music under the direction of the conductor alfredo antonini . in collaboration with the concert pianist john browning , producer robert herridge and director roger englander , the orchestra presented a virtuoso live presentation of sergei rachmaninoff 's second piano concerto . television and the performing arts . brian g . rose . greenwood press , new york 1986 p . 104 alfredo antonini and john browning collaborating on books.google.com for nearly a decade , the symphony of the air performed many concerts led by stokowski , the orchestra 's music director from 1955 . the orchestra recorded widely ( on rca victor , columbia , vanguard and united artists ) under leading conductors , including stokowski , bernstein , monteux , fritz reiner , bruno walter , kirill kondrashin , sir thomas beecham , alfred wallenstein and josef krips . only once more did they use their old name , the nbc symphony orchestra , in the 1963 telecast of gian carlo menotti 's written-for-television opera , amahl and the night visitors , with an all-new cast . the orchestra disbanded in 1963 . see also . radio orchestra . listen to . toscanini and nbc symphony orchestra ( 1947 ) : berlioz ' the damnation of faust ( 13 minutes ) toscanini and nbc symphony orchestra ( 1953 ) : beethoven 's eroica , third movement . references . external links . audiophile audition : review of arturo toscanini conducts the nbc symphony : the television concerts -- 1948-52 , volume four allmusic : nbc symphony orchestra '' a toscanini odyssey '' by mortimer h . frank nbc symphony personnel listing