William Draper Lewis

personal life and education . william draper lewis was reported by the pennsylvania law review as being a devout episcopalian williston , samuel '' william draper lewis '' , university of pennsylvania law review and american law register , university of pennsylvania , volume 83 , no . 3 , january 1935 . retrieved may 17 , 2018 . born to quaker parents , roberts , owen j . '' william draper lewis '' , university of pennsylvania law review and american law register , university of pennsylvania , volume 98 , no . 1 , november 1949 . retrieved may 17 , 2018 . henry and fannie hannah wilson lewis , in philadelphia , in 1867 . lewis was the great-grandson of simeon draper , and a descendant of james draper , an early settler of the massachusetts bay colony . he also descended from puritan pioneer george lewes ( 1600–1663 ) , an early settler at plymouth colony ; the clothier-turned-farmer was also , in 1548 and 1550 , an early surveyor of highways and , in 1651 , was appointed constable of the town of barnstable . swift , c . f . reprint of amos otis papers , in genealogical notes of barnstable families , volume 2 , f . b . & f . p . goss publishers and printers , barnstable , mass . , usa , 1890 , page 118 . retrieved may 21 , 2018 . lewis attended germantown academy , graduating in 1885 , earned a b.s . from haverford college in 1888 , then , in 1892 , received an llb . and phd in economics from the university of pennsylvania . he was the first cousin of francis draper lewis , co-founder of morgan , lewis & bockius . draper , thomas waln-morgan the drapers in america , j . polhemus printing company , new york , usa , 1892 , pages 67-68 . retrieved may 17 , 2018 . in 1892 , lewis married caroline mary cope , with whom he had four children , henry , alfreda cope , anna , and william draper jr . u of pennsylvania '' william draper lewis personal correspondence '' , penn libraries , university of pennsylvania retrieved may 6 , 2018 . . university of pennsylvania law school . in 1896 , lewis , though only 29 , was the perfect candidate for the first full-time dean of the university 's law school . his law practice had all but disappeared under what was to become a lifelong obsession : the cataloging of american law . only four years out of law school , he had committed himself to an overwhelming smorgasbord of editorial projects , the major ones in conjunction with friend , business associate and later u.s . senator george wharton pepper . notably , the two men served as editors of the university of pennsylvania law review , published at the time under the name american law register and review . lewis saw a national role for the law school , one that would fill the role of the fading apprenticeship system for young lawyers . development of a core of full-time faculty sat at the top of lewis 's agenda , but he gave equal attention to curriculum , admissions and graduation standards , and facilities – in particular the library . a pragmatist and a humanist , he established the tradition at penn law of the dean as first among equals . lewis treated his colleagues and friends with enormous good humor and tolerance . he was , perhaps more than anyone before or since at the law school , a grand master of consensus . he was also continually concerned with student welfare ; a goodly part of each faculty meeting was given over to the discussion of student '' petitions '' for relief of one kind or another . he cared about , stewed over , and poked into every conceivable aspect of the school . he arranged stays for sick students at sanitariums . he even toured the guts of his grand new building ( opened in 1900 ) to understand and correct malfunctions of the heating and ventilation system . a compulsive communicator , lewis dictated letters a dozen at a time and served as recording secretary for faculty meetings . his mailings to prospective students and their parents could run to three or four typed pages , intermixing his philosophy of education with practical concerns directed to the inquirer 's situation . well-loved by students , lewis was universally referred to as '' uncle billy '' and considered somewhat eccentric ; at a 1934 dinner in lewis ' honor , pepper toasted '' one of the most lovable and whimsical personalities which any of us have met in a lifetime . we reserve the right to rejoice in his split infinitives , his mixed metaphors and the strange beings with which his imagination peopled the cases discussed in his classroom . '' lewis could be quite deliberately funny , which could invite criticism . to the secretary of the university , he wrote , in 1900 : '' i have received your formal apology for your very grave mistake concerning the university council . what it was all about i have not the slightest idea , but evidently if anything was wrong , the letter before me makes everything right . '' he was also a manager of the 1907-founded comparative law bureau of the american bar association , whose annual bulletin was the first comparative law journal in the u.s . political career . during the later years of his deanship , lewis 's attention was highly diverted by the politics of the progressive republican movement . advisor and confidant to theodore roosevelt ; lewis chaired the platform committee for roosevelt 's failed run for president on the bull moose ticket in 1912 . in his most politically impassioned ( or naïve ) maneuver , lewis ran for pennsylvania governor in 1914 on a straight progressive platform , a dalliance which forced his resignation from the deanship but took him no closer to the governor 's mansion . he remained on the law school faculty until 1924 . american law institute . at the 1920 and 1921 meetings of the association of american law schools , lewis urged the creation of an '' institute of law '' to elucidate the progress of the common law . in 1923 , the american law institute became a reality . '' founding father '' aba journal '' the a.l.i . at 50 '' , american bar association , 1973 , page 761 . retrieved june 21 , 2018 . lewis became its first director , shaping its agenda of preparing '' restatements '' of the '' law , as it had developed under the divergent decisions of the american courts , '' being , according to judge augustus n . hand , '' largely his own conception and it is no exaggeration to say that it was principally his faith and zeal that finally resulted in enlisting senator elihu root , george w . wickersham , james byrnes and many other distinguished lawyers , as well as numerous judges and teachers of the law , in the enterprise and in obtaining the financial support for it of the carnegie corporation , '' presidential advisor root , a nobel peace laureate , was also a close advisor to andrew carnegie . hand , a . n . '' william draper lewis , '' by augustus n . hand , penn law legal scholarship repository , university of pennsylvania law school . retrieved may 29 , 2018 . nps '' an unexpected inauguration that changed the nation , '' national park service , january 4 , 2016 . retrieved may 29 , 2018 . lewis served the institute until june 1947 , two years before his death . though the ali 's restatements met with complaints that they undermined the fluidity of the common law and echoed the codification of european civil law , it is fair to say lewis 's work as director rank him as the single most influential figure in the pragmatic development of 20th-century american law . author . lewis was a prolific writer and editor , oclc world cat . retrieved may 20 , 2018 . perhaps epitomized by his having edited all eight volumes of great american lawyers . lewis , w . d . great american lawyers , the john c . winston company , philadelphia , usa , 1907 . retrieved may 20 , 2018 . during the year following roosevelt 's death ; dr . lewis authored the life of theodore roosevelt , lewis , w.d . the life of theodore roosevelt , the john c . winston company , philadelphia , usa , 1919 . retrieved may 19 , 2018 . a biography reviewed in 1920 as '' notable for its calm judicious survey of roosevelt 's public life and , particularly , of the rise , growth , and decline of the progressive party . a remarkably sympathetic introduction is supplied by ex-president taft . '' shaw , albert the american review of reviews , volume 60 , review of reviews , 1920 , page 195 . retrieved may 19 , 2018 . . death . he died on september 2 , 1949 . . external links . guide to the personal correspondence of william draper lewis at the biddle law library archives the william draper lewis house , ca . 1892 , part of the awbury historic district the yale biographical dictionary of american law , roger k . newman , yale university press , 2009 , page 336 . retrieved may 21 , 2018 . pepper and lewis ' new digest : a digest of the laws of pennsylvania from 1700 to 1894 together with the constitution of the united states and of the state of pennsylvania , volume 1 , by george wharton pepper and william draper lewis , t . & j . w . johnson and co . , 1896 . retrieved june 21 , 2018 . references .