Force spectroscopy

experimental techniques . there are many ways to accurately manipulate single molecules . prominent among these are optical or magnetic tweezers , atomic-force-microscope ( afm ) cantilevers and acoustic force spectroscopy . in all of these techniques , a biomolecule , such as protein or dna , or some other biopolymer has one end bound to a surface and the other to a force sensor . the force sensor is usually a micrometre-sized bead or a cantilever , whose displacement can be measured to determine the force . atomic force microscope cantilevers . molecules adsorbed on a surface are picked up by a microscopic tip ( nanometres wide ) that is located on the end of an elastic cantilever . in a more sophisticated version of this experiment ( chemical force microscopy ) the tips are covalently functionalized with the molecules of interest . a piezoelectric controller then pulls up the cantilever . if some force is acting on the elastic cantilever ( for example because some molecule is being stretched between the surface and the tip ) , this will deflect upward ( repulsive force ) or downward ( attractive force ) . according to hooke 's law , this deflection will be proportional to the force acting on the cantilever . deflection is measured by the position of a laser beam reflected by the cantilever . this kind of set-up can measure forces as low as 10 pn ( 10 −11 n ) , the fundamental resolution limit is given by the cantilever 's thermal noise . the so-called force curve is the graph of force ( or more precisely , of cantilever deflection ) versus the piezoelectric position on the z axis . an ideal hookean spring , for example , would display a straight diagonal force curve . typically , the force curves observed in the force spectroscopy experiments consist of a contact ( diagonal ) region where the probe contacts the sample surface , and a non-contact region where the probe is off the sample surface . when the restoring force of the cantilever exceeds tip-sample adhesion force the probe jumps out of contact , and the magnitude of this jump is often used as a measure of adhesion force or rupture force . in general the rupture of a tip-surface bond is a stochastic process ; therefore reliable quantification of the adhesion force requires taking multiple individual force curves . the histogram of the adhesion forces obtained in these multiple measurements provides the main data output for force spectroscopy measurement . in biophysics , single-molecule force spectroscopy can be used to study the energy landscape underlying the interaction between two bio-molecules , like proteins . here , one binding partner can be attached to a cantilever tip via a flexible linker molecule ( peg chain ) , while the other one is immobilized on a substrate surface . in a typical approach , the cantilever is repeatedly approached and retracted from the sample at a constant speed . in some cases , binding between the two partners will occur , which will become visible in the force curve , as the use of a flexible linker gives rise to a characteristic curve shape ( see worm-like chain model ) distinct from adhesion . the collected rupture forces can then be analysed as a function of the bond loading rate . the resulting graph of the average rupture force as a function of the loading rate is called the force spectrum and forms the basic dataset for dynamic force spectroscopy . in the ideal case of a single sharp energy barrier for the tip-sample interactions the dynamic force spectrum will show a linear increase of the rupture force as function of a logarithm of the loading rate , as described by a model proposed by bell et al . here , the slope of the rupture force spectrum is equal to the \frac , where x_\beta is the distance from the energy minimum to the transition state . so far , a number of theoretical models exist describing the relationship between loading rate and rupture force , based upon different assumptions and predicting distinct curve shapes . for example , ma x . , gosai a . et al . , utilized dynamic force spectroscopy along with molecular dynamics simulations to find out the binding force between thrombin , a blood coagulation protein , and its dna aptamer . . acoustic force spectroscopy . a recently developed technique , acoustic force spectroscopy ( afs ) , allows the force manipulation of hundreds of single-molecules and single-cells in parallel , providing high experimental throughput . in this technique , a piezo element resonantly excites planar acoustic waves over a microfluidic chip . the generated acoustic waves are capable of exerting forces on microspheres with different density than the surrounding medium . biomolecules , such as dna , rna or proteins , can be individually tethered between the microspheres and a surface and then probed by the acoustic forces exerted by the piezo sensor . cells can be manipulated by the acoustic forces directly , or by using microspheres as handles . with afs devices it is possible to apply forces ranging from 0 to several hundreds of piconewtons on hundreds of microspheres and obtain force-extension curves or histograms of rupture forces of many individual events in parallel . optical tweezers . another technique that has been gaining ground for single molecule experiments is the use of optical tweezers for applying mechanical forces on molecules . a strongly focused laser beam has the ability to catch and hold particles ( of dielectric material ) in a size range from nanometers to micrometers . the trapping action of optical tweezers results from the dipole or optical gradient force on the dielectric sphere . the technique of using a focused laser beam as an atom trap was first applied in 1984 at bell laboratories . until then experiments had been carried out using oppositely directed lasers as a means to trap particles . later experiments , at the same project at bell laboratories and others since , showed damage-free manipulation on cells using an infrared laser . thus , the ground was made for biological experiments with optical trapping . each technique has its own advantages and disadvantages . for example , afm cantilevers , can measure angstrom-scale , millisecond events and forces larger than 10 pn . while glass microfibers can not achieve such fine spatial and temporal resolution , they can measure piconewton forces . optical tweezers allow the measurement of piconewton forces and nanometer displacements which is an ideal range for many biological experiments . magnetic tweezers can measure femtonewton forces , and additionally they can also be used to apply torsion . afs devices allow the statistical analysis of the mechanical properties of biological systems by applying piconewton forces to hundreds of individual particles in parallel , with sub-millisecond response time . applications . common applications of force spectroscopy are measurements of polymer elasticity , especially biopolymers such as rna and dna . another biophysics application of polymer force spectroscopy is on protein unfolding . modular proteins can be adsorbed to a gold or ( more rarely ) mica surface and then stretched . the sequential unfolding of modules is observed as a very characteristic sawtooth pattern of the force vs elongation graph ; every tooth corresponds to the unfolding of a single protein module ( apart from the last that is generally the detachment of the protein molecule from the tip ) . much information about protein elasticity and protein unfolding can be obtained by this technique . many proteins in the living cell must face mechanical stress . moreover , force spectroscopy can be used to investigate the enzymatic activity of proteins involved in dna replication , transcription , organization and repair . this is achieved by measuring the position of a bead attached to a dna-protein complex stalled on a dna tether that has one end attached to a surface , while keeping the force constant . this technique has been used , for example , to study transcription elongation inhibition by klebsidin and acinetodin . the other main application of force spectroscopy is the study of mechanical resistance of chemical bonds . in this case , generally the tip is functionalized with a ligand that binds to another molecule bound to the surface . the tip is pushed on the surface , allowing for contact between the two molecules , and then retracted until the newly formed bond breaks up . the force at which the bond breaks up is measured . since mechanical breaking is a kinetic , stochastic process , the breaking force is not an absolute parameter , but it is a function of both temperature and pulling speed . low temperatures and high pulling speeds correspond to higher breaking forces . by careful analysis of the breaking force at various pulling speeds , it is possible to map the energy landscape of the chemical bond under mechanical force . this is leading to interesting results in the study of antibody-antigen , protein-protein , protein-living cell interaction and catch bonds . recently this technique has been used in cell biology to measure the aggregative stochastic forces created by motor proteins that influence the motion of particles within the cytoplasm . in this , way force spectrum microscopy may be used better to understand the many cellular processes that require the motion of particles within cytoplasm . . references . bibliography . smith , s . ; cui , y . ; bustamante , c . science ( washington , d.c . ) 1996 ; 271:795 .