Thomas Walsingham

life . he became a monk at st albans , where he appears to have passed the whole of his monastic life , excepting a period from 1394 to 1396 during which he was prior of wymondham abbey , norfolk , england , another benedictine house . at st albans he was in charge of the scriptorium , or writing room , and he died about 1422 . walsingham is stated by bale and pits to have been a native of norfolk . this is probably an inference from his name , as walsingham is a village in that county . from an early period he was connected with the abbey of st albans abbey at st albans , hertfordshire , and was doubtless at school there . an inconclusive passage in his historia anglicana has been taken as evidence that he was educated at oxford . the abbey of st . albans , however , maintained particularly close relations with oxford , sending its novices to be trained at st . alban hall and its monks at gloucester college . it is probable , therefore , that walsingham was at the university . subsequently , as the register book of benefactors of st . albans abbey preserved in corpus christi college , cambridge , shows , he held in the abbey not only the office of precentor , implying some musical education , but the more important one of scriptorarius , or superintendent of the copying-room . according to the register it was under thomas de la mare , who was abbot from 1350 to 1396 , that he held these offices . before 1388 , he compiled a work ( chronica majora ) well known at that date as a book of reference . in 1394 , he was of standing sufficient to be promoted to the dignity of prior of wymondham . he ceased to be prior of wymondham in 1396 , and was recalled to st . albans , where he composed his ypodigma neustriæ , or demonstration of events in normandy , dedicated to henry v , about 1419 . his historia anglicana , indeed , is carried down to 1422 , though it remains a matter of controversy whether the latter portion is from his pen . nothing further is known of his life . pits speaks of walsingham 's office of ‘ scriptorarius ’ at st . albans abbey as that of historiographer royal ( regius historicus ) , and as bestowed on walsingham by the abbot at the instance of the king . this king , according to bale and pits , was henry vi , for both of them assert that walsingham flourished a.d . 1440 . the title of historiographer royal has probably no more basis than bale 's similar story of william rishanger . bale makes his case worse by adding that walsingham was the author of a work styled acta henrici sexti . this is now unknown . if the ‘ chronica majora ’ was written , as must be supposed , at the latest not long after 1380 , walsingham must have been of exceptional age for that period in 1440 . it is quite inconceivable that he can have been writing histories after 1461 , the virtual close of henry vi 's reign . the acta regis henrici sexti is therefore probably apocryphal , and bale and pits have post-dated walsingham . works . recent research conjecturally assigns to walsingham the following six chronicles : chronica majora , now lost , written before 1388 . the chronicon angliæ from 1328 to 1388 , edited by mr . ( later sir ) e . m . thompson in the rolls series in 1874 . this was previously known to have been compiled by a monk of st . albans , but had escaped attention by being erroneously catalogued as walsingham 's ‘ ypodigma neustriæ . ’ the ‘ chronicon ’ ranges from 1328 to 1388 . the actions and motives of john of gaunt are bitterly assailed in the ‘ chronicon , ’ and it is evident that on the accession of henry iv the ‘ scandalous chronicle , ’ as its editor calls the ‘ chronicon , ’ was suppressed by the monks of st . albans , fearful of the consequences of publishing these attacks upon the king 's father , and its place was taken by the ‘ chronicle of st . albans , ’ no . 4 infra . very few manuscripts of it have therefore survived . two shorter forms of this ‘ chronicon ’ exist in a bodleian manuscript ( 316 ) written soon after 1388 , and in the cottonian ms . faustina b . ix . in these a passage occurs referring the reader for further particulars of wat tyler 's rebellion to the ( lost ) ‘ chronica majora ’ of thomas walsingham at st . albans . between 1390 and 1394 , when he left st . albans , walsingham compiled the gesta abbatum , a history of the abbots of st . albans from its foundation by offa . as in his other works , walsingham took the early part of the history from the writings of previous chroniclers , particularly of matthew paris , the great st . albans chronicler . the portion beginning with 1308 is his original composition . it is only brought down to 1390 , probably because of walsingham 's promotion to wymundham , though he intimates his intention of bringing it down to the death of abbot thomas de la mare in 1396 . this was done by a continuator . the gesta abbatum was edited for the rolls series in 1867–9 in 2 vols . a chronicle extant in british museum royal ms . 13 e ix . ff . 177–326 , which has no title , but from the fact that it was written and preserved at st . albans is commonly called the st . albans ms . or chronicle . it was compiled in or soon after 1394 , its last date being 1393 . it covers the period 1272 to 1393 , incorporating successively the chronicles of matthew of westminster , adam murimuth , the continuation of trivet 's ‘ annales , ’ john trokelowe , and others . its text agrees with the ‘ chronicon angliæ ’ ( no . 2 supra ) to 1369 . from this point it varies frequently from the chronicon , and at almost all points it tones down the chronicon 's unfavourable comments on the action and character of john of gaunt . the ‘ historia vitæ et regni ricardi secundi ’ published by hearne in 1729 was largely borrowed from this ‘ st . albans ms . ’ historia anglicana , also designated by early writers historia brevis , which comprises the years 1272 to 1422 . after a critical examination of the ‘ historia anglicana , ’ mr . riley comes to the conclusion that only of the portion extending from 1377 to 1392 is walsingham the author . the grounds for this conclusion are , in short , ( 1 ) that the last period into which the work may be divided ( 1393–1422 ) contains a far larger number of petty inaccuracies than the fifteen years 1377–92 ; ( 2 ) that for some time after 1392 the history is ‘ less full and satisfactory ; ’ and ( 3 ) differences of style . with this conclusion sir e . m . thompson agrees . on the other hand , mr . gairdner suggests that an explanation of the defects of the later portion may be found in the circumstance that in 1394–1400 walsingham was absent from st . albans as prior of wymundham . the ypodigma neustriæ , which is admitted on all hands to be by walsingham , also contains a considerable number of inaccuracies , and these may possibly have crept both into this work and the latter part of the historia anglicana owing to the approach of old age . lastly , as far as 1419 the historia anglicana is frequently word for word the same as the ypodigma neustriæ . walsingham 's ‘ historia anglicana ’ was first printed as ‘ historia brevis angliæ ab eduardo i ad henricum v ’ ( london , 1594 , fol . ) ; another edition , by w . camden , frankfort , 1603 , 4to . it was edited by mr . riley for the rolls series in 1863 ( 2 vols . ) . a chronicle which is chiefly an abridgment of the historia anglicana , and is also attributed to walsingham , exists in the bodleian library ( rawl . ms . b . 152 ) , and at trinity college , dublin ( e . 5 , 8 ) . it begins in 1342 and ends at 1417 , and contains a note referring to the polychronicon , the name by which the historia anglicana is sometimes known . this abridgment of the ‘ historia anglicana ’ is doubtless the work by walsingham which bale entitles the ‘ auctuarium polychronici ’ ( 1342 to 1417 ) . the ypodigma neustriæ , like the historia anglicana , is a compilation . its object was to provide henry v with an instructive summary of the history of his predecessors , the dukes of normandy , and to furnish an historical justification of his invasion of france . its dedication was written after the conquest of normandy , completed by the surrender of rouen in january 1419 . but the portion allotted to normandy ( ‘ neustria ’ ) in the volume is comparatively small . from the time of duke rollo to the norman conquest of england walsingham borrows from the ‘ historia normannorum ’ of william of jumièges . his other authorities are ralph de diceto , william of malmesbury , john brompton , henry knighton , nicholas trivet , roger de hoveden , matthew paris , william rishanger , matthew westminster , adam murimuth , the st . albans chronicle , the chronicle of walter de hemingburgh , the harleian ms . 3634 , and the manuscripts in corpus christi college , cambridge . the ypodigma was first published in london in 1574 fol . , and was edited by mr . h . t . riley in the rolls series in 1876 . assessment . pits remarks in his life of walsingham that we owe to him the knowledge of many historical incidents not recorded by other writers . he is the principal authority for the reigns of richard ii , henry iv and henry v . our acquaintance with john wycliff 's career is largely due to his information , though he was greatly prejudiced against lollardy . he is also the chief authority for the insurrection of wat tyler in 1381 . the peasants revolt of that year was formidable at st . albans , the abbey being besieged , many of its court rolls and other muniments burnt , and charters of manumission extorted . walsingham 's admiration for henry v , as the opposer of lollardy , led him to follow with minute detail the progress of that king 's campaigns in france . walsingham was a painstaking collector of facts rather than an historian , though he sometimes manipulated his facts with ulterior objects , as is illustrated by the contradictory accounts he gave of the characters of richard ii and john of gaunt . tanner mentions a manuscript in the library of st . john 's college , oxford , as attributed to thomas walsingham . it is intituled de generatione et natura deorum , a title which suggests remoteness from thomas walsingham 's literary pursuits . walsingham was no relation to francis walsingham , spymaster to queen elizabeth i . references . a modern edition of walsingham 's chronica maiora in : david preest , the chronica maiora of thomas walsingham 1376-1422 , with introduction and notes by james g . clark ( woodbridge : boydell , 2005 ) . ; attribution