Scott Raynor

life and career . raynor began playing drums at a young age , forming a group with friend ryan kennedy at age 11 to perform at a school competition – '' a kind of 'show and tell ' thing , '' raynor later recalled . the duo were initially inspired by metallica , but found their material far too technical ; they instead played '' twist of cain '' by danzig and '' london dungeon '' by the misfits . raynor 's first legitimate performance consisted of a cover of '' vlad the impaler '' by gwar . . beginnings of music career . raynor attended rancho bernardo high school ( rbhs ) . rbhs often arranged battle of the bands competitions , and raynor participated : his band , the necropheliacs , played a cover of metallica 's '' creeping death '' . shooman , 2010 . p . 9-10 while at the competition , new transfer student tom delonge , who had been kicked out of poway high school for attending a basketball game while drunk , performed an original song titled '' who 's gon na shave your back tonight ? '' to a packed auditorium . raynor was introduced to delonge at a party by paul scott , founding member of the necropheliacs , shortly before he moved out of state . the two found they had plenty in common , and delonge was searching for a more permanent band to create music with . the two began writing songs at raynor 's parents ' home – '' a strange mix of metal and descendents-style punk '' – and tried out a variety of bass players , according to raynor . hoppus , 2001 . p . 12 delonge later met mark hoppus in august 1992 through friend kerry key and his girlfriend , anne hoppus . '' i thought they were hilarious when i met them . i mean , i did n't have a driver 's license yet , so i gained a lot of agency through hanging with them and their group of friends , '' said raynor . shooman , 2010 . p . 11 the trio began to practice in raynor 's room ( amid complaints from neighbors ) , which was soundproofed with empty egg cartons . the trio spent time together constantly , attending punk shows and movies and playing practical jokes . the trio first operated under a variety of names , including duck tape and figure 8 , until delonge rechristened the band '' blink '' . shooman , 2010 . pp . & nbsp ; 13–14 hoppus ' girlfriend later led him to depart from the group for a time , but he returned when raynor and delonge began recording a demo tape on a four track recorder with friend and collaborator cam jones . hoppus , 2001 . p . 13-15 shooman , 2010 . p . 13 the band soon became part of a circuit that also included the likes of ten foot pole and unwritten law , and they found their way onto the bill as the opening band for local acts at soma , a local all-ages venue which they longed to headline . '' it 's difficult to describe , in words , the nauseous mix of fear and excitement that would hit me when i first started seeing lines of people wanting to hear us play , '' said raynor . shooman , 2010 . p . 18-19 the three eventually were playing concerts at local venues such as soma , which alerted local independent record label cargo music . hoppus , 2001 . p . 29 hoppus was the only member to sign the contract , as delonge was at work at the time and raynor was still a minor . hoppus , 2001 . p . 30 the cheshire cat sessions were to be the last performance with the band for raynor , whose family had moved to reno , nevada . raynor stayed with his sister for the summer of 1993 in order to rehearse for the recording of their debut album . shooman , 2010 . p . 24 raynor moved to reno following the recording and was briefly replaced by school friend mike krull . the band saved money and began flying raynor out to shows , but eventually raynor would move back to san diego to live with hoppus and his family . hoppus , 2001 . p . 28 his parents allowed him to drop out of full-time school to move back and play with the band , but he would continue to finish his diploma by bringing homework on tour . '' i think mark and his sister anne and i stayed up watching old tv shows until morning that whole summer , '' he recalled . shooman , 2010 . p . 24 '' the summer i lived with mark and his family was probably the greatest summer of my life so far , '' said raynor in 2001 . '' i left home at 17 , came to san diego , we bought a van , finished our first video… i had all kinds of dreams in my head and they were all coming true . '' hoppus , 2001 . p . 28 . mainstream success and dismissal from blink-182 . by march 1996 , the trio began to accumulate a genuine buzz among major labels , resulting in a bidding war between interscope , mca and epitaph . mca 's persistence and sincerity won the band over , as well as their promise of complete artistic freedom . hoppus , 2001 . p . 64 the band began recording their sophomore effort dude ranch that winter . raynor had broken both heels and was in a wheelchair due to a drunken stunt ; he was well enough to record the drum tracks for the album while on crutches . hoppus , 2001 . p . 72 the record hit stores the following summer and the band headed out on the warped tour , which raynor described as '' one of the most unequivocally positive experiences of my time with the band . '' shooman , 2010 . p . 37-38 when lead single '' dammit '' began rotation at los angeles-based kroq , other stations took notice and the single was added to rock radio playlists across the country . hoppus , 2001 . p . 74 desperate for a break due to extended touring , the overworked band began to argue and tensions formed , centering largely around raynor . hoppus , 2001 . p . 81 raynor had planned from the earliest days of the band to one day attend college , as he said in a partially tongue-in-cheek remark in a 1994 interview : '' i do n't want to be 30 and still in a punk-rock band . that seems kind of scary to me . '' shortly after the band released dude ranch , raynor began to think outside of the situation , viewing the major label experience as nothing like he had hoped . shooman , 2010 . p . 50 he had only been half invested in the band since signing to mca , as he felt it offered less creative freedom , especially in comparison to epitaph , which had been pursuing the band and was raynor 's first choice . shooman , 2010 . p . 56 '' i mean , i was intellectually invested , i recognized it as a smart move financially . but it 's like that song says , ' i left my heart in san francisco ' ; i left my heart in the office at epitaph . after that compromise i found it difficult to make further ones , and i felt like i was asked to make a lot . eventually , there was not enough of my heart in the band to justify my sticking around . i backed away , i was dead weight . '' the tension came to a head in february 1998 as the band embarked on snocore , described as '' a winter version of the warped tour . '' sharing the stage with primus , the band was enjoying more success than ever before , but the drama between the musicians had grown substantially . hoppus , 2001 . p . 83 relations reached a low point when the band engaged in a fight on a nebraska date after snocore 's conclusion . shooman , 2010 . p . 47 shortly after the conclusion of snocore was a short minitour along the western coast , most notably southern california , the band 's favorite place to play . the tour ended with the band headlining a sold-out show at the palladium in hollywood , where the band had dreamed of performing for years . hoppus , 2001 . p . 84 raynor suffered a '' tragic loss '' during the west coast mini-tour and flew home , forcing the band to find a fill-in drummer : travis barker of the ska punk support band the aquabats . shooman , 2010 . p . 51 barker learned the drum tracks for the band 's set in only 45 minutes prior to his first show . shooman , 2010 . p . 52 raynor returned for the band 's hollywood palladium performance , and the band became increasingly uneasy and arguments grew worse . hoppus , 2001 . p . 85 to offset personal issues , raynor began to drink heavily and it began to affect the band 's performances . shooman , 2010 . p . 56 following a largely successful australian tour in the spring , hoppus and delonge presented an ultimatum : quit drinking or go to an in-patient rehab . raynor agreed to both and informed the band of his decision after taking the weekend to mull options . according to raynor , he was fired through a phone call despite his agreement to rehab . despite this , he felt no malice toward his former bandmates and conceded they were '' right '' to fire him . the band would minimize the impact of the situation in future interviews and remained vague regarding his departure . the band later worked raynor 's departure into a song , '' man overboard , '' which makes reference to his alcohol abuse . . later work . following his exit from blink-182 , raynor kept himself busy with various musical projects , including a group called the axidentals . raynor played guitar for the group , which recorded an extended play and a full-length that was left unreleased when vagrant records showed interest in signing the band . shooman , 2010 . p . 80-81 by the time the deal went through , raynor was having disputes with the group and quit ; the band later released their debut album as death on wednesday through vagrant in 2000 . raynor also began contributing to a charity called standup for kids , an outreach organization that helped street and homeless youth . he also taught music to teens in trouble with the law under the street of dreams program . raynor later went on to perform with the group grimby from 2000 to 2001 , which recorded an extended play at doubletime studios . recorded live over the course of a day , raynor has described it as dark comedy , '' a black sabbath , ramones , and '' weird al '' yankovic milkshake . '' in january 2003 , a rumor circulated on the internet that raynor had been shot dead ; he addressed the hoax via a letter he e-mailed to the sites in question , that instead directed the attention to the standup for kids organization . shooman , 2010 . p . 114-115 raynor fulfilled a long-held ambition to work with nirvana producer jack endino on an extended play recorded with the spazms in 2004 . '' the language of the whole record really speaks for me . it 's deskilled , nihilistic , and posits , by default not intention , a franco-feminism , '' he said . as of 2017 raynor was the drummer for the los angeles post punk band the wraith . shooman , 2010 . p . 133-134 by way of photographs via facebook in june , 2018 , scott raynor was no longer the band ’ s drummer . references . . notes . external links .