Mogambo

plot . eloise '' honey bear '' kelly ( ava gardner ) arrives at a remote african outpost , looking for a rich maharajah acquaintance , only to find he has cancelled his trip owing to unrest in his realm . while waiting for the next river boat out , she spars with hardworking big game hunter victor marswell ( clark gable ) , who initially views her as a certain disreputable type . they later develop a mutual attraction and make love . when the river boat returns , it brings donald nordley ( donald sinden ) and his wife linda ( grace kelly ) . honey bear takes the steamer out at marswell 's urging , although she would prefer to stay with him and he expresses some regret at their parting . the nordleys wish to go on safari to record the cries of gorillas . marswell declines to guide them there due to the difficulties involved and insists that they be guided on the agreed route by his assistant , despite the nordley 's protests . honey bear rejoins the group after the steamer runs aground . marswell rescues linda from a panther and honey bear sees that they are attracted to one another . after marswell talks to linda privately , he agrees to take the nordleys into gorilla country , while also taking honey bear part of the way to join the district commissioner , who can then take her back to civilization . however , they find the commissioner mortally wounded by recently belligerent natives . with reinforcements days away , the small party narrowly escapes , taking the commissioner with them . meanwhile , a serious romance is developing between marswell and linda . only donald is blind to the situation . marswell plans to tell him about how he and linda feel , but has second thoughts after realizing how much donald loves his wife and perhaps how she would be better off remaining with him . the situation is aggravated when marswell reluctantly shoots a gorilla to save donald , blowing a chance to capture a baby gorilla . marswell goes back to camp , depressed , and begins drinking heavily in his tent . honey bear joins him . when linda appears , she finds them cuddling . marswell decides he can fix everything by making linda hate him and makes a show of this cuddling followed by dismissive remarks about linda 's infatuation with '' the white hunter '' to enrage her . unfortunately , his ploy works too well when linda shoots him with his own pistol , wounding him in the arm . honey bear lies to the others , telling them that marswell had been making advances to linda for some time , finally forcing linda to shoot him in his drunken state . the next day , the party breaks camp to head back , leaving marswell behind to try to capture young gorillas to pay for the safari . marswell , acknowledging to himself his feelings for honey bear , asks her to stay and then proposes to her , but she rebuffs him . as the canoes set off , however , she suddenly jumps into the water and wades her way back to him . the two embrace . cast . clark gable as victor marswell ava gardner as eloise kelly grace kelly as linda nordley donald sinden as donald nordley philip stainton as john brown-pryce eric pohlmann as leon boltchak laurence naismith as skipper denis o'dea as father josef . production . development . in 1946 the los angeles times reported that mgm were considering remaking red dust with marilyn maxwell as a possible star . in march 1948 , marie mcdonald reportedly screen tested for the jean harlow part . in may 1949 , maxwell and gene kelly were being considered for lead roles . the studio went on to have a great deal of success with color remakes of old films shot on location overseas , including quo vadis , filmed in europe , and king solomon 's mines , shot in africa . in august 1951 , mgm announced they would make mogambo , which would be shot on location in africa . the producer would be sam zimbalist who had made king solomon 's mines and the star would be clark gable . in february 1952 , zimbalist scouted locations in africa for six weeks . in june john ford agreed to direct . . casting . shelley winters was mentioned as a possible co-star . patricia neal was also discussed . in june 1952 , ava gardner signed . grace kelly was not the first choice for the role of linda nordley . gene tierney dropped out due to not wanting to leave aly khan in paris . . shooting . gable arrived in kenya on 1 november 1952 and was given an armed guard due to the mau mau uprising . filming started 17 november . it was done on location in okalataka , french congo ; mount kenya , thika , kenya — mt longonot , and lake naivasha , both in the kenyan rift valley and fourteen falls near thika are seen as backdrops — kagera river , tanganyika ; isoila , uganda , and interiors were shot at the mgm-british studios , borehamwood , hertfordshire , england . frank allen and his wife were guides during the six week-safari that constituted location filming . the shoot was difficult . gardner fell ill with dysentery during the shoot , requiring her to be flown to england ( she recovered and flew back ) . there was a rumor clark gable was going to be assassinated by the mau mau , so john ford moved a location . two of the crew were revealed to be mau mau . the unit was plagued by rain and the poor quality of the roads - three of the crew were killed in road accidents , including assistant director john hancock . donald sinden , then a contract star for the rank organisation at pinewood studios , recalled : '' ten white hunters were seconded to our unit for our protection and to provide fresh meat . among them were duke of manchester and marcus , lord wallscourt , a delightful man whom ford treated abysmally - sometimes very sadistically . in ford 's eyes the poor man could do nothing right and was continually being bawled out in front of the entire unit ( in some ways he occasionally took the heat off me ) . none of us could understand the reason for this appalling treatment , which the dear kind man in no way deserved . he himself was quite at a loss . several weeks later we discovered the cause from ford 's brother-in-law : before emigrating to america , ford 's grandfather had been a labourer on the estate in ireland of the then lord wallscourt : ford was now getting his own back at his descendant . not a charming sight . donald sinden a touch of the memoirs , hodder & stoughton 1982 ; / ; pp . 174-75 , 185 before leaving camp on the first morning of shooting i had been told to report to the hair-dressing departments tent , where i found the make-up men armed with electric clippers : ' i have to remove the hair from your chest . ' 'whatever for ? ' i asked , 'orders . ' it transpired that clark gable , whose chest was completely devoid of hair , had always insisted that no other actor should appear on film exposing a hirsute breast . this included any member of the crew not wearing a shirt as well . he considered it a slight on his masculinity . we now had to return to the mgm studios in london to shoot all the interior scenes . someone must have pointed out to ford that he had been thoroughly foul to me during the entire location shoot and when i arrived for my first day 's work i found that he had caused a large notice to be painted at the entrance to our sound stage in capital letters reading '' be kind to donald week '' . he was as good as his word - for precisely seven days . on the eighth day he ripped the sign down and returned to his normal bullying behaviour . '' . post-production . the music featured in the film was performed by local native tribes ( except for gardner accompanied by player piano ) , unusual for hollywood , and the film records a traditional africa and safari style . francoist spain censors would not allow adultery to be shown onscreen . for that reason , they changed the relationship of the characters of linda nordley ( kelly ) and donald nordley ( sinden ) from wife and husband to sister and brother in the dubbed version released in spain , thus necessitating the removal of a bedroom scene in which only one bed is present . reception . the film was a massive hit & nbsp ; — according to mgm records it made 4,576,000 in the us and canada and 3,692,000 elsewhere , resulting in a profit of 2,026,000 . it currently has an 83 % rating on rotten tomatoes based on 12 reviews . . awards and honors . grace kelly won a golden globe award for best supporting actress while the film was nominated for two oscars : academy award for best actress ( gardner ) and best actress in a supporting role ( kelly ) . the film was also nominated for a bafta award for best film . the film was nominated for the american film institute 's 2002 list afi 's 100 years . 100 passions . . notes . external links .