KNX (standard)

knx standard . the knx standard has been built on the osi-based eib protocol stack extended with the physical layers , configuration modes and application experience of batibus and ehs . knx installations can use several physical communication media : twisted pair wiring ( inherited from the eib standard . ( the before inherited batibus communication medium ( tp0 ) is no longer part of the knx specifications . ) power-line networking ( inherited from eib standard . ( the before inherited ehs communication medium ( pl132 ) is no longer part of the knx specifications . ) radio ( knx-rf ) ip ( also referred to as eibnet/ip or knxnet/ip ) knx is not based on a specific hardware platform and a network can be controlled by anything from an 8-bit microcontroller to a pc , according to the demands of a particular building . the most common form of installation is over twisted pair medium . knx is an approved standard by the following organisations , ( inter alia ) : international standard ( iso/iec 14543-3 ) european standard ( cenelec en 50090 and cen en 13321-1 ) us standard ( ansi/ashrae 135 ) china guobiao ( gb/t 20965 ) it is administered by the knx association cvba , a non-profit organisation governed by belgian law which was formed in 1999 . the knx association had 443 registered hardware and software vendor members from 44 nations as at 1 july 2018 . it had partnership agreements with over 77,000 installer companies in 163 countries and more than 440 registered training centres . the current vendor list can be found at knx.org : this is a royalty-free open standard and thus access to the knx specifications is unrestricted . . knx architecture all information in this and subsequent sections is summarised from . knx devices are commonly connected by a twisted pair bus and can be modified from a controller . the bus is routed in parallel to the electrical power supply to all devices and systems on the network linking : sensors ( e.g . push buttons , thermostats , anemometers , movement ) gather information and send it on the bus as a data telegram ; actuators ( dimming units , heating valves , displays ) receive data telegrams which are then converted into actions ; and controllers and other logic functions ( room temperature controllers , shutter controllers and other ) system devices and components ( e.g . line couplers , backbone couplers ) . classifying devices as either '' sensor '' or '' actuator '' is outdated and simplistic . many actuators include controller functionality , but also sensor functionality ( for instance measuring operating hours , number of switch cycles , current , electrical power consumption , and more ) . application software , together with system topology and commissioning software , is loaded onto the devices via a system interface component . installed systems can be accessed via lan , point to point links , or phone networks for central or distributed control of the system via computers , tablets and touch screens , and smartphones . the key features of the knx architecture are : interworking and distributed application models for the building automation various tasks ; schemes for configuration and management of resources on the network , and to permit the binding of parts of a distributed application in different nodes ; a communication system with a message protocol and models for the communication stack in each node ( capable of hosting distributed applications ( knx common kernel ) ; and models for the realization of these elements when developing actual devices to be mounted and linked in an installation . applications , interworking and binding . central to the knx architecture concepts are datapoints ( inputs , outputs , parameters , and diagnostic data ) which represent process and control variables in the system . the standardised containers for these datapoints are group objects and interface object properties . the communication system offers a reduced instruction set to read and write datapoint values . datapoints have to confirm to standardised datapoint types , themselves grouped into functional blocks . these functional blocks and datapoint types are related to applications fields , but some of them are of general use ( such as date and time ) . datapoints may be accessed through unicast or multicast mechanisms . to logically link applications datapoints across the network , knx has three underlying binding schemes : one for free , one for structured and one for tagged binding : in free binding , links between datapoints are not prescribed - in combination with free addressing , this supports customized multicast grouping at the level of individual datapoints and is central to s-mode configuration ( see below ) ; in structured binding , the knx specification stipulates a precise pattern for linking a whole set of datapoints , usually corresponding to a functional block or channel ( push-button modes follow this concept ) ; tagged binding is also pre-structured by the application models , but the numerical value of address is part of its value . common kernel and message protocol . the common kernel sits on top of the physical layers and the medium-specific data link layer and is shared by all the devices on the knx network . it is osi 7-layer model compliant : a general data link layer , which sits above the specific data link layers for each medium , provides access control and the logical link control ; a network layer ( for nodes with routing functionality ) provides a segment-wise acknowledged telegram ( frame ) and controls the hop count of a frame ; a transport layer enables four types of communication : one-to-many connectionless ( multicast ) , one-to-all connectionless ( broadcast ) , one-to-one connectionless , one-to-one connection-oriented ; ( osi session and presentation layers are empty ) ; and an application layer offers a toolkit of services to the application process . configuration modes . an installation has to be configured at the network topology level and at individual nodes or devices . the first level is a precondition or “ bootstrap ” phase , prior to the configuration of the distributed applications , i.e . binding and parameter setting . configuration may be achieved through a combination of local activity on the devices ( such pushing a button ) , and active network management communication over the bus ( peer-to-peer , or more centralized master-slave ) . the knx configuration mode : picks out a certain scheme for configuration and binding ; maps it to a particular choice of address scheme ; and completes all this with a choice of management procedures and matching resource realizations . some modes require more active management over the bus , whereas some others are mainly oriented towards local configuration . there are three categories of knx devices : a-mode or '' automatic mode '' devices which can configure themselves , and are able to be installed by the end user ; e-mode or '' easy mode '' devices that require basic training to install : their behaviour is pre-programmed , but configuration parameters need to be tailored to the user 's requirements ; or s-mode or '' system mode '' devices that can be used to create sophisticated building automation systems : they have no default behaviour , and must be programmed and installed by specialists . knx encompasses tools for project engineering tasks such as linking a series of individual devices into a functioning installation and integrating different media and configuration modes . this is embodied in an engineering tool software ( ets ) suite . devices . a knx installation always consists of a set of devices connected to the bus or network . device models vary according to node roles , capabilities , management features and configuration modes , and are all laid down in the profiles . there are also general-purpose device models , such as for bus coupling units ( bcus ) or bus interface modules ( bims ) . devices may be identified and subsequently accessed throughout the network either by their individual address , or by their unique serial number , depending on the configuration mode . ( unique serial numbers are allocated by the knx association certification department . ) devices can also disclose both a manufacturer specific reference and functional ( manufacturer independent ) information when queried . logical topology and individual address space . a knx wired network can be formed with tree , line and star topologies , which can be mixed as needed ; ring topologies are not supported . a tree topology is recommended for a large installation . knx can link up to 57,375 devices using 16-bit addresses . the lowest eight bits provide up to 256 addresses within one line , which can consist of up to four segments , each having a maximum of 64 ( tp1-64 ) devices , or up to 256 ( tp1-256 ) devices . each segment requires a local power supply and the maximum length of a segment is 1000 m . ( the actual number of devices supported is dependent on the power supply and the power load of the individual devices . ) segments connected with line repeater can extend to a length of 4000 m and link up to 256 devices . lines may be grouped together into an area , with up to 15 lines connected to a main line via line couplers . the next four bits of the address are used to identify individual lines . an entire domain can be formed with 15 areas linked by a backbone line using backbone couplers , and the top four bits of the address space identify an area . ( line repeaters may not be used on a backbone or mainline . ) coupling units allow address filtering which helps to improve performance given the limited bus signal speed . an installation based on knxnet/ip allows the integration of knx sub networks via ip as the knx address structure is similar to an ip address . physical transmission media . tp 1 . the tp1 twisted pair bus ( inherited from eib ) provides asynchronous , character oriented data transfer and half-duplex bidirectional differential signaling with a signaling speed of 9600 bit/s . media access control is via csma/ca . every bus user has equal data transmission rights and data is exchanged directly ( peer-to-peer ) between bus users . selv power is distributed via the same pair for low-power devices . a deprecated specification , tp0 , running at a slower signalling speed of , has been retained from the batibus standard but knx products can not exchange information with batibus devices . pl 110 . pl 110 power-line transmission is delivered using iec 61334 signalling with asynchronous transmission of data packets and half duplex bi-directional communication . it uses the central frequency 110 khz ( cenelec b band ) and has a data rate of 1200 bit/s . it also uses csma . knx powerline is aimed at smart white goods , but the take-up has been low . an alternative variant , pl 132 , has a carrier frequency centred on 132.5khz ( cenelec-c band ) . rf . rf enables communication in the 868.3 mhz band for using frequency-shift keying with manchester code . ip . knxnet/ip has integration solutions for ip-enabled media like ethernet ( ieee 802.2 ) , bluetooth , wi-fi ( ieee 802.11 ) , firewire ( ieee 1394 ) etc . frame ( telegram ) overview . ignoring any preamble for medium-specific access and collision control , a frame format is generally : . security . knx telegrams can be signed or encrypted thanks to the extension of the protocol that was developed starting in 2013 , knx data secure for securing telegrams on the traditional knx media tp and rf and knx ip secure for securing knx telegrams tunnelled via ip . knx data secure became an en standard ( en 50090-3-4 ) in 2018 , knx ip secure an iso standard ( iso 22510 ) in 2019 . conformity . any product labeled with the knx trademark must be certified to conform with the standards ( and thus interoperable with other devices ) by accredited third party test labs . see also . dollx8 enocean home automation insteon z-wave intelligent building lighting control console lighting control system opentherm smart environment touchscreen upb