Rachel Whiteread

early life and education . whiteread was born in 1963 in london . birth registered in ilford registration district in the second quarter of 1963 . her mother , patricia whiteread ( née lancaster ) , who was also an artist , died in 2003 at the age of 72 . death registered in tower hamlets registration district in december 2003 . her father , thomas whiteread , was a geography teacher , polytechnic administrator and lifelong supporter of the labour party , who died when whiteread was studying at art school in 1988 . death registered in islington registration district in september 1988 . she is the third of three sisters – the older two being identical twins . she took a workshop on casting with the sculptor richard wilson and began to realize the possibilities in casting objects . she was briefly at the cyprus college of art . from 1985 to 1987 she studied sculpture at slade school of art , university college , london , where she was taught by phyllida barlow , graduating with an ma in 1987 . whiteread worked as an invigilator at the serpentine gallery . for a time she worked in highgate cemetery fixing lids back onto time-damaged coffins . she began to exhibit in 1987 , with her first solo exhibition coming in 1988 . she lives and works in a former synagogue in east london with long-term partner and fellow sculptor marcus taylor . they have two sons . . work . many of whiteread 's works are casts of ordinary domestic objects and , in numerous cases , their so-called negative space . for example , she is known for making solid casts of the open space in and around pieces of furniture such as tables and chairs , architectural details and even entire rooms and buildings . she says the casts carry '' the residue of years and years of use . '' whiteread mainly focuses on the line and the form for her pieces . while still at the slade , whiteread cast domestic objects and created her first sculpture , closet . she made a plaster cast of the interior of a wooden wardrobe and covered it with black felt . it was based on comforting childhood memories of hiding in a dark closet . after she graduated she rented space for a studio using the enterprise allowance scheme . she created shallow breath ( 1988 ) , the cast of the underside of a bed , made not long after her father died . both sculptures were exhibited in her first solo show in 1988 along with casts of other domestic pieces . the work all sold and allowed her to apply for grants to find funding for larger sculptures . . ghost . after her first solo exhibition , whiteread decided to cast the space that her domestic objects could have inhabited . she applied for grants , describing the project as '' mummifying the air in a room . '' she completed ghost in 1990 . it was cast from a room in a house on archway road in north london , much like the house she grew up in . the road was being widened , and the house was torn down . she used plaster to cast the parlor walls and ceiling in sections and assembled them on a metal frame . ghost was first shown at the nonprofit chisenhale gallery . it was purchased by charles saatchi and included with other works by whiteread in his first '' young british art '' show in 1992 . in may 2004 a fire in a momart storage warehouse destroyed many works from the saatchi collection , including , it is believed , some by whiteread . however , ghost had recently been moved from the warehouse to the new gagosian gallery in london . the work was acquired by the national gallery of art in washington , d.c . in the autumn of 2004 . . house and the turner prize . in october 1993 whiteread completed house , the cast of a victorian terrace house . she had begun considering casting an entire house in 1991 . she and james lingwood of artangel looked at houses to be torn down in north and east london in 1992 , but without success in securing one . during this period in 1992 and 1993 , whiteread had an artist residency in berlin with a scholarship from the daad artist 's programme . while in berlin , she created untitled ( room ) , the cast of a generic , anonymous room that she built herself . she finished the interior of a room-sized box with wallpaper , windows , and door before casting . the sculpture is in the collection of the museum of modern art in new york . house , perhaps her best-known work , was a concrete cast of the inside of an entire victorian terraced house completed in autumn 1993 , exhibited at the location of the original house – 193 grove road – in east london ( all the houses in the street had earlier been knocked down by the council ) . it drew mixed responses , winning her both the turner prize for the best young british artist in 1993 and the k foundation art award for the worst british artist . walker , john a . ( 1999 ) the house that no longer was a home , excerpt from art & outrage . she was the first woman to win a turner prize . tower hamlets london borough council demolished house on 11 january 1994 , roberts , alison . '' best and worst of art bites the dust '' . the times , london , 12 january 1994 . a decision which caused some controversy itself . untitled ( one hundred spaces ) ( 1997 ) . for the sensation exhibition in 1997 , whiteread exhibited untitled ( one hundred spaces ) , a series of resin casts of the space underneath chairs . this work can be seen as a descendant of bruce nauman 's concrete cast of the area under his chair of 1965 . the critical response included : '' like a field of large glace sweets , it is her most spectacular , and benign installation to date . monuments to domesticity , they are like solidified jellies , opalescent ice-cubes , or bars of soap – lavender , rose , spearmint , lilac . they look like a regulated graveyard or a series of futuristic standing stones with a passing resemblance to television sets . '' : — andrew lambirth , the spectator , 12 october 1996 . water tower . in 1998 , whiteread made water tower as part of a grant for new york city 's public art fund . the piece , which is 12 ' 2 '' and 9 ' in diameter , was a translucent resin cast of a water tower installed on a rooftop in new york city 's soho district . it has been called '' an extremely beautiful object , which changes colour with the sky , and also a very appropriate one , celebrating one of the most idiosyncratic and charming features of the new york skyline . '' the piece is now in the permanent collection of the museum of modern art ( moma ) . just as ghost led on to the larger and better known house , so water tower led to the more public trafalgar square plinth work three years later . . holocaust monument a.k.a . nameless library ( 2000 ) . image : rachel whitereadwien holocaust mahnmal wien judenplatz.jpg thumb right holocaust monument ( 2000 ) judenplatz , vienna during the holocaust , 65,000 austrian jews were executed , and in memory , monument to the victims of fascism was a monument erected to commemorate these lost lives , however , this piece was seen as unsatisfying , so simon wiesenthal proposed the idea for a new memorial to the mayor of vienna . with the condition that this memorial could not be figurative and needed to represent all 65,000 lives and the camps they were executed at , rachel whiteread was chosen out of ten artists to create this monument . her monument nameless library was erected in judenplatz square in vienna and appears to be an inside-out library . this structure was built from positively cast cement books which are placed with their spines facing inward . the inability to read these books allude to the lost lives of the 65,000 austrian jews whose stories are unable to be told leaving the viewer with a sense of loss and absence . these books have also been seen as referring to the nazi book burnings . the sculpture also does not include corners or bookshelves which further symbolizes the lack of structure and support . nameless library also is constructed on the excavation grounds of vienna 's oldest synagogues which caused a lot of criticism towards the piece as many citizens felt that the grounds sufficed for the memorial itself . some critics even accused her of stereotyping the jewish people as '' the people of the book '' considering that jewish memorials were traditionally written . this monument also questions the architectural concepts of interior and exterior as the building surrounding the square form walls , and the streets leading into it like doorways . in addition , the inverted rose ceiling works as a drainage point to the interior of the sculpture . . untitled monument ( 2001 ) . with untitled monument ( 2001 ) , ( also variously known as plinth or inverted plinth ) , whiteread became the third artist to provide a sculpture for the empty fourth plinth in trafalgar square . her sculpture was an 11-ton resin cast of the plinth itself , made by mike smith studio , london , which stood upside down , creating a sort of mirror-image of the plinth . it was said to be the most massive object ever made out of resin , taking eight attempts to produce due to the resin cracking . o'grady , carrie . '' and the nominations are '' . the guardian , 1 november 2003 . retrieved on 28 march 2007 . the work was produced in two halves , and surface blisters of the cast were repaired by picking them off and filling the small craters with a syringe of resin . unusually for a public work , she raised funds for the piece herself by selling maquettes ( small preparatory models ) ; this was no small gesture with the mold alone costing over £100,000 and the total cost estimated at £225,000 the critical response included : '' this dazzling anti-monument monument looks like a glass coffin , but its watery transparency relates to the large fountain that dominates the trafalgar plaza . following the aquatic theme , whiteread 's monument evokes the scene of the 1805 naval battle for which the square is named . '' ebony , david . '' london calling '' . artnet , 2006 . retrieved on 28 march 2007 . : — david ebony , artnet '' it 's a simple trick , but an effective one , and the associations it conjures – heaviness and lightness , earth and heaven , death and life – are thought-provoking and manifold . whiteread 's monument , as light and gleaming as the plinth is dark and squat , is the only one of the four commissioned pieces to allude directly to the plinth 's defining emptiness . she sees it not as a space to be filled , but as an absence to be acknowledged , and she does it well . '' : — ned denny , new statesman , 9 july 2001 . snow show ( 2004 ) . '' the challenge has been to work in collaboration with an architect finnish architect juhani pallasmaa in a completely unfamiliar material . at this point , there is a 3-dimensional model of an actual stairwell space in east london , electronic imagery and a wooden mould that is being constructed in rovaniemi , finland . i know that the piece will be made from snow and will have a feeling of solidity ; the viewer will be able to walk into it . the form is based upon a simple stairwell space that has been turned by 90 degrees . the exterior of the piece is a pragmatic solution simply reflecting the complex geometry of the interior . the new space should feel familiar and domestic . i hope that it will disorientate the viewer and make one think of other places . '' : — rachel whiteread '' 'it was the ephemerality that appealed to me , ' says rachel whiteread . 'it was a chance to do an experiment . ' '' : — rachel whiteread . embankment ( 2005–2006 ) . thumb in spring 2004 , she was offered the annual unilever series commission to produce a piece for tate modern 's vast turbine hall , delaying acceptance for five to six months until she was confident she could conceive of a work to fill the space . throughout the latter half of september 2005 and mid-way through october her work embankment was installed and was made public on 10 october . it consists of some 14,000 translucent , white polyethylene boxes ( themselves casts of the inside of cardboard boxes ) stacked in various ways ; some in very tall mountain-like peaks and others in lower ( though still over human height ) , rectangular , more leveled arrangements . they are fixed in position with an adhesive . she cited the end scenes of both raiders of the lost ark and citizen kane as visual precursors ; she also spoke of the death of her mother and a period of upheaval which involved packing and moving comparable boxes . the culture show , bbc2 , 13 october 2005 it is also thought that her recent trip to the arctic is an inspiration , although critics counter that white is merely the colour the polyethylene comes in , and it would have added significantly to the expense to dye them . the boxes were manufactured from casts of ten plain cardboard boxes by a company that produces grit bins and traffic bollards . the critical response included : '' with this work whiteread has deepened her game , and made a work as rich and subtle as it is spectacular . whatever else it is , embankment is generous and brave , a statement of intent . '' searle , adrian . '' a view of a mind at work '' . the guardian , 11 october 2005 . retrieved on 28 march 2007 . : — adrian searle , the guardian , 11 october 2005 . '' everything feels surprisingly domestic in scale , the intimidating vistas of the turbine hall shrunk down to irregular paths and byways . from atop the walkway , it looks like a storage depot that is steadily losing the plot ; from inside , as you thread your way between the mounds of blocks , it feels more like an icy maze . '' : — andrew dickson , the guardian , 10 october 2005 . '' this is another example of meritless gigantism that could be anywhere , and is the least successful of the gallery 's six attempts to exploit its most unsympathetic space , '' evening standard , quoted in abc news ( australia ) : — brian sewell , london evening standard , october 2005 . '' looks like a random pile of giant sugar cubes . luckily , the £400,000 sponsored work is recyclable . '' : — stephen moyes , daily mirror , 11 october 2005 . charity box ( 2007 ) . whiteread created this small , plaster sculpture for a charity auction by the prior weston pta , in support of the prior weston primary school in islington , london . the piece measures , a comparatively tiny , 16 & nbsp ; cm x 11.5 & nbsp ; cm x 11.5 & nbsp ; cm . angel of the south ( 2008 ) . she was one of the five artists shortlisted for the angel of the south project in january 2008 . the gran boathouse ( 2010 ) . the gran boathouse is located on the waters edge in gran norway . from a distance , it looks like any other boathouse , but closer inspection reveals that this is a work of art in concrete . the work is a cast of the interior of an old boathouse . whiteread turns the boathouse inside out thereby capturing a moment in time . in this way , she encourages us to reflect on what we see around us . '' i have mummified the air inside the boathouse , '' says rachel whiteread . '' i wanted to make a shy sculpture , a sculpture that would stand there peaceful and noble . '' the boathouse and its interior had all the qualities that she was looking for . it represented the history of the place . the sculpture is preserving what would otherwise have been lost . work since 2012 . cast from generic wooden sheds , detached 1 , detached 2 , and detached 3 ( 2012 ) render the empty interior of a garden shed in concrete and steel . circa 1665 ( i ) ( 2012 ) , look , look , look ( 2012 ) and loom ( 2012 ) belong to a series cast from doors and windows in shades of rose , eau-de-nil , or steely resin . propped against or affixed to walls , the sculptures glow with absorbed and reflected light . rachel whiteread : detached , april 11 - may 25 , 2013 gagosian gallery , london . other works like untitled ( amber ) ( 2012 ) and untitled ( green ) ( 2012 ) are diminutive cardboard constructions mounted on graphite-marked notepaper , painted with silver leaf and complete with celluloid '' windows '' that refer to the resin sculptures . . cabin ( 2016 ) . cabin is a concrete reverse cast of a wooden shed . it has been located on discovery hill on governors island in new york harbour since 2016 . whiteread uses this idea in order to produce a negative space that had existed but no longer does . since cabin is away from the noisy city , it creates a peaceful scene and a quiet sense . cabin is said to be her first public commission in the united states that is installed permanently on the island . with this work , whiteread wanted to '' blur the notion of space even further by allowing the booming nature of the park to and hide the installation . '' therefore even though the city that is so advanced with technology and is polluted by gasoline , '' nature is still present . '' '' what an extraordinary site , and what an honor to be asked to put something there , '' whiteread states . ' i tried to imagine what one could sit there with some kind of dignity , to create a place of remembrance . '' she would like '' to make a piece that was evocative without wanting to make a memorial to the world trade center . '' : - rachel whiteread . references . further reading . . external links . luhring augustine website gagosian website