The Pursuit of Love

plot summary . the narrator is fanny , whose mother ( called '' the bolter '' for her habit of serial monogamy ) and father have left her to be brought up by her aunt emily and the valetudinarian davey , whom emily marries early in the novel . fanny also spends holidays with her uncle matthew radlett , aunt sadie , and numerous cousins at alconleigh . linda , the second radlett daughter , is fanny 's best friend and the main character of the novel . the early chapters recount the radlett children 's bizarre upbringing , including their contrasting obsessions with hunting and preventing cruelty to animals , and the activities of their secret society , '' the hons . '' the radlett daughters receive little in the way of formal education , and as linda grows older she is increasingly consumed by a desire for romantic love and marriage . louisa , the eldest radlett child , makes her début and quickly becomes engaged to john fort william , a scottish peer more than twenty years her senior . linda finds lord fort william an unromantic choice of husband , but is deeply jealous that louisa is getting married . linda becomes bored and depressed , awaiting her own coming-out party . during this time she makes friends with lord merlin , a neighbouring landlord who is a wealthy , charming aesthete with many fashionable friends . merlin brings tony kroesig , heir to a wealthy banking family , as a last-minute guest to linda 's coming-out ball . linda falls in love with tony , but their relationship is rocky from the start . uncle matthew disapproves of tony 's german ancestry ( he believes that all foreigners are fiends ) , and is furious when linda and fanny sneak away to oxford to have luncheon with tony . linda and tony eventually marry despite the strong disapproval of their families . linda very quickly realises that she has made a serious mistake , but she keeps up a pretence of having a happy marriage . linda and tony have one child , moira , to whom linda takes an instant dislike . linda almost dies during moira 's birth , and her doctors strongly advise her to have no more children . moira is soon abandoned to the care of her paternal grandparents . during this time , fanny marries a young man called alfred and begins a family of her own ; she therefore sees linda less frequently . after nine years of marriage , linda leaves tony for christian talbot , an ardent communist . christian is kind but vague , and ultimately uninterested in individuals , preferring to focus on the plight of the working class . linda 's divorce and remarriage cause a rift between her and her parents , but after some months they reconcile . linda and christian go to france to work with spanish refugees in perpignan during the spanish civil war , where they meet linda 's old friend lavender davis , an efficient young woman also volunteering to help the refugees . linda realises that christian and lavender are falling in love with one another and that they would be a better pairing . linda decides to leave christian and leave france . on the way back to england , linda runs out of money in paris and meets fabrice de sauveterre , a wealthy french duke . linda becomes his mistress and lives with him in paris for eleven months . during this time she cultivates a great interest in clothes , which fabrice encourages and finances , but most of her happiness is the result of the fact that she has finally found the love of her life . when world war ii breaks out , fabrice persuades linda to return to england alone , for he has work to do in the french resistance . during the war , he is able to visit linda in england once . she becomes pregnant . meanwhile , for safety during the london blitz , fanny , louisa , and their children are living at alconleigh , along with matthew , sadie , emily , davey , '' the bolter , '' and her new lover juan ( whom uncle matthew calls '' gewan '' ) . when linda 's house is bombed , she also goes to stay at alconleigh . the bolter sees linda as a younger version of herself , which linda resents , because she is certain that she has found the love of her life in fabrice and will not run off from any more husbands . fanny is also expecting a baby , and she and linda give birth to their sons on the same day . linda dies in childbirth , as the doctors had warned ; around this same time , fabrice is killed in the war . fanny and her husband adopt linda 's child and name him fabrice . the radletts . uncle matthew , '' lord alconleigh '' ; an eccentric , bullying patriarch who periodically uses bloodhounds to hunt his children across the oxfordshire countryside aunt sadie , an affectionate but somewhat ineffectual matriarch louisa , the dependable , domestic eldest daughter linda , beautiful and highly-strung , the central character in the pursuit of love . bob , the eldest son , one of the few well-behaved radlett children jassy , matt 's inseparable friend , who is perpetually saving up to run away from home matt , jassy 's inseparable friend , eventually runs away from eton to fight in the spanish civil war robin , the youngest son victoria , the baby of the family , born when the older children are entering their teens . an irrepressible child , she appears more prominently in the sequel , love in a cold climate . other characters . fanny logan , the narrator , a cousin of the radletts and linda 's best friend fabrice de sauveterre , a wealthy french duke , linda 's final lover and the great love of her life emily warbeck , sadie alconleigh 's sister and fanny 's aunt davey warbeck , emily 's husband , a distinguished writer and critic , and also a hypochondriac who undergoes unusual remedies for the sake of his health the bolter , for whom no other name is given , fanny 's mother and younger sister to sadie and emily . she is called the bolter because of her many marriages . lord merlin , a neighbour of the radletts who befriends and mentors linda , and introduces her to high society tony kroesig , linda 's first husband , a banker and later a conservative mp sir leicester kroesig , tony 's father , also a banker , who strongly dislikes linda moira kroesig , linda and tony 's child , whom linda dislikes on sight christian talbot , linda 's second husband , an ardent communist lavender davis , a childhood acquaintance of linda's john fort william , louisa 's husband , in the house of lords alfred wincham , fanny 's husband , an oxford don juan , the bolter 's spanish lover . in popular culture . carrie bradshaw is shown reading the vintage books omnibus edition of the pursuit of love and love in a cold climate in sex and the city 2 . a copy of the same edition is also seen in wes anderson 's short film hotel chevalier . the title of the novel and fabrice are referenced in jamie cullum 's song '' love ai n't gon na let you down '' . adaptations . in 1980 the pursuit of love and love in a cold climate were adapted into an eight part miniseries by itv under the title love in a cold climate . a second adaptation of the pursuit of love and love in a cold climate by the bbc and wgbh-tv was released in 2001 as the two-part drama love in a cold climate . tom hooper directed the screenplay adapted by deborah moggach from the novels . in 2019 the bbc announced plans for another adaptation , the pursuit of love directed by emily mortimer and starring lily james and emily beecham . the miniseries began filming in 2020 and was disrupted by the covid-19 pandemic . . see also . the pursuit of laughter the pursuit ( album ) . references . external links . official nancy mitford website