Veolia Transport

history . cgea transport . the company was established on 1 january 1997 as cgea transport , created from the public transport business of compagnie générale d'entreprises automobiles ( cgea ) , which was a subsidiary of compagnie générale des eaux ( cge ) . cgea was previously acquired by cge in 1980 , and its waste management and environmental services division was already rebranded onyx environnement in 1989 , leaving cgea with only the transport business . compagnie générale française des transports et entreprises ( cgfte ) was also acquired by cge in the 1980s , was also absorbed into cgea in 1988 . . vivendi , connex and veolia . cge , the ultimate parent company , was later renamed to vivendi in 1998 , and created veolia environnement in 1999 to consolidate its environmental divisions including the transport division . viviendi environnement was renamed veolia environnement in 2003 . as a result , the name of cgea transport was rebranded connex in 1999 , adopting the brand that its south central and south eastern rail franchises in south east england had traded under since 1996 . '' connex expands throughout the world '' today 's railways europe issue 54 june 2000 page 15 in 2005 , as a result of global rebranding of all veolia environnement subsidiaries , connex was renamed veolia transport . '' connex is dead , long live veolia '' today 's railways europe issue 123 march 2006 page 11 some operations such as connex melbourne retained the connex name and logo . in 2007 , the group posted revenues of €5.6 billion in 2007 , '' veolia transport public transportation and freight services '' . and sold veolia cargo , the rail freight branch of veolia transport in 2009 to sncf and getlink . sncf and eurotunnel acquire veolia cargo via www.geodis.com a merger between veolia transport and the old transdev was announced on 23 july 2009 . merger of veolia transport and transdev transdev was then a subsidiary of caisse des dépôts . the merger was completed in march 2011 . veolia transdev became the world 's private-sector leader in sustainable mobility with more than 110,000 employees in 28 countries . veolia transdev was renamed and simplified to transdev in 2013 . in july 2011 , amid disappointing financial results , veolia environnement announced the launch of new restructuring plans and redeployment of assets and businesses . in december 2011 , veolia announced a €5bn divestment program over 2012-2013 . as part of this programme , veolia would divest its participation in transdev and exit the transport business altogether . in january 2019 , veolia sold the last of its transdev shares to the rethmann group , the owner of rhenus . veolia out of transport as rethmann acquires transdev stake railway gazette international 11 january 2019 . europe . france . the company is the third largest private sector operator of public transport and operates : 7 tramway networks across the country : 5 in service ( bordeaux , nice , rouen , nancy ) ; 1 in construction in suburban lyon , ( lesly ) and two in project ( le havre and toulon ) 77 bus networks ( january 1 , 2009 ) , especially in bordeaux , nice , rouen , saint-étienne , toulon , le havre and nancy more than 25 suburban networks in suburban paris : ( seine-st-denis '' tra '' , melun '' tram '' , sénart '' sénart bus '' , etc . ) 4 tourist railways ( petit train de la rhune , vapeur du trieux , chemin de fer de la mure and chemins de fer de provence ) ferry services in mediterranéa : veolia recently bought 28 % of the sncm , a previously state-owned ferry company . belgium . autocars de polder has been part of the veolia group since 1995 . veolia operates some de lijn routes under contract . veolia transport belgium ( vtb ) was passed on to transdev until it was sold to a consortium consisting of cube infrastructure and gimv in march 2014 . . denmark . veolia ran half of the transport operations of the privatised combus especially around copenhagen . copenhagen : suburban buses . these operations were sold to arriva in october 2007 . finland . helsinki : veolia owns helsinki metropolitan area 's bus company veolia finland , which was previously linjebuss and operates essentially in vantaa , a northern suburb of helsinki . tampere : veolia owns the regional bus company previously known as alhonen & lastunen seinäjoki : veolia owns yet another local bus company , now known as veolia transport west oy , operating both local and long-distance routes . veolia transport finland oy has since been passed on to transdev and is now known as transdev finland oy from 5 february 2015 . . germany . veolia verkehr , former connex verkehr , offers train services , several of a regional character such as the bayerische oberlandbahn from munich , and two long-distance services . veolia owns a number of bus companies , mostly in suburban areas . it also operates tram systems : aachen : suburban buses , berlin : suburban tram line linking to the s bahn , frankfurt : urban linepacks a & e , suburban services , bad homburg : urban & suburban buses , hagen : urban network , pforzheim : urban network won by veolia in august 2006 . network included in '' karlsruher verkehrsverbund gmbh '' ( kvv ) and linked to it by tram-train line , schwäbisch hall : urban network , stuttgart : suburban buses , . and also into rural areas . veolia verkehr has since been passed on to transdev and is now known as transdev gmbh since march 2015 . . ireland . dublin : veolia operates the luas tramway which started operations in june 2004 . operation of the luas tramway has since been passed on to transdev and renamed transdev ireland . galway : veolia owned the nestor airlink bus company which operates between galway and dublin airport . however jim burke & sons own and run it as of march 2009 . jersey . mybus operated bus services in jersey between 29 september 2002 and 31 december 2012 under the mybus brand . final tender from ct plus to run jersey 's buses approved bbc news 10 july 2012 . netherlands . veolia transport nederland consists of : veolia transport veluwe , operating in de veluwe region in gelderland , veolia transport brabant , operating in middle and western noord-brabant with 4 urban networks in breda , tilburg , bergen op zoom and roosendaal , veolia transport limburg , operating in the whole province of limburg , including city buses in maastricht , parkstad ( heerlen-kerkrade-landgraaf-brunssum ) , venlo , and roermond and the roermond–nijmegen and maastricht–kerkrade train routes . veolia transport fast ferries zeeland ( western scheldt ferry ) . veolia transport zeeuwsch-vlaanderen , in the southern part of zeeland province . formerly veolia cargo ] nederland freight trains , sold in 2009 to sncf geodis . sncf and eurotunnel acquire veolia cargo world cargo news 3 september 2009 eurotunnel and sncf acquire veolia cargo international railway journal 3 september 2009 veolia transport nederland became part of transdev in march 2011 and was brought under common ownership with connexxion to form transdev nederland . annual report for year ended 31 december 2011 connexxion both continued to operate independently until june 2015 when both were brought under common management . transdev merges connexxion and veolia transport nederland under one brand transdev 22 may 2015 ( dutch ) when the limburg concession expired on 11 december 2016 , the remaining haaglanden operations were rebranded as connexxion . arriva wins re-awarded limburg operating contract railway gazette international 3 june 2015 veolia name disappears from the ov ov magazine 21 november 2016 ( dutch ) . norway . veolia transport norge operates : trondheim tramway , rogaland buses , nordland buses and ferries . finnmark buses and ferries . on 6 may 2011 , veolia transport norge was sold in a management buyout and renamed boreal transport norge as . the new owners were transport management as ( 1.4 % ) ( the management ) and cube norge as ( 98.6 % ) , a subsidiary of cube communications infrastructure s.c.a . ( cube infrastructure fund ) of luxembourg . . spain . barcelona : two unlinked tram networks trambaix and trambesòs and two networks in the suburbs : terrassa and mataró , bilbao : bilbobus urban network , contract won in may 2008 , sold in 2012 jerez : urban network , parla : tramway in suburban madrid . sweden . veolia transport sverige ab is the umbrella company of veolia transport companies in sweden : gothenburg : veolia owns the ferry company styrsöbolaget that operates the cross-river ferries ( älvsnabben ) as well as the ferries to the south archipelago . veolia also operate some local city bus networks or interurban lines on contract to the local authorities ( västtrafik ) . norrköping : veolia operate the norrköping tramway on behalf of östgötatrafiken . stockholm : until april 2012 , veolia transport ( now transdev ) was running three tram networks ( lidingöbanan , nockebybanan and tvärbanan ) and a local railway ( saltsjöbanan ) in the city on behalf of sl . metro contracted by the stockholm county council until 2009 , after which the contract was taken over by mtr corporation . malmö : veolia runs long distance trains from malmö to stockholm , in the winter season going further on to åre , and the long distance train from malmö to berlin with train ferry via trelleborg to sassnitz in the summer season . veolia transport sverige ab has since been passed on to transdev and is now known as transdev sverige ab since february 2015 . . united kingdom . connex south eastern - a train operator in south-east england that ran from 14 october 1996 to 9 november 2003 . the contract was due to run until 2011 ; but their contract was revoked owing to poor financial management after repeated warnings from government . sra confirms transfer from connex to south eastern trains strategic rail authority 8 november 2003 rail authority takes on franchise bbc news 8 november 2003 connex south central - a train operator in the south of england that ran from 26 may 1996 until 25 august 2001 . initially their contract was due to run until 2003 . in october 2000 the new contract was awarded to govia . soon after they and connex worked out a takeover of the remainder of connex 's contract ; starting in august 2001 . connex loses rail franchise , bbc news 24 october 2000 . acquisition of connex south central limited by govia limited go-ahead group 30 may 2001 completion of acquisition of south central franchise go-ahead group 28 august 2001 '' govia southern central goes into business '' the railway magazine issue 1206 october 2001 page 12 connex bus uk - a bus operator formed in mid 1999 by connex , operating bus services in greater london . sold to national express in 2004 after losing the rail franchises above . national express buys 200 london buses the daily telegraph 27 february 2004 dunn-line – a national express contractor . veolia sold its nottingham bus and private hire coach operations to premiere travel from 31 january 2011 ; on 6 january 2011 , its national express coach work from the city passed to yourbus . crossgates coaches , which purchased the following ( ceased by december 2012 ) : pullman coaches bebb travel – a national express contractor shamrock coaches hawkes longs astons coaches ( kempsey , worcester ) paul james coaches ( taken over by centrebus in october 2011 ) veolia transport – running a number of nexus secured local bus services in tyne & wear . veolia local and sightseeing services in york were taken over by transdev york in august 2008 . blazefield expands with york deal busandcoach.com 4 june 2008 as a result , veolia transport had no more operations in uk by the time of veolia transdev 's rebranding in 2013 . however , since the services in york were taken over by transdev york ( part of the old transdev ) , they still eventually became part of veolia transdev and the current transdev . central europe . veolia transport central europe is a daughter company for central europe . it was later passed on to transdev and then sold to arriva in the spring of 2013 . . czech republic . veolia transport is one of the largest bus operators , operates also one regional railway line and one trolleybus network . main acquisitions carried out ( as connex ) in 2002–2004 ( čsad ostrava , třinec , praha-vršovice , příbram , dp teplice ) , smaller in 2005 ( mad kolín ) , 2008 ( nerabus ) , 2010 ( spojbus ) etc . in summer 2008 , it changed its trademark from connex to veolia transport . in 2004–2007 , several times competed or offered for passenger railway transport , however have got no new job yet . veolia transport česká republika a . s . ( since 2006 a daughter of german company veolia transport central europe ) has 4 operator subcompanies : veolia transport morava a . s . ( based on former companies čsad bus ostrava→connex morava and čsad třinec→bus slezsko ) , operates regional bus transport in moravian-silesian region and olomouc region , urban bus networks in 7 cities , e . g . třinec , český těšín , šumperk and krnov , many long-distance bus lines , some skibus and cyclobus lines etc . operates the local railway line 293 ( desná railway ) . veolia transport východní čechy a . s . ( based on the former companies čsad autobusy cz chrudim→connex východní čechy and městská autobusová doprava kolín , s . r . o . ) , operates regional bus transport in the east bohemia ( east part of central bohemian region , pardubice region , hradec králové region etc . ) , urban bus networks in chrudim , kutná hora and kolín and some long-distance bus , skibus and cyclobus lines . veolia transport praha s . r . o . ( based on the former companies čsad praha-vršovice→connex praha , čsad příbram→connex příbram , nerabus s . r . o . and spojbus s . r . o . ) , operates regional bus transport mostly south and south-east of prague , including several bus lines of prague city transport and urban bus networks in příbram , neratovice , roudnice nad labem , říčany etc . veolia transport teplice s . r . o . ( based on the former city enterprise dp teplice ) , operates urban network of bus and trolleybus lines in teplice . slovakia . nitra : urban network and bus station . poland . veolia owns a number of bus companies and operates an urban network : tczew : urban city network . serbia . veolia owns a number of bus companies and operates 2 urban networks : belgrade : urban city network požarevac : urban , suburban and intercity network . asia . east asia ( excluding philippines ) . veolia transport 's more recent operations in east asia were operated as a joint venture with ratp group , known as veolia transport ratp asia ( vtra ) . it was created in july 2009 and absorbed all existing veolia transport operating companies and contracts . veolia transport 's share has since been passed on to transdev , with the joint venture renamed ratp dev transdev asia ( rdta ) . china . veolia transport chinese limited ( vtcl ) started a joint venture with nanjing zhongbei to operate bus networks in china in 2008 . it operates in : anqing : anhui province huaibei : bus network operated as a joint venture into a city of 2 040 000 inhabitants ( 932 185 hab . urban in 2006 ) in anhui province huainan : bus network operated as a joint venture into a city of 1 076 000 inhabitants ( 1 075 754 hab . urban in 2006 ) in anhui province ma'anshan : anhui province nanjing : suburbs of luhe and pukou it was passed to vtra upon the latter 's creation in 2009 . hong kong . hong kong island : veolia transport chinese limited also acquired 50 % of hong kong tramways and took over the daily operations from the wharf on april 7 , 2009 , wholly owned on february 17 , 2010 . french firm to fully own tramway the tramways is now a fully owned subsidiary of ratp dev transdev asia . india . mumbai : veolia transport is part of a consortium which is led by reliance infrastructure , together with mumbai metropolitan region development authority ( mmrda ) ; a joint venture known as mumbai metro one pvt ltd . the share by veolia would later be passed on to vtra ( now ratp dev transdev asia ) . they would build the first corridor of the mumbai metro on the 11.4 & nbsp ; km stretch between versova-andheri-ghatkopar on the east-west corridor . the project started construction in 2008 and was completed and opened in 2014 . ratp dev transdev asia also holds 70 % share of the operating company , metro one operation pvt ltd . . macau . macau : ratp dev transdev asia created reolian public transport co . to operate buses in macau . services began august 1 , 2011 and is operating two of five groupings of routes , also to be the more important arterial routes of the city . the joint venture announced filing for bankruptcy on 1 october 2013 . the operation was finally terminated in july 2014 and passed on to another operator . south korea . seoul : metro 9 is a joint venture of veolia transport korea ( 80 % ) and hyundai rotem ( 20 % ) . metro 9 operates line 9 of seoul 's metro . the line opened in 2009 . ratp dev transdev asia now holds the share held by veolia transport korea . philippines . connex operated the bonifacio transport corporation in the philippines in the early 2000s . it is unknown when exactly did connex stop operating the bus services . israel . . light rail . jerusalem : veolia won a 500 million contract in 2003 to build and maintain the jerusalem light rail system , which will comprise eight lines running across the city . it is expected to be completed by 2020 . the first line , from pisgat ze'ev to beit hakerem , began operation in 2011 . due to the controversial nature of the project , veolia became a target of the boycott , divestment and sanctions ( bds ) campaign . in september 2009 , the company considering selling its share in the project to the dan bus company for 15–20 million . in october 2010 , it agreed to sell its stake to egged instead . as a result , dan sued veolia . after the operation was passed on to transdev , the sale to egged was finally approved in august 2015 . . buses . veolia operates buses in israel under veolia transportation brand . it used to operate with both the veolia transportation brand and the connex brand together in the late 2000s . they operate : modi'in : intercity and urban buses in a city located between jerusalem and tel aviv . formerly run by margalit . ashdod : intercity buses to tel aviv and gush dan , and to ashkelon . formerly run by egged bus cooperative . tiberias : urban and regional buses . formerly run by egged bus cooperative . yavne : urban buses . formerly run by egged bus cooperative . lod : urban buses and intercity buses to tel aviv . formerly run by egged bus cooperative . bnei brak : intercity buses to jerusalem . formerly run by dan bus company . in 2012 , denis gasquet , veolia 's senior executive vice president , visited israel , where the company has reached a turnover of 1.5 billion shekels a year . after 20 years of investment in the country , gasquet said the company had never lost a tender due to its commitment to israel . despite operational hitches , veolia stated that there were no political problems with the arabs or the jews , and the company was '' not ashamed to say that we make money in israel . '' not afraid to make money in israel , haaretz after these operations was passed on to transdev , the buses in modi'in were sold to kavim in july 2013 , while the rest were sold to afikim in september 2013 . . lebanon . around a 40 & nbsp ; km radius from beirut : connex operates school bus services for the grand lycée franco-libanais in achrafieh , beirut using a fleet of temsa prestij buses , nissan civilian buses and nissan urvan vans . the operation was part of veolia transportation from 1998 till 2008 . after 2008 , it retained the connex branding and logo . its current fate is unknown as its official web page was last operational in 2017 , and its last post on its official facebook page was in 2015 . oceania . australia . connex changed its name to the same as its french parent company 's , veolia , in january 2006 . branding on buses and trains was changed to reflect this position , with the exception of connex melbourne . revenue for australia was over a 635 million . brisbane , queensland : veolia operated as transdev queensland after purchasing national bus company 's business in september 2004 . national express sells buses the age ( melbourne ) 22 september 2004 connex pursues further development in australia connex press release 7 september 2004 melbourne , victoria : connex melbourne operated the franchise for operating half of railways in melbourne , later extending to the entire network in 2004 . the contract expired on 30 november 2009 . [ '' new train , tram operators for melbourne '' the age 25 june 2009 perth , western australia : veolia purchased transdev wa from national bus company in 2004 . connex acquires brisbane and perth companies australasian bus & coach sydney , new south wales : veolia operated a commuter bus services in south and south-western sydney as transdev nsw , formerly connex southtrans and connex nsw , after purchasing southtrans in september 1999 . transdev nsw australian bus fleet lists veolia also operated the sydney monorail and light rail network as veolia transport sydney , on behalf of metro transport sydney since august 1998 . it was cgea transport 's first venture into australia and first operated as cgea transport sydney . it also owned 51 % of the monorail between 1998 and 2001 . stock exchange announcement australian infrastructure fund 11 august 1998 with the exception of connex melbourne , the other veolia transport operations have since been passed on to transdev and grouped to form its australasian subsidiary transdev australasia ( together with veolia auckland and old transdev ) . new caledonia . nouméa : veolia created and ran the nouméa suburban bus network since february 2002 , under the carsud brand . . new zealand . auckland : transdev auckland operated the commuter rail services in partnership with auckland transport . it changed its name from connex to veolia on 1 march 2006 . veolia transport auckland has since been passed on to transdev and grouped with veolia transport and old transdev 's australian operations to form transdev australasia . north america . veolia transportation is the north american business unit of veolia transport veolia transportation : about us it has since been passed on to transdev and renamed transdev north america in 2014 . canada . in april 2005 veolia were awarded the contract in york region in suburban toronto , ontario , canada running the bus rapid transit ( brt ) naming the routes viva and joining with york region transit ( yrt ) as a one fare transit system . veolia also operates transit services in the greater montreal area cit chambly-richelieu-carignan sainte-julie public transit saint-jean-sur-richelieu public transit . united states . connex arrived in the united states in 2001 , with the acquisition of yellow transportation in baltimore , maryland . on september 1 , 2005 , connex acquired atc from national express , making connex-atc the largest privately owned public transportation company in north america . atc was formed in 1951 and originally owned bus companies before becoming a contractor . american transit corp . in 2006 , connex-atc changed its name to veolia transportation , acquired shuttleport , and won several contracts in the us , including : antelope valley transit authority in los angeles county , california , atlanta : in suburban gwinnett county , georgia , gwinnett county transit operates bus routes within as well as xpress bus routes to atlanta . austin : capital metrorail and bus routes throughout austin and surrounding communities . in march 2009 , employees of veolia transportation were said to have tested trains on rail sections without prior approval and hence the capital metrorail was delayed . '' feds investigating austin 's capital metrorail incident '' boston : veolia operated the massachusetts bay transportation authoritys regional commuter rail operations from 1 july 2003 until 30 june 2014 in conjunction with bombardier transportation and alternate concepts . '' connex wins in boston '' railway gazette international february 2003 page 66 keolis wins massachusetts commuter rail operating contract railway gazette international 10 january 2014 as the mbta commuter rail . charleston : veolia operates buses for carta charm city circulator operates service throughout downtown baltimore . it began service in 2010 . denver , co : regional transportation district ( rtd ) routes throughout the metro-wide district . greensboro , nc : operates buses for greensboro transit authority ( gta ) las vegas : rtc transit in las vegas including the deuce & max ( contract expires july 7 , 2013 ) los angeles : metrolink , 2005-2010 . '' connex wins metrolink race '' railway gazette international january 2005 page 9 a connex/veolia engineer texting on-duty was responsible for a head-on collision causing 26 deaths and 135 injuries , the deadliest incident in metrolink history , leading the metrolink board to return to the previous contractor , amtrak . miami : tri-rail , a train system won in 2007 in the miami metropolitan area of florida . napa county , california : operates vine transit system . nassau county , new york : veolia won a contract to operate long island bus ( renamed nassau inter-county express ) in place of the mta effective january 1 , 2012 . new jersey : certain bus routes in monmouth county as part of new jersey transit bus operations . new orleans : new orleans regional transit authority , won in 2008 phoenix : the valley metro bus system serving the phoenix metropolitan area of arizona with contracts in phoenix , mesa and tempe , redding : redding area bus authority sacramento : in suburban yolo county , california , yolobus provides public transportation . san diego : san diego metropolitan transit system bus routes and the sprinter dmu rail system in san diego county , california , victor valley : victor valley transit authority serving the victorville , california area . veolia now employs over 16,000 employees with 6,500 vehicles and a revenue of over 1 billion . in 2005 in north america . its executive team includes mark joseph ( ceo of vtna ) . it is headquartered in oak brook , illinois . veolia also owns the supershuttle shared-ride airport shuttle service , as well as the execucar black car/sedan service . veolia also operates taxicab services across the country under various brands . south america . chile . santiago : veolia owns redbus urbano , which operates feeder services to the metro and '' troncales '' in northern suburban santiago . this operation has since been passed on to transdev . colombia . bogotá : veolia , in conjunction with three other operators , runs a 90 & nbsp ; km right-of-way bus line called the transmilenio system used by more than 1,400,000 persons a day . this has since been passed on to transdev . references . external links . veolia environnement veolia transport czech republic ( june 2012 ) veolia verkehr , germany ( march 2015 ) connex jersey ( december 2012 ) veolia transport sverige ( sweden ) veolia transport australia & new zealand ( may 2012 ) veolia auckland , new zealand ( may 2013 ) veolia ireland ( june 2007 ) veolia israel ( october 2010 ) veolia transportation ( august 2014 ) ( north america ) veolia transport ( july 2011 ) ( united kingdom ) veolia transport nederland ( october 2015 ) ( netherlands ) atc-nec ( merger ) doubts persist over veolia ’ s financial health