Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation

background . alkene dihydroxylation by osmium tetroxide is an old and extremely useful method for the functionalization of olefins . however , since osmium ( viii ) reagents like osmium tetroxide ( oso 4 ) are expensive and extremely toxic , it has become desirable to develop catalytic variants of this reaction . some stoichiometric terminal oxidants that have been employed in these catalytic reactions include potassium chlorate , hydrogen peroxide ( milas hydroxylation ) , n-methylmorpholine n-oxide ( nmo , upjohn dihydroxylation ) , tert-butyl hydroperoxide ( tbhp ) , and potassium ferricyanide ( k 3 fe ( cn ) 6 ) . k . barry sharpless was the first to develop a general , reliable enantioselective alkene dihydroxylation , referred to as the sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation ( sad ) . low levels of oso 4 are combined with a stoichiometric ferricyanide oxidant in the presence of chiral nitrogenous ligands to create an asymmetric environment around the oxidant . reaction mechanism . the reaction mechanism of the sharpless dihydroxylation begins with the formation of the osmium tetroxide – ligand complex ( 2 ) . a 3+2 -cycloaddition with the alkene ( 3 ) gives the cyclic intermediate 4 . basic hydrolysis liberates the diol ( 5 ) and the reduced osmate ( 6 ) . methanesulfonamide ( ch 3 so 2 nh 2 ) has been identified as a catalyst to accelerate this step of the catalytic cycle and if frequently used as an additive to allow non-terminal alkene substrates to react efficiently at 0 °c . finally , the stoichiometric oxidant regenerates the osmium tetroxide – ligand complex ( 2 ) . 600px the mechanism of the sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation has been extensively studied and a potential secondary catalytic cycle has been identified ( see below ) . if the osmylate ester intermediate is oxidized before it dissociates , then an osmium ( viii ) -diol complex is formed which may then dihydroxylate another alkene . sundermeier , u . , dobler , c . , beller , m . recent developments in the osmium-catalyzed dihydroxylation of olefins . modern oxidation methods . 2004 wiley-vch verlag gmbh & co . kgaa , weinheim . dihydroxylations resulting from this secondary pathway generally suffer lower enantioselectivities than those resulting from the primary pathway . a schematic showing this secondary catalytic pathway is shown below . this secondary pathway may be suppressed by using a higher molar concentration of ligand . 600px . 2+2 vs 3+2 debate . in his original report sharpless suggested the reaction proceeded via a cycloaddition 2+2 cycloaddition of oso 4 onto the alkene to give an osmaoxetane intermediate ( see below ) . this intermediate would then undergo a migratory insertion to form an osmylate ester which after hydrolysis would give the corresponding diol . in 1989 e . j . corey published a slightly different variant of this reaction and suggested that the reaction most likely proceeded via a 3+2 cycloaddition of oso 4 with the alkene to directly generate the osmylate ester . corey 's suggestion was based on a previous computational study done by jorgensen and hoffman which determined the 3+2 reaction pathway to be the lower energy pathway . in addition corey reasoned that steric repulsions in the octahedral intermediate would disfavor the 2+2 pathway . 700px the next ten years saw numerous publications by both corey and sharpless , each supporting their own version of the mechanism . while these studies were not able to distinguish between the two proposed cyclization pathways , they were successful in shedding light on the mechanism in other ways . for example , sharpless provided evidence for the reaction proceeding via a step-wise mechanism . thomas , g . ; sharpless , k . b . aciee 1993 , 32 , 1329 additionally both sharpless and corey showed that the active catalyst possesses a u-shaped chiral binding pocket . corey also showed that the catalyst obeys michaelis-menten kinetics and acts like an enzyme pocket with a pre-equilibrium . in the february 1997 issue of the journal of the american chemical society sharpless published the results of a study ( a hammett analysis ) which he claimed supported a 2+2 cyclization over a 3+2 . in the october issue of the same year , however , sharpless also published the results of another study conducted in collaboration with ken houk and singleton which provided conclusive evidence for the 3+2 mechanism . thus sharpless was forced to concede the decade-long debate . catalyst structure . crystallographic evidence has shown that the active catalyst possesses a pentacoordinate osmium species held in a u-shaped binding pocket . the nitrogenous ligand holds oso 4 in a chiral environment making approach of one side of the olefin sterically hindered while the other is not . . catalytic systems . numerous catalytic systems and modifications have been developed for the sad . given below is a brief overview of the various components of the catalytic system : catalytic oxidant : this is always oso 4 , however certain additives can coordinate to the osmium ( viii ) and modify its electronic properties . oso 4 is often generated in situ from k 2 oso 2 ( oh ) 4 ( an os ( vi ) species ) due to safety concerns . chiral auxiliary : this is usually some kind of cinchona alkaloid . stoichiometric oxidant : peroxides were among the first stoichiometric oxidants to be used in this catalytic cycle ; see the milas hydroxylation . drawbacks of peroxides include chemoselectivity issues . trialkylammonium n-oxides , such as nmo—as in the upjohn reaction—and trimethylamine n-oxide . potassium ferricyanide ( k 3 fe ( cn ) 6 ) is the most commonly used stoichiometric oxidant for the reaction , and is the oxidant that comes in the commercially available ad-mix preparations . additive : citric acid : osmium tetroxide is an electrophilic oxidant and as such reacts slowly with electron-deficient olefins . it has been found that the rate of oxidation of electron-deficient olefins can be accelerated by maintaining the ph of the reaction slightly acidic . on the other hand , a high ph can increase the rate of oxidation of internal olefins , and also increase the enantiomeric excess ( e.e . ) for the oxidation of terminal olefins . . regioselectivity . in general sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation favors oxidation of the more electron-rich alkene ( scheme 1 ) . 600px in this example sad gives the diol of the alkene closest to the ( electron-withdrawing ) para-methoxybenzoyl group , albeit in low yield . this is likely due to the ability of the aryl ring to interact favorably with the active site of the catalyst via π-stacking . in this manner the aryl substituent can act as a directing group . 600px . stereoselectivity . the diastereoselectivity of sad is set primarily by the choice of ligand ( i.e . ad-mix-α versus ad-mix-β ) , however factors such as pre-existing chirality in the substrate or neighboring functional groups may also play a role . in the example shown below , the para-methoxybenzoyl substituent serves primarily as a source of steric bulk to allow the catalyst to differentiate the two faces of the alkene . 600px it is often difficult to obtain high diastereoselectivity on cis-alkenes when both sides of the olefin have similar steric environments . further reading .