Lou Grant

fictional biography . pre-wjm-tv . although the setting of the mary tyler moore show might have implied that he was a native minnesotan , lou grant in fact established that he was born in the fictional town of goshen , michigan . he was the son of john simpson grant and ellen hammersmith grant ; his grandfather was a pharmacist . at some point in his youth and early adulthood he developed a lifelong affection for westerns , particularly those starring john wayne . in high school , he was a tackle for his school 's football team . soon after high school , he married edie mackenzie ( priscilla morrill ) , at an age young enough to have four grandchildren before he turned 50 . after marriage he became a combatant in world war ii . he served in both the pacific and european theatres . at one point , he was a sergeant in the pacific-based 2nd marine division . during another phase of his wartime service he was injured by a grenade in france , the last remnants of which were only removed in his late 40s . he was also part of a unit that liberated an unknown town in germany . during the war he met and befriended walter cronkite . he attended college ( although on several occasions he stated he never had the chance to attend ) , likely after the war . he started his career in print journalism as a copy boy but it is unclear whether this was in detroit , minneapolis or san francisco as he worked for papers in all three cities . in this period of his life , he met and worked with charlie hume ( mason adams ) for the first time at the san francisco call-bulletin , and worked with jack riley ( eugene roche ) . . wjm-tv . at some point in his late 30s he made the transition to broadcast journalism , and by the time of the 1966 elections he was working on a radio news show , as he explained to mary richards on the occasion of her producing her first news show all by herself at wjm-tv . he eventually became the head of the wjm news department . he worked in that capacity for 11 years . for most of that period , mary richards served as his associate producer ( later producer , with lou having the title of executive producer , and she reported to him ) , ted baxter as his news anchor and murray slaughter as his head writer . of these relationships , the one with richards was likely the closest . when he first interviewed mary he liked her because she had spunk , even though he hated spunk . he offered her the job of associate producer , which paid less than the secretarial position for which she 'd initially interviewed , but more than what he said was the going rate for full producers . she accepted , saying that she could only '' afford '' to be an associate producer . at the same time mary discovered that lou was a heavy drinker , with a penchant for hiding whole bottles of scotch in his desk drawers . except for one abortive attempt at romance , his general attitude towards her was paternalistic . a typical display of his affection for richards came when his nephew , allen , tried to put the moves on mary . lou became infuriated and said '' listen you , let me remind you of something , and remember this forever . i think of this girl here as if she were my own daughter and that means she is your cousin , you get my drift ? '' lou 's personality was outwardly that of a tough loner and a workaholic man 's man . the real lou grant was somewhat more complicated . he was quick to anger and had a violent streak , at times threatening the barely competent ted baxter and once causing him physical injury . however , those who understood him best , like mary richards , knew he was also painfully shy , with a particular awkwardness around women . with those few people he trusted , lou was protective and could at times confide his emotional vulnerability . lou 's marriage began to slide as he and edie both adjusted to life after parenthood . they briefly separated for the first time almost immediately after their youngest daughter got married and left the house . though they reconciled on this occasion , they would occasionally re-separate and seek marriage counseling over the next two years . in about 1973 he and edie divorced , after which edie promptly remarried . lou , who had been consistently portrayed as a devoted husband , tentatively began to date again . he went out with a woman named charlene ( sheree north ; janis paige in '' menage-a-lou '' of season 6 ) in particularly season 5 ; mary 's best friend rhoda morgenstern in season 4 ; mary 's next-door neighbor , paula kovacks ( penny marshall ) in season 6 ; mary 's aunt flo ( eileen heckart ) in seasons 6 and 7 ; and even with mary herself in the penultimate episode . he and sue ann nivens almost had a relationship as well . though he never talked about his religious background , several comments by those around him during his time at wjm suggest he might have been jewish : phyllis lindstrom was the first to suggest that he would get along well with rhoda since , in her strained words , they were '' both.earthy , '' and in a later episode sue ann nivens assured him he would not mind singing her '' non-denominational '' christmas carols . professionally , his career with wjm-tv ended in the final episode . lou , along with mary , murray , and sue ann nivens were fired due to low ratings . lou 's sometime-nemesis , the vacuous ted baxter—the real cause for the ratings slide—was retained . . los angeles tribune . soon thereafter , he wrote to his former co-worker , charlie hume ( mason adams ) , inquiring about the possibility of work ; when hume confirmed that he knew of a position for him , grant relocated to los angeles , to work with him at the fictitious los angeles tribune , as the paper 's city editor , returning him to newspaper work . his subordinates at that time included staff reporters joe rossi ( robert walden ) ; billie newman ( linda kelsey ) ; her predecessor , carla mardigian ( rebecca balding ) ; and photographer dennis '' animal '' price ( daryl anderson ) . his assistant city editor was art donovan ( jack bannon ) . charlie hume was now his boss , who ultimately reported to publisher margaret jones pynchon ( nancy marchand ) . they , like those back at wjm , became his family . in the last episode of season one it is revealed that he has just turned 50 , which would have meant he began serving in wwii at about the age of 14 . unofficial appearances . in a 1984 episode of saturday night live , lou hired a team of mercenaries to '' rescue '' mary richards after she got stuck in the '70s in syndicated reruns . but mary refused rescue on the grounds that she never ages and never gains weight , and that people still like her . in 1996 the character appeared on '' call waiting '' , an episode of roseanne , in a dream sequence experienced by the show 's lead . roseanne ( roseanne barr ) was mary and dan ( john goodman ) was lou , and the two got into a heated argument . lou stomped out , but quickly returned and was then played by asner . ( he commented about not feeling like himself . ) asner was uncredited . in 1998 , asner appeared in a cameo role as an associated press editor in the miniseries more tales of the city ( based on the series of armistead maupin novels ) . though not lou grant , per se , the character 's demeanor was similar to that of the character . in 2004 , asner unofficially reprised the role in a series of ads promoting twin cities station kstp-tv , a real television station in the same market as the fictional wjm-tv . additionally in 2013 , asner again reprised the role for a series of promos for the mary tyler moore show airing on metv . reception . asner won five primetime emmy awards for his portrayal of lou , with three of these awards for the mary tyler moore show and two for lou grant . bravo ranked lou 35th on their list of the 100 greatest tv characters . . references .