Jing Ke

background . in 230 bc , the qin state began conquering other states qin 's wars of unification . qin 's army successfully annihilated the weakest of the seven warring states , han . two years later zhao was also conquered . 王恆偉 . ( 2005 ) ( 2006 ) 中國歷史講堂 2 戰國 秦 漢 . 中華書局 . pp . 70-71 . in exchange for peace , king xi of yan had earlier forced his son crown prince dan to be held hostage by the qin , but prince dan returned knowing that qin was far stronger than yan and would attack it sooner or later . jing ke originally came from the wei ( state ) . he was a scholar , proficient in the art of the sword . his homeland of wei was absorbed by qin , and jing ke fled to yan . a youxia named tian guang ( 田光 ) first introduced him to prince dan . 曹正文 . 1998 ( 1998 ) . 俠客行 : 縱談中國武俠 . 知書房出版集團 publishing . , . p . 27 . there jing ke accepted the hospitality of prince dan , who as a last resort decided to send an assassin against the king of qin . the plan involved either kidnapping the king and forcing him to release the territories from his control ; or failing this , killing him . the expectation in either case was that qin would be left disorganized , enabling the other six major states to unite against it . . assassination plot . the plan . in 228 bc , the qin army was already at the zhao capital of handan , and was waiting to approach the state of yan . jing ke agreed to go to qin and pretend to be a nobleman begging for mercy . according to events at the time , dukang ( 督亢 ) ( in present-day hebei province ) was the first part of the yan state that the qin wanted , by reason of its fertile farmland . the plan was to present as gifts the map of dukang and the severed head of the traitorous qin general fan wuji to the king of qin , in order to approach him . at the time , general fan wuji had lost favor with qin and wanted revenge against it ; 王恆偉 . ( 2005 ) ( 2006 ) 中國歷史講堂 2 戰國 秦 漢 . 中華書局 . pp . 72-73 . whereas the qin state put a bounty on capturing him of 1,000 gold pieces . 戴逸 , 龔書鐸 . 2002 ( 2003 ) 中國通史 . 春秋 戰國 秦 . intelligence press . p . 62 . jing ke went to fan himself to discuss the assassination plan . fan wuji believed that the plan would work , and agreed to commit suicide so that his head could be collected . prince dan then obtained the sharpest possible dagger , refined it with poison , and gave it to jing ke . to accompany him , prince dan assigned qin wuyang as his assistant . qin wuyang was known to have successfully committed murder at the age of 13 . in 227 bc , prince dan and other guests wore white clothing and white hats at the yi river ( 易水 ) to send the pair of assassins off . jing ke reportedly sang a song '' the wind blows , the river freezes . the hero fords , never to return ! '' ( 風蕭蕭兮易水寒，壯士一去兮不復還 ) . the king of qin received the message of visitors presenting a gift to him , and was willing to receive them at the city . . assassination attempt . concealing the dagger inside the map scroll , jing ke and qin wuyang represented the yan as ambassadors and met with king zheng . qin wuyang reportedly became so nervous that he acted almost paralyzed when entering the palace , and jing ke managed the excuse that his partner had never set eyes on the grace of son of heaven . sima qian . dawson , raymond stanley . brashier , k . e . ( 2007 ) . the first emperor : selections from the historical records . oxford university press . , . pp . 15-20 , 82 , 99 . other sources suggest jing ke described qin wuyang as a rural boy who had never seen the world and was suffering a cultural shock . the panicked qin wuyang was then barred from moving up the palace , and jing ke was ordered to present the map alone . jing ke approached king zheng and politely presented the map scroll . when the king zheng unrolled the map , jing ke immediately seized the revealed dagger , grabbed the king 's clothes and attacked him , who somehow managed to back away from the initial thrust by tearing off a sleeve in the process . while king zheng fled from his attacker on foot , he attempted to draw his own sword hanging from his belt , but was unable to do so while running desperately as it was a very long ceremonial sword . none of the other qin officials within the vicinity were armed and able to stop jing ke , and the guards were all stationed outside the palace and were unable to immediately reach the scene . in the confusion jing ke began to close in on the king , who struggled to get away from the assassin by circling behind a pillar . seeing the king in grave danger , a royal physician named xia wuju ( 夏無且 ) grabbed his own medicine bag and hurled it at jing ke , which slowed down the assassin just enough to allow king zheng to recover some distance . reminded by cries from other officials , the king managed to shift his longsword behind his back and unsheathe it over the shoulder . now armed , he immediately turned back and struck jing ke in the thigh , effectively immobilizing him . 王恆偉 . ( 2005 ) ( 2006 ) 中國歷史講堂 2 戰國 秦 漢 . 中華書局 . pp . 74-75 . the injured jing ke , out of a desperate last attempt , threw his dagger towards king zheng , only to miss the target . the king then proceeded to stab jing ke eight more times , mortally wounding him . knowing it was hopelessly over , the dying jing ke sat with his legs stretched forward ( jījù ) , a manner then considered very rude , and used the last of his strength to taunt king zheng with abuses . at this point , the guards had arrived at the scene to finish off both jing ke and the fleeing qin wuyang . it was recorded that right after the incident , king zheng sat on his throne catatonically holding the sword , due to the exhaustion caused by the adrenaline rush , before he finally recovered after a short while and thanked the physician xia wuju for attempting to stop the assassin . yan annihilation . after jing ke 's attempt , the qin army general wang jian was sent against the yan state . in 226 bc , prince dan sent his army to fight at ji ( 薊 ) , but were soon defeated . in an effort to try to appease the king of qin , king xi of yan put his son to death ; however , the yan were annexed nonetheless and the yan were destroyed . . in popular culture . the chinese film the emperor and the assassin ( 1999 ) , featuring gong li and others , is based on the aforementioned events . jing ke himself does not appear in the films the emperor 's shadow ( 1996 ) , directed by zhou xiaowen , or hero ( 2002 ) starring jet li ; but both films borrow elements from his story . a fictionalized version of jing ke appears in the film highlander : endgame ( 2000 ) , played by actor and martial artist donnie yen . in the film , jing ke is , like the other principal characters , an immortal warrior living in the story 's present day . the film alters the spelling of jing ke 's name to '' jin ke '' and makes reference to his historical association with qin shi huang . duncan macleod : '' jin ke ? who served with the emperor chin ? '' · jin ke : '' the same man . '' · ( highlander : endgame ( 2000 ) dimension films ) the chinese film hero ( 2002 ) is loosely based on jing ke 's assassination attempt , with jet li playing the assassin . the character tsing yi in john woo 's last hurrah for chivalry ( 1979 ) , according to its director , is inspired by jing ke . a chinese tv series called assassinator jing ke ( 荆轲传奇 ) was produced in 2004 , depicting a fictionalized biography of jing ke , starring liu ye , wang yanan , and peter ho . jing ke is a spy in the computer game civilization iv : beyond the sword . jing ke is one of the heroes in the legend of qin , 3d animation series , father of the protagonist , jing tianming . ke 's farewell song is also quoted in this series . jing ke 's song as he left for his mission was played in the song episode 119 medley in an episode of the show community , when señor chang entered the library to kill off the two remaining students in the paintball fight . jing ke appears in the mobile game fate/grand order as an assassin class servant . this version of jing ke appears as a woman , and the game notes she was recorded in history as a man for unknown reasons . her personal quest revolves around her failed attempt . jing ke 's story is the basis of the plot of katanagatari . jing ke is the protagonist of the short story '' the circle '' by liu cixin . jing ke appears in the fictional historical drama the king 's woman based on the novel the legend of qin : li ji story ( 秦时明月之丽姬传 ) . nobel laureate mo yan wrote a play in 2003 , entitled '' our jing ke '' ( 我们的荆轲 ) , which retells the story of jing ke 's failed assassination attempt . the play premiered in august 2011 in beijing by beijing people 's art theatre ( bpat ) . the play won the highest drama award in china in 2012 . a tv show called '' kings of china '' has been confirmed to cover jing ke . see also . gao jianli