Mount Parnassus

geology and geography . parnassus is one of the largest mountainous regions of mainland greece and one of the highest greek mountains . it spreads over three municipalities , namely boeotia , phthiotis and phocis , where its largest part lies . its altitude is 2,457 meters and its highest peak is liakouras . to the northeast it is connected to mount giona and to the south to kirphe . the mountain is delimited to the east by the valley of the boeotian kephissus and to the west by the valley of amfissa . an unusual geological feature of parnassus is its rich deposits of bauxite , which has led to their systematic mining since the end of the 1930s , resulting in ecological damage to part of the mountain . racot , a . , 1967 , '' les parnassiens , introduction and commentaries by m . pakenham '' , presented by louis forestier , aux lettres modernes : collection avant-siècle . mythology . mount parnassus is named after parnassos , the son of the nymph kleodora and the man kleopompus . a city , of which parnassos was leader , was flooded by torrential rains . the citizens ran from the flood , following wolves ' howling , up the mountain slope . there the survivors built another city , and called it lykoreia , which in greek means '' the howling of the wolves . '' while orpheus was living the greek gods by hoopes and evslin , , , 1995 , page 77 his father was a thracian king ; his mother the muse calliope . for a while he lived on parnassus with his mother and his eight beautiful aunts , and there met apollo who was courting the laughing muse thalia . apollo was taken with orpheus , gave him his little golden lyre , and taught him to play . his mother taught him to make verses for singing . with his mother and his eight beautiful aunts on parnassus , he met apollo who was courting the laughing muse thalia . apollo became fond of orpheus and gave him a little golden lyre , and taught him to play it . orpheus 's mother taught him to make verses for singing . as the oracle of delphi was sacred to the god apollo , so did the mountain itself become associated with apollo . according to some traditions , parnassus was the site of the fountain castalia and the home of the muses ; according to other traditions , that honor fell to mount helicon , another mountain in the same range . as the home of the muses , parnassus became known as the home of poetry , music , and learning . parnassus was also the site of several unrelated minor events in greek mythology . in some versions of the greek flood myth , the ark of deucalion comes to rest on the slopes of parnassus . this is the version of the myth recounted in ovid 's metamorphoses . orestes spent his time in hiding on mount parnassus . parnassus was sacred to the god dionysus . the corycian cave , located on the slopes of parnassus , was sacred to pan and to the muses . in book 19 of the odyssey , odysseus recounts a story of how he was gored in the thigh during a boar hunt on mount parnassus in his youth . parnassus was also the home of pegasus , the hippogryph of bellerophon . as metaphor . this relation of the mountain to the muses offered an instigation to its more recent '' mystification '' , with the poetic-artistic trend of the 19th century called '' parnassism '' . the parnassic movement was established in france in the decade 1866–1876 as a reaction to romanticism with a return to some classicistic elements and belief in the doctrine '' art for the art '' , first expressed by theophile gautier . the periodical modern parnassus issued for the first time by catul mendes and xavier ricard contained direct references to mt . parnassus and its mythological feature as habitation of the muses . the parnassists , who did not exceed a group of twenty poets , exercised a relatively strong influence on the cultural life of paris , particularly due to their tenacity on perfection of rhyme and vocabulary . parnassism influenced several french poets , but it also exercised an influence on modern greek poets , particularly kostis palamas and gryparis . the name of the mountain ( mont parnasse ) was also given to a quarter of paris on the left bank of the seine , where artists and poets used to gather and recite their poems in public . montparnasse is nowadays one of the most renowned quarters of the city and in its cemetery many personalities of the arts and culture are buried . parnassus figures earlier in jonathan swift 's the battle of the books ( 1697 ) as the site of an ideological war between the ancients and the moderns . cultural change . in 1995 , roland s . moore , of the prevention research center in the us , conducted a study on how the advent of tourism influenced cultural change in the region . the research focused primarily on changes in alcohol use and the structure of the household . prior to the 1970s and the boom of greek tourism , drinking was done primarily by men . as time went on , a greater variety of liquor became available , leading to greater consumption , particularly by women , who were more likely to work in the hospitality sector where drinks were readily available . the role of patriarchal breadwinner diminished , replaced by a more democratic familial structure . national park . the significant biodiversity , both in flora and in fauna , led the authorities to the establishment of the national park of parnassus in 1938 , the year when the systematic mining of bauxite started . the park comprises a landscape of spreading on the mountainous region between delphi , arachova and agoriani . among the endemic flora species under protection are the cephalonian fir tree and the parnassian peony ( paeonia parnassica ) . in the park sojourn prey birds and wolves , boars , badgers and weasels . parnassos ski resort . the slopes of mount parnassus are composed of two ski sections , kellaria and fterolakka , which together make up the largest ski center in greece . a smaller ski center ( only two drag lifts ) called gerontovrahos is across a ridge from kellaria . parnassus is mined for its abundant supply of bauxite which is converted to aluminium oxide and then to aluminium . the parnassos ski centre the construction of the ski resort started in 1975 and was completed in 1976 , when the first two drag lifts operated in fterolaka . in 1981 the construction of a new ski area was completed in kelaria , while in winter season 1987–1988 the chair lift hermes started operating and connected the two ski areas . both ski resorts continued expanding and in 1993 the first high-speed quad in greece was installed , named hercules . in 2014–2015 two new hybrid lifts were installed along with a new eight-seater , replacing the old infrastructure . today the ski center operates with 16 lifts , two hybrid ski lifts which combine an eight-seater cabin and a six-seater chair , an eight-seater cabin , a 4-seater chair lift , a 2-seater chair lift , 6 drag lifts and four baby lifts . the ski center boasts 25 marked ski runs and about 15 ski routes of total length while the longest run is . see also . list of mountains in greece . references . external links . greek mountain flora '' óros parnassos , greece '' on peakbagger