August Neander

biography . neander was born at göttingen as david mendel . his father , emmanuel mendel , is said to have been a jewish pedlar , but august adopted the name of neander on his baptism as a protestantism . while still very young , he moved with his mother to hamburg . from the grammar school ( johanneum ) he passed to the gymnasium , where the study of plato appears especially to have engrossed him . considerable interest attaches to his early companionship with wilhelm neumann and certain others , among whom were the writer karl august varnhagen von ense and the poet adelbert von chamisso . baptized on february 25 , 1806 , neander went to halle to study divinity at the age of 17 . friedrich schleiermacher was then lecturing at halle . neander found in him the inspiration he needed , while schleiermacher found a congenial pupil ; one destined to propagate his views in a higher and more effective christian form . before the end of that year , the events of the war of the fourth coalition forced neander to move to göttingen . there he continued his studies , made himself an expert on plato and plutarch , and became especially advanced in theology under the venerable gj planck . the impulse communicated by schleiermacher was confirmed by planck , and neander seems now to have realized that the original investigation of christian history was to form the great work of his life . having finished his university course , he returned to hamburg , and passed his examination for the christian ministry . after an interval of about eighteen months , however , he decided on an academic career , which began at heidelberg , where two vacancies had occurred in the theological faculty of the university . he went there as a teacher of theology in 1811 and in 1812 he became a professor . in the same year ( 1812 ) he published his monograph über den kaiser julianus und sein zeitalter . the fresh insight into the history of the church evinced by this work drew attention to its author , and even before he had terminated the first year of his academical labours at heidelberg , he was called to berlin , where he was appointed professor of theology . his pupils included edmond de pressensé . in the year following his appointment he published a second monograph der heilige bernhard und sein zeitalter ( berlin , 1813 ) and then in 1818 his work on gnosticism ( genetische entwickelung der vornehmsten gnostischen systeme ) . a still more extended and elaborate monograph than either of the preceding followed in 1822 , der heilige john chrysostom und die kirche besonders des orients in dessen zeitalter , and again , in 1824 another on tertullian ( antignostikus ) . he had in the meantime begun his great work , to which these efforts were only preparatory studies . the first volume of his allgemeine geschichte der christlichen religion und kirche embracing the history of the first three centuries , made it appearance in 1825 . the others followed at intervals—the fifth , which appeared in 1842 , bringing down the narrative to the pontificate of boniface viii . a posthumous volume edited by cft schneider in 1852 , carried it on to the period of the council of basel . aside from this work , he published in 1832 his geschichte der pflanzung und leitung der christlichen kirche durch die apostel , and in 1837 his das leben jesu christi , in seinem geschichilichen zusammenhang und seiner geschichtlichen entwickelung , called forth by the famous das leben jesu of david strauss . in addition to all these he published denkwürdigkeiten aus der geschichte des christentums ( 1823-1824 , 2 vols . , 1825 , 3 vols . , 1846 ) ; das eine und mannichfaltige des christlichen lebens ( 1840 ) ; papers on plotinus , thomas aquinas , theobald thamer , blaise pascal , john henry newman , blanco white and thomas arnold , and other occasional pieces ( kleine gelegenheitsschriften , 1829 ) , mainly of a practical , exegetical and historical character . several of his books went through multiple editions and were translated into english . he died in berlin on 14 july 1850 , worn out and nearly blind with incessant study . his grave is preserved in the protestant friedhof i der jerusalems- und neuen kirchengemeinde ( cemetery no . i of the congregations of jerusalem 's church and new church ) in kreuzberg , south of hallesches tor . after his death a succession of volumes , representing his various courses of lectures , appeared ( 1856–1864 ) , in addition to the lectures on the history of dogma ( theologische vorlesungen ) , admirable in spirit and execution , which were edited by j . l . jacobi in 1857 . . personal influences . people . neander 's personal influences began first and foremost within his own family . his father did not have a very positive influence in young neander 's life . shortly after neander 's birth , his mother esther divorced from her worthless husband and removed the whole family to hamburg . esther mendel struggled on a daily basis to support her children financially . as a result , the family experienced a great deal of poverty . however , neander cherished this period in his life , and described it in endearing terms as “ men in all ages who…have been indebted to their pious mothers ” for planting the seeds of faith in their hearts . this period in neander 's life assuredly had a profound effect on both his personal faith , and his attitude towards life in general . neander was often described as ‘ wide-hearted ’ , ‘ truthful ’ , ‘ sincere ’ , ‘ free from all the stuff of vanity ’ , ‘ affectionate ’ , ‘ innocent and pure of heart ’ . this personal quality was most certainly received through his mother 's influence . to what degree these influences affected the writings of neander has not yet been established in the literature . neander was most indebted to his teacher and later his friend and colleague schleiermacher , of whom similar sentiments are evident in his perceived purpose of recording church history . “ to exhibit the history of the church of christ , as a living witness of the divine power of christianity ; as a school of christian experience ; a voice , a sounding through the ages , of instruction , of doctrine , and of reproof , for all who are disposed to listen . ” schleiermacher 's attitude towards history undoubtedly influenced that of his student and colleague , which in turn would have also influenced neander 's work . biblical conversion from judaism to christianity . the conversion of augustus neander from judaism to christianity was the single most important event in his life , and had a large impact upon both himself and his writing . neander , along with his brothers and sisters , followed later by their mother , eventually left the synagogue and embraced christianity . in his own personal conversion , neander was especially influenced by the apostle john , due to the similarity in the sentiment of john 's writings to that of neander 's beloved plato . neander 's conversion has often been likened to the conversion of saint paul of tarsus . while his transition from judaism to christianity was far less abrupt than that of his predecessor , he is thought to resemble the apostle paul in other ways . neander 's purity of motive , the strength of his conviction , his unselfish devotion to christianity , and his similar zeal for freedom from a life of legalism are all aspects of paul 's character that are reflected in the character of neander . his conversion had a profound impact on his work and gave rise to an incredible conviction of the importance of faith , and is also considered to be one of the most sincere and intelligent events of his life . the impact that it had on both his person and his work was evident in his passion for the lord , his relationship with his students , and his attitude towards church history . . church history . his general history of the christian religion and church ( allgemeine geschichte der christlichen religion und kirche ) remains the greatest monument of his genius . in this neander 's chief aim was everywhere to understand what was individual in history . in the principal figures of ecclesiastical history he tried to depict the representative tendencies of each age , and also the types of the essential tendencies of human nature generally . his guiding principle in dealing both with the history and with the present condition of the church was '' that christianity has room for the various tendencies of human nature , and aims at permeating and glorifying them all ; that according to the divine plan these various tendencies are to occur successively and simultaneously and to counterbalance each other , so that the freedom and variety of the development of the spiritual life ought not to be forced into a single dogmatic form '' ( otto pfleiderer ) .