Aphasiology

acute aphasias . acute aphasias are often the result of tissue damage following a stroke . expressive aphasia . first described by the france neurologist paul broca in the nineteenth century , expressive aphasia causes the speech of those afflicted to display a considerable vocabulary but to show grammatical deficits . it is characterized by a halting speech consisting mainly of content words , i.e . nouns and verbs , and , at least in english , distinctly lacking small grammatical function words such as articles and prepositions . this observation gave rise to the terms telegraphic speech and , more recently , agrammatism . the extent to which expressive aphasics retain knowledge of grammar is a matter of considerable controversy . nonetheless , because their comprehension of spoken language is mostly preserved , and because their speech is usually good enough to get their point across , the agrammatic nature of their speech suggests that the disorder chiefly involves the expressive mechanisms of language that turn thoughts into well-formed sentences . the view of expressive aphasia as an expressive disorder is supported by its frequent co-occurrence with facial motor difficulties , and its anatomical localization . although expressive aphasia may be caused by brain damage to many regions , it is most commonly associated with the inferior frontal gyrus , a region that overlaps with motor cortex controlling the mouth and tongue , extending into the periventricular white matter . not surprisingly , this region has come to be known as '' broca 's area '' . however , an intriguing line of research has demonstrated specific comprehension deficits in expressive aphasics as well . these deficits generally involve sentences that are grammatical , but atypical in their word order . the simplest example is sentences in the passive voice , such as '' the boy was chased by the girl . '' expressive aphasics may have quite a hard time realizing that the girl is doing the chasing , but they do much better with '' the mouse was chased by the cat , '' where world knowledge constraints contribute to the correct interpretation . however , '' the cat was chased by the mouse '' would likewise be incomprehensible . this evidence suggests that grammatical competence may be a specific function of broca 's area . lesions exclusively to broca 's area ( the foot of the inferior frontal gyrus ) do not produce broca 's aphasia , but instead mild dysprosody and agraphia , sometimes accompanied by word-finding pauses and mild dysarthria . not much is known about what other areas must be damaged in order to produce broca 's aphasia , but some maintain damage to the inferior pre-rolandic motor strip ( the motor cortex region responsible glossopharyngeal muscle control ) is also necessary . receptive aphasia . receptive aphasia was originally described by the german neurologist karl wernicke , a contemporary of broca . receptive aphasics produce speech that seems fluent and grammatical , but is largely devoid of sensible content . comprehension is severely impaired , but while patients display a great deal of difficulty comprehending individual words , they can more easily understand words in context . receptive aphasia is associated with the posterior third of the superior temporal gyrus in the distribution of the inferior division of the middle cerebral artery , known as '' wernicke 's area '' , an area adjacent to the cortex responsible for auditory processing . if the damage extends posteriorly , visual connections are disrupted , and the patient will have difficulty understanding written language . therefore , the localization of the two best-known aphasias mirrors the grossest dichotomy in brain organization : anterior areas are specialized for motor output , and posterior areas for sensory processing . a fascinating corollary of this has come from research on aphasias in deaf users of sign language , who show deficits in signing and comprehension analogous to expressive and receptive aphasias in hearing populations . these studies demonstrate that the grammatical functions of broca 's area and the semantic functions of wernicke 's area are indeed deep , abstract properties of the language system independent of its modality of expression . global aphasia . another less commonly known aphasia is global aphasia , which generally manifests itself after a stroke affecting an extensive portion of the brain occurs , including infarction of both divisions of the middle cerebral artery and generally both broca 's area and wernicke 's area . survivors with global aphasia may have great difficulty understanding and forming words and sentences , and generally experience a great deal of difficulty when trying to communicate . with considerable speech therapy rehabilitation , global aphasia may progress into expressive aphasia or receptive aphasia . anomic aphasia . a person with anomic aphasia have word-finding difficulties . anomic aphasia , also known as anomia , is a non-fluent aphasia , which means the person speaks hesitantly because of a difficulty naming words and/or producing correct syntax . the person struggles to find the right words for speaking and writing . subjects tend to use circumlocutions , in which they speak around the word they can not find , to make up for their loss . people also with anomic aphasia tend to know how to use an object , but rather can not name the aforementioned object . any damage in or near the zone of language can result in anomic aphasia . other forms of aphasia often transition into a syndrome of primarily anomic aphasia in the process of recovery . . conduction aphasia . conduction aphasia is a rare form of aphasia in which fibres in the arcuate fasciculus and superior longitudinal fasciculus are damaged . these fibres are the link between the wernicke 's and broca 's area . damage to the area connecting comprehension and expression together has the following symptoms : fluent speech , good comprehension , poor oral reading , repetition is poor and transpositions of sounds within words is very common . primary progressive aphasias . primary progressive aphasia is a rare disorder where people slowly lose their ability to talk , read , write , and comprehend what they hear in conversation over a period of time . it was first described as a distinct syndrome by mesulam in 1982 . there are three variants : progressive nonfluent aphasia , semantic dementia , and logopenic progressive aphasia . . history . the nineteenth century marked the most important time in the evolution of aphasiology , beginning with the works of franz josef gall . gall is the founder of the more modern localization theory and is the origin of the idea of a language center in the brain . however , supporting evidence for the theory that language had its own anatomical representation was not found until the case study of mr . leborgne , also known as tan , by paul broca in 1861 . the discovery of what is now known as broca 's area was followed years later by carl wernicke 's famous work , 'the symptom-complex of aphasia : a psychological study on an anatomical basis ' in 1874 . this paper is regarded as one of the most influential works in the history of the field of aphasiology . in it , wernicke described many of the different classifications of aphasia and is the basis for the classical model of aphasia . tesak , juergen ; & code , chris ( 2008 ) . milestones in the history of aphasia . new york : psychology press . . references . external links . official website of the scientific journal aphasiology official website of the british aphasiology society