The Boo Radleys

career . beginnings . in 1990 , the band 's first album ichabod and i was released on a small british indie label , action records . although not a commercial success , this release brought the band to the attention of rough trade records , to whom they signed . around this time , hewitt was replaced on drums by rob cieka . he then went on to drum for placebo until 2007 . almost immediately after the release of the every heaven ep in 1991 , rough trade collapsed and the boo radleys were signed by alan mcgee 's creation records . their first for creation was everything 's alright forever in 1992 , and giant steps ( 1993 ) followed . giant steps was awarded 9/10 by the uk music magazine nme , which stated , '' it 's an intentional masterpiece , a throw-everything-at-the-wall bric-a-brac of sounds , colours and stolen ideas . that the boo radleys ( of all people ! ) have decided to accept their own challenge and create a record as diverse and boundary-bending as this is , at first glance , staggering . is n't this the job of the u2s and the leisured idols of rock , unable to do anything without the tacit approval of history ? fortunately not . the boo radleys are sifting through time ( the mid-'60s , mostly ) and conjuring up something that 's as cut-up and ambitious as anything you 'd care to mention '' . reviewing the album 's re-release in 2008 , sic magazine wrote , '' for 64 minutes they were the greatest band on the planet . '' giant steps placed second to debut by björk in the 1993 nme album of the year list , voted by the paper 's contributors , although it came in first place in the subsequent nme readers ' poll . the now-defunct select magazine declared giant steps their album of the year for 1993 . the boo radleys also appear on the original motion picture soundtrack to the 1993 film so i married an axe murderer with their cover of the la 's song '' there she goes '' . wake up ! and beyond . despite critical acclaim and a cult fanbase , the boo radleys were still largely unknown to the general public by the time the britpop phenomenon broke into the mainstream in 1995 . this changed when the band released the upbeat single '' wake up boo ! '' in the spring of that year . it made the top 40 in the uk singles chart , peaking at number 9 . the single remained on the chart for two months , by far the band 's longest run for any of its singles ; later , on 26 october 2009 , bfbs forces radio launched its live afghanistan studio output with the track after it topped a listeners poll seeking a suitable first track . carr describes writing the song watching the big breakfast after a night on acid . the follow-up release , '' find the answer within , '' was the band 's only other single to chart for more than two weeks . their fourth album wake up ! ( 1995 ) , was their commercial peak . interviewed in 2005 by the bbc , carr said : '' i tried to have nothing to do with what was being called britpop . our whole career was spent trying not to 'fit in ' . we just carried on doing what we had been doing . i did n't like most of the new bands or the flag-waving . i did n't like new labour or idolise paul weller and i hated media-generated movements within music '' . the same year the band featured on help with '' oh brother '' , exclusive to that release . help was a charity album aimed at raising funds for war child , also featuring various other artists such as radiohead and the manic street preachers . in 1996 , the boo radleys released their fifth album c'mon kids . as explained by rowbottom in an interview in 2005 : '' we did n't want to scare away the hit-kids , we wanted to take them with us to somewhere that we 'd not been before . all we wanted to do was make a different type of album than wake up . all we wanted to do was try something new - to keep ourselves fresh and interested . we were very surprised to find that it was seen as a deliberate attempt to scare away newly created fans . that would have been an extremely foolish thing to do . '' the boo radleys ' final album was 1998 's kingsize . one single was released from the album , '' free huey ! '' . the title track was due to have been released as a second single , but the band decided to split up . sice later told time out magazine : '' it was such a relief when martin phoned me and said he did n't want to make any more records . we ’ d been wanting it to stop for quite a long time , but i could n't do it – i did n't want to leave . i wanted the band to end and only martin could have done that . there was always the fear if i left , that they would just get another singer in and i did n't want that . never mind not having the heart to tour – i barely had the heart to go down to the studio while we were making kingsize . '' a compilation album , find the way out , was released in 2005 , and a further compilation the best of the boo radleys appeared in 2007 . disbandment . the boo radleys disbanded in early 1999 . brown built a popular recording studio before going on to john moores university for teacher training . he progressed on to teaching information technology at st louis grammar school in kilkeel , northern ireland , and also taught at park high school in birkenhead . under the name martin carr , carr has since released six albums , including the fingertip saint sessions volume 1 , go with yourself , advertisements for myself ( 2002 ) and all watched over by machines of loving grace ( 2004 ) . his most recent album was titled distractions . carr has since announced that he will be retiring the bravecaptain name to work on new projects , but these will not include reforming the boo radleys . his first solo album ye gods ( and little fishes ) was released in mid 2009 . cieka is now a member of the band domino bones , alongside bez ( dancer ) , formerly of happy mondays . after an album in 1996 ( first fruits ) under the name eggman , while still a member of the boo radleys , rowbottom walked away from music for several years after the split . then , following a guest vocal on bravecaptain 's , all watched over by machines of loving grace , and also two songs with the japanese musician ryo matsui 's solo project , meister , he formed paperlung . the band featured rowbottom on vocals , simon gardiner on bass , ben datlen on guitar and guillaume jambel of transcargo on drums . they released two singles , '' the days that god sold you '' ( 2006 ) and '' do what thou will '' , and an album , balance ( 2007 ) . in 2020 , it was reported that some members of the boo radleys were coming together to record new music to mark 25 years since the band 's heyday . . discography . the discography of the boo radleys consists of six studio albums , three compilation albums , five extended-plays , and sixteen singles one of which ( '' lazarus '' ) was a released twice , along with remixes of the same song , and their final single ( '' kingsize '' ) which was cancelled before release . studio albums . . soundtracks . '' there she goes '' ( 1993 ) from so i married an axe murderer . members . final lineup . martin carr & nbsp ; - guitar , vocals , keyboards ( 1988 - 1999 ) simon rowbottom & nbsp ; - vocals , guitar ( 1988 - 1999 ) tim brown & nbsp ; - bass , keyboards ( 1988 - 1999 ) rob cieka - drums , percussion ( 1990 - 1999 ) . former members . rob harrison & nbsp ; - drums ( 1988 - 1990 ) steve hewitt & nbsp ; - drums ( 1990 ) . session musicians . roddy lorimer & nbsp ; - flugelhorn , trumpet ( 1992 ) steve kitchen & nbsp ; - flugelhorn , trumpet ( 1993 ) chris moore & nbsp ; - trumpet ( 1993 ) lindsay johnston & nbsp ; - cello ( 1993 ) margaret fielder & nbsp ; - cello ( 1993 ) jackie toy & nbsp ; - clarinet , bass clarinet ( 1993 ) pale saints & nbsp ; - vocals ( 1993 ) . timeline . . references . external links .