Indirect fire

description . there are two dimensions in aiming a weapon : in the horizontal plane ( azimuth ) ; and in the vertical plane ( elevation ) , which is governed by the distance ( range ) to the target and the energy of the propelling charge . the projectile trajectory is affected by atmospheric conditions , the velocity of the projectile , the difference in altitude between the firer and the target , and other factors . direct fire sights may include mechanisms to compensate for some of these . handguns and rifles , machine guns , anti-tank guns , tank guns , many types of rocket ( weapon ) ( although missiles , mortars , howitzers , rocket artillery , multiple rocket launchers , and artillery in general , cruise missiles , and ballistic missiles , etc . , are indirect ) , and guns mounted in aircraft are examples of weapons primarily designed for direct fire . nato defines indirect fire as '' fire delivered at a target which can not be seen by the aimer . '' aap-6 nato glossary of terms and definitions the implication is that azimuth and/or elevation 'aiming ' is done using instrumental methods . hence indirect fire means applying 'firing data ' to azimuth and elevation sights and laying these sights . indirect fire can be used when the target is visible from the firing position . however , it is mostly used when the target is at longer range and invisible to the firer due to the terrain . longer range uses a higher trajectory , and in theory maximum range is achieved with an elevation angle of 45 degrees . indirect fire is most commonly associated with field artillery ( although field artillery was originally and until after world war i a direct fire weapon , hence the bullet-shields fitted to the carriages of guns such as the famous m1897 75 & nbsp ; mm ) and mortars . it is also used with naval guns against shore targets , sometimes with machine guns , and has been used with tank and anti-tank guns and by anti-aircraft guns against surface targets . it is reasonable to assume that original purpose of indirect fire was to enable fire from a 'covered position ' , one where gunners can not be seen and engaged by their enemies ( that and as the range of artillery lengthened , it was impossible to see the target past all the intervening terrain ) . the concealment aspect remains important , but from world war i equally important was the capability to concentrate the fire of many artillery batteries at the same target or set of targets . this became increasingly important as the range of artillery increased , allowing each battery to have an ever-greater area of influence , but required command and control arrangements to enable concentration of fire . the physical laws of ballistics means that guns firing larger and heavier projectile can send them further than smaller-calibre guns firing lighter shells . by the end of the 20th century , the typical maximum range for the most common guns was about 24 to 30 & nbsp ; km , up from about 8 & nbsp ; km in world war i . during world war i , covered positions moved further back and indirect fire evolved to allow any point within range to be attacked , firepower mobility , without moving the firers . if the target can not be seen from the gun position , there has to be a means of identifying targets and correcting aim according to fall of shot . the position of some targets may be identified by a headquarters from various sources of information ( spotters ) : observers on the ground , in aircraft , or in observation balloons . the development of telecommunication immensely simplified reporting , and enabled many widely dispersed firers to concentrate their fire on one target . until the introduction of smart munitions the trajectory of the projectile could not be altered once fired . history . indirect arrow fire by archers was commonly used by ancient armies . it was used during both battles and sieges . for several centuries coehorn mortars were fired indirectly because their fixed elevation meant range was determined by the amount of propelling powder . it is also reasonable conjecture that if these mortars were used from inside fortifications their targets may have been invisible to them and therefore met the definition of indirect fire . it could also be argued that niccolò tartaglia 's invention of the gunner 's quadrant ( see clinometer ) in the 16th century introduced indirect fire guns because it enabled gunlaying by instrument instead of line of sight . artillery : its origin , heyday and decline , brigadier o . f . g . hogg , 1970 , c . hurst and company this instrument was basically a carpenter 's set square with a graduated arc and plumb-bob placed in the muzzle to measure an elevation . there are suggestions , the history of the royal artillery from the indian mutiny to the great war , vol ii , 1899–1914 , major general sir john headlam , 1934 based on an account in livre de canonerie published in 1561 and reproduced in revue d'artillerie of march 1908 , that indirect fire was used by the burgundians in the 16th century . the russians seem to have used something similar at paltzig in 1759 where they fired over trees , and their instructions of the time indicate this was a normal practice . '' red god of war '' soviet artillery and rocket forces , chris bellamy , 1986 these methods probably involved an aiming point positioned in line with the target . the earliest example of indirect fire adjusted by an observer seems to be during the defence of hougoumont in the battle of waterloo where a battery of the royal horse artillery fired an indirect shrapnel barrage against advancing french troops using corrections given by the commander of an adjacent battery with a direct line of sight . against all odds ! : dramatic last stand actions . perret , brian . cassell 2000 . : discussed during the account of the hougoumont action . modern indirect fire dates from the late 19th century . in 1882 a russian , lt col k . g . guk , published field artillery fire from covered positions that described a better method of indirect laying ( instead of aiming points in line with the target ) . in essence , this was the geometry of using angles to aiming points that could be in any direction relative to the target . the problem was the lack of an azimuth instrument to enable it ; clinometers for elevation already existed . the germans solved this problem by inventing the lining-plane in about 1890 . this was a gun-mounted rotatable open sight , mounted in alignment with the bore , and able to measure large angles from it . similar designs , usually able to measure angles in a full circle , were widely adopted over the following decade . by the early 1900s the open sight was sometimes replaced by a telescope and the term goniometer had replaced '' lining-plane '' in english . the first incontrovertible , documented use of indirect fire in war using guk 's methods , albeit without lining-plane sights , was on 26 october 1899 by british gunners during the second boer war . although both sides demonstrated early on in the conflict that could use the technique effectively , in many subsequent battles , british commanders nonetheless ordered artillery to be '' less timid '' and to move forward to address troops ' concerns about their guns abandoning them . the british used improvised gun arcs with howitzers ; the sighting arrangements used by the boers with their german and french guns is unclear . the early goniometric devices suffered from the problem that the layer ( gun aimer ) had to move around to look through the sight . this was very unsatisfactory if the aiming point was not to the front , particularly on larger guns . the solution was a periscopic panoramic sight , with the eyepiece to the rear and the rotatable top of the sight above the height of the layer 's head . the german goertz 1906 design was selected by both the british and the russians . the british adopted the name '' dial sight '' for this instrument ; the us used '' panoramic telescope '' ; the russia used '' goertz panorama '' . elevations were measured by a clinometer , a device using a spirit level to measure a vertical angle from the horizontal plane . these could be separate instruments placed on a surface parallel to the axis of the bore or physically integrated into some form of sight mount . some guns had clinometers graduated in distances instead of angles . clinometers had several other names including '' gunner 's level '' , '' range scale '' , '' elevation drum '' and '' gunner ’ s quadrant '' and several different configurations . those graduated in ranges were specific to a type of gun . these arrangements lasted for most of the 20th century until robust , reliable and cost-effectively accurate gyroscopes provided a means of pointing gun or launcher in any required azimuth and elevation , thereby enabling indirect fire without using external aiming points . these devices use gyros in all three axes to determine current elevation , azimuth and trunnion tilt . related issues . before a gun or launcher can be aimed , it must be oriented towards a known azimuth , or at least towards a target area . initially , the angle between the aiming point and target area is deduced , or estimated , and set on the azimuth sight . each gun is then laid on the aiming point , with this angle in order to keep them aimed roughly parallel to each other . however , for artillery another instrument , called either a director ( united kingdom ) or aiming circle ( united states ) , became widespread and eventually the primary method of orienting guns in most if not all armies . after being oriented and pointed in the required direction a gun recorded angles to one or more aiming points . indirect fire needs a command and control arrangement to allot guns to targets and direct their fire . the latter may involve ground or air observers or technical devices and systems . fire may be either '' adjusted '' or '' predicted '' . the latter ( originally called '' map shooting '' ) means firing data is calculated to include corrections for non-standard conditions . it also requires the target location to be precisely known relative to the gun location . predicted fire was introduced in world war i . adjusting ( originally '' ranging '' ) means some form of observation is used to correct the fall of shot onto the target ; there are several possible reasons for this : geospatial relationship between gun and target is not accurately known ; good quality data for non-standard conditions is unavailable ; or the target is moving or expected to move . adjusted and predicted fire are not mutually exclusive , the former may use predicted data and the later may need adjusting in some circumstances . there are two approaches to the azimuth that orients the guns of a battery for indirect fire . originally '' zero '' , meaning 6400 mils , 360 degrees or their equivalent , was set at whatever the direction the oriented gun was pointed . firing data was a deflection or switch from this zero . the other method was to set the sight at the actual grid bearing in which the gun was oriented , and firing data was the actual bearing to the target . the latter reduces sources of mistakes and made it easier to check that the guns were correctly laid . by the late 1950s , most armies had adopted the bearing method , the notable exception being the united states . see also . gun laying prism paralleloscope . footnotes . references .