Byerley Turk

background . the biographical details of the stallion are the subject of much speculation . the entry in the general stud book simply states : '' byerly turk , was captain byerly 's charger in ireland , in king william 's wars ( 1689 , & c . ) . '' general stud book , vol . , i , p . 389 as for his earlier history , the most popular theory is that the horse was captured at the battle of buda ( 1686 ) along with the lister turk , who was brought to england by the duke of berwick . other sources speculate he was one of three turkish stallions captured at the battle of vienna . it is even possible he was bred in england from previously imported stock . he was definitely the war horse of captain robert byerley , who was dispatched to ireland in 1689 during king william 's war and saw further military service in the battle of the boyne . according to early records , captain byerley was nearly captured while reconnoitering the enemy , '' owing his safety to the superior speed of his horse '' . as a general rule , the spelling of a name registered with the jockey club is considered definitive , even if it is an obvious error . however , the original edition of the general stud book was compiled nearly a century after the fact ( in 1791 ) and contains several errors that have been subsequently corrected . most sources consider the correct spelling of the horse 's name to follow the correct spelling of the owner 's name , byerley . the byerley turk was a dark brown or black horse of unknown breeding , but described in historic accounts as an arabian . at the time , turkish horses were described as descended from '' those of arabia or persia '' , but stated that they were longer in the body and of a larger size . he was described as a horse of elegance , courage and speed . many of his offspring were also noted to have been either bay or black . . stud record . in 1692 , captain byerley married his cousin , mary wharton ( sole heir to the estate of goldsborough , near knaresborough , north yorkshire , england ) and moved to live with her at her family home of goldsborough hall . after byerley retired ( as colonel byerley ) , the byerley turk retired to stud , first at middridge grange , then , from 1697 , at goldsborough hall . the byerley turk died there in 1706 and it is believed he is buried close to the hall . goldsborough hall is now a private family home that offers accommodation , which includes the commemorative byerley suite . he did not cover many well-bred mares , but his most significant sons include : black hearty , black colt born c . 1695 , '' a famous horse of sir george fletcher '' grasshopper or bristol grasshopper , c . 1695 , won the town plate at nottingham under 10 stone jigg , c . 1701 , a bay colt of middling ability who became the sire of partner , a four-time leading sire . partner sired tartar , who was the sire of herod ( 1738 ) . herod founded one of the three sire lines from which all modern thoroughbreds descend , the other lines being founded by eclipse and matchem . basto , a nearly black colt born c . 1704 , who won several match races from 1708 to 1710 . basto sired old ebony , the foundation mare of family 5 . the byerley turk also sired several highly influential daughters , most of whose names do not survive . they are generally classified by the female family that they belong to : byerley turk mare , a black or brown daughter out of tarfollet barb mare , through whom all modern members of family 1 descend . family 1 is estimated to account for 15 % of all thoroughbreds , and has been divided into several sub-families for ease of reference . for example , family 1-k , the family of frankel among many others , traces back through several branches to family 1-a , bonny lass , a grand-daughter of the byerley turk mare . as of 2010 , there were 33 epsom derby winners , 31 st . leger winners , and 40 winners of the oaks stakes listed in family 1 as descendants of the byerley turk mare bowes ' byerley turk mare , the '' dam of the two true blues '' , the taproot of family 3 . though not as widespread as family 1 , many classic winners around the world trace back to family 3 . as of 2010 , there were 25 derby winners , 26 oaks winners and 20 st leger winners from family 3 the byerley turk mare out of bustler mare , the taproot of family 8 , which has produced 7 oaks winners , 11 derby winners , and 15 st leger winners including nijinsky the byerley turk mare that was the taproot of family 17 , which has produced 2 oaks and 3 st leger winners the byerley turk mare that was the taproot of family 41 wentworth , lady , “ thoroughbred racing stock ” , george allen & unwin ltd , london , 1960 , warne & co , london & new york , 1960 . byerley turk sire line . the byerley sire line persisted by producing a major sire every few generations , whose sons would create branches of their own . most of these branches have died out over the course of time . the line of descent to the present day is as follows : morris , simon ; tesio power 2000 – stallions of the world , syntax software churchill , jennifer , australia and new zealand – sires for '87 , racetrack magazine the byerley turk ( ~1680 ) sired jigg in 1705 , who sired partner in 1718 , who sired tartar in 1743 , who sired herod in 1758 . herod was the leading sire in great britain and ireland from 1777 to 1784 herod sired highflyer in 1774 , leading sire in great britain from 1785-1796 . highflyer 's line persisted for many generations but died out in the first half of the 20th century herod also sired florizel born in 1768 , who sired diomed ( 1777 ) . diomed would become a foundation sire of the american turf . in turn , diomed sired sir archy who was the first great '' sire of sires '' in the united states . a few generations later through sir archy 's line came lexington who became the leading sire in north america sixteen times in the mid-19th century , but his sire line died out in the late 20th century american classic pedigrees ( 1914-2002 ) herod 's line continued through woodpecker , foaled in 1773 , who sired buzzard ( 1787 ) . buzzard founded several sire lines that flourished in the 19th century , most of which withered away in the 20th century buzzard 's sire line continued through selim , foaled in 1802 , who was leading sire of 1814 . selim produced yet another flourishing sire line , most of which died away by the mid 20th century selim 's sire line continued through sultan , born in 1816 . sultan was leading sire 6 times sultan in turn sired bay middleton ( 1833 ) , who was leading sire in 1844 and 1849 . bay middleton sired several sire sons but most of his line died out by the middle of the 20th century . bay middleton 's sire line continued through the flying dutchman , born in 1846 . the flying dutchmen sired several sons whose lines gradually died out over the course of the 20th century . the flying dutchman 's line continued through dollar in 1860 , who sired androcles in 1870 , who sired cambyse in 1884 , who sired gardefeu in 1895 , who sired chouberski in 1902 , who sired bruleur in 1910 , who sired ksar in 1918 . ksar was a two-time winner of the arc de triomphe and the leading sire in france for 1931 . ksar sired tourbillon in 1928 tourbillon was three-time leading sire in france . his son djebel , born in 1937 , won the arc de triomphe and 2,000 guineas djebel sired my babu , who also won the 2000 guineas . the my babu sire line persisted for several generations , leading to cirrus des aigles , a group 1 winner as late as 2014 . unfortunately , cirrus des aigles was gelded so the my babu sire line is on the brink of extinction . djebel also sired clarion , born in 1944 , who , though less successful than my babu on the track , is the best hope for the survival of the byerley turk sire line clarion sired klairon in 1952 , whose son luthier would lead the french sire list four times . luthier 's sire line continued for a few generations but seems to have died out klairon also sired lorenzaccio in 1965 , who in turn sired ahonoora in 1975 ahonoora proved a very successful sire , with offspring including : do n't forget me ( 2000 guineas ) , dr devious ( epsom derby ) , and indian ridge . indian ridge in turn has several sons and grandsons still at stud . another son of ahonoora , inchinor , sired notnowcato in 2002 thus the continuation of the byerley turk thoroughbred sire line via herod now largely depends on the descendants of ahonoora , several of whom are at stud in europe . also , a direct male descendant by the name of gem twist , a three-time american grand prix association champion thoroughbred show jumper , had two clones produced clone of top jumper gem twist born cloned horses may now compete says fei that have successfully produced offspring as recently as 2012 . gem twist , et clones produce first foals the clones and any offspring of them are not considered thoroughbreds however , as the breed requires procreation by natural means . note that focusing on the sire line underestimates the ongoing influence of the byerley turk : detailed pedigree analysis shows that he has a higher percentage of blood in the modern thoroughbred than either of his fellow foundation sires through other lines of descent . furthermore , the influence of the byerley turk has been felt through other horse breeds through his direct male descendants diomed ( american quarter horse and standardbred ) , lost bloodline duroc american star denmark ( american saddlebred ) , kentucky 's saddlebred heritage and justin morgan ( morgan horse ) . origin of the morgan horse in fact , denmark and justin morgan are key foundation sires for their respective breeds . therefore , the byerley turk overall sire line lives on today more prominently through the american saddlebred and morgan horse than the thoroughbred . sire line tree . byerley turk byerley portraits byerley turk byerley turk tree byerley turk line byerley sirelines byerley gelding jigg ( halloway ) archer black hearty grasshopper sprite turk turk pedigree jigg partner sly ( bumper ) pembed partner ( grisewood ) partner ( moore ) grey spot ploughboy partner plunder barforth cato little john freeholder achilles little john ( constable ) spectre sedbury sedbury soldier alfred tantivy bumper stilts badsticks golden ball skeleton looby merry andrew stroker white stockings badger badger ( sedley ) dart baboon mettle mixbury bedlam little john ( croft ) pompey true blue cheshire tom tartar lucifer miner beaufremont favourite herod — the byerley turk 's sire line continues through sons of herod as described above nimrod smiling ball tartar ( wildman ) venture tom jones traveller young traveller ( coatsworth ) skim dainty davy young traveller ( fermor ) squirrel snail traveller ( morton ) ariel partner ( lightfoot ) norval nonpareil yorick apollo bellair silverlegs tristram shandy traveller ( burwell ) lycurgus traveller ( lloyd ) jigg ( heneage ) sprightly turn post conquerer robinson crusoe hopewell look about you poor robin bonny widower arthur o'bradley sqirrel midge young midge better luck spavins drunkin jigg shock shock ( meredith ) ginger shock ( baylor ) easby miller bolton marcellus silvertail saucebox silvertail midas basto soreheels grey soreheels dimple little scar . references . sire line for 15 generations . bibliography . the byerley turk by jeremy james , publ . merlin unwin books , is a fictionalized account of the life of the byerley turk . it describes the battle of vienna and the battle of buda ( 1686 ) , with a turkish perspective . the horse as a cultural icon : the real and the symbolic horse in the early modern world edited by peter edwards , karl a e enenkel and elspeth graham , publ . brill 14 oct 2011 . the chapter by richard nash beware a bastard breed - notes towards a revisionist history of the thoroughbred racehorse details nash 's research into the origins of the byerley turk . external links . international museum of the horse