Dykes to Watch Out For

overview . dtwof chronicled the lives , loves , and politics of a fairly diverse group of characters ( most of them lesbians ) living in a medium-sized city in the united states , featuring both humorous soap opera storylines and biting topical commentary . the strip was carried in funny times and syndicated to a number of list of lgbt periodicals , and also posted on the web . bechdel discusses the changeover from self-syndication to the web on the official site . the first illustrated book edition was published by firebrand books in 1986 . according to bechdel , her strip was '' half op-ed column and half endless , serialized victorian novel '' . characters reacted to contemporary events , including going to the michigan womyn 's festival , gay pride parades and protest marches , and having heated discussions about day-to-day events , political issues and the way lesbian culture was changing . the strip was one of the most successful and longest-running queer comic strips . it introduced the bechdel test , a set of criteria for determining gender bias in works of entertainment , that has since found broad application . on may 10 , 2008 , bechdel announced that she was putting the strip on indefinite hiatus in order to complete her graphic novel memoir love life , which was eventually published in 2012 as are you my mother ? . on november 23 , 2016 , bechdel broke the strip 's hiatus with an episode called “ pièce de résistance ” . the same characters are shown addressing the eight-year gap and responding to the election of donald trump . “ pièce de résistance ” was published in seven days and on bechdel 's website . the amount of traffic caused the website to crash . bechdel also drew the cover for the november 23–30 , 2016 issue of seven days , featuring the dykes to watch out for characters having thanksgiving dinner . in the strip , the characters reflect on donald trump ’ s presidency and write postcards to the white house for the ides of the trump campaign . the seven days post states that bechdel “ now draws single strips when inspiration strikes . ” . main characters . the strip ran for 25 years ; the characters aged in real time , and their ( unnamed ) city changed in ways realistic of many us cities . many of the characters were connected to the city 's feminist bookstore , which faced insuperable commercial pressures when bounders books and muzak ( a parody of borders books and music ) moved in . eventually madwimmin books closed , and some of its laid-off employees went to work at bounders . other characters are connected via working or studying at the university , shared housing , or romantic relationships . the central characters included : mo testa ( given name monica ) , the central character , a politically committed lesbian feminism with a tendency to kvetch . she worked at madwimmin bookstore , and then briefly at bounders books and muzak while earning a library science degree , finally getting a job as a reference librarian . lois macgiver , a sex-positive activist , drag king , also a book clerk at both stores . lois is housemate to ginger and sparrow , and dates single mother jasmine , mother of transgender teenager janis ( originally introduced as jonas ) . ginger jordan , a struggling academic and english professor at buffalo lake state university , whose star student cynthia was interning at the cia despite coming out to her parents . longtime housemate of lois and sparrow , ginger eventually bought a house with samia , a syrian muslim chemist in a lavender marriage to a man . sparrow pidgeon ( birth name prudence ) , former women 's shelter director and new ager-turned-atheist , who identified herself as a '' bisexual lesbian '' and became involved with a straight jewish male activist , stuart goodman ( jokingly thought of by the others as being '' more stereotypically lesbian than many lesbians '' ) . sparrow and stuart have a child , jiao raizel ( or j.r . ) , and stuart becomes a stay-at-home dad ; lois and stuart homeschooled janis and j.r . clarice clifford , a workaholic environmental lawyer and college girlfriend of mo 's . toni ortiz , a cpa and business manager , who had a child with clarice ; she was a stay-at-home-mom for several years while raising their son rafael clifford-ortiz ( or raffi ) . toni and clarice had a commitment ceremony in the backyard , a civil union in vermont , and a ( not legally recognized by the state ) marriage at city hall . they later explored the phenomenon of divorcing without court involvement . clarice then moved in with sparrow , stuart and lois , taking the room vacated by ginger . harriet , a state human rights investigator , mo 's ex-lover , and single mother to daughter isabel . dr . sydney krukowski , an academically involved , materialistic , yuppie women 's studies professor with a compulsive spending habit , mo 's lover and a breast cancer survivor . jezanna ramsay ( birth name alberta ) , owner-manager of madwimmin books . after its demise , she taught english as a second language . thea , a jewish lesbian with multiple sclerosis who was sydney 's lover in college . thea worked at madwimmin books , and afterwards taught art to kids . long-term housemates sparrow and ginger purchased the house they had shared with first with lois and later with stuart . when ginger wanted to move on , the group was able to buy her share by sparrow taking the executive director position at the state naral office . revealed in strip 508 . only some of the characters ' surnames were known , since such names appeared only when it was appropriate to the dialogue ( when ginger and sydney , as college instructors , were addressed as '' professor jordan '' and '' dr . krukowski '' , for instance ) and were not established from the beginning . books . strip collections . the strip had a number of strip collections , including : dykes to watch out for ( 1986 ) ( non-serialized comics from 1983-1986 ) more dykes to watch out for ( 1988 ) ( strips 1-23 , plus '' down to the skin : a mildly erotic epilogue '' and a number of non-serialized comics from 1986-1987 ) new , improved ! dykes to watch out for ( 1990 ) ( strips 24-77 ) dykes to watch out for : the sequel ( 1992 ) ( strips 78-126 , plus '' serial monogamy '' ) spawn of dykes to watch out for ( 1993 ) ( strips 127-170 , plus '' flesh & blood '' ) unnatural dykes to watch out for ( 1995 ) ( strips 171-221 , plus '' sentimental education '' ) hot , throbbing dykes to watch out for ( 1997 ) ( strips 222-263 , plus '' sense & sensibility '' ) split-level dykes to watch out for ( 1998 ) ( strips 264-297 , plus '' demographic rift '' ) post-dykes to watch out for ( 2000 ) ( strips 298-337 ) dykes and sundry other carbon-based life-forms to watch out for ( 2003 ) ( strips 338-397 , plus '' replicants '' ) invasion of the dykes to watch out for ( 2005 ) ( strips 398-457 ) the essential dykes to watch out for ( 2008 ) ( strips 458-527 , plus most of the preceding strips and '' cartoonist 's introduction '' ) the first of these collections contained miscellaneous , individual strips ; the serialized story centered around mo began halfway through the second collection , more dykes to watch out for . beginning with the third book bechdel began including graphic '' novellas '' at the end of each book . some were flashbacks , such as the tale of how everyone met in unnatural dykes to watch out for , or serial monogamy , bechdel 's humorous '' documentary '' on lesbian relationships , but most have advanced the plot in new and interesting ways , such as raffi 's birth at the end of spawn of dykes to watch out for . while not a compilation , the indelible alison bechdel : confessions , comix , and miscellaneous dykes to watch out for ( 1998 ) included many of the strips bechdel published in calendars , a timeline of the strip to date , and a fanciful '' tour '' of the '' factory '' where dykes to watch out for is produced . the essential dykes to watch out for , published in 2008 , compiled most but not all of the strips that had ever been published under the title , along with a 12-page introduction in which bechdel reflected on her time drawing the strip . the book won the ferro-grumley award for lgbt fiction in 2009 . . literary references . as with bechdel 's popular autobiographical novel , fun home , dtwof included many literary allusions . for example , the name chosen for sydney krukowski references stanley kowalski , a character from a streetcar named desire . sydney also drinks loch lomond , a brand of scotch whisky famously invented by hergé in the adventures of tintin . see also . hothead paisan jane 's world wimmen 's comix list of feminist comic books portrayal of women in comics