Vicar

roman catholic church . the pope uses the title vicarius christi , meaning the vicar of christ . the papacy first used this title in the 6th century ; earlier they used the title '' vicar of saint peter '' or vicarius principis apostolorum , the '' vicar of the chief of the apostles '' . in catholic canon law , a vicar is the representative of any ecclesiastic entity . the romans had used the term to describe officials subordinate to the praetorian prefects . in the early christian churches , bishops likewise had their vicars , such as the archdeacons and archpriests , and also the rural priest , the curate who had the cure or care of all the souls outside the episcopal cities . the position of the roman catholic vicar as it evolved is sketched in the catholic encyclopedia , 1908 . vicars have various titles based on what role they are performing . an apostolic vicar is a bishop or priest who heads a missionary particular church that is not yet ready to be a full diocese – he stands as the local representative of the pope , in the pope 's role as bishop of all unorganized territories . a vicar capitular , who exercises authority in the place of the diocesan chapter , is a temporary ordinary of a diocese during a sede vacante period . vicars exercise authority as the agents of the bishop of the diocese . most vicars , however , have ordinary power , which means that their agency is not by virtue of a delegation but is established by law . vicar general , episcopal vicars , and judicial vicars exercise vicarious ordinary power ; they each exercise a portion of the power of the diocesan bishop ( judicial for the judicial vicar , executive for the others ) by virtue of their office and not by virtue of a mandate . a vicar forane , also known as an archpriest or dean , is a priest entrusted by the bishop with a certain degree of leadership in a territorial division of a diocese or a pastoral region known as a vicarate forane or a deanery . a parochial vicar is a priest assigned to a parish in addition to , and in collaboration with , the parish priest or rector . he exercises his ministry as an agent of the parish 's pastor , who is termed parochus in latin . some papal legates are given the title vicar of the apostolic see . a vicar can be the priest of a '' chapel of ease '' , a building within the parish which is not the parish church . non-resident canons led also to the institution of vicars choral , each canon having his own vicar , who sat in his stall in his absence ( see cathedral ) . in opus dei , a regional vicar is a priest designated to fulfil responsibilities for an entire country or region , such as france or the united states . eastern orthodox churches . in the russian orthodox church and some other non-hellenic eastern orthodox churches that historically follow russian tradition , vicar ( russian : vikariy / викарий ) is a term for what is known as suffragan bishop in the anglican communion or as auxiliary bishop in the latin rite of the roman catholic church . a vicar bishop usually bears in his title the names of both his titular see ( usually , a smaller town within the diocese he ministers in ) and the see he is subordinate to . for example , ignaty punin , the vicar bishop under the diocese of smolensk , is titled '' the rt revd ignaty , the bishop of vyazma , the vicar of the diocese of smolensk '' , vyasma being a smaller town inside the territory of the diocese of smolensk . normally , only large dioceses have vicar bishops , sometimes more than one . usually , russian orthodox vicar bishops have no independent jurisdiction ( even in their titular towns ) and are subordinate to their diocesan bishops ; though some of them de facto may have jurisdiction over some territories , especially when there is a need to avoid an overlapping jurisdiction . in some other eastern orthodox churches the term '' chorbishop '' is used instead of '' vicar bishop '' . anglicanism . in anglicanism , a vicar is a type of parish priest . historically , parish priests in the church of england were divided into vicars , rectors , and perpetual curates . the parish clergy and church were supported by tithes—like a local tax ( traditionally , as the etymology of tithe suggests , of ten percent ) levied on the personal as well as agricultural output of the parish . roughly speaking , the distinction was that a rector directly received both the greater and lesser tithes of his parish while a vicar received only the lesser tithes ( the greater tithes going to the lay holder , or impropriator , of the living ) ; a perpetual curate with a small cure and often aged or infirm received neither greater nor lesser tithes , and received only a small salary ( paid sometimes by the diocese ) . ( see also in church of england . ) today , the roles of a rector and a vicar are essentially the same . which of the two titles is held by the parish priest is historical . some parishes have a rector , others a vicar . in the episcopal church ( united states ) , the positions of '' vicar '' and '' curate '' are not recognized in the canons of the entire church . however , some diocesan canons do define '' vicar '' as the priest in charge of a mission ; and '' curate '' is often used for assistants , being entirely analogous to the english situation . vicarage . a vicarage , or vicarage house , is a residence provided by the church for the priest . they were usually located near the church and were sometimes quite elaborate and other times inadequate . dating from medieval times , they were often rebuilt and modernized . in the second half of the 20th century , most large vicarages were replaced with more modern and simpler houses . . lutheran usage . in the evangelical lutheran church in america , the lutheran church–missouri synod , the lutheran church–canada , and the wisconsin evangelical lutheran synod , a vicar is a candidate for ordained pastoral ministry , serving in a vicariate or internship , usually in the third year of seminary training , though it can be delayed to the fourth year ( this is often referred to as '' a vicarage '' , a homonym of the residence of the vicar ) . typically at the end of the year of vicarage , the candidate returns to seminary and completes a final year of studies . after being issued a call or assignment , the candidate is ordained as a pastor in the ministry of word and sacrament . the role of a vicar in the lutheran tradition is most comparable to that of a transitional deacon in the anglican and roman churches , except that lutheran vicars are not ordained . in the evangelical lutheran church in south africa , a vicar is a person who has completed seminary training and is awaiting ordination while serving at a parish where the diocesan council places him or her . the title '' vikar '' , used in the lutheran churches in germany , is comparable while the lutheran church of sweden calls it '' kyrkoherde '' ( '' church shepherd '' ) , although that title is more comparable to a rector . notable vicars . oliver goldsmith 's novel the vicar of wakefield ( 1766 ) and honoré de balzac 's the curate of tours ( le curé de tours ; 1832 ) evoke the impoverished world of the 18th- and 19th-century vicar . anthony trollope 's chronicles of barsetshire are peopled with churchmen of varying situations , from wealthy to impoverished ; the income differences prompted a digression in framley parsonage ( chapter 14 ) on the incomprehensible logic that made one vicar rich and another poor . the 18th-century satirical ballad '' the vicar of bray '' reveals the changes of conscience a vicar ( whether of the bray , berkshire or of that in county wicklow ) might undergo in order to retain his meagre post , between the 1680s and 1720s . '' the curate of ars '' ( usually in french : le curé d'ars ) is a style often used to refer to saint jean vianney , a french parish priest canonized on account of his piety and simplicity of life .