Thiotimoline

chemical properties . in asimov 's writings the endochronicity of thiotimoline is explained by the fact that in the thiotimoline molecule , there is at least one carbon atom such that , while two of the carbon 's four chemical bonds lie in normal spacetime , one of the bonds projects into the future and another into the past . thiotimoline is derived from the bark of the ( fictitious ) shrub rosacea karlsbadensis rugo , and the thiotimoline molecule includes at least fourteen hydroxy groups , two amine groups , and one sulfonic acid group , and possibly one nitro compound group as well . the nature of the hydrocarbon nucleus is unknown , although it seems in part to be an aromatic hydrocarbon . background . in 1947 asimov was engaged in doctoral research in chemistry and , as part of his experimental procedure , he needed to dissolve catechol in water . as he observed the crystals dissolve as soon as they hit the water 's surface , it occurred to him that if catechol were any more soluble , then it would dissolve before it encountered the water . by that time asimov had been writing professionally for nine years and would soon write a doctoral dissertation . he feared that the experience of writing readable prose for publication might have impaired his ability to write the turgid prose typical of academic discourse , and decided to practice with a spoof article ( including charts , graphs , tables , and citations of fake articles in nonexistent journals ) describing experiments on a compound , thiotimoline , that was so soluble that it dissolved in water up to 1.12 seconds before the water was added . asimov wrote the article on 8 june 1947 , but was uncertain as to whether the resulting work of fiction was publishable . john w . campbell , the editor of astounding science fiction accepted it for publication on 10 june , agreeing to asimov 's request that it appear under a pseudonym in deference to asimov 's concern that he might alienate potential doctoral examiners at columbia university if he were revealed as the author . some months later asimov was alarmed to see the piece appear in the march 1948 issue of astounding under his own name , and copies of the issue circulated at the columbia chemistry department . asimov believed that campbell had done so out of greater wisdom . his examiners told him that they accepted his dissertation by asking a final question about thiotimoline , resulting in him having to be led from the room while laughing hysterically with relief . the article made asimov famous for the first time outside science fiction , as chemists shared copies of the article . he heard that many children went to the new york public library trying to find the nonexistent journals . '' the micropsychiatric applications of thiotimoline '' . in 1952 , asimov wrote a second spoof scientific paper on thiotimoline called '' the micropsychiatric applications of thiotimoline '' . like the first , it included charts , graphs , tables , and citations of fake articles from fake journals ( along with one real citation : asimov 's own earlier spoof article from astounding , which was listed tongue-in-cheek as the journal of astounding science fiction ) . this second article described the use of thiotimoline to establish a quantitative classification of '' certain mental disorders '' . it also expounds a putative rationale for thiotimoline 's behaviour : namely that the chemical bonds in the compound 's structural formula are so starved of space that some are forced into the time dimension . according to the second article , thiotimoline 's time of solubility varies depending on the determination of the person adding the water . it also claims that one effect is that when people with multiple personalities add the water , some parts of the thiotimoline dissolve before others , due to some of the individual 's personalities being more determined than others . '' the micropsychiatric applications of thiotimoline '' appeared in the december 1953 issue of astounding . the first two thiotimoline '' articles '' appeared together in asimov 's first collection of science essays , only a trillion ( 1957 ) , under the joint title '' the marvellous properties of thiotimoline '' . asimov also included the original article in his 1972 collection the early asimov . the first article also appeared in fifty years of the best science fiction from analog ( davis publications , 1982 ) . '' thiotimoline and the space age '' . asimov wrote a third thiotimoline article on 14 november 1959 called '' thiotimoline and the space age '' . instead of a fake scientific paper , this third article took the form of an address by asimov to the 12th annual meeting of the american chronochemical society , a nonexistent scientific society . in his address , asimov '' describes '' his first experiments with thiotimoline in july 1947 , and timing the compound 's dissolution with the original endochronometer , '' the same instrument now at the smithsonian '' . asimov laments the skepticism with which chronochemistry has been greeted in america , noting with sorrow that his address has only attracted fifteen attendees . he then contrasts the thriving state of chronochemistry in the soviet union , with the research town of khrushchevsk , nicknamed '' tiotimolingrad '' , established in the urals . according to asimov , two scottish researchers have developed a '' telechronic battery '' , which uses a series of 77,000 interconnected endochronometers to allow a final sample of thiotimoline to dissolve up to a day before water is added to an initial sample . asimov says there is '' strong , if indirect , evidence that the soviet union possesses even more sophisticated devices and is turning them out in commercial quantities '' . he believes that the soviets are using telechronic batteries to determine ahead of time whether satellite launches will be successful . finally , asimov describes attempts to create a '' heisenberg failure '' , to get a sample of thiotimoline to dissolve without later adding water to it . in every case where the thiotimoline dissolved , some accident occurred that caused some water to be added to it at the proper time . several attempts to create a heisenberg failure in the mid-1950s coincided with a series of hurricanes striking new england in such a manner as to suggest that nature would find a way to add water whatever man decided , if man were to be resolute in not adding water . asimov speculated that noah 's flood might have been brought about by thiotimoline experiments among the ancient sumerians . he then concludes with some speculation about thiotimoline 's potential applications as a weapon of mass destruction by deliberately using it to artificially induce hurricanes . '' thiotimoline and the space age '' appeared in the october 1960 issue of astounding , which was then in the final stages of changing its name to analog . the article was reprinted in full in opus 100 ( 1969 ) and the asimov chronicles : fifty years of isaac asimov ( 1989 ) . '' thiotimoline to the stars '' . asimov 's final piece on thiotimoline was a short story titled '' thiotimoline to the stars '' , which he wrote for harry harrison 's astounding ( 1973 ) . in it , admiral vernon , commandant of the astronautic academy , gives a speech to the graduating '' class of '22 '' . vernon 's speech explains that thiotimoline was first mentioned in 1948 by a semi-mythical scientist named azimuth or asymptote , but that serious study of the compound did n't begin until the 21st century scientist almirante worked out the theory of steric hindrance . later scientists worked out ways to form endochronic molecules into polymers , allowing large structures such as spaceships to be built out of endochronic materials . one effect of endochronicity is that if one fails to add water to an object that has reacted to water , the object will travel into the future in search of water to interact with . an individual with sufficient inborn talent , vernon explains , can perfectly balance a starship 's endochronicity with relativistic time dilation , so that a ship traveling at relativistic speeds can age at the same rate as the rest of the universe , allowing it to return to its starting point within months , rather than centuries , of its departure . vernon emphasizes that starship pilots are expected to match endochronicity with relativity exactly : a sixty-second difference between the two is regarded as barely acceptable , and a 120-second difference is considered grounds for dismissal . vernon also emphasizes that endochronic molecules are unstable , and must be renewed before each trip , so that an endochronic ship that finds itself lost might not have sufficient endochronicity to return to its proper time . a ship that finds itself in the future might be able to re-endochronize itself if the technology still exists ; a ship that finds itself in the past will be marooned there . finally , vernon reveals that the auditorium where he is giving his speech is actually an endochronic starship , and that during his speech , they have all flown to the outskirts of the solar system . the graduates felt no acceleration because canceling out time dilation also caused the canceling out of inertia . when vernon concludes his speech , the graduates will be landing in the united nations port at lincoln , nebraska , where they will be spending the weekend . after they land , vernon receives an awful shock and passes out when his pilot informs him that the ship is surrounded by indians . vernon wrongly assumed the pilot meant red indians , and thought that they had landed centuries in the past . but the pilot only meant that they had landed at the correct time but near calcutta , india . asimov included '' thiotimoline to the stars '' in his 1975 collection buy jupiter and other stories . other references to thiotimoline . in glen bever 's story '' and silently vanish away '' a chemist with the unique ability to use psychokinetic catalysis to speed up difficult reactions is shocked by a lab explosion and the mixture he was working on gets changed . under analysis the structure never appears to be the same twice and when the substance is injected into lab rats they start to silently and suddenly vanish . it is found that one part of the compound is a molecule which spreads out into four dimensions . the four-dimensional molecule is thiotimoline . the story appeared in the november 1971 issue of analog science fiction/science fact . topi h . barr 's story '' antithiotimoline '' deals with a chemist who accidentally creates a thiotimoline-like compound which extrudes only into the past , enabling the scientist to create images of past events . the narrator complains that thiotimoline is extremely difficult to obtain , and suspects that the cia or other agencies are controlling the supply for their own reasons . the story appeared in the december 1977 issue of analog . spider robinson 's story '' mirror mirror , off the wall '' , published in time travelers strictly cash in 1981 , also references thiotimoline . in robert silverberg 's 1989 story '' the asenion solution '' , thiotimoline is used to send excess quantities of plutonium-186 to the end of time , where they will fall over the brink into anti-time and lead to the big bang . '' the asenion solution '' appeared in the asimov festschrift foundation 's friends . the november/december 2001 and march/april 2002 issues of the ieee design & test of computers included spoof articles on the use of thiotimoline for debugging computers . the last byte in the game we happy few , a mysterious liquid called '' motilene '' acts as the primary source of electrical power in the setting , and is pumped throughout the city in pipes in lieu of a traditional electrical grid , or alternatively placed into special jars to act as portable batteries . a research note can be found in one location which makes reference to '' thiomotilene crystals '' and their '' endochronic properties '' , which in turn strongly suggests motilene 's name be derived from thiotimoline . see also . tachyons in fiction list of fictional elements , materials , isotopes and atomic particles pâté de foie gras , another asimov scientific spoof about a goose which actually laid golden eggs . references . external links . '' the endochronic properties of resublimated thiotimoline '' and '' the micropsychiatric applications of thiotimoline '' on the internet archive