Princess Benedikte of Denmark

early life . birth . princess benedikte was born on 29 april 1944 at the frederick viii palace in the amalienborg in copenhagen as the second child and daughter of frederick ix of denmark and ingrid of sweden née princess ingrid of sweden . her father was the eldest son of king christian x of denmark and queen alexandrine née duchess alexandrine of mecklenburg-schwerin ; and her mother was the only daughter of gustav vi adolf of sweden ( later king gustav vi adolf of sweden ) and his first wife crown princess margaret née princess margaret of connaught . her birth took place during nazi germany 's occupation of denmark . the day after the birth of the princess , members of the danish resistance group holger danske performed a salute of 21 bombs in the ørstedsparken public park in central copenhagen as a reference to the traditional 21-gun salute performed by the danish army and navy at the occasion of royal births . peter øvig knudsen : efter drabet ( s . 191 ) , forlaget press , oslo 2003 , she was baptism on 24 may 1944 in the holmen church in copenhagen . her godparents were king christian x and queen alexandrine ( her paternal grandparents ) , prince gustav of denmark ( paternal grand-uncle ) , gustaf v of sweden ( maternal great-grandfather ) , prince sigvard , duke of uppland ( maternal uncle ) , princess caroline-mathilde of denmark ( paternal aunt-by-marriage ) , princess ingeborg of denmark ( paternal grand-aunt ) , princess margaretha of sweden ( her father 's first cousin ) , sir alexander ramsay ( maternal grand-uncle ) and queen elizabeth the queen mother . prinsesse benediktes fødsel og dåb – website of the danish national archives . princess benedikte has one elder sister , margrethe , present queen of denmark , and a younger sister , anne marie , who was born in 1946 and married constantine ii of greece . childhood and education . princess benedikte and her sisters grew up in apartments at frederick viii 's palace at amalienborg in copenhagen and in fredensborg palace in north zealand . she spent summer holidays with the royal family at her parents ' summer residence at gråsten palace in southern jutland . on 20 april 1947 , king christian x died and benedikte 's father ascended the throne as king frederick ix . at the time of her father 's accession to the throne , only males could ascend the throne of denmark . as her parents had no sons , it was assumed that her uncle prince knud would one day assume the throne . the popularity of frederick ix and his daughters and the more prominent role of women in danish life paved the way for a new act of succession in 1953 which permitted female succession to the throne following the principle of male-preference primogeniture , where a female can ascend to the throne if she has no brothers . benedikte 's elder sister margrethe therefore became heir presumptive , and princess benedikte and princess anne-marie became second and third in the line of succession . princess benedikte was educated at n . zahle 's school , a private school in copenhagen , followed by stays at a boarding school ( benenden school ) in england and a swiss finishing school . in 1965 she took a class at the margrethe-skolen , a private fashion and design school in copenhagen . . marriage . benedikte was married on 3 february 1968 at fredensborg palace church to richard , 6th prince of sayn-wittgenstein-berleburg ( 1934-2017 ) . they had three children : : : prince gustav ( born 12 january 1969 ) . : : princess alexandra ( born 20 november 1970 ) . : : princess nathalie ( born 2 may 1975 ) . the king had decreed that princess benedikte 's children would need to be raised in denmark in order to have succession rights . since the condition was not met , princess benedikte 's three children are not in line to succeed to the throne . , peter kurrild-klitgaard . the children of princess benedikte are styled as highnesses in denmark by an order in council . elsewhere they are serene highnesses by courtesy . interests . she is an honorary member of the st george 's guilds in denmark . in 2007 she was awarded with a prize of honour by this scout association for adults . she is also involved in equestrian sport , and has acted as an honorary patron of the world breeding federation for sport horses . in 2006 , she ran in an election for president of the international equestrian federation , but she was heavily defeated , earning only 16 votes and placing last out of the three candidates . . titles , styles , honours and awards . thumb as princess of denmark , benedikte is entitled to the style '' her royal highness '' . . honours . . national . : knight of the order of the elephant ( r.e . ) : knight grand commander of the order of the dannebrog ( s.kmd . ) : dame of the royal family order : dame of the royal family order : dame of the royal family order : recipient of the dannebrogordenens hæderstegn ( d.ht . ) : recipient of the homeguard medal of merit : recipient of the 100th anniversary medal of the birth of king christian x : recipient of the 50th anniversary medal of the arrival of queen ingrid to denmark : recipient of the 50th birthday medal of queen margrethe ii : recipient of the silver anniversary medal of queen margrethe ii and prince henrik : recipient of the silver jubilee medal of queen margrethe ii : recipient of the 100th anniversary medal of the birth of king frederik ix : recipient of the queen ingrid commemorative medal : recipient of the 75th birthday medal of prince henrik : recipient of the 350th anniversary medal of the royal danish life guards : recipient of the 70th birthday medal of queen margrethe ii : recipient of the ruby jubilee medal of queen margrethe ii : recipient of the 400th anniversary medal of the guard hussar regiment : recipient of the 75th birthday medal of queen margrethe ii name '' tumblr '' > : recipient of the golden anniversary medal of queen margrethe ii and prince henrik : recipient of the prince henrik 's commemorative medal : recipient of the 80th birthday medal of queen margrethe ii . foreign . : grand cross of order of the liberator general san martín : knight grand cross of the order of the crown : grand cross of the order of the white rose : grand cross of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany greek royal family : dame grand cross of the order of saints olga and sophia recipient of the commemorative badge of the centenary of the royal house of greece : grand cross of the order of the falcon pahlavi dynasty : knight grand cordon of the order of the crown ( iran ) : grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic : knight grand cross of the order of adolphe of nassau : grand cross of the order of the aztec eagle : knight commander of the order of the crown : knight grand cross of the order of the crown : recipient of the decorations and medals of the netherlands : knight grand cross of the order of st olav : knight grand cross of the order of isabella the catholic : member grand cross of the royal order of the polar star : recipient of the royal jubilee commemorative medals : recipient of the royal jubilee commemorative medals : recipient of the royal jubilee commemorative medals : grand officer of the order of the republic : knight of the decoration of honour . awards and patronages . . national . : chairman of the pigespejdernes fællesråd danmark : protector of the green girl guides : protector of the det danske spejderkorps : patron of the world association of girl guides and girl scouts : patron of the dressage : patron of the international federation for equestrian sports : patron award of the danish warmblood : patron of the alzheimer 's association : honorary member of the guild of st george . foreign . : honorary doctorate of the seoul women 's university : patron of the olave baden-powell . ancestry . references . external links . -