Henry Bennet, 1st Earl of Arlington

background and early life . he was the son of sir john bennet of dawley , middlesex , by dorothy , daughter of sir john crofts of little saxham , suffolk . he was the younger brother of john bennet , 1st baron ossulston ; his sister was elizabeth bennet who married sir robert carr ( or kerr ) . he was baptized at little saxham , suffolk , in 1618 , and was educated at westminster school and christ church , oxford . he gained some distinction as a scholar and a poet , and was originally destined for holy orders . in 1643 , he was secretary to lord digby at oxford , and was employed as a messenger between the queen and ormonde in ireland . subsequently , he took up arms for the king , and received a wound on the bridge of his nose in the skirmish at andover in 1644 . the scar resulting from this wound must have been prominent , because arlington took to covering it with black plaster . after the defeat of the royal cause he travelled in france and italy , joined the exiled royal family in 1650 , and in 1654 became official secretary to james on the recommendation of charles , who had already been attracted by his '' pleasant and agreeable humour . '' he was said by some to have been the father of an illegitimate child by lucy walter . knighthood . in march 1657 , he was knighted , and the same year was sent as charles 's agent to madrid , where he remained , endeavouring to obtain assistance for the royal cause , till after the restoration . on his return to england in 1661 he was made keeper of the privy purse , and became the prime favourite . one of his duties was the procuring and management of the royal mistresses , in which his success gained him great credit . allying himself with barbara villiers , he encouraged charles 's increasing dislike of clarendon ; and he was made secretary of state in october 1662 in spite of the opposition of clarendon , who had to find him a seat in parliament . he represented callington from 1661 till 1665 , but appears never to have taken part in debate . . biography . he served subsequently on the committees for explaining the irish act of settlement 1662 and for tangier . in 1665 he obtained a peerage as baron arlington , alan marshall , ‘ bennet , henry , first earl of arlington ( bap . 1618 , d . 1685 ) ’ , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edn , jan 2008 . ( properly harlington , in middlesex ) and in 1667 was appointed one of the postmasters-general . the control of foreign affairs was entrusted to him , and he was chiefly responsible for the attack on the smyrna fleet and for the second anglo-dutch war , during which he married the beautiful ( and dutch ) elisabeth van nassau-beverweert ( 28 december 1633 – 18 january 1718 ) in march 1665 . elisabeth was the daughter of louis of nassau , lord of de lek and beverweerd , the natural son of stadtholder maurice of orange , by his wife isabella de hornes . they had one daughter , isabella fitzroy , duchess of grafton ( c.1668-1723 ) . lady arlington 's sister emilia , another noted beauty , married thomas butler , 6th earl of ossory . in 1665 he advised charles to grant liberty of conscience , but this was merely a concession to gain money during the war ; and he showed great activity later in oppressing the nonconformists . death of thomas wriothesley . on the death of thomas wriothesley , 4th earl of southampton , whose administration he had attacked , his great ambition , the treasurership , was not satisfied ; and on the fall of clarendon , against whom he had intrigued , he did not , though becoming a member of the cabal ministry , obtain the supreme influence which he had expected ; for buckingham first equalled , and soon surpassed him , in the royal favour . with buckingham a sharp rivalry sprang up , and they only combined forces when endeavouring to bring about some evil measure , such as the ruin of the great ormonde , who was an opponent of their policy and their schemes . another object of jealousy to arlington was sir william temple , who achieved a great popular success in 1668 by the conclusion of the triple alliance ; arlington endeavoured to procure his removal to madrid , and entered with alacrity into charles 's plans for destroying the whole policy embodied in the treaty , and for making terms with france . he refused a bribe from louis xiv , but allowed his wife to accept a gift of 10,000 crowns ; in 1670 he was the only minister besides the roman catholic thomas clifford , 1st baron clifford to whom the first secret treaty of dover ( may 1670 ) , one clause of which provided for charles 's declaration of his conversion to catholicism , was confided ; and he was the chief actor in the deception practised upon the rest of the council . personal views . he supported several other measures—the scheme for rendering the king 's power absolute by force of arms ; the '' stop of the exchequer '' , involving a repudiation of the state debt in 1672 ; and the royal declaration of indulgence the same year , '' that we might keep all quiet at home whilst we are busy abroad . '' on 22 april 1672 he was created an earl , with a special remainder that the title would pass to his daughter , and on 15 june obtained the order of the garter ; the same month he proceeded with buckingham on a mission , first to william at the hague , and afterwards to louis at utrecht , endeavouring to force upon the dutch terms of peace which were indignantly refused , failing to end the third anglo-dutch war . but arlington 's support of the court policy was entirely subordinate to personal interests ; and after the appointment of clifford in november 1672 to the treasurership , his jealousy and mortification , together with his alarm at the violent opposition aroused in parliament , caused him to veer over to the other side . declaration of indulgence . he advised charles in march 1673 to submit the legality of the declaration of indulgence to the house of lords , and supported the test act of the same year , which compelled clifford to resign . he joined the pro-dutch party , and in order to make his peace with his new allies , disclosed the secret treaty of dover to the staunch protestants ormonde and anthony ashley-cooper , 1st earl of shaftesbury . arlington had , however , lost the confidence of all parties , and these efforts to procure support met with little success . on 15 january 1674 he was impeached by the commons , the specific charges being '' popery '' , corruption , and the betrayal of his trust — buckingham in his own defence having accused him the day before of being the chief instigator of the french and anti-protestant policy , of the scheme of governing by consent . but the motion for his removal , owing chiefly to the influence of his brother-in-law , the popular lord ossory , was rejected by 166 votes to 127 . his escape could not , however , prevent his fall , and he resigned the secretaryship on 11 september 1674 , being appointed lord chamberlain instead . for 1675 he made another attempt to gain favour with the parliament by supporting measures against france and against the roman catholics , and by joining in the pressure put upon charles to remove james from the court . in november he went on a mission to the hague , with the popular objects of effecting a peace and of concluding an alliance with william and james 's daughter mary . in this he entirely failed , and he returned home completely discredited . treasurership . he had again been disappointed of the treasurership when danby succeeded clifford ; charles having declared '' that he had too much kindness for him to let him have it for he was not fit for the office . '' his intrigues with discontented persons in parliament to stir up an opposition to his successful rival came to nothing . from this time , though lingering on at court , he possessed no influence , and was treated with scanty respect . it was safe to ridicule his person and behaviour , and it became a common jest for '' some courtier to put black patch upon his nose and strut about with a white staff in a hand in order to make the king merry at his expense . '' he was appointed a commissioner of the treasury in march 1679 , was included in sir william temple 's new modeled council the same year , and was a member of the inner cabinet which was most immediately formed . in 1681 he was made lord lieutenant of suffolk . death and inheritance . image:2nd countess arlington & 2nd duke of grafton.jpg thumb arlington 's only daughter isabella and her son charles fitzroy , 2nd duke of grafton he died on 28 july 1685 , and was buried at euston , where he had bought a large estate and had carried out extensive building operations . his residence in london was arlington house , which he constructed when his previous residence goring house burned down in 1674 , this residence would be succeeded by buckingham house which became buckingham palace . his title passed by special remainder to his only daughter isabella . in 1672 , when she was four or five years old she married the nine year old henry fitzroy , 1st duke of grafton , natural son of king charles ii by lady castlemaine . the ceremony was repeated in 1679 , presumably to allow the couple to cohabit . they had one son charles fitzroy , 2nd duke of grafton . grafton was killed at the siege of cork in 1690 . isabella in 1698 remarried sir thomas hanmer , 4th baronet . she died in 1723 . gallery . image:1stlordclifford.jpg thomas clifford , 1st baron clifford of chudleigh ( 1630-1673 ) . image : henry bennett earl of arlington.jpg henry bennet , 1st earl of a rlington ( 1618-1685 ) . image:2nddukeofbuckingham.jpg george villiers , 2nd duke of buckingham ( 1628-1687 ) . image : anthony ashley-cooper , 1st earl of shaftesbury.jpg anthony ashley-cooper , 1st earl of shaftesbury ( 1621-1683 ) . image : john maitland , duke of lauderdale by jacob huysmans.jpg john maitland , 1st duke of lauderdale ( 1616-1682 ) . . references . ; attribution - - -