Lope de Aguirre

in spain . aguirre was born around 1510 in the araotz valley ( a valley and hamlet belonging to oñati ) , close to arantzazu in the province of gipuzkoa or in aramaio , in the basque country of northern spain . he was the son of a nobleman , possibly from a family of court clerks . aguirre was in his twenties and living in seville when hernando pizarro returned from peru and brought back the treasures of the incas , inspiring aguirre to follow in his footsteps . in the new world . aguirre probably enlisted in an expedition of 250 men chosen to serve under the command of rodrigo duran . he arrived in peru in 1536 or 1537 . aguirre got work '' breaking '' stallions in cuzco , the capital of nuevo toledo , and was appointed regidor ( alderman ) of the city . as a conquistador , however , he soon became infamous for his violence , cruelty , and sedition against the crown . in 1544 , aguirre was at the side of peru 's first viceroy , blasco núñez vela , who had arrived from spain with orders to implement the new laws , suppress the encomiendas , and liberate the natives from slavery . many of the conquistadors refused to implement these laws , which prohibited them from exploiting the indians . aguirre , however , took part in the plot with melchor verdugo to free the viceroy ( who had been imprisoned on the island of san lorenzo ) , and thus turned against gonzalo pizarro ( the leader of the anti-viceroy/new laws faction ) . after the failed attempt , they escaped from lima to cajamarca , and started to gather men to help the viceroy . in the meantime , thanks to the oidor alvarez , the viceroy had escaped to tumbes and gathered a small military force in the belief that all the country would rise up to defend the crown under the royal flag . the viceroy 's resistance to pizarro and his deputy francisco de carvajal , the infamous '' el demonio de los andes '' ( '' demon of the andes '' ) would last for two years until he was defeated in añaquito on 18 january 1546 . aguirre and melchor verdugo , a converso jew , had gone to nicaragua sailing to trujillo with 33 men . verdugo had conferred captain 's rank on rodrigo de esquivel and nuño de guzmán , sergeant major rank on aguirre and contador status on the cleric alonso de henao , who would later participate in the expedition of pedro de ursúa to omagua and el dorado . however , in 1551 , aguirre returned to potosí ( then still part of peru and now part of bolivia ) . the judge , francisco de esquivel , arrested him and charged him with infraction of the laws protecting the indians . the judge discounted aguirre 's justifications and his claims of belonging to the spanish gentry and sentenced him to a public flogging . his pride wounded , aguirre waited for the end of the judge 's mandate to avenge his honor . fearing aguirre 's vengeance , the judge fled , changing his residence constantly . aguirre pursued esquivel to lima , quito and then to cusco , missing him at all three places . for three years he trailed esquivel on foot and without shoes , his soldiers following this obstinate pursuit with interest . aguirre finally found him in cuzco , taking a nap in the library of his house , and wearing a coat of chain mail he always wore for fear of aguirre . aguirre crept up to the sleeping esquivel and stabbed him twice with a dagger , but when the mail stopped his blows to the former magistrate 's body , he stabbed him in the right temple and killed him . protected by friends who had hidden him , aguirre fled from cuzco and took refuge with a relative in huamanga . in 1554 , needing to put down the rebellion of hernández girón , alonso de alvarado secured a pardon for everyone who had been affiliated with aguirre and enlisted in his army . aguirre fought and was wounded by two musket shots at the battle of chuquinga against girón , resulting in an incurable limp that would cause his peers to ostracise him . . search for el dorado . together with his daughter elvira , aguirre joined the 1560 expedition of pedro de ursúa down the marañón and amazon rivers with 300 spaniards and hundreds of natives ; the actual goal of ursúa was to send idle veterans from the spanish conquest of the inca empire away , to keep them from trouble-making . a year later , aguirre participated in the overthrow and killing of ursúa and his successor , fernando de guzmán , whom he ultimately succeeded . he and his men reached the atlantic ( probably by the orinoco river ) . on 23 march 1561 , aguirre urged 186 officers and soldiers to sign a statement acknowledging him as '' prince of peru , tierra firme and chile '' . in 1561 , he seized isla margarita and suppressed any opposition to his reign , killing the governor . when he crossed to the mainland in an attempt to take panama , his open rebellion against the spanish crown came to an end . he was surrounded at barquisimeto , where he murdered his own daughter , elvira , '' because someone that i loved so much should not come to be bedded by uncouth people '' . he also killed several followers who intended to capture him . he was eventually captured and shot to death ; his body was beheaded and cut into quarters with pieces being sent to nearby towns as a warning . lewis 2003 , p . 18 . popular culture . aguirre has been represented in film twice : by klaus kinski in the allegorical film aguirre , the wrath of god in 1972 , and by omero antonutti in el dorado in 1988 . aguirre 's ill-fated voyage is the topic of robert southey 's book the expedition of orsua ; and the crimes of aguirre ( 1821 ) , of ramón j . sender 's 1968 spanish-language novel la aventura equinoccial de lope de aguirre and of stephen minta 's 1995 book aguirre : the re-creation of a sixteenth-century journey across south america , in which minta retraces the expedition . aguirre was also featured in the educational video game the amazon trail . . references . bibliography . galster , ingrid ( 1996 ) . aguirre oder die willkür der nachwelt . die rebellion des baskischen konquistadors lope de aguirre in historiographie und geschichtsfiktion ( 1561–1992 ) . frankfurt am main : vervuert verlag , galster , ingrid ( 2011 ) . aguirre o la posteridad arbitraria . la rebelión del conquistador vasco lope de aguirre en historiografía y ficción histórica ( 1561-1992 ) . bogotá : ed . universidad del rosario and ed . universidad javeriana , ( also available as ebook ) . martinez tolentino , jaime ( 2016 ) . dos cronicas desconocidas de lope de aguirre . madrid : editorial fundamentos , 2012 . external links . letter from lope de aguirre to king philip of spain , 1561 bubers basque biography on lope de aguirre extensive bibliography about lope de aguirre