Resource depletion

depletion accounting . in an effort to offset the depletion of resources , theorists have come up with the concept of depletion accounting . better known as 'green accounting , ' depletion accounting aims to account for nature 's value on an equal footing with the market economy . resource depletion accounting uses data provided from countries to estimate the adjustments needed due to their use and depletion of the natural capital available to them . natural capital are natural resources such as mineral deposits or timber stocks . depletion accounting factors in several different influences such as the number of years until resource exhaustion , the cost of resource extraction and the demand of the resource . resource extraction industries make up a large part of the economic activity in developing countries . this , in turn , leads to higher levels of resource depletion and environmental degradation in developing countries . theorists argue that implementation of resource depletion accounting is necessary in developing countries . depletion accounting also seeks to measure the social value of natural resources and ecosystems . measurement of social value is sought through ecosystem services , which are defined as the benefits of nature to households , communities and economies . . importance . there are many different groups interested in depletion accounting . environmentalists are interested in depletion accounting as a way to track the use of natural resources over time , hold governments accountable or to compare their environmental conditions to those of another country . economists want to measure resource depletion to understand how financially reliant countries or corporations are on non-renewable resources , whether this use can be sustained and the financial drawbacks of switching to renewable resources in light of the depleting resources . . issues . depletion accounting is complex to implement as nature is not as quantifiable like cars , houses or bread . for depletion accounting to work , appropriate units of natural resources must be established so that natural resources can be viable in the market economy . the main issues that arise when trying to do so are , determining a suitable unit of account , deciding how to deal with '' collective '' nature of a complete ecosystem , delineating the borderline of the ecosystem and defining the extent of possible duplication when the resource interacts in more than one ecosystem . some economists want to include measurement of the benefits arising from public goods provided by nature , but currently there are no market indicators of value . globally , environmental economics has not been able to provide a consensus of measurement units of nature 's services . minerals depletion . minerals are needed to provide food , clothing , and housing . a united states geological survey ( usgs ) study found a significant long-term trend over the 20th century for non-renewable resources such as minerals to supply a greater proportion of the raw material inputs to the non-fuel , non-food sector of the economy ; an example is the greater consumption of crushed stone , sand , and gravel used in construction . materials flow and sustainability , us geological survey.fact sheet fs-068-98 , june 1998 . large-scale exploitation of minerals began in the industrial revolution around 1760 in england and has grown rapidly ever since . technological improvements have allowed humans to dig deeper and access lower grades and different types of ore over that time . virtually all basic industrial metals ( copper , iron , bauxite , etc . ) , as well as rare earth minerals , face production output limitations from time to time , because supply involves large up-front investments and is therefore slow to respond to rapid increases in demand . minerals projected by some to enter production decline during the next 20 years : gasoline ( 2023 ) valero & valero ( 2010 ) による『physical geonomics : combining the exergy and hubbert peak analysis for predicting mineral resources depletion』から copper ( 2024 ) . data from the united states geological survey ( usgs ) suggest that it is very unlikely that copper production will peak before 2040 . zinc . zinc depletion developments in hydrometallurgy have transformed non-sulfide zinc deposits ( largely ignored until now ) into large low cost reserves . minerals projected by some to enter production decline during the present century : aluminium ( 2057 ) coal ( 2060 ) iron ( 2068 ) such projections may change , as new discoveries are made and typically misinterpret available data on mineral resources and mineral reserves . . oil . peak oil is the period when the maximum rate of global petroleum extraction is reached , after which the rate of production will undergo a long-term decline . the 2005 hirsch report concluded that the decreased supply combined with increasing demand will significantly increase the worldwide prices of petroleum derived products , and that most significant will be the availability and price of liquid fuel for transportation . the hirsch report , funded by united states department of energy , concluded that “ the peaking of world oil production presents the u . s . and the world with an unprecedented risk management problem . as peaking is approached , liquid fuel prices and price volatility will increase dramatically , and , without timely mitigation , the social , economic and political costs will be unprecedented . viable mitigation options exist on both the supply and demand sides , but to have substantial impact , they must be initiated more than a decade in advance of peaking . ” doe hirsch report . deforestation . deforestation is the clearing of forests by cutting or burning of trees and plants in a forested area . as a result of deforestation , recently about one half of the forests that once covered earth have been destroyed . '' global deforestation '' . global change curriculum . university of michigan global change program . january 4 , 2006 it occurs for many different reasons , and it has several negative implications on the atmosphere and the quality of the land in and surrounding the forest . causes . one of the main causes of deforestation is clearing forests for agricultural reasons . as the population of developing areas , especially near rainforests , increases , the need for land for farming becomes more and more important . butler , rhett a . '' impact of population and poverty on rainforests '' . mongabay.com / a place out of time : tropical rainforests and the perils they face . retrieved may 13 , 2009 . for most people , a forest has no value when its resources are not being used , so the incentives to deforest these areas outweigh the incentives to preserve the forests . for this reason , the economic value of the forests is very important for the developing countries . . environmental impact . because deforestation is so extensive , it has made several significant impacts on the environment , including : carbon dioxide in the atmosphere changing the water cycle an increase in soil erosion a decrease in biodiversity deforestation and global warming . because trees and plants remove carbon dioxide and emit oxygen into the atmosphere , the reduction of forests contribute to about 12 % of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions . g . r . van der werf , d . c . morton , r . s . defries , j . g . j . olivier , p . s . kasibhatla , r . b . jackson , g . j . collatz and j . t . randerson , co2 emissions from forest loss , nature geoscience , volume 2 ( november 2009 ) pp . 737–738 one of the most pressing issues that deforestation creates is soil erosion . the removal of trees causes higher rates of erosion , increasing risks of landslides , which is a direct threat to many people living close to deforested areas . as forests get destroyed , so does the habitat for millions of animals . it is estimated that 80 % of the world 's known biodiversity lives in the rainforests , and the destruction of these rainforests is accelerating extinction at an alarming rate . do we have enough forests ? by sten nilsson . controlling deforestation . the united nations and the world bank created programs such as reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( redd ) , which works especially with developing countries to use subsidies or other incentives to encourage citizens to use the forest in a more sustainable way . '' copenhagen accord of 18 december 2009 '' . unfcc . 2009 . retrieved 2009-12-28 . in addition to making sure that emissions from deforestation are kept to a minimum , an effort to educate people on sustainability and helping them to focus on the long-term risks is key to the success of these programs . diamond , jared collapse : how societies choose to fail or succeed ; viking press 2004 , pages 301–302 the new york declaration on forests and its associated actions promotes reforestation , which is being encouraged in many countries in an attempt to repair the damage that deforestation has done . . wetlands . wetlands are ecosystems that are often saturated by enough surface or groundwater to sustain vegetation that is usually adapted to saturated soil conditions , such as cattails , bulrushes , red maples , wild rice , blackberries , cranberry , and peat moss . because some varieties of wetlands are rich in minerals and nutrients and provide many of the advantages of both land and water environments they contain diverse species and provide a distinct basis for the food chain . wetland habitats contribute to environmental health and biodiversity . wetlands are a nonrenewable resource on a human timescale and in some environments can not ever be renewed . recent studies indicate that global loss of wetlands could be as high as 87 % since 1700 ad , with 64 % of wetland loss occurring since 1900 . some loss of wetlands resulted from natural causes such as erosion , sedimentation , subsidence , and a rise in the sea level . wetlands provide environmental services for : food and habitat improving water quality commercial fishing floodwater reduction shoreline stabilization recreation . resources in wetlands . some of the world 's most successful agricultural areas are wetlands which have been drained an converted to farmland for large-scale agriculture . large-scale draining of wetlands also occurs for real estate development and urbanization . in contrast , in some cases wetlands are also flooded to be converted to recreational lakes or hydropower generation . in some countries ranchers have also moved their property onto wetlands for grazing due to the nutrient rich vegetation . wetlands in southern america also prove a fruitful resource for poaching , as animals with valuable hides such a jaguar , maned wolf , caiman and snake are drawn to wetlands . the effect of the removal of large predators is still unknown in south african wetlands . humans benefit from wetlands in indirect ways as well . wetlands act as natural water filters , when runoff from either natural or man-made processes pass through , wetlands can have a neutralizing effect . if a wetland is in between an agricultural zone and a freshwater ecosystem , fertilizer runoff will be absorbed by the wetland and used to fuel the slow processes that occur happen , by the time the water reaches the freshwater ecosystem there wo n't be enough fertilizer to cause destructive algal blooms that poison freshwater ecosystems . . non-natural causes of wetland degradation . hydrologic alteration drainage dredging stream channelization ditching levees deposition of fill material diversion dam groundwater drainage dam urbanization and urban development marinas/boats industrialization and industrial development agriculture silviculture/timber harvest mining atmospheric deposition to preserve the resources extracted from wetlands , current strategies are to rank wetlands and prioritize the conservation of wetlands with more environmental services , create more efficient irrigation for wetlands being used for agriculture and restricting access to wetlands by tourists . . groundwater . water is an essential resource needed to survive everyday life . historically , water has had a profound influence on a nation 's prosperity and success around the world . groundwater is water that is in saturated zones underground , the upper surface of the saturated zone is called the water table . groundwater is held in the pores and fractures of underground materials like sand , gravel and other rock , these rock materials are called aquifers . groundwater can either flow naturally out of rock materials or can be pumped out . groundwater supplies wells and aquifers for private , agricultural , and public use and is used by more than a third of the world 's population every day for their drinking water . globally there is 22.6 million cubic kilometers of groundwater available and only . 35 million of that is renewable . . groundwater as a non-renewable resource . groundwater is considered to be a non-renewable resource because less than six percent of the water around the world is replenished and renewed on a human timescale of 50 years . people are already using non-renewable water that is thousands of years old , in areas like egypt they are using water that may have been renewed a million years ago which is not renewable on human timescales . of the groundwater used for agriculture 16 to 33 % is non-renewable . it is estimated that since the 1960s groundwater extraction has more than doubled , which has increased groundwater depletion . due to this increase in depletion , in some of the most depleted areas use of groundwater for irrigation has become impossible or cost prohibitive . . environmental impacts . overusing groundwater , old or young can lower subsurface water levels and dry up streams , which could have a huge effect on ecosystems on the surface . when the most easily recoverable fresh groundwater is removed this leaves a residual with inferior water quality . this is in part from induced leakage from the land surface , confining layers or adjacent aquifers that contain saline or contaminated water . worldwide the magnitude of groundwater depletion from storage may be so large as to constitute a measurable contributor to sea-level rise . . mitigation . currently , societies respond to water-resource depletion by shifting management objectives from location and developing new supplies to augmenting conserving and reallocation of existing supplies . there are two different perspectives to groundwater depletion , the first is that depletion is considered literally and simply as a reduction in the volume of water in the saturated zone , regardless of water quality considerations . a second perspective views depletion as a reduction in the usable volume of fresh groundwater in storage . augmenting supplies can mean improving water quality or increasing water quantity . depletion due to quality considerations can be overcome by treatment , whereas large volume metric depletion can only be alleviated by decreasing discharge or increasing recharge . artificial recharge of storm flow and treated municipal wastewater , has successfully reversed groundwater declines . in the future improved infiltration and recharge technologies will be more widely used to maximize the capture of runoff and treated wastewater . renewable resources . renewable energy can be collected from renewable resources . the two main sources of renewable energy are solar energy and wind power . the government and scientists are researching and looking upon alternatives to replace the depleting nonrenewable resources . japan and the u.s . are leading in the department of selling and manufacturing solar powered utilities .