Clement Greenberg

early life . clement greenberg was born in the borough of the bronx , nyc , in 1909 . his parents were middle-class jewish immigrants , and he was the eldest of their three sons . since childhood , greenberg sketched compulsively , until becoming a young adult , when he began to focus on literature . greenberg attended erasmus hall high school , the marquand school for boys , then syracuse university , graduating with an a.b . in 1930 , cum laude , phi beta kappa . alice goldfarb marquis , '' art czar : the rise and fall of clement greenberg '' , mfa publications , boston , 2006 , pp . 7–9 , 12–13 after college , already as fluent in yiddish as english since childhood , greenberg taught himself italian and german in addition to french and latin . during the next few years , greenberg travelled the u.s . working for his father 's dry-goods business , but the work did not suit his inclinations , so he turned to working as a translator . greenberg married in 1934 , had a son the next year , and was divorced the year after that . in 1936 , greenberg took a series of jobs with the federal government , from civil service administration , to the veterans ' administration , and finally to the appraisers ' division of the customs service in 1937 . it was then that greenberg began to write seriously , and soon after began getting published in a handful of small magazines and literary journals . . avant garde and kitsch . though his first published essays dealt mainly with literature and theatre , art still held a powerful attraction for greenberg , so in 1939 , he made a sudden name as a visual art writer with possibly his most well-known and oft-quoted essay , '' avant-garde and kitsch '' , first published in the journal partisan review . in this marxist-influenced essay , greenberg claimed that true avant-garde art is a product of the enlightenment 's revolution of critical thinking , and as such resists and recoils from the degradation of culture in both mainstream capitalist and communist society , while acknowledging the paradox that , at the same time , the artist , dependent on the market or the state , remains inexorably attached '' by an umbilical cord of gold '' . kitsch , on the other hand , was the product of industrialization and the urbanization of the working class , a filler made for the consumption of the working class : a populace hungry for culture , but without the resources and education to enjoy cutting edge avant garde culture . greenberg writes , kitsch , using for raw material the debased and academicized simulacra of genuine culture , welcomes and cultivates this insensibility . it is the source of its profits . kitsch is mechanical and operates by formulas . kitsch is vicarious experience and faked sensations . kitsch changes according to style , but remains always the same . kitsch is the epitome of all that is spurious in the life of our times . kitsch pretends to demand nothing of its customers except their money – not even their time . '' greenberg , clement . '' avant-garde and kitsch . '' partisan review . 6:5 ( 1939 ) 34–49 for greenberg , avant garde art was too '' innocent '' to be effectively used as propaganda or bent to a cause , while kitsch was ideal for stirring up false sentiment . greenberg appropriated the german word '' kitsch '' to describe this low , concocted form of '' culture '' , though its connotations have since been recast to a more affirmative acceptance of nostalgic materials of capitalist/communist culture . art history , abstract expressionism and after . greenberg wrote several seminal essays that defined his views on art history in the 20th century . in 1940 , greenberg joined partisan review as an editor . he became art critic for the nation in 1942 . he was associate editor of commentary from 1945 until 1957 . roger kimball , collected essays and criticism , by clement greenberg , edited by john o'brian , commentary , december 1987 in december 1950 , he joined the government funded american committee for cultural freedom . greenberg believed modernism provided a critical commentary on experience . it was constantly changing to adapt to kitsch pseudo-culture , which was itself always developing . in the years after world war ii , greenberg pushed the position that the best avant-garde artists were emerging in america rather than europe . frances stonor saunders , the cultural cold war : the cia and the world of arts and letters , new york : the new press , 1999 , pp . 158 , 199 , 255 , 258 , 275 , 277 . particularly , he championed jackson pollock as the greatest painter of his generation , commemorating the artist 's all-over painting . in the 1955 essay '' american-type painting '' greenberg promoted the work of abstract expressionists , among them jackson pollock , willem de kooning , hans hofmann , barnett newman , and clyfford still , as the next stage in modernist art , arguing that these painters were moving towards greater emphasis on the 'flatness ' of the picture plane . greenberg helped to articulate a concept of medium specificity . it posited that there were inherent qualities specific to each different artistic medium , and part of the modernist project involved creating artworks that were more and more committed to their particular medium . in the case of painting , the two-dimensional reality of their medium lead to an increasing emphasis on flatness , in contrast with the illusion of depth commonly found in painting since the renaissance and the invention of pictorial perspective . in greenberg 's view , after world war ii the united states had become the guardian of 'advanced art ' . he praised similar movements abroad and , after the success of the painters eleven exhibition in 1956 with the american abstract artists at new york 's riverside gallery , he travelled to toronto to see the group 's work in 1957 . he was particularly impressed by the potential of painters william ronald and jack bush , and later developed a close friendship with bush . greenberg saw bush 's post-painters eleven work as a clear manifestation of the shift from abstract expressionism to color field painting and lyrical abstraction , a shift he had called for in most of his critical writings of the period . greenberg expressed mixed feelings about pop art . on the one hand he maintained that pop art partook of a trend toward '' openness and clarity as against the turgidities of second generation abstract expressionism . '' but on the other hand greenberg claimed that pop art did not '' really challenge taste on more than a superficial level . '' through the 1960s greenberg remained an influential figure on a younger generation of critics including michael fried and rosalind e . krauss . greenberg 's antagonism to 'postmodernist ' theories and socially engaged movements in art caused him to become a target for critics who labelled him , and the art he admired , as '' old fashioned '' . in his book '' the painted word '' , tom wolfe criticized greenberg along with harold rosenberg and leo steinberg , whom he dubbed the kings of '' cultureburg '' . wolfe argued that these three critics were dominating the world of art with their theories and that , unlike the world of literature in which anyone can buy a book , the art world was controlled by an insular circle of rich collectors , museums and critics with out-sized influence . davis , douglas ( june 9 , 1975 ) . '' crying wolfe '' . newsweek 88 . in shomette 1992 . . post-painterly abstraction . eventually , greenberg was concerned that some abstract expressionism had been '' reduced to a set of mannerisms '' and increasingly looked to a new set of artists who abandoned such elements as subject matter , connection with the artist , and definite brush strokes . greenberg suggested this process attained a level of '' purity '' ( a word he only used within scare quotes ) that would reveal the truthfulness of the canvas , and the two-dimensional aspects of the space ( flatness ) . greenberg coined the term post-painterly abstraction to distinguish it from abstract expressionism , or painterly abstraction , as greenberg preferred to call it . post-painterly abstraction was a term given to a myriad of abstract art that reacted against gestural abstraction of second-generation abstract expressionists . among the dominant trends in the post-painterly abstraction are hard-edge painting such as ellsworth kelly and frank stella who explored relationships between tightly ruled shapes and edges , in stella 's case , between the shapes depicted on the surface and the literal shape of the support and color field such as helen frankenthaler and morris louis , who stained first magna then water-based acrylic paints into unprimed canvas , exploring tactile and optical aspects of large , vivid fields of pure , open color . the line between these movements is tenuous , however as artists such as kenneth noland utilized aspects of both movements in his art . post-painterly abstraction is generally seen as continuing the modernist dialectic of self-criticism . clement greenberg collection . in 2000 , the portland art museum ( pam ) acquired the clement greenberg collection of 159 paintings , prints , drawings , and sculpture by 59 important artists of the late-20th century and early-21st century . pam exhibits the works primarily in the jubitz center for modern and contemporary art – some sculpture resides outdoors . most of the artists represented are american , along with several canadians , and a handful of artists of other nationalities . artists represented in the collection include among others : edward avedisian , walter darby bannard , stanley boxer , jack bush , anthony caro , dan christensen , ronald davis , richard diebenkorn , enrico donati , friedel dzubas , andré fauteux , paul feeley , helen frankenthaler , robert goodnough , adolph gottlieb , hans hofmann , wolfgang hollegha , robert jacobsen , paul jenkins , seymour lipton , georges mathieu , kenneth noland , jules olitski , william perehudoff , jackson pollock , larry poons , william ronald , anne ryan , david smith , theodoros stamos , anne truitt , alfred wallis , and larry zox . clement greenberg : a critic 's collection by bruce guenther , karen wilkin ( editor ) greenberg 's widow , janice van horne , donated his annotated library of exhibition catalogues and publications on artists in greenberg 's collection to the portland art museum . greenberg 's annotated library is available at the portland art museum 's crumpacker family library which is open to the public free of charge . in popular culture . greenberg was portrayed by actor jeffrey tambor in the 2000 film pollock , about the life of jackson pollock . bibliography . greenberg , clement . art and culture , beacon press , 1961 greenberg , clement . late writings , edited by robert c . morgan , st . paul : university of minnesota press , 2003 . clement greenberg : a critic 's collection by bruce guenther , karen wilkin ( editor ) , portland : portland art museum , 2001 . greenberg , clement . homemade esthetics : observations on art and taste . oxford university press , 1999 . jones , caroline a . alone : clement greenberg 's modernism and the bureaucratization of the senses . university of chicago press , 2005 . kuspit , donald . clement greenberg : art critic . university of wisconsin , 1979 . marquis , alice goldfarb . art czar : the rise and fall of clement greenberg . boston : mfa publications , 2006 . o'brian , john . clement greenberg : the collected essays and criticism . 4 vols . chicago : university of chicago press , 1986 and 1993 . rubenfeld , florence . clement greenberg : a life . scribner , 1997 . tekiner , deniz . '' formalist art criticism and the politics of meaning . '' social justice , issue on art , power , and social change , 33:2 ( 2006 ) . anatoly rykov . clement greenberg and american theory of contemporary art in the 1960s , in art history , journal of the russian institute of art history . 2007 , no . 1-2 , pp . & nbsp ; 538–563 . see also . art criticism art critic art history modernism formalism ( art ) postmodern art abstract expressionism post-painterly abstraction color field lyrical abstraction american abstract artists jackson pollock willem de kooning painters eleven medium specificity . references . external links . clement greenberg – author page that includes text of many works by greenberg clement greenberg – art critic on the art story foundation website finding aid for hdl:10020/cifa950085 the getty research institute , los angeles , california .