Hugues de Payens

name . the majority of the primary sources of information for his life are presented in latin or the medieval french language . in french his name usually appears as hugues de payens or payns . his earliest certain appearance in documents is under the part-latin , part-french name hugo de peans ( 1120–1125 ; details below ) . later latin sources call him hugo de paganis . in english works he often appears as hugh de payns , in italian sometimes as ugo de ' pagani ' . origin and early life . there is no known early biography of hugues de payens in existence , nor do later writers cite such a biography . none of the sources on his later career give details of his early life . information is therefore scanty and uncertain ; embellishments depend partly on documents that may not refer to the same individual , partly on histories written decades or even centuries after his death . the earliest source that details a geographical origin for the later grand master is the old french translation of william of tyre 's history of events beyond the sea . the latin text calls him simply hugo de paganis , text at the latin library but the french translation , dated to c . 1200 , describes him as hues de paiens delez troies ( '' hugh of payens near troyes '' ) , text : see book 12 chapter 7 a reference to the village of payns , about 10 & nbsp ; km from troyes , in champagne ( eastern france ) . in early documents of that region hugo de pedano , montiniaci dominus is mentioned as a witness to a donation by count hugh of champagne in a document of 1085–90 , indicating that the man was at least sixteen by this date—a legal adult and thus able to bear witness to legal documents—and so born no later than 1070 . the same name appears on a number of other charters up to 1113 also relating to count hugh of champagne , suggesting that hugo de pedano or hugo dominus de peanz was a member of the count 's court . by the year 1113 he was married to elizabeth de chappes , who bore him at least one child , thibaud , later abbot of abbaye de la colombe la colombe at sens . the documents span hugues ' lifetime and the disposition of his property after his death . the one belated statement that the founder of the knights templars came from '' payns near troyes '' has some circumstantial confirmation . bernard of clairvaux , who favoured the order and helped to compose its latin rule , also had the support of hugh of champagne . the latin rule of the order was confirmed at the council of troyes in 1129 . a templar commandery was eventually built at payns . some scholars have however looked for hugues ' origins elsewhere . there was an early claim that he came from the vivarais ( the district of viviers in the modern département of ardèche ) . michel des chaliards , les pagels de l'ardèche et leurs seigneurs ( roudil ) p . 44 ; f . malartre , in revue du vivarais vol . 86 ( 1982 ) p . 125 ; odo de gissey , histoire de n.d du puy ( 1644 ) hugues has also been identified with hug de pinós , third son of galceran i , lord of pinós in catalonia ; j . g . atienza , la mística solar de los templarios pp . 240–243 however , galceran married only in 1090 , far too late a date for him to be the father of the founder of the knights templars . there is also a claim that hugues de payens or ugo de ' pagani came from nocera de ' pagani in campania , southern italy . reference to nocera as his birthplace is found at least as early as baedeker 's southern italy ( 1869 ) karl baedeker , italy : handbook for travellers . part 3 ( coblenz , 1869 ) p . 145 and is also found in the catholic encyclopedia . nocera dei pagani in catholic encyclopedia vol . 11 ( 1911 ) two more recent writers say that the theory is supported by a letter that hugues wrote from palestine in 1103 , in which he talked of writing to '' my father in nocera '' to tell him of the death of his cousin alessandro . mario moiraghi , l'italiano che fondò i templari . hugo de paganis cavaliere di campania ( edizioni ancora , 2005 . see interview with moiraghi . the foundation of the order . hugh , count of champagne made a pilgrimage to the holy land in 1104–07 and visited jerusalem for a second time in 1114–16 . it is probable that he was accompanied by hugues de payens , who remained there after the count returned to france as there is a charter with '' hugonis de peans '' in the witness list from jerusalem in 1120 and again in 1123 . in 1125 his name appears again as a witness to a donation , this time accompanied by the title '' magister militum templi '' ( '' master of the knights of the temple '' ) . he most likely obtained approval for the order from king baldwin ii of jerusalem and warmund , patriarch of jerusalem at the council of nablus in 1120 . one early chronicler , simon de st . bertin , implies that the knights templar originated earlier , before the death of godfrey of bouillon in 1100 : '' while he godfrey was reigning magnificently , some had decided not to return to the shadows of the world after suffering such dangers for god 's sake . on the advice of the princes of god 's army they vowed themselves to god 's temple under this rule : they would renounce the world , give up personal goods , free themselves to pursue purity , and lead a communal life wearing a poor habit , only using arms to defend the land against the attacks of the insurgent pagans when necessity demanded . '' simon de st . bertin , gesta abbatum sancti bertini sithensium ed . o . holder-egger , in monumenta germanica historica : scriptores vol . 13 , p . 649 . translation by helen nicholson later chroniclers write that hugues de payens approached king baldwin ii of jerusalem ( whose reign began in 1118 ) with eight knights , two of whom were brothers and all of whom were his relatives by either blood or marriage , in order to form the order of the knights templar . the other knights were godfrey de saint-omer , payen de montdidier , archambaud de st . agnan , andré de montbard , geoffrey bison , and two men recorded only by the names of rossal and gondamer . baldwin approved the foundation of the order and entrusted the temple of jerusalem to its care . count hugh of champagne himself joined the knights templar on his third visit to the holy land in 1125 . as grand master , hugues de payens led the order for almost twenty years until his death , helping to establish the order 's foundations as an important and influential military and financial institution . on his visit to england and scotland in 1128 , he raised men and money for the order , and also founded their first house in london and another near edinburgh at balantrodoch , now known as temple , midlothian . the latin rule laying down the way of life of the order , attributed to hugues de payens and bernard of clairvaux , was confirmed in 1129 at the council of troyes over which pope honorius ii presided . hugues de payens died , apparently on bornholm , in 1136 . the circumstances and date of his death are not recorded in any chronicle , though the templars commemorated him every year on 24 may , and it 's presumed he died of old age . the 16th century historian marco antonio guarini claimed that hugues was buried in the church of san giacomo at ferrara . marco antonio guarini , compendio historico p . 224 ; bianca capone ferrari , loredana imperio , enzo valentini , guida all'italia dei templari . gli insediamenti templari in italia ( rom : edizioni mediterranee , 1997 ) p . 125 he was succeeded as grand master by robert de craon . in popular culture . it has recently been claimed that the wife of hugues de payens was catherine st . clair within the context of the alternative history of rosslyn . e.g . tim wallace-murphy , the templar legacy & the masonic inheritance within rosslyn chapel , p.17 ( the friends of rosslyn , 1994 . the claim that hugues de payens married catherine st . clair was made in les dossiers secrets d'henri lobineau ( 1967 ) , '' tableau généalogique de gisors , guitry , mareuil et saint-clair par henri lobineau '' in pierre jarnac , les mystères de rennes-le-château , mélanges sulfureux ( cert , 1995 ) . hugues is the main protagonist of the jack whyte novel knights of the black and white . notes . external links . the crusades and the knights templar helen nicholson , translator , contemporary reactions to the foundation of the templars hugues de payns museum payns , france