Wellington boot

design and use . wellington boots in contemporary usage are waterproof and are most often made from rubber or polyvinyl chloride ( pvc ) , a halogenated polymer . they are usually worn when walking on wet or muddy ground , or to protect the wearer from heavy showers and puddles . they are generally just below knee-high although shorter boots are available . the '' wellington '' is a common and necessary safety or hygiene shoe in diverse industrial settings : for heavy industry with an integrated reinforced toe ; protection from mud and grime in mines , from chemical spills in chemical plants and from water , dirt , and mud in horticultural and agricultural work ; and serving the high standard of hygiene required in food processing plants , operating theater , and dust-free clean rooms for electronics manufacture . sailing wear includes short and tall sailing wellingtons with non-marking , slip-resistant soles to avoid damage to a boat 's deck . these boots require thermal socks to be worn underneath as the rubber does not provide enough warmth . history . origins . the duke of wellington instructed his shoemaker , hoby of st . james 's street , london , to modify the 18th-century hessian boot . the resulting new boot was fabricated in soft calfskin leather , had the trim removed and was cut to fit more closely around the leg . the heels were low cut , stacked around an inch ( 2.5 centimetres ) , and the boot stopped at mid-calf . it was suitably hard-wearing for riding , yet smart enough for informal evening wear . the boot was dubbed the wellington and the name has stuck in english ever since . in the 1815 portrait by james lonsdale , the duke can be seen wearing the more formal hessian style boots , which are tasselled . wellington 's utilitarian new boots quickly caught on with patriotic british gentlemen eager to emulate their war hero . christopher breward , “ men in heels : from power to perversity , ” in shoes : pleasure and pain , ed . helen persson ( london : v & a publishing , 2015 ) , 137 ; matthew mccormack , “ boots , material culture and georgian masculinities , ” social history 42 , no . 4 ( 2017 ) : 475–478 considered fashionable and foppish in the best circles and worn by dandies , such as beau brummell , they remained the main fashion for men through the 1840s . in the 1850s they were more commonly made in the calf-high version , and in the 1860s they were both superseded by the ankle boot , except for riding . wellington is one of the two british prime ministers to have given his name to an item of clothing , the other being sir anthony eden ( see anthony eden hat ) whilst sir winston churchill gave his name to a cigar , and william gladstone ( four times prime minister between 1868 and 1894 ) gave his to the gladstone bag , the classic doctor 's portmanteau . modifications . wellington boots were at first made of leather . however , in 1852 hiram hutchinson met charles goodyear , who had just invented the sulfur vulcanisation process for natural rubber . hutchinson bought the patent to manufacture footwear and moved to france to establish à l'aigle ( '' to the eagle '' ) in 1853 , to honour his home country . today the company is simply called aigle . in a country where 95 % of the population were working on fields with clog ( shoe ) as they had been for generations , the introduction of the wholly waterproof , wellington-type rubber boot became an instant success : farmers would be able to come back home with clean , dry feet . production in world war i . production of the wellington boot was dramatically boosted with the advent of world war i and a requirement for footwear suitable for the conditions in europe 's flooded and muddy trenches . the north british rubber company ( now hunter boot ltd ) was asked by the war office to construct a boot suitable for such conditions . the mills ran day and night to produce immense quantities of these trench boots . in total , 1,185,036 pairs were made to meet the british army 's demands . production in world war ii . in world war ii , hunter boot was again requested to supply vast quantities of wellington and thigh boots . 80 % of production was of war materials – from ( rubber ) ground sheets to life belts and gas masks . in the netherlands , the british forces were working in flooded conditions which demanded wellingtons and thigh boots in vast supplies . by the end of the war in 1945 , the wellington had become popular among men , women and children for wet weather wear . the boot had developed to become far roomier with a thick sole and rounded toe . also , with the rationing of that time , labourers began to use them for daily work . post-war . the lower cost and ease of rubber '' wellington '' boot manufacture , and being entirely waterproof , lent itself immediately to being the preferred protective material to leather in all forms of industry . increased attention to occupational health and safety requirements led to the steel toe or steel-capped wellington : a protective ( commonly internal ) toe-capping to protect the foot from crush and puncture injuries . although traditionally made of steel , the reinforcement may be a composite or a plastic material such as thermoplastic polyurethane ( tpu ) . such steel-toe wellingtons are nearly indispensable in an enormous range of industry and are often mandatory wear to meet local occupational health and safety legislation or insurance requirements . in july 1956 , the competition commission published its report on the supply of certain rubber footwear , monopolies and restrictive practices commission , report on the supply of certain rubber footwear , london : hmso , 1956 . full text retrieved on 22 february 2019 at which covered rubber boots of all kinds including wellingtons and overboots . this 107-page official publication addressed contemporary concerns about unfair pricing of rubber footwear manufactured in the uk or imported from overseas . the appendices include lists of rubber footwear manufacturers and price-lists of each company 's range of wellington boots available in the mid-1950s . green wellington boots , introduced by hunter boot ltd in 1955 , gradually became a shorthand for '' country life '' in the uk . in 1980 , sales of their boots skyrocketed after lady diana spencer ( future princess diana ) was pictured wearing a pair on the balmoral estate during her courtship with prince charles . . usage and terminology . thumb . australia . though most commonly called '' gum boots '' , an alternative name , '' blucher boot '' , is occasionally used by some older australians . blücher was wellington 's colleague at the battle of waterloo and there is speculation that some early emigrants to australia , remembering the battle , may have confused a different design the blucher shoe developed by blucher . the australian poet henry lawson wrote a poem to a pair of blucher boots in 1890 . . north america . usually called rubber boots , but sometimes galoshes , mud boots , rain boots , mucking boots , billy boots , or gum-boots , are popular in canada and the united states , particularly in springtime when melting snows leave wet and muddy ground . young people can be seen wearing them to school or university and taking them to summer camps . while green is popular in britain , red-soled black rubber boots are often seen in the united states , in addition to canadian styles . rubber boots specifically made for cold weather , lined with warm insulating material , are especially popular practical footwear for canadian winters . this same style of lined boot is also popular among those who work in or near the ocean as one can wade in and out of shallow , but cold , ocean water , while staying dry and warm . in the us white mid-calf rubber boots are worn by workers on shrimp boats and construction workers pouring concrete . leather boots similar to wellington 's original hessian boots have been marketed in north america as '' ranch wellingtons '' or '' western wellingtons '' . these boots have more rounded toes , lower heels , and less radically scalloped tops than typical '' cowboy boots '' . new zealand . in new zealand , wellingtons are called '' gumboots '' , '' wellies '' , or '' redbands '' ( after a popular skellerup brand ) , and are considered essential foot wear for farmers . gumboots are often referred to in new zealand popular culture such as the rurally-based footrot flats comic strip . the farming town of taihape in the north island proclaims itself '' gumboot capital of the world '' and has annual competitions and events such as gumboot day , where wellie wanging . most gumboots are black , but those worn by abattoir workers , butchers , fishermen and by hospital operating theatre staff and surgeons are white , and children 's sizes come in multiple colours . the term '' gum boot '' in new zealand is thought to derive from the 19th-century kauri gum diggers , who wore this footwear , or perhaps because the boots were made from gum rubber . the term is often abbreviated to '' gummies '' . new zealand comedy character fred dagg paid tribute to this iconic footwear in his song '' gumboots '' a modified version of billy connolly 's '' if it wisnae fur yer wellies '' . nordic countries . the boots are very popular in scandinavian countries , with conditions and climate similar to canada . in fact , before its entry into the mobile phone business , rubber boots were among the best-known products of nokia . both the finnish defence forces and the swedish armed forces issue rubber boots to all soldiers for use in wet conditions and during the winter with felt liners . russia . in russia rubber boots were first introduced in the 1920s . immediately , they became extremely popular because of russian weather conditions . during the rule of joseph stalin , 17 rubber-boot factories were built in different parts of the soviet union . along with valenki in winter , rubber boots became the traditional footwear in springs and autumns . when nikita khrushchev came to power , the boot became charged politically in the context of the '' battle for modesty '' campaign , where rubber footwear was proclaimed as '' socialism style '' ( thus fashionable ) , while leather , which was obviously more expensive , was derided as '' capitalism style '' ( thus unfashionable ) . during the period 1961–1964 , leather footwear disappeared from soviet shops . when leonid brezhnev came to power in 1964 , the usual leather footwear returned to shops , and rubber boots quickly lost their popularity , returning to their original role of utility footwear . nowadays , wellington boots in russia have the same role as in most countries . united kingdom . wellington boots are a commonly used form of waterproof footwear in the uk , and usually referred to as '' wellies '' . wellington boots are particularly popular for small children when they want to jump in puddles , which is an activity encouraged by the popular children 's tv-series peppa pig as , in the show , the main character peppa and her brother george enjoy splashing in muddy puddles . see also . british country clothing galoshes waders ( footwear ) mackintosh paddington bear william 's wish wellingtons . references . external links .