Thames and Medway Canal

construction . right the first practical attempt to build the canal began in 1799 , when an engineer named ralph dodd published a pamphlet and began to solicit investment for the scheme . dodd , ralph ( 1799 ) report on the proposed canal navigation forming a junction of the rivers thames and medway dodd 's plan was for a six-mile canal with locks and basins , taking two years to build and costing £24,576 , part of the cost to be defrayed by selling the excavated chalk as agricultural lime . dodd was confident that the canal would be useful to the government but would also attract commercial vessels . '' upon enquiry , i find the commerce that would employ this canal is immense ; probably few canals in this kingdom would have greater traffic . '' dodd , ralph ( 1799 ) report on the proposed canal navigation forming a junction of the rivers thames and medway , quoted in hadfield ( 1969 ) , p81 in 1800 the canal company received the necessary act of parliament and work began at the gravesend end . the estimated cost had now risen to £57,433 . from the gravesend basin , the canal began with a straight section aligned with new tavern fort , gravesend . by 1801 it ran six and a half kilometres ( four miles ) to higham . a new engineer , ralph walker , arrived and announced that the whole canal would cost significantly more than the revised estimate . work halted , and by 1804 dodd had probably left the project . over the next few years , walker suggested two new routes for the higham to strood stretch , for which acts of parliament were obtained and money raised . his second route was decided on but required a tunnel through the chalk hills ; work on this did not start until 1819 . the canal finally opened on 14 october 1824 , by which time the napoleonic wars were long over and the military need had greatly diminished . the canal had taken five acts of parliament and cost some £260,000 . hadfield claims that contemporary figures of around £350,000 are probably exaggerations . . operating problems . the canal was 13 & nbsp ; m ( 43 & nbsp ; ft ) wide and carried the thames sailing barges common on both rivers . it was intended that the canal would be used for the transport of hops and other locally grown produce , but it was not a commercial success . it had locks at each end to protect the water level from tidal change , but the canal walls leaked and the water level dropped between every spring tide . a steam-driven pumping station was built to rectify this . complaints then came from barge-owners that the tunnel was slow to use , so in 1830 it was shut for two months while an open-air passing place was dug in the middle . this 100-yard long cutting divided the tunnel into a separate higham tunnel and strood tunnel . the canal tolls reflected these improvements , but if a boat missed the tide it would have to wait in the canal basin for longer than the journey round hoo would have taken . higham and strood tunnel . the higham and strood tunnel is long , and was the second longest canal tunnel built in the uk ( the longest is the standedge tunnels ) . it was also the largest : 10.7 & nbsp ; m ( 35 & nbsp ; ft ) high from arch to canal bed , 6.6 & nbsp ; m ( 21.5 & nbsp ; ft ) wide at the water line , a further 1.5 & nbsp ; m ( 5 & nbsp ; ft ) wide at towpath level , and had water 2.4 & nbsp ; m ( 8 & nbsp ; ft ) deep . strickland , william . report on canals , railways , roads , & c , & c , made to the pennsylvania society for the promotion of internal improvements . philadelphia , 1826 . contains detailed diagram of newly opened tunnel . these dimensions could accommodate a 60 tonne sailing barge with its mast lowered . the tunnel was dug through the chalk using only hand tools , but occasionally gunpowder was used . several workmen were killed in rockfalls . and it was considered an engineering wonder of its time . the tunnel is so perfectly straight , that a person placed at one end , may discern a small light entering at the other extremity . on the opening of the tunnel , a small steam passage boat was employed for the conveyance of passengers from gravesend to rochester , and vice versa ; but as it was found to injure the towing-path of the tunnel , as well as the banks of the canal , it was discontinued . foot passengers , however , still pass to and fro , though some caution is necessary , to avoid coming into contact with the horse , or horses , towing the barges . —tallis directory known as the tallis directory 1839 . sharing with the railway . thumb from 1845 the newly built railway between gravesend and strood shared the tunnel with the canal , a single track resting partially on the towpath and partially on wooden stakes in the water . the ride through the dreary tunnel with the dark waters of the canal beneath us , and an insecure chalk roof above our heads , enlivened as it is by occasional shrieks from the engine 's vaporous lungs , and the unceasing rattle of the train , is apt to make one feel somewhat nervous ; and the first glimpse of bright daylight that breaks upon us , relieves us from a natural anxiety as to the chances we run of being crushed by the fall of some twenty tons of chalk from above , or being precipitated into twenty feet of water beneath , with the doors of the carriages locked and no '' nautilus belt '' around our waists and not even a child 's caul in our pocket . this relief is however temporary , for the light only breaks in through a gap in the tunnel , and some more experienced traveller informs us we are only half out of it . however , our journey is brought to a close without any accident : and we embark on the steamer that is to deposit us at chatham . —william orr , 1847 orr , william ( london : 1847 ) summer excursions in the county of kent along the river thames and medway , quoted in barnard , derek ( 1999 ) one leg in the water . accessed 2007-30-01barnard 's article includes a diagram of the tunnel with the railway suspended above it . in 1846 the canal company sold the tunnel to the south eastern railway company , which filled the canal and laid a double railway track over it . this was part of the north kent line . the canal towing contractor 's home was converted into the ticket office for higham railway station . orr 's fears of a chalk fall , however , were not unfounded . over the years , there have been many roof falls , most small . but in december 1999 a fall near strood derailed a train , fortunately without causing serious injuries ( but leaving a hole in the ground in an orchard ) . some 60 % of the tunnel had by this date been lined : in 2004 it was closed to line the remainder and renew the track , reopening a year later on 17 january 2005 . 1846 to today . thumb the remainder of the canal , between higham and gravesend , continued to be used until 1934 . it suffered bomb damage during world war ii , and some areas have been back-filled or are choked with reed growth . the strood canal basin , long orphaned by the loss of the tunnel , was back-filled in 1986 and has now been built over . since 1976 the canal has been in the hands of the thames & medway canal association ( tmca ) , which has dredged some areas . british rail restored one of the swing bridges . the towpath has recently been renovated for use by pedestrians and cyclists . it now forms part of route 1 of the national cycle network from dover to john o ' groats . for walkers , it forms part of circular walks linked to the saxon shore way . there are now plans to fully renovate the canal and make it a focal point of development in gravesend , to benefit the town while meeting the thames gateway project 's demands for house-building . gravesend canal basin area and north east gravesend supplementary planning document . draft for public consultation november 2005 gravesham borough council . retrieved 30 december 2005 . in october 2004 , the gravesend canal basin was dredged , after which the lock gates into the thames were renovated , enabling the basin to be used by boats from the river . the line of the canal has been protected from development since 1992 . . notes and references . priestley , joseph ( 1831 ) . historical account of the navigable rivers , canals and railways throughout great britain . 1st ed longman ; nichols . 2nd ed cass , 1967 . this author ( b.1739 ) is not joseph priestley the chemist . thames and medway canal association history of the canal rayner , stephen . memories page , medway news ( used with permission ) . further reading . march , edgar ( 1948 ) . spritsail barges of the thames & medway . david & charles , 1970 . see also . canals of the united kingdom history of the british canal system . external links . thames and medway canal association - currently restoring sections of the canal . victorian web pencil drawing of higham tunnel entrance , 1889 multimap map of canal from gravesend to lower higham . strood canal basin was in crook of river medway above word '' rochester '' on map . sustrans official site of the national cycle network .