Colchicum

common names . the common names autumn crocus , meadow saffron and naked lady may be applied to the whole genus or to many of its species ; they refer to the '' naked '' crocus-like flowers that appear in late summer or autumn , long before the strap-like foliage which appears in spring . colchicum and crocus look alike and can be confused by the casual observer . to add to the confusion , there are autumn-flowering species of crocus . however , colchicums have 3 styles and 6 stamen , while crocuses have 1 style and 3 stamens . a handbook of crocus and colchicum for gardeners , page 154 in addition , the corm structures are quite different—in colchicum , the corm is irregular , while in crocuses , the corm is like a flattened ball . a handbook of crocus and colchicum for gardeners , page 20 , elsewhere crocus is in the iris family , iridaceae . etymology . the name of the genus derives from κολχίς ( colchis ) , the ancient greek name for the region of კოლხეთი ( kolkhida ) in modern georgia ( caucasus ) . colchis features in greek mythology as the land to which the argonauts journeyed in quest of the golden fleece and where jason encountered medea . the greek toponym colchis is thought by scholars to derive from the urartian qulḫa , pronounced '' kolcha '' ( guttural '' ch '' - as in scots loch ) . lordkipanidze , o . ( 1991 ) . archeology in georgia , weinheim , 110 . . relationships . colchicum melanthioides , also known as androcymbium melanthioides , is probably the best known species from the tropics regions . in contrast to most temperate colchicums , the flower and leaves are produced at the same time , the white flowers usually in a small corymb that is enclosed by white bracts . close relatives such as colchicum scabromarginatum ( androcymbium scabromarginatum ) and colchicum coloratum ( androcymbium burchellii ) have flowers with very short stalks and may be pollinated by rodent . . cultivation . temperate colchicums are commonly grown in gardens as ornamental flowers . species found in cultivation include : c . × agrippinum c . autumnale c . × byzantinum c . cilicicum c . lusitanum c . speciosum c . tenorei there are also cultivars and hybrids such as : - c . 'dick trotter ' ( violet with white centre ) c . 'disraeli ' ( purple white ) , c . 'giant ' ( red with white centre ) c . 'harlekijn ' ( white with purple band ) c . 'lilac wonder ' ( lilac ) c . 'pink goblet ' ( violet-purple ) c . 'poseidon ' ( purple ) c . 'rosy dawn ' ( rose pink ) c . 'violet queen ' ( purple ) c . 'waterlily ' ( double , lilac-pink ) those marked have gained the royal horticultural society 's award of garden merit ( confirmed 2017 ) . in the united kingdom , the national collection of colchicums is maintained at felbrigg hall , norfolk . medicinal uses and poisonous properties . plants in this genus contain toxic amounts of the alkaloid colchicine which is used pharmaceutically to treat gout and familial mediterranean fever . the use of the roots and seeds in traditional medicine is thought to have arisen due to the presence of this drug . its leaf , corm and seeds are poisonous . murderer catherine wilson is thought to have used it to poison a number of victims in the 19th century . the species known to contain the most lethal amount of colchicine is c . autumnale . . species . the following are the species included in the genus colchicum . many species previously classified in androcymbium , bulbocodium and merendera were moved to colchicum based on molecular genetic evidence . sunset western garden book , 1995:606–607 androcymbium is currently considered a separate genus by some . colchicum × agrippinum ( probably a hybrid of garden origin ) colchicum alpinum dc . in j.b.a.m.de lamarck & a.p.de candolle colchicum androcymbioides ( valdés ) k.perss . colchicum antepense k.perss . colchicum antilibanoticum gomb . colchicum arenarium waldst . & kit . colchicum arenasii fridl . colchicum asteranthum vassiliades & k.m.perss . colchicum atropurpureum stapf ex stearn ( unresolved name ) colchicum atticum spruner ex tommas . colchicum autumnale l . colchicum balansae planch . colchicum baytopiorum c.d.brickell colchicum bivonae guss . colchicum boissieri orph . colchicum bulbocodium ker gawl . colchicum burttii meikle colchicum × byzantinum ker gawl . colchicum chalcedonicum azn . colchicum chimonanthum k.perss . colchicum chlorobasis k.perss . colchicum cilicicum ( boiss . ) dammer colchicum confusum k.perss . colchicum corsicum baker colchicum cretense greuter colchicum crocifolium boiss . colchicum cupanii guss . colchicum davisii c.d.brickell colchicum decaisnei boiss . colchicum doerfleri halácsy colchicum dolichantherum k.perss . colchicum eichleri ( regel ) k.perss . colchicum euboeum ( boiss . ) k.perss . colchicum fasciculare ( l . ) r.br . colchicum feinbruniae k.perss . colchicum figlalii ( varol ) parolly & eren colchicum filifolium ( cambess . ) stef . colchicum freynii bornm . colchicum gonarei camarda colchicum graecum k.perss . colchicum greuteri ( gabrieljan ) k.perss . colchicum haynaldii heuff . colchicum heldreichii k.perss . colchicum hierosolymitanum feinbrun colchicum hirsutum stef . colchicum hungaricum janka colchicum ignescens k.perss . colchicum imperatoris-friderici siehe ex k.perss . colchicum inundatum k.perss . colchicum kesselringii regel colchicum kotschyi boiss . colchicum kurdicum ( bornm . ) stef . colchicum laetum steven colchicum lagotum k.perss . colchicum leptanthum k.perss . colchicum lingulatum boiss . & spruner in p.e.boissier colchicum longifolium castagne colchicum lusitanum brot . colchicum luteum baker colchicum macedonicum kosanin colchicum macrophyllum b.l.burtt colchicum manissadjianii ( azn . ) k.perss . colchicum micaceum k.perss . colchicum micranthum boiss . colchicum minutum k.perss . colchicum mirzoevae ( gabrieljan ) k.perss . colchicum montanum l . colchicum multiflorum brot . colchicum munzurense k.perss . colchicum nanum k.perss . colchicum neapolitanum ( ten . ) ten . colchicum parlatoris orph . colchicum parnassicum sart . , orph . & heldr . in p.e.boissier colchicum paschei k.perss . colchicum peloponnesiacum rech.f . & p.h.davis colchicum persicum baker colchicum polyphyllum boiss . & heldr . in p.e.boissier colchicum pulchellum k.perss . colchicum pusillum sieber colchicum raddeanum ( regel ) k.perss . colchicum rausii k.perss . colchicum ritchii r.br . colchicum robustum ( bunge ) stef . colchicum sanguicolle k.perss . colchicum schimperi janka ex stef . colchicum serpentinum woronow ex miscz . colchicum sfikasianum kit tan & iatroú colchicum sieheanum hausskn . ex stef . colchicum soboliferum ( c.a.mey . ) stef . colchicum speciosum steven colchicum stevenii kunth colchicum szovitsii fisch . & c.a.mey . colchicum trigynum ( steven ex adam ) stearn colchicum triphyllum kunze colchicum troodi kotschy in f.unger & c.g.t.kotschy colchicum tunicatum feinbrun colchicum turcicum janka colchicum tuviae feinbrun colchicum umbrosum steven colchicum varians ( freyn & bornm . ) dyer in b.d.jackson colchicum variegatum l . colchicum wendelboi k.perss . colchicum woronowii bokeriya colchicum zahnii heldr . . references . sources . suite 101 . plants and bulbs : hardy fall-blooming bulbs for your garden veseys : information for gardeners a handbook of crocus and colchicum for gardeners , bowles , e . a . , d . van nostrand company , inc . , 1952 the european garden flora : a manual for the identification of plants cultivated in europe , both out-of-doors and under glass , volume 1 , walters , s . m . , et al . , editors , cambridge university press , 1984