Eggs over Easy

formation . although both hailed from new york city , jack o'hara ( guitar , bass & vocals ) met austin de lone ( keyboards , guitar & vocals ) in berkeley , california , where they formed a duo . the pair moved back to new york , where they met brien hopkins ( keyboards , bass , guitar & vocals ) who joined to form a multi-instrumental trio , without a drummer or percussionist . sleevenotes by nigel cross to the 2006 hux records re-release they regularly played clubs and bars in greenwich village and long island , until they acquired a small fan base , and a manager , peter kauff . kauff was also helping cannon films to move into the music business , and arranged for chas chandler ( bass player for the animals and producer/manager of the jimi hendrix experience ) to produce their first album . . london . recording started at olympic studios in barnes , london , in december 1970 , initially with les sampson ( a friend of noel redding who joined him in the band road ) on drums . they also played several dates at the american embassy as a trio . recording was completed in january 1971 , with ex-animal john steel on drums . the recordings went well , but kauff fell out with cannon films , and advised the band to stay in london , until the problems were resolved , rather than return to the us . chandler , by now their manager , arranged for the band to play a number of college gigs around the country . many of these were sponsored by the american embassy in london , which paid for the band to tour british universities to perform before larger audiences with american poets such as marilyn hacker , denis boyles and louis simpson . by then , the band had moved into a house , 10 alma street , kentish town , near a pub called the tally ho . the band were used to playing in american bars , but in common with most london pubs at the time , the tally ho had a jazz-only policy . they persuaded the landlord that they played jazz , although their music was predominantly country rock and blues , and first appeared on either 3 may , or 13 may 1971 , with steel on drums . they soon attracted large crowds - including other musicians , such as graham parker , nick lowe and elvis costello - making eggs the pioneers of the '' pub rock '' movement . eventually , they were asked to increase their performances , until they were playing three nights and sunday lunchtime each week . on other days they often appeared at other venues , such as the marquee , which is where dave robinson , brinsley schwarz 's manager , had seen them and introduced them to the band . eggs over easy had a large repertoire of over 50 of their own songs , and 50 covers , and were regularly joined on stage by members of brinsley schwarz and other performers , such as loudon wainwright iii and frankie miller . one of the former tally ho jazz players , barry richardson , was so impressed he formed bees make honey , who were also given a tally ho residency , alongside a mix of new and existing bands , such as max merritt and brinsley schwarz . the number of venues wanting to stage eggs over easy and other '' pub-rock '' bands was also increasing , primarily in large victorian pubs '' north of regents park '' where there were plenty of suitable pubs . eggs over easy toured a chain of london pubs owned by the brewer ind coope , and in september and october 1971 supported john mayall on a uk tour , with george butler replacing steel on drums ; '' eggs over easy 's country rock-flavored repertoire offering a fascinating counterpoint to mayall 's then rampant jazz-blues fixation '' ( dave thompson ) . kauff had not managed to resolve the dispute with cannon films , so the album remained unreleased , and the band had not secured a contract with a uk record label either . as they were having visa problems , kauff suggested that they return home , so on 7 november 1971 they played their last gig at the tally ho , and went back to the us . . return to us . back in new york , bill franz joined on drums , they signed a deal with a & m records and in 1972 they recorded their first album to be released , good ' n ' cheap . this was partially a re-recording of the tracks originally recorded in london . the album was produced by link wray , at his brother , vernon wray ’ s studio in tucson , arizona , and the band wrote all but one of the songs . in 1973 , they moved to san francisco , and later supported eagles and yes on tour , the sort of '' megastar '' bands that , back in england , pub rock was seen as a backlash against . by 1976 john '' jay '' david ( ex dr . hook & the medicine show ) had replaced franz on drums , and they issued a single '' bar in my car '' , on buffalo records , but the record company '' tanked as soon as the record came out . '' originally titled '' i 'm gon na put a bar in the back of my car ( and drive myself to drink ) '' , the song appears on numerous internet lists of '' worst country song titles '' as being from their album fear of frying , but this is incorrect . the second album fear of frying was eventually recorded in 1980/81 and issued on squish records , which also failed as soon as the album was released , making this album a rarity , which has yet to be re-issued on cd . the eggs were frequently joined on stage by grootna 's vocalist anna rizzo and also played with members of commander cody and his lost planet airmen in moonlighters . one of their final gigs was as '' the opinions '' , backing dan hicks ; eggs over easy finally split in 1981 . after the break-up , hopkins continued as a songwriter , o ’ hara became a recording engineer and de lone played as a session musician with bonnie raitt , nick lowe , elvis costello and others . . discography . albums . good ' n ' cheap - lp ( 1972 ) a & m ( a & m 2366 ) : lp re-issue ( 1986 ) edsel : cd ( 1998 ) edsel ( ed199 ) : cd + bonus tracks ( 2006 ) hux ( hux 081 ) fear of frying – lp ( 1981 ) squish records . singles . '' back of my car '' ( 1974 ) buffalo records . compilations . naughty rhythms : the best of pub rock cd ( 1996 ) emi ( premier 37968 ) includes one '' eggs '' track - '' factory '' goodbye nashville hello camden town – a pub rock anthology cd ( 2007 ) castle music ( cmedd1451 ) includes one '' eggs '' track - '' runnin ' down to memphis '' good ' n ' cheap : the eggs over easy story 2-cd ( 2016 ) yep roc records . references .