Spacing Guild

the original series . dune . in dune , paul atreides defeats padishah emperor shaddam iv in a battle on arrakis . he demands first the emperor 's daughter for a wife , which would make paul heir to the throne , and second that the emperor immediately step down . the demands are coupled with a threat to destroy the spice . since that would end all interstellar transit , the guild sides with paul , threatening to strand the emperor and his troops on arrakis if he does not relinquish the throne . in 'appendix a ' of dune , herbert wrote that the guild , along with the bene gesserit order , had been responsible for the standardization of religion in the dune universe ; they promoted the adoption of the orange catholic bible and offered protection to the dissenting theologians who created this book . nonetheless , in the same appendix , herbert held that the guild members themselves were atheists , and only promoted this move to promote a stable societal order from which they could profit . as discussed by reverend mother mohiam and paul atreides at the beginning of the novel , the guild arose in the aftermath of the butlerian jihad , when '' thinking machines '' that nearly overthrew humanity were defeated . this resulted in a general aversion to technologies that perfected artificial intelligence , which in turn led to various groups attempting to perfect the human mind and physical capacity , using incredibly refined training and psychoactive drugs . there was a chaotic period when '' real sorcerers '' from these different schools of human development rivaled each other , but at the same time made great new strides towards their goals - mohiam calls it '' a time of deep contrasts '' . from this competition , the various schools gradually coalesced into two formalized orders : the spacing guild , and the bene gesserit . neither of them , however , actively tried to openly seize power over all of humanity and rule directly , instead sharing power with the emperor and the great houses , and influencing events from the shadows . paul later concludes that the guild ( and by extension the bene gesserit ) did this out of a belief that any political empire is finite , ending sooner or later : the only way to guarantee their continual existence was to be a '' parasite '' , propping up one imperial dynasty until it collapsed , then simply switching to support the next one . dune messiah . navigators are made prescient by the spice ( a requirement of being a pilot ) , and are sometimes utilized as such : in dune messiah ( 1969 ) , a navigator named edric takes part in a plot to assassinate the emperor , paul atreides . the presence of a prescient hides the activities of that person , and those around him , from other prescients ; edric 's involvement is solely to protect the conspirators from paul 's prescient sight . . god emperor of dune . in god emperor of dune ( 1981 ) , leto ii atreides has secured complete control over of the scarce melange reserves through hydraulic empire , making the guild completely dependent on him . leto ii also notes in one occasion : . heretics of dune and chapterhouse : dune . in the fifth and sixth novels of the series , heretics of dune ( 1984 ) and chapterhouse : dune ( 1985 ) , 5,000 years after the reign of paul atreides ( a period that includes 3,500 years of leto ii 's reign and 1,500 years following his death ) , the technocrats of ix develop technology that the ixians and the administrative faction of the spacing guild refer to as '' compilers '' . these compilers perform calculations very similar to computers , nearly violating the prohibitions against '' thinking machines '' that were imposed following the butlerian jihad several millennia before . these compilers eliminate the need for the navigators , and the strategic disadvantage that this aspect of melange dependency has become , because the navigators ' abilities are slowly being compromised by the severe reductions in the availability of spice resulting from the destruction of dune and the sandworms on that planet , and the strict control by the bene gesserit , who maintain a monopoly over the largest stockpiles of melange . the prescient rule of leto ii that lasted 3,500 years has shown the universe the perils of prescience , namely that the entire universe can be locked into the vision of a single entity , giving that entity absolute power . the guild , facing obsolescence and suspicion , couples itself with ix in decline ; navigators continue to exist , but their importance in the universe is severely diminished . as paul atreides notes in dune , it was the spacing guild 's obsession with the '' safe path '' that led them '' ever into stagnation '' , and brought on their eventual obsolescence . . prequels . in dune : house corrino ( 2001 ) , the third novel in the prelude to dune prequel trilogy by brian herbert and kevin j . anderson ( 1999–2001 ) , it is reiterated that aurelius venport is believed to have founded the guild . in the brian herbert/kevin j . anderson legends of dune prequel series ( 2002–2004 ) , however , it is confirmed that his lover norma cenva , a mathematical genius with great psychic power , had in fact invented the space-folding ships which would eventually be called heighliners . ever uncaring about her own fame , norma credits the invention to aurelius as a gift to him in dune : the battle of corrin ( 2004 ) . norma discovers that an excessive dose of melange allows her to safely navigate the ships using prescience ; she allows herself to mutate to perfect the process , becoming the first navigator . aurelius and norma 's son adrien venport establish the foldspace shipping company and find the ten volunteers to become the initial group of navigators . after consolidating its hold on the space travel industry during the events of sisterhood of dune , this company , now called '' venport holdings '' or even '' venhold '' , evolves into the guild of the later novels . venhold originally has the monopoly on foldspace travel , granted to aurelius venport by serena butler . however , decades after the end of the butlerian jihad , emperor jules revokes the monopoly in order to curry political favor , resulting in several rival foldspace companies springing up , such as celestial transport and escontran . these new companies , however , are unable to provide 100 % safe transportation due to their lack of navigators , the creation process of whom is a proprietary secret tightly held by venhold . director josef venport ruthlessly crushes the competition and even executes a rival ceo . the dune games . in emperor : battle for dune ( 2001 ) , the spacing guild plays the role of a subhouse . it has its own private army with which it can back up its demands . the guild uses its heighliners to transport troops from the various homeworlds to arrakis . later in the game , they become evil , building an '' emperor worm '' through which they hope to rule the universe . depending on which house you use , and whether or not you win or lose , the campaign end cutscenes are different . references . de : begriffe der dune-zyklen raumgilde