Drusilla (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)

character history . drusilla 's history unfolds in flashbacks scattered among numerous episodes of both buffy the vampire slayer and angel ; they are not presented in chronological order . in '' lie to me '' , angel explains that , in 1860 when he was still angelus , he became obsessed with drusilla , a beautiful young catholic woman who lived with her parents and two sisters in london . angelus 's sire darla first discovered drusilla , and presented her to angelus as a new possible victim to torment . drusilla had psychic abilities , and was capable of occasionally foretelling the future , especially tragic situations . however , she believed this to be an evil affliction and wished to enter a nunnery to cleanse herself . angelus sensed her purity and became obsessed with destroying her , as drusilla had the potential for sainthood . angelus first made contact with her by murdering drusilla 's priest , and impersonating him when she went to confession . when she confessed that she believed her abilities were evil , angelus toyed with her by suggesting she embrace the evil instead of rejecting it . at some later point angelus tortured and killed drusilla 's entire family , causing her to flee to a convent in prague . on the day she was to take her holy vows , angelus made her watch as he killed every person in the convent and engaged in sexual relations with darla . the trauma of angelus 's atrocities drove drusilla insane , and angelus chose to turn her into a vampire , as he considered her a masterpiece , a testament to his talent . believing death to be a mercy to her at this point , he chose to sire her to make her pain eternal as an immortal . after being sired , drusilla , now a predator , joined angelus and darla on their murderous travels . in 1880 , drusilla sired the young poet william , who joined the group . she and william , later known as '' spike '' , shared an intimate relationship , though angelus continued to engage in sexual relations with dru as well . shortly after angelus is cursed with a soul , spike and drusilla ( unaware of the ensoulment ) go their separate ways from darla and angel . at some point before their arrival in sunnydale in late 1997 , drusilla is attacked and severely injured by an angry mob in prague , leaving her in a weakened and frail condition . spike cares for her , and the couple decide to travel to the hellmouth in hopes that its energy will help to restore drusilla 's strength and health . they arrive in sunnydale in the episode '' school hard '' , and spike plots the downfall of the current slayer , buffy summers . when he discovers that drusilla can be cured by the blood of her sire , spike captures angel and allows drusilla to torture him until it is time to perform the ritual . although buffy and her friends save angel , the ritual is successful . drusilla , fully restored , now takes care of spike , who has been temporarily paralyzed by buffy 's attack . when angel reverts to angelus , he re-joins the couple . drusilla soon kills kendra , another slayer , by hypnotizing her and cutting her throat with a fingernail ( which impresses spike when he learns of it ) . drusilla is delighted by angelus 's determination to destroy the world and encourages his ongoing sexual attention ; both dynamics strongly disturb spike , who wants drusilla to himself again and does not particularly want the world to end . spike decides to help buffy save the world in exchange for his and drusilla 's safe passage from sunnydale . drusilla resists spike 's betrayal of angelus , and he attacks her , ultimately carrying her unconscious body from the fray . drusilla and spike flee to brazil , where drusilla becomes disillusioned with their relationship . spike 's alliance with the slayer , combined with dru 's skills of foresight and perception , prove to her that spike is now tainted ( not '' demon enough '' for her ) and that he is developing feelings for buffy . drusilla breaks up with spike , and he rejects her offer to remain friends . drusilla reappears on angel in 2000 , when wolfram & hart brings her to los angeles to re-sire darla , who had been resurrected as a human dying of syphilis . drusilla , who loves darla like a '' grandmum , '' and also more than that , over their 150-year-old complicated relationship , genuinely believes she is doing darla a favor by siring her and is puzzled by darla 's brief rage before her renewed vampire nature kicks in . reconciled , the two wreak havoc in the city until angel sets them on fire . the two go underground to heal , but drusilla leaves darla , who is then protected by lindsey mcdonald . drusilla returns to sunnydale in the episode '' crush '' to persuade spike to join darla and herself in reforming their '' family '' unit , but instead , spike seizes the opportunity to try to prove his love for buffy by offering to stake drusilla . heartbroken by the actions of her former lover , drusilla departs sunnydale and remains at large . however , in season seven of buffy , the first evil impersonates drusilla in an unsuccessful attempt to break spike 's spirit . spike claims that the first evil 's impersonation is not crazy enough to be drusilla . in angel comics by idw publishing set after the television series ended , drusilla reappears , breaking out of a psychiatric institution , in the story arc drusilla ( 2009 ) . still mentally ill , her whereabouts since her last appearance in angel remain unexplained . after assault by a crowd , she awakens , still pallid-skinned , in what appears to be georgian london , in broad daylight and enters what seems to be her parents ’ home . she encounters a doll ( which may or may not be '' miss edith '' ) and is called by a third party , possibly her parents . it is uncertain whether this is an elaborate hallucination , time travel to her personal past or an alternate universe where she was never turned by angelus . it is strongly implied , however , that the story actually takes place before drusilla is sired , and the parts of it set in the modern day are actually a premonition in the human , 19th-century drusilla 's mind . she later reappears in the spike mini-series ( 2010–11 ) by idw , where she encounters spike in las vegas , having allied herself with a human who believes spike stole his soul . spike has buffy 's friend willow magically transfer his soul to drusilla to give her a shot at redemption , but they are forced to reverse the spell when it drives her even madder than she already is . the character next appears in angel & faith by dark horse comics in the story arc '' daddy issues '' ( 2012 ) , in which drusilla has become sane thanks to the lorophage demon , popularly referred to as the highgate vampire , which ate her trauma and pain . in her new role as '' mother superior '' , she sought to perform similar treatments on the citizens of london , which angel likened to lobotomies . when angel killed the lorophage , drusilla becomes insane once more , and is free . dark horse intended to release the 5-issue miniseries drusilla : run and catch , examining what happened next for her , but it was delayed until the conclusion of season nine . later in the angel & faith series , it transpires she went on to kill one of the london slayers affiliated with faith . she returns in the second series , in which she helps the demon archaeus ( the master 's sire ) build an army of vampires to take over magic town . however she flees in the finale when angel , faith and their allies defeat archaeus and his army in a battle . powers and abilities . drusilla has all the standard powers and vulnerabilities of a vampire , plus minor psychic abilities . she is immortal , regenerates damage , drains human blood to survive , and is stronger than most humans . drusilla 's technique in combat , although awkward-looking , has allowed her to briefly hold her own in a fight against angel ( in '' reunion '' ) and spike ( in '' becoming , part two '' ) , along with besting kendra the vampire slayer ( in '' becoming , part one '' ) before using the hypnosis technique and then killing her . it was also in this fight with kendra that drusilla showed that her fingernails are sharper than one would normally expect , as she uses them to slit kendra 's throat . darla had demonstrated a similar technique when she sired angel ; whether this is due to vampiric abilities or physical manipulation of nails is unclear . drusilla is also a seer with minor psychic abilities . however , since she had these before becoming a vampire their source and cause are unknown . she receives vivid visions that contain possible glimpses of the future , and can also see into people 's minds and project false imagery into them ( e.g . in '' becoming , part two '' , when she convinces giles that she is really jenny calendar ) . she is also capable of hypnotizing people , which she does by catching their gazes , pointing her fingers towards her victim 's eyes and then to her own , whispering to them ( '' be in my eyes , be in me '' ) . drusilla uses this technique to murder kendra in the episode '' becoming , part one '' . the master uses a similar skill to paralyze buffy in '' prophecy girl '' . like all vampires , she is vulnerable to holy items and sunlight , can be killed by decapitation or a stake to the heart , and can not enter the home of a living human without first being invited by someone who lives there . personality and appearance . actress juliet landau said that when she first received the script , it indicated that drusilla 's accent could be british or american . landau felt drusilla '' should really be cockney , especially with the whole sid and nancy analogy . '' though she never considered portraying drusilla with a southern american accent , as james marsters had considered for spike , she notes that invited comparisons with blanche dubois would also have been interesting . drusilla 's madness is exhibited in her often-strange dialogue , which is peppered with non sequiturs like '' spike , do you love my insides ? all the parts you ca n't see ? '' her behavior is girlish , accompanied by a dark , irony twist . for instance , when she is happy , she will squeal and laugh like a young child , but she is happiest when committing torture , hunting humans , or witnessing mass destruction . she has a fondness for china dolls but keeps them blindfolded or gagged . she also loves flowers and cute animals , but is not sane enough to care for them ; as she says , '' do you like daisies ? i plant them but they always die . everything i put in the ground withers and dies . '' she even goes so far as to own a pekingese puppy . she speaks in a soft , mellow voice which contrasts with her dialogue . drusilla 's costumes were initially intended to be a '' cross between a victorian period look and the kate moss heroin chic fashion look , '' says landau . . appearances . drusilla appeared in 24 buffyverse episodes : ; buffy the vampire slayer : drusilla has appeared in 17 episodes , appearing in the second , fifth , and seventh seasons . season 2 ( 1997–98 ) : '' school hard '' ( first appearance ) , '' halloween '' , '' lie to me '' , '' what 's my line , part one '' , '' what 's my line , part two '' , '' surprise '' , '' innocence '' , '' bewitched , bothered and bewildered '' , '' passion '' , '' i only have eyes for you '' , '' becoming , part one '' ( also in flashbacks ) , '' becoming , part two '' season 5 ( 2000–01 ) : '' fool for love '' ( flashbacks ) , '' crush '' ( last present appearance ) season 7 ( 2002–03 ) : '' lessons '' ( as the first evil ) , '' bring on the night '' ( as the first evil ) , '' lies my parents told me '' ( flashbacks ) ; angel : drusilla has appeared in 7 episodes , appearing in the second and fifth seasons . season 2 ( 2000–01 ) : '' dear boy '' ( flashbacks ) , '' darla '' ( flashbacks ) , '' the trial '' , '' reunion '' , '' redefinition '' season 5 ( 2003–04 ) : '' destiny '' ( flashbacks ) , '' the girl in question '' ( flashbacks ) : drusilla also appears in issues 24 and 25 of the canonical angel comics ( both 2009 ) . these are co-written by landau , and tell the story of drusilla after the television series . other stories featuring drusilla include '' the problem with vampires '' , from the 2004 comic mini-series tales of the vampires . drusilla appears in a number of comics/novels of the buffy/angel expanded universe . she appears notably in her own mini-series : spike & dru . references . external links . drusilla on imdb drusilla comic at fearnet