Eurico Gaspar Dutra

biography . military , born in cuiabá , mato grosso . he later falsified his birth year to 1885 , at age 19 , so that he would have a physical compatible with the age , in order to facilitate his entry into the army . he studied at the preparatory and tactical school of rio grande do sul ( 1902-1904 ) and at the military academy of brazil ( military school of ‘ ’ praia vermelha ’ ’ in rio de janeiro ) in 1904 , of which he was expelled for taking part in an uprising that same year , related to the vaccine revolt , but pardoned , returned to school , now based in realengo , completing the course in 1906 . he was also a student of the school of war in porto alegre ( 1906 ) , the school of artillery and engineering , where perfected in mechanics , ballistics and metallurgy ( 1908-1910 ) , and the school of general staff , where he graduated as the 1st in class and received the rare mention '' très bien '' ( 1922 ) , acting shortly after , in the repression of the são paulo revolution of 1924 . helped found the national defense magazine in 1918 , fought the uprising known as the '' 18 fort '' in 1922 , in rio de janeiro , and participated , integrating the north detachment , under the command of general mena barreto , of the fighting against an insurgency erupted in manaus that radiated to pará . by having fought the revolution of 1930 , he was sent to the command of the 11th cavalry independent regiment in ponta porã . promoted to colonel , dutra took command of the 4th cavalry divisional regiment ( 1931-1933 ) in três corações , where he fought the constitutionalist revolution in são paulo in 1932 . defended the government of president washington luís against the rebels of 1930s , but already in 1932 , fought the constitutionalist revolution in são paulo . appointed commander of the 1st military region ( 1935-1936 ) , stood out in reaction to the uprising of 35 , episode known as “ intentona comunista ” , occupying the post of minister of war ( 1936-1945 ) . minister of war . during world war ii , he was among the brazilian military leaders who were against an alignment with allies and a deeper involvement of the country in the conflict . with , although modest , brazilian expeditionary force , and the growing pressure from civil society for democratization of the country , dutra formally adhered to the idea of the end of the regime that started in 1930 , participating in the following deposition of getúlio vargas in october 1945 , continuing the interventionist doctrine , practiced at the time by the brazilian army . frank mccann '' soldiers of the patria : a history of the brazilian army , 1889–1937 '' stanford university press 2004 , page 441 , last but one paragraph view on google books . 1945 election . in this context , the deposed leader announced the following month his support for dutra , the candidate of the army , at the expense of the candidate of the air force , eduardo gomes , in the elections that followed . presidency . on september 18 , 1946 , the fifth constitution of brazil was enacted , marking the country 's return to democratic rule . later that year , the government created the social service of industry ( sesi ) and social service of commerce ( sesc ) , and the general staff , the future general staff of the armed forces ( emfa ) . the same year , the president ordered the closing of casinos and prohibited gambling in the country . in 1947 , he registered the appointment of osvaldo aranha delegate of brazil to the united nations , the forfeiture of the brazilian communist party , breaking off diplomatic relations with the soviet union and achieved , in petrópolis , the inter-american conference of peacekeeping and security of the continent , which was attended by the u.s . president , harry truman . closer relations with the americans was evidenced also in the formation of the joint commission brazil-united states , known as abbink mission , headed by john abbink and minister octavio gouveia de bouillon . assignment was to diagnose the main problems of the brazilian economy and , as a special recommendation , the use of external resources in the oil sector . still in 1947 was the intervention of the ministry of labour in many unions , continuing the guardianship of the state over union activities guaranteed by ordinance in 9.070 of march 1946 , a regulation to limit he right to strike . concomitant with the union repression and incomes policy , economic policy has gone through two phases : the former was liberal and sought to break with previous forms of intervention in the economy . however , imports of goods led to a rapid depletion of the country 's foreign exchange reserves . in 1947 , under the guidance of the international monetary fund a second phase , in which the exchange control was retaken , kept the cruise at high levels compared to the u.s . currency . this policy discouraged exports , encouraging , on the other hand , the import of equipment , machinery and other inputs , excluding consumer goods , and favored the expansion of the manufacturing sector . the development strategy of the government included the “ salte plan ” , named for an emphasis on health , food , transportation and energy . proposed in 1947 , it aimed at the management of public spending and investment in key sectors in the country but only began to receive funding from the budget in 1949 , being forgotten in 1951 . during this period measurements the country 's economic growth by calculating the gross domestic product were first regularly published . the average annual growth of the brazilian economy under his administration was 7.6 % . during the dutra government construction of the hydroelectric plant of paulo afonso , bahia , and the president dutra highway linking rio to são paulo was initiated . in october 1948 his government set up the superior school of war ( esg ) , with american support . later life . upon leaving the presidency , he remained active in politics until he ran again for president in the indirect elections for president of 1964 . facing a difficult election against military-backed general humberto de alencar castelo branco , dutra received only 0.54 % of the vote . he died away from public life in rio de janeiro on june 11 , 1974 , at 91 . his body was buried in the são joão batista cemetery . gallery . 1949 state visit to the united states . file : photograph of president truman and brazilian president eurico dutra standing at attention with other dignitaries . - nara - 200121.jpg president dutra and u.s . president harry s . truman standing at attention with other dignitaries during welcoming ceremonies for dutra in washington , d.c . on may 18 . file : photograph of president truman and brazilian president eurico dutra sampling a birthday cake decorated with brazilian . - nara - 200122.jpg presidents dutra and truman sampling a birthday cake decorated with brazilian and u.s . flags . file : photograph of president eurico dutra of brazil ( in uniform ) with two other dignitaries , outside the george washington . - nara - 200124.jpg dutra ( in uniform ) , outside the george washington home at mount vernon , during his visit to the united states . file : photograph of the president and mrs . truman with president eurico dutra of brazil and other dignitaries , during . - nara - 200119.jpg dutra , truman , bess truman and other dignitaries at a state dinner . file : boavin2.jpg americans greet dutra with a gesture of welcome . . references . external links .