Harriet Vane

character biography . harriet vane is the only daughter of a country doctor . she was an undergraduate at shrewsbury college , oxford ( based on sayers ' own somerville college , somerville stories – dorothy l sayers , somerville college , university of oxford , uk . the location of which is given as the balliol college sports grounds , now partly occupied by a residential annexe , on holywell street ) and took a first in english . her parents both died while she was quite young and she was left to make her own fortune at the age of 23 . she has had some success as a writer of detective stories , living and socialising with other artists in bloomsbury . she begins a relationship with philip boyes , a more literary but far less successful writer who professes not to believe in marriage , and she agrees to live with him without marrying . after a year of this arrangement , boyes believes that she truly loves him and proposes marriage . angered by his hypocrisy and aghast at being offered marriage as '' a bad-conduct prize '' , harriet breaks off the relationship . boyes dies soon afterwards of arsenic poisoning & nbsp ; – the method harriet had researched for her new book . she is arrested and tried for murdering boyes . wimsey comes to her rescue by proving who really poisoned boyes . after harriet is acquitted , she remains quite notorious . sales of her books skyrocket . wimsey continues to pursue her romantically , but harriet repeatedly declines marriage on the principle that gratitude is not a good basis for it . to relax , she takes a walking tour , during which she finds a corpse on a beach , adding to her notoriety . the press is naturally interested ; wimsey hastens to the scene , after receiving a tip from a journalist friend , to help shield harriet from suspicion . the two investigate the death ( when they are not romantically sparring ) and unmask the murderer . a few years later , in 1935 , harriet returns to her old oxford college for a reunion ( or gaudy ) and is later asked to investigate some strange occurrences there . she protests that she is not a sleuth , and recommends that the college hire professional detectives . however , failing to reach either miss climpson , at the female detective agency set up by wimsey , or wimsey himself , she agrees to assist the college . her cover is research into sheridan le fanu , an anglo-irish writer of gothic tales and mystery novels of the 19th century . ( in thrones , dominations , the authors ' note ( plural , since the novel was finished posthumously by another author ) states that vane published a monograph on sheridan le fanu in 1946 . ) after months of unpleasant incidents at the college and with no solution in sight , harriet turns once again to wimsey for help . by the end of the book the villain has been discovered and harriet has finally accepted wimsey 's proposal . the press is delighted to have a woman once accused of murder engaged to a duke 's son , and happily publicises the fact . wimsey and vane have a quiet wedding in oxford with no notice to the press , and escape to their new country residence , talboys , a tudor farmhouse in north hertfordshire which harriet had admired as a child and which peter had given her as a wedding present . the body of the former owner is discovered in the cellar , leading them to investigate . thrones , dominations , a novel abandoned by sayers and finished by jill paton walsh , is set in and around london , shortly after wimsey and vane return from their honeymoon . the first of their children is born in the story '' the haunted policeman '' . by the time of the short story '' talboys '' , they have three sons : bredon delagardie peter wimsey ( born in october 1936 ) , roger wimsey ( born 1938 ) , and paul wimsey ( born 1940 or 1941 ) . chronologically between the two are the wimsey papers , a series of epistolary articles sayers wrote for the spectator at the beginning of world war ii . jill paton walsh referenced the wimsey papers in writing a presumption of death , set at the beginning of the second world war , in which harriet takes a leading role . sayers told friends orally that harriet and peter wimsey were to have five children in all , though she did not disclose the names and sexes of the two youngest children . reynolds ( 1993 ) , p . 340 . influences . sayers consciously modelled vane on herself , although perhaps not as closely as her fans ( and even friends ) sometimes thought . some view vane as a stand-in for the author , although vane has many more faults than self-insertion . sayers was among the first generation of women to receive an oxford education , graduating ba with first-class honours in 1915 and as an ma in 1920 . she gave harriet vane , too , an oxford education . vane 's relationship with boyes has many similarities with sayers ' love affair ( 1921–1922 ) with the author john cournos ( 1881–1966 ) , a russian-born american jew . biographers note that sayers ' later relationship with bill white and her marriage to the fellow writer oswald atherton '' mac '' fleming provide grist for vane 's struggle to balance love ( and perhaps marriage to wimsey ) and her work . after sayers ' affairs with cournos and white were revealed , the comparisons between sayers and vane became more emphatic . ( neither of these affairs was publicly known during sayers ' lifetime . ) mcgregor and lewis suggest that some of vane 's and wimsey 's observations about mystery in story versus real life – though in the context of a mystery story – reflect sayers ' sense of fun and ability to laugh with her characters . bibliography . books by dorothy l . sayers . strong poison ( 1930 ) have his carcase ( 1932 ) gaudy night ( 1936 ) busman 's honeymoon ( 1937 ) ( as lady peter wimsey ) in the teeth of the evidence ( 1939 ) ( editions published after 1942 usually add talboys , the last story sayers wrote to feature lord and lady peter wimsey ) . books by jill paton walsh . thrones , dominations ( 1998 ) by dorothy l . sayers and jill paton walsh a presumption of death ( 2002 ) by jill paton walsh the attenbury emeralds ( 2010 ) by jill paton walsh the late scholar ( 2013 ) by jill paton walsh . portrayal in film , tv or theatre . harriet vane was portrayed by constance cummings in a 1940 film adaptation of busman 's honeymoon ( us : the haunted honeymoon ) , with robert montgomery as peter wimsey . however , the film bore little resemblance to sayers ' writing , and she refused to see it . vane was voiced by sarah badell in a bbc radio 4 serialization of 'busman 's honeymoon ' in 1983 and was played by harriet walter in the 1987 bbc television adaptations of strong poison , have his carcase and gaudy night and by emily richard in the 1988 stage adaptation of busman 's honeymoon at the lyric theatre , hammersmith . in a 2005 bbc audio production of gaudy night , harriet vane was played by joanna david . references . ; citations ; bibliography james brabazon ( 1981 ) dorothy l . sayers : a biography