International draughts

rules . the general rule is that all moves and captures are made diagonally . all references to squares refer to the dark squares only . the main differences from english draughts are : the size of the board ( 10×10 ) , pieces can also capture backward ( not only forward ) , the long-range moving and capturing capability of kings known as flying , and the requirement that the maximum number of men be captured whenever a player has capturing options . starting position . the game is played on a board with 10×10 squares , alternatingly dark and light . the lower-leftmost square should be dark . each player has 20 pieces . in the starting position ( see illustration ) the pieces are placed on the first four rows closest to the players . this leaves two central rows empty . moves and captures . thumb the player with the light pieces moves first . then turns alternate . ordinary pieces move one square diagonally forward to an unoccupied square . enemy pieces can and must be captured by jumping over the enemy piece , two squares forward or backward to an unoccupied square immediately beyond . if a jump is possible it must be done , even if doing so incurs a disadvantage . multiple successive jumps forward or backward in a single turn can and must be made if after each jump there is an unoccupied square immediately beyond the enemy piece . it is compulsory to jump over as many pieces as possible . one must play with the piece that can make the maximum number of captures . a jumped piece is removed from the board at the end of the turn . ( so for a multi-jump move , jumped pieces are not removed during the move , they are removed only after the entire multi-jump move is complete . ) the same piece may not be jumped more than once . crowning . a piece is crowned if it stops on the far edge of the board at the end of its turn ( that is , not if it reaches the edge but must then jump another piece backward ) . another piece is placed on top of it to mark it . crowned pieces , sometimes called kings , can move freely multiple steps in any direction and may jump over and hence capture an opponent piece some distance away and choose where to stop afterwards , but must still capture the maximum number of pieces possible . winning and draws . a player with no valid move remaining loses . this occurs if the player has no pieces left , or if all the player 's pieces are obstructed from moving by opponent pieces . a game is a draw if neither opponent has the possibility to win the game . the game is considered a draw when the same position repeats itself for the third time ( not necessarily consecutive ) , with the same player having the move each time . a king-versus-king endgame is automatically declared a draw , as is any other position proven to be a draw . these are extra rules accommodated in some tournaments and may vary : if , during 25 moves , there were only king movements , without piece movements or jumps , the game is considered a draw . if there are only three kings , two kings and a piece , or a king and two pieces against a king , the game will be considered a draw after the two players have each played 16 turns . before a proposal for a draw can be made , at least 40 moves must have been made by each player . . notation . thumb each of the fifty dark squares has a number ( 1 through 50 ) . number 46 is at the left corner seen from the player with the light pieces . number 5 is at the left corner seen from the player with the dark pieces . sport . the first world championship was held in international draughts in 1894 . it was won by frenchman isidore weiss , who held the title for eighteen years with seven world championship titles . then , for nearly sixty years , the title was held by representatives from either france or the netherlands , including herman hoogland , stanislas bizot , marius fabre , ben springer , maurice raichenbach , pierre ghestem , and piet roozenburg . in 1956 , the hegemony of the french and the dutch was broken : the champion was canadian marcel deslauriers . in 1958 , the ussr 's iser kuperman became the world champion , beginning the era of soviet domination in international draughts , a feat which would mirror their domination at chess around this time . the official status of the world championships are held under the auspices of the world draughts federation ( fmjd ) since 1948 . in 1998 , the first world championship was held in the format of the blitz . the first women 's world championship was held in 1973 . the first women 's champion was elena mikhailovskaya from soviet union . a world junior championship has been contested since 1971 ; the first winner was nicholay mischansky . in addition to the world championships , there is also a european championships since 1965 ( men ) and 2000 ( women ) . the world draughts federation maintains a ranking . , the men 's list is headed by alexander shvartsman from russia , and the women 's list is headed by zoja golubeva from latvia . computers . computer draughts programs have been improving every year . first draughts programs were written in the mid-1970s . the first computer draughts tournament took place in 1987 . in 1993 , computer draughts program truus ranked about 40th in the world . in 2003 computer draughts program buggy beat world number 8 samb . in 2005 , the 10-time world champion and 2005 world champion , alexei chizhov , commented that he could not beat the computer , but he also would not lose to the computer . in 2010 , the 9 piece endgame database was built . . schwarzman beat maximus ( 2012 ) . alexander schwarzman beat computer program maximus on april 14 , 2012 . schwarzman won game 2 in the 6-game match . the other 5 games were draws . schwarzman was world champion in 1998 , 2007 , and 2009 . jan-jaap van horssen of the netherlands wrote maximus . maximus used a six-piece endgame database . the computer was an intel core i7-3930k at 3.2 & nbsp ; ghz 32 gigabytes memory ; it had six cores with hyperthreading . the average search depth was 24.5 ply . the average number of moves evaluated per second was 23,357,000 . the average search time was 3 minutes and 52.98 seconds . . list of top international draughts programs . scan by fabien letouzey kingsrow kingsrow ed gilbert site by ed gilbert dragon draughts damage by bert tuyt damy maximus some older well known programs are : truus flits . computer tournament winners . culemborg 2013 dragon draughts culemborg 2012 dragon draughts culemborg 2011 maximus culemborg 2010 damage culemborg 2009 damy . see also . dameo hexdame – international draughts rules applied to a hexagonal board list of draughts european championship winners list of draughts world championship winners list of women 's draughts european championship winners list of women 's draughts world championship winners . references . external links . fmjd ( world draughts federation ) rules and regulations de : dame ( spiel ) es : damas fr : dames ja : チェッカー zh : 國際跳棋