Wolf interval

temperament and the wolf . in 12-tone scales , the average value of the twelve fifths must equal the 700 cents of equal temperament . if eleven of them have a value of 700 & nbsp ; − & nbsp ; ε cents , as in quarter-comma meantone and most other meantone temperament tuning systems , the other fifth ( more properly called a diminished sixth ) will equal 700 & nbsp ; + & nbsp ; 11ε cents . the value of ε changes depending on the tuning system . in other tuning systems ( such as pythagorean tuning and twelfth-comma meantone ) , eleven fifths may have a size of 700 & nbsp ; + & nbsp ; ε cents , thus the diminished sixth is 700 & nbsp ; − & nbsp ; 11ε cents . if 11ε is very large , as in the quarter-comma meantone tuning system , the diminished sixth is regarded as a wolf fifth . in terms of frequency ratios , the product of the fifths must be 128 , and if f is the size of a fifth , 128 : f 11 , or f 11 :128 , will be the size of the wolf . we likewise find varied tunings for the thirds . major thirds must average 400 cents , and to each pair of thirds of size 400 & nbsp ; ∓ & nbsp ; 4ε cents we have a third ( or diminished fourth ) of 400 & nbsp ; ± & nbsp ; 8ε cents , leading to eight thirds 4ε cents narrower or wider , and four diminished fourths 8ε cents wider or narrower than average . three of these diminished fourths form major triads with perfect fifths , but one of them forms a major triad with the diminished sixth . if the diminished sixth is a wolf interval , this triad is called the wolf major triad . similarly , we obtain nine minor thirds of 300 & nbsp ; ± & nbsp ; 3ε cents and three minor thirds ( or augmented seconds ) of 300 & nbsp ; ∓ & nbsp ; 9ε cents . quarter comma meantone . in quarter-comma meantone , the fifth is of size , about 3.42157 cents ( or exactly one twelfth of a diesis ) flatter than 700 cents , and so the wolf is about 737.637 cents , or 35.682 cents sharper than a perfect fifth of size exactly 3:2 , and this is the original howling wolf fifth . the flat minor thirds are only about 2.335 cents sharper than a subminor third of size 7:6 , and the sharp major thirds , of size exactly 32:25 , are about 7.712 cents flatter than the supermajor third of 9:7 . meantone tunings with slightly flatter fifths produce even closer approximations to the subminor and supermajor thirds and corresponding triads . these thirds therefore hardly deserve the appellation of wolf , and in fact historically have not been given that name . pythagorean tuning . in pythagorean tuning , there are eleven justly tuned fifths sharper than 700 cents by about 1.955 cents ( or exactly one twelfth of a pythagorean comma ) , and hence one fifth will be flatter by twelve times that , which is 23.460 cents ( one pythagorean comma ) flatter than a just fifth . a fifth this flat can also be regarded as howling like a wolf . there are also now eight sharp and four flat major thirds . five-limit tuning . five-limit tuning was designed to maximize the number of pure intervals , but even in this system several intervals are markedly impure . 5-limit tuning yields a much larger number of wolf intervals with respect to pythagorean tuning , which can be considered a 3-limit just intonation tuning . namely , while pythagorean tuning determines only 2 wolf intervals ( a fifth and a fourth ) , the 5-limit symmetric scales produce 12 of them , and the asymmetric scale 14 . it is also important to note that the two fifths , three minor thirds , and three major sixths marked in orange in the tables ( ratio 40/27 , 32/27 , and 27/16 ( or g− , e♭− , and a+ ) , even though they do not completely meet the conditions to be wolf intervals , deviate from the corresponding pure ratio by an amount ( 1 syntonic comma , i.e . , 81/80 , or about 21.5 cents ) large enough to be clearly perceived as dissonant . five-limit tuning determines one diminished sixth of size 1024:675 ( about 722 cents , i.e . 20 cents sharper than the 3:2 pythagorean perfect fifth ) . whether this interval should be considered dissonant enough to be called a wolf fifth is a controversial matter . five-limit tuning also creates two impure perfect fifths of size 40:27 ( about 680 cents ; less pure than the 3:2 pythagorean perfect fifth ) . these are not diminished sixths , but relative to the pythagorean perfect fifth they are less consonant ( about 20 cents flatter ) and hence , they might be considered to be wolf fifths . the corresponding inversion is an impure perfect fourth of size 27:20 ( about 520 cents ) . for instance , in the c major diatonic scale , an impure perfect fifth arises between d and a , and its inversion arises between a and d . since the term perfect means , in this context , perfectly consonant , definition of perfect consonance in godfrey weber 's general music teacher , by godfrey weber , 1841 . the impure perfect fourth and perfect fifth are sometimes simply called imperfect fourth and fifth . however , the widely adopted standard naming convention for interval ( music ) classifies them as perfect intervals , together with the octave and unison . this is also true for any perfect fourth or perfect fifth which slightly deviates from the perfectly consonant 4:3 or 3:2 ratios ( for instance , those tuned using 12-tone equal or quarter-comma meantone temperament ) . conversely , the expressions imperfect fourth and imperfect fifth do not conflict with the standard naming convention when they refer to a dissonant augmented third or diminished sixth ( e.g . the wolf fourth and fifth in pythagorean tuning ) . '' taming the wolf '' . wolf intervals are a consequence of mapping a two-dimensional temperament to a one-dimensional keyboard . the only solution is to make the number of dimensions match . that is , either : keep the ( one-dimensional ) piano keyboard , and shift to a one-dimensional temperament ( e.g . , equal temperament ) , or keep the two-dimensional temperament , and shift to a two-dimensional keyboard . keep the piano keyboard . when the perfect fifth is tempered to be exactly 700 cents wide ( that is , tempered by approximately of a syntonic comma , or exactly of a pythagorean comma ) then the tuning is identical to the familiar 12-tone equal temperament . because of the compromises ( and wolf intervals ) forced on meantone tunings by the one-dimensional piano-style keyboard , well temperaments and eventually equal temperament became more popular . a fifth of the size mozart favored , at or near the 55-equal fifth of 698.182 cents , will have a wolf of 720 cents , 18.045 cents sharper than a justly tuned fifth . this howls far less acutely , but still very noticeably . the wolf can be tamed by adopting equal temperament or a well temperament . the very intrepid may simply want to treat it as a xenharmonic music interval ; depending on the size of the meantone fifth it can be made to be exactly 20:13 or 17:11 , or less commonly to 32:21 or 49:32 . with a more extreme meantone temperament , like 19 equal temperament , the wolf is large enough that it is closer in size to a sixth than a fifth , and sounds like a different interval altogether rather than a mistuned fifth . keep the two-dimensional tuning system . top image : rank-2 temperaments with the generator close to a fifth and period an octave.jpg right 250px thumb figure 2 : the syntonic temperament ’ s tuning continuum . to use a two-dimensional temperament without wolf intervals , one needs a two-dimensional keyboard that is '' isomorphic '' with that temperament . a keyboard and temperament are isomorphic if they are generated by the same intervals . for example , the wicki keyboard shown in figure 1 is generated by the same musical intervals as the syntonic temperament — that is , by the octave and tempered perfect fifth — so they are isomorphic . on an isomorphic keyboard , any given musical interval has the same shape wherever it appears — in any octave , key , and tuning — except at the edges . for example , on wicki 's keyboard , from any given note , the note that is a tempered perfect fifth higher is always up-and-rightwardly adjacent to the given note . there are no wolf intervals within the note-span of this keyboard . the only problem is at the edge , on the note e . the note that is a tempered perfect fifth higher than e is b , which is not included on the keyboard shown ( although it could be included in a larger keyboard , placed just to the right of a , hence maintaining the keyboard 's consistent note-pattern ) . because there is no b button , when playing an e power chord , one must choose some other note that is close in pitch to b , such as c , to play instead of the missing b . that is , the interval from e to c would be a '' wolf interval '' on this keyboard . however , such edge conditions produce wolf intervals only if the isomorphic keyboard has fewer buttons per octave than the tuning has enharmonically distinct notes . for example , the isomorphic keyboard in figure 2 has 19 buttons per octave , so the above-cited edge condition , from e to c , is not a wolf interval in 12-tet , 17-tet , or 19-tet ; however , it is a wolf interval in 26-tet , 31-tet , and 53-tet . in these latter tunings , using electronic transposition could keep the current key 's notes centered on the isomorphic keyboard , in which case these wolf intervals would very rarely be encountered in tonal music , despite modulation to exotic keys . a keyboard that is isomorphic with the syntonic temperament , such as wicki 's keyboard above , retains its isomorphism in any tuning within the tuning continuum of the syntonic temperament , even when changing tuning dynamically among such tunings . figure 2 shows the valid tuning range of the syntonic temperament . listen to it . listen to the two fifths here :