Open Software Foundation

history . the organization was first proposed by armando stettner of digital equipment corporation ( dec ) at an invitation-only meeting hosted by dec for several unix system vendors in january 1988 ( called the '' hamilton group '' , since the meeting was held at dec 's offices on palo alto 's hamilton avenue ) . it was intended as an organization for joint development , mostly in response to a perceived threat of '' merged unix system '' efforts by at & t corporation and sun microsystems . after discussion during the meeting , the proposal was tabled so that members of the hamilton group could broach the idea of a joint development effort with sun and at & t . in the meantime , stettner was asked to write an organization charter . that charter was formally presented to apollo , hp , ibm and others after sun and at & t rejected the overture by the hamilton group members . the foundation 's original sponsoring members were apollo computer , groupe bull , digital equipment corporation , hewlett-packard , ibm , nixdorf computer , and siemens ag , sometimes called the '' gang of seven '' . later sponsor members included philips and hitachi with the broader general membership growing to more than a hundred companies . it was registered under the u.s . national cooperative research act of 1984 , which reduces potential antitrust liabilities of research joint ventures and standards development organizations . the sponsors gave osf significant funding , a broad mandate ( the so-called '' seven principles '' ) , substantial independence , and support from sponsor senior management . senior operating executives from the sponsoring companies served on osf 's initial board of directors . one of the seven principles was declaration of an '' open process '' whereby osf staff would create request for proposals for source technologies to be selected by osf , in a vendor neutral process . the selected technology would be licensed by the osf to the public . membership in the organization gave member companies a voice in the process for requirements . at the founding , five open process projects were named . the organization was seen as a response to the collaboration between at & t and sun on unix system v release 4 , and a fear that other vendors would be locked out of the standardization process . this led scott mcnealy of sun to quip that '' osf '' really stood for '' oppose sun forever '' . the competition between the opposing versions of unix systems became known as the unix wars . at & t founded the unix international ( ui ) project management organization later that year as a counter-response to the osf . ui was led by peter cunningham , formerly of international computers limited ( icl ) , as its president . ui had many of the same characteristics of osf , with the exception of a software development staff . unix system laboratories ( usl ) filled the software development role , and ui was based in parsippany-troy hills , new jersey to be close to usl . the executive staff of the open software foundation included david tory , president , formerly of computer associates ; norma clarke , vice-president human resources formerly of mitre ; marty ford , vice-president finance , formerly of dec ; ira goldstein , vice-president research institute , formerly of hewlett-packard ; roger gourd , vice-president engineering , formerly of dec ; alex morrow , vice-president strategy , formerly of ibm ; donal o'shea , vice-president of operations , formerly of unisoft . this staff added more than 300 employees in less than two years . the organization 's headquarters were at 11 cambridge center in cambridge , massachusetts , intentionally located in the neighborhood of the massachusetts institute of technology along with remote development offices in munich , germany and grenoble , france and field offices in brussels and tokyo . to the public , the organization appeared to be nothing more than an advocacy group ; in reality it included a distributed software development organization . an independent security software company - addamax , filed suit in 1990 against osf and its sponsors charging that osf was engaged in anticompetitive practices . the court delivered a grant of summary judgment to osf ( 152 f.3d 48 , 50 ( 1st cir.1998 ) . in a related action in 1991 , the federal trade commission investigated osf for allegedly using '' unfair trade practices '' in its '' process for acquiring technology . '' . products . ) . however , other unix vendors licensed the operating system to include various components of osf/1 in their products . other software vendors also licensed osf/1 including apple . parts of osf/1 were contained in so many versions of unix that it may have been the most widely deployed unix product ever produced . other technologies developed by osf include motif and distributed computing environment ( dce ) , respectively a widget toolkit and package of distributed network computing technologies . the motif toolkit was adopted as a formal standard within the institute of electrical and electronics engineers ( ieee ) as p1295 in 1994 . filling out the initial ( and what turned out to be final ) five technologies from osf were dme , the distributed management environment and andf , the architecturally neutral distribution format . technologies which were produced primarily by osf included ode , the open development environment - a flexible development , build and source control environment ; tet , the test environment toolkit - an open framework for building and executing automated test cases ; and the operating system osf/1 mk from the osf research institute based on the mach3.0 microkernel . ode and tet were made available as open source . tet was produced as a result of collaboration between osf , unix international and the x/open consortium . all the osf technologies had corresponding manuals and supporting publications produced almost exclusively by the staff at osf and published by prentice-hall . ibm has published its version of ode on github . . merger . by 1993 , it had become clear that the greater threat to unix system vendors was not each other as much as the increasing presence of microsoft in enterprise computing . in may , the common open software environment ( cose ) initiative was announced by the major players in the unix world from both the ui and osf camps : hewlett-packard , ibm , sun , unix system laboratories , and the santa cruz operation . as part of this agreement , sun and at & t became osf sponsor members , osf submitted motif to the x/open consortium for certification and branding and novell passed control and licensing of the unix trademark to the x/open consortium . in march 1994 , osf announced its new organizational model and introduced the cose technology model as its pre-structured technology ( pst ) process , which marked the end of osf as a significant software development company . it also assumed responsibility for future work on the cose initiative 's common desktop environment ( cde ) . in september 1995 , the merger of osf/motif and cde into a single project , cde/motif , was announced . in february 1996 osf merged with x/open to become the open group .