PeopleSoft

history . founded in 1987 by ken morris and david duffield , peoplesoft was originally headquartered in walnut creek , california , before moving to pleasanton , california . duffield envisioned a client–server version of integral systems popular mainframe hrms package . he cofounded peoplesoft after leaving integral systems which was also based in walnut creek . it should not be confused with integral systems of columbia , maryland , a different company . the company 's sole venture backing came from ibm . george j . still , jr . from norwest venture partners joined the board of directors . peoplesoft version 1 , released in the late 1989 , was the first fully integrated , robust client–server hrms application suite . peoplesoft expanded its product range to include a financials module in 1992 , distribution in 1994 , and manufacturing in 1996 after the acquisition of red pepper . . product design . application architecture . the original architecture for the peoplesoft is a suite of products built on a client–server ( two-tier ) approach with a dedicated client . with the release of version 8 , the entire suite was rewritten as an n-tier web-centric design called peoplesoft internet architecture ( pia ) . the new format allowed all of a company 's business functions to be accessed and run from within a web browser . originally , a small number of security and system setup functions still needed to be performed on a fat client machine ; however , this is no longer the case . the peoplesoft application suite can function as an erp system , similar to sap , but can also be used for single modules - for example , student administration or hcm ( human capital management ) alone . peoplesoft uses a functionality now known as integration broker to communicate with different modules ( known as pillars ) . in addition integration broker can be utilized for web services calls between peoplesoft and other applications . development platform . implementation focuses on peoplesoft 's proprietary peopletools technology . peopletools includes many different components used to create web-based applications : a scripting language known as peoplecode , design tools to define various types of metadata , standard security structure , batch processing tools , and the ability to interface with a sql database . the metadata describes data for user interfaces , tables , messages , security , navigation , portals , etc . this set of tools can make the peoplesoft suite platform-independent . components . before pia version 8.0 , components were called panel groups . . jd edwards . in 2003 , peoplesoft performed a friendly merger with smaller rival jd edwards . the latter 's similar product line , world and oneworld , targeted mid-sized companies too small to benefit from peoplesoft 's applications . jd edwards ' software used the configurable network computing architecture , which shielded applications from both the operating system and the database back-end . peoplesoft branded the oneworld product peoplesoft enterpriseone . . oracle corporation acquisition . beginning in 2003 , oracle began to maneuver for control of the peoplesoft company . in june 2003 , oracle made a 13 billion bid in a hostile corporate takeover attempt . in february 2004 , oracle decreased their bid to approximately 9.4 billion ; this offer was also rejected by peoplesoft 's board of directors . complicating oracle 's takeover attempt was peoplesoft 's poison pill , allowing their customers to potentially receive refunds of 2–5 times the amount they had paid in the case of a takeover . later that month , the u.s . department of justice filed suit to block oracle , on the grounds that the acquisition would break antitrust laws . in september 2004 , the suit was rejected by a u.s . federal judge , who found that the justice department had not proven its antitrust case . in october , the same decision was handed down by the european commission . although oracle had reduced its offer to 7.7 billion in may , it again raised its bid in november to 9.4 billion . in december 2004 , oracle announced that it had signed a definitive merger agreement to acquire peoplesoft for approximately 10.3 billion . a month after the acquisition of peoplesoft , oracle cut over half of peoplesoft 's workforce , laying off 6,000 of peoplesoft 's 11,000 employees . oracle moved to capitalize on the perceived strong brand loyalty within the jd edwards user community by rebranding former jd edwards products . thus peoplesoft enterpriseone became jd edwards enterpriseone and peoplesoft world became jd edwards world . oracle announced in 2005 that fusion applications would combine the best aspects of the peoplesoft , jd edwards , and oracle applications and merge them into a new product suite . oracle would later slow the release cadence for peoplesoft applications , instead releasing '' feature packs '' to add functionality . . peoplesoft timeline . 1987 : peoplesoft , inc . founded by david duffield and ken morris in walnut creek , ca , usa . 1988 : peoplesoft hrms released . 1991 : begins opening international offices . 1994 : public distribution of distribution and financials modules . 1995 : launch of student administration system . 1995 : opened office in mexico , first in latin america . 1996 : releases manufacturing and peoplesoft 6 , their first erp package . 1997 : peoplesoft 7 is released within upgraded erp modules . 1998 : peoplesoft 7.5 is released with improved client/server technology . acquired intrepid systems . 1998 : peoplesoft student administration system was released . 1999 : craig conway named new ceo ; release products to enable internet transactions . 2000 : acquired vantive corporation . 2000 : deliver peoplesoft 8 with an in-house application service provider . 2003 : acquired jd edwards 2004 : dave duffield returns as ceo , replacing craig conway . 2005 : acquired by oracle corporation . 2006 : peoplesoft fscm 9.0 is released . ( september 2006 ) 2006 : peoplesoft hcm 9.0 is released . ( december 2006 ) 2009 : peoplesoft hcm 9.1 is released . ( october 2009 ) 2009 : peoplesoft fscm 9.1 is released . ( november 2009 ) 2013 : peoplesoft 9.2 is released . ( fscm and hcm released simultaneously ) 2015 : peoplesoft campus solutions 9.2 is released ( december 2015 ) . security . peoplesoft applications , which address complex business requirements , have some known issues in terms of online security . peoplesoft is used by fortune 500 companies and government organizations , and almost 50 % of them are vulnerable and can be hacked via the internet , as researchers state . the risk factor lies in existing vulnerabilities of oracle peoplesoft systems that could enable data breaches at businesses , government organizations , and universities . because of this , companies using peoplesoft applications are under constant threat of cyber attacks . according to the research on public-facing oracle peoplesoft applications and their vulnerabilities , systems available online are susceptible to the tokenchpoken attack . a tokenchpoken attack , which affects systems that use single sign-on ( sso ) , is possible because an authentication cookie ( ps_token ) used by peoplesoft applications can be forged . when the ps_token is identified by a '' brute force '' tokenchpoken attack , it is possible to log in under a system account and gain access to all data from the compromised system . since 2010 , several cases have been reported of peoplesoft security breaches . in march 2013 , salem state university in massachusetts alerted 25,000 students and employees that their social security numbers might have been compromised in a database breach . similarly , in february 2016 , the university of central florida disclosed that over 63,000 student social security numbers had been compromised . all organizations that use peoplesoft ( including companies specialized in charity , food , manufacturing , retail , transport , etc . ) stay vulnerable to tokenchpoken and other interventions if they do not pay due attention to security .