Symbel

etymology . the prevalent view today is that old english symbel , old saxon symbal , sumbal heliand , line 3340 : '' sittan at sumble '' . ( old high german sumbal ) and old norse sumbl , verðar nema oc sumbl ( cibum capere et symposium ) grimm , ch . 14 all of which translate roughly as '' feast , banquet , ( social ) gathering '' , continue a common germanic sumlan '' banquet '' , which would correspond to a pie '' joint meal '' or '' congregation '' ( literally , symposium or assembly ) . handbook of germanic etymology ( 2003 ) : 386 . see also torp-falk , wörterbuch der indogermanischen sprachen ( 1909 ) , of which erades does not seem to have been aware . a number of earlier scholars have argued for a borrowing from latin symbola , gerhard köbler , altsächsisches wörterbuch s.v . '' sumbal '' against this derivation ( in the case of oe symbel ) , p.a . erades argues that these cognates go back to common germanic sumil or sumal '' gathering '' ( in the last case , with ablaut in the suffix ) . he explains the germanic stem sum- as ultimately deriving from proto-indo-european , the zero-grade of ablaut of '' one , together '' . p.a . erades , '' a romance congener . '' he rejects the earlier if somewhat hesitant view that old english symbel derives from latin symbola . this is the same element which developed into copulative a in ancient greek . paul bauschatz appears to accept sum , sam '' together '' , but proposes that the word represents a compound with alu '' ale '' as its second element ( rather than a suffix ) . this would render the meaning '' gathering or coming together of ale '' . bauschatz , '' the germanic ritual feast '' . 291 . icelandic sumbl had previously been explained as a compound of sam- and öl , see cleasby-vigfussion : 604 . the old english noun is usually translated as '' feast '' , and forms various compounds such as symbel-wyn '' joy at feasting '' , symbel-dæg '' feast day '' , symbel-niht '' feast-night '' , symbel-hūs '' feast-house , guest-room '' , symbel-tīd '' feast time '' , symbel-werig '' weary of feasting '' etc . there is also a derived verb , symblian or symblan , meaning '' to feast , caraouse , enjoy one 's self '' . not to be confused is the unrelated homophone symbel , symble meaning '' always , ever '' . anglo-saxon symbel . in old english poetry , especially beowulf , feasts could be instrumental occasions to bind the community , secure the loyalty of warriors and to bolster their determination to perform heroic deeds . in beowulf , unferth the thyle ( cf . : on þulr ) appears to act as a royal officiant at the feast which king hrothgar organised for the geatish newcomers , beowulf and his companions . he challenged and questioned beowulf , not eschewing taunts and mockery ( flyting ) . since no one intervenes during the incident , such behaviour appears to have been expected of him . in beowulf , a warrior 's boast ( gielp , gylp ) or his oath ( beot ) is often spoken at a feast . another role commonly attested for during a feast was that of the scop ( cf . : on skald ) , who recited genealogies , folklore and metrical poetry . the alcoholic drink was served by women or alekeepers ( ealu bora '' ale bearer '' ) , the first round usually poured by the lady of the house . bauschatz ' theory . paul c . bauschatz in 1976 suggested that the term reflects a pagan ritual which had a '' great religious significance in the culture of the early germanic people '' . the ritual according to bauschatz was always conducted indoors , usually in a chieftain 's mead hall . symbel involved a formulaic ritual which was more solemn and serious than mere drinking or celebration . the primary elements of symbel are drinking ale or mead from a drinking horn , speech making ( which often included formulaic boasting and oaths ) , and gift giving . eating and feasting were specifically excluded from symbel , and no alcohol was set aside for the gods or other deities in the form of a sacrifice . bauschatz pp.74-75 bauschatz ' lead is followed only sporadically in modern scholarship . similar concepts in scandinavia . bragafull . the bragarfull '' promise-cup '' or bragafull '' best cup '' or '' chieftain 's cup '' ( compare bragi ) was in norse culture a particular drinking from a cup or drinking horn on ceremonial occasions , often involving the swearing of oaths when the cup or horn was drunk by a chieftain or passed around and drunk by those assembled . the names are sometimes anglicized as bragarful and bragaful respectively . that the name appears in two forms with two meanings makes it difficult to determine the literal meaning . the word bragr 'best , foremost ' is a source for its first element . the form bragafull ( but not bragarfull ) can also be interpreted as 'bragi 's cup ' , referring to the bragi , god of poetry , though no special connection to bragi appears in any of the sources . snorri sturluson in his heimskringla , in the saga of hákon the good , describes the custom of the bragarfull at feasts : the fire was in the middle of the floor of the temple , and over it hung the kettles , and the full goblets were handed across the fire ; and he who made the feast , and was a godi 'chief ' , blessed the full goblets , and all the meat of the sacrifice . and first odin 's goblet was emptied for victory and power to his king ; thereafter , njörd 's and freya 's goblets for peace and a good season . then it was the custom of many to empty the bragafull ; and then the guests emptied a goblet to the memory of departed friends , called the minni 'remembrance' . in ynglinga saga section of the same work , snorri relates : it was the custom at that time that he who gave an heirship-feast after kings or jarls , and entered upon the heritage , should sit upon the footstool in front of the high seat , until the full bowl , which was called the bragafull , was brought in . then he should stand up , take the bragafull , make solemn vows to be afterwards fulfilled , and thereupon empty the beaker . then he should ascend the high seat which his father had occupied ; and thus he came to the full heritage after his father . now it was done so on this occasion . when the full bragafull came in , king ingjald stood up , grasped a large bull 's horn , and made a solemn vow to enlarge his dominions by one half , towards all the four corners of the world , or die ; and thereupon pointed with the horn to the four quarters . the fagrskinna ( a 13th-century history of the kings of norway ) , has a similar account in respect to svein forkbeard , mentioning first ceremonial drinkings dedicated to the greatest of one 's kindred , then to thor or others of the gods . then the bragarfull was poured out and when the giver of the feast had drunk this , he was to make a vow , to be also sworn by those present with him , and only then to sit himself on throne of the deceased . a prose passage inserted in the poetic edda poem helgakviða hjörvarðssonar relates : hedin was coming home alone from the forest one yule-eve , and found a troll-woman ; she rode on a wolf , and had snakes in place of a bridle . she asked hedin for his company . '' nay , '' said he . she said , '' thou shalt pay for this at the bragarfull . '' that evening the great vows were taken ; the sacred boar was brought in , the men laid their hands thereon , and took their vows at the bragarfull . hedin vowed that he would have sváva , eylimi 's daughter , the beloved of his brother helgi ; then such great grief seized him that he went forth on wild paths southward over the land , and found helgi , his brother . hervarar saga ok heiðreks relates that hjörvard , the son of arngrim , promised at his bragarfull to wed ingeborg the princess of sweden , and the legends of ragnar lodbrok relate that the geatish jarl herraud promised his daughter to anyone who could liberate her from a dragon or talk to her in its presence . minni . the term minni '' remembrance , memory '' was used for ritual drinking dedicated to the remembrance of the gods . terms used in this context , both in the eddaic poems and in the sagas , include minnis-öl '' memory-ale '' , minnis-horn '' memory-horn '' , minnis-full '' memory-cup '' , minni-sveig '' memory-draught '' . the term minnisveig is used by the annotator of the sigrdrífumál before the valkyrie 's invocation of the gods . olafssaga has minniöl signôð âsom '' they dedicated memory-ale to the æsir '' . '' memory-cups '' dedicated to individual gods are also named oðins full , niarðar full , freys full etc . the custom was continued uninterrupted by christianization , and minni was now drunk to christ , mary and the saints ( krists minni , michaêls minni , etc . ) jacob grimm , deutsche mythologie ( 1835 ) , chapter 3 . but the minni given to gods or saints was only the most prominent instance of this custom , placed at the beginning of the ritual drinking . later on , drinkers would also give minni to their departed friends . the term minni is the exact cognate of the middle high german minne . the german word had the same meaning of '' remembrance of absent or departed loved ones '' , but acquired the meaning of '' romantic longing for an unattainable woman of higher status '' in courtly culture , giving rise to the genre of minnesang , and the personification of '' remembrance '' as frau minne . neopaganism . inspired by bauschatz ' theory from the 1970s , the sumbel has become a central ritual of heathenry in the united states . in this version , sumbel is a drinking-ritual in which a drinking horn full of mead or ale is passed around and a series of toasts are made , usually to gods , ancestors , and/or heroes of the religion . the toasts vary by group , and some groups make a distinction between a '' regular '' sumbel and a '' high '' sumbel , which have different levels of formality , and different rules during toasting . participants may also make boasts of their own deeds , or oaths or promises of future actions . words spoken during the sumbel are considered carefully and any oaths made are considered sacrosanct , becoming part of the destiny of those assembled . the name sumbel ( or symbel ) is mainly derived from anglo-saxon sources . for this reason , the ritual is not known by this name among icelandic nordic pagans , who nevertheless practice a similar ritual as part of their blot . michael strmiska , modern paganism in world cultures : comparative perspectives , p abc-clio , 2005 , , pp . 129 , 165 . in theodism or anglo-saxon neopaganism in particular , the symbel has a particularly high importance , considered '' perhaps the highest rite '' or '' amongst the most holy rites '' englatheod.org celebrated . symbel consists of rounds of ritual drinking and toasting , and invariably takes place within an enclosed space of some kind . garman lord , p . 27 it is usually inaugurated by three formal rounds , as determined by the host ; often led by toasts in honor of the gods , then ancestors and/or heroes , and then a general or personal boast . other boasts may take place as necessary . symbel is always formally closed once the formal boasts are completed , in order that the symbel might maintain its dignity and not degenerate into '' mere partying '' . garman lord , p . 30 the two types of boast are the ȝielp ( pronounced 'yelp ' ) and the beot ( pronounced 'bayawt ' , but as one syllable ) . the former is a boast of one 's own worthiness , such as one 's accomplishments , ancestry , etc . the latter is a boast of an action one plans to undertake . in order to protect the luck of the hall , such boasts are subject to challenge by the thyle , whose job it is to make sure that unlucky boasts do not contaminate the luck of all present . notes . see also . alu ( runic ) blót drinking horn kvasir mead of poetry tamada toast ( honor ) . references . bauschatz , paul c . the well and the tree : world and time in early germanic culture . amhurst : university of massachusetts press , 1983 . bauschatz , paul c . '' the germanic ritual feast . '' in proceedings of the third international conference of nordic and general linguistics , ed . john weinstock . the nordic languages and modern linguistics 3 . austin : university of texas press , 1978 . 289-95 . bjork , robert e . '' speech as gift in beowulf . '' speculum ( 1994 ) . conquergood , dwight , '' boasting in anglo-saxon england , performance and the heroic ethos . '' literature and performance i ( april 1991 ) . enright , m.j . , lady with a mead cup : ritual , prophecy , and lordship in the european warband . dublin , 1976 erades , p.a . '' a romance congener of oe symbel . '' english studies 48 ( 1967 ) : 25-7 . nelson , marie . '' beowulf 's boast words . '' neophilologus 89.2 ( april 2005 ) : 299-310 . orel , vladimir e . a handbook of germanic etymology . leiden , 2003 . pollington , steven . the mead-hall : the feasting tradition in anglo-saxon england . anglo-saxon books . norfolk , 2003 . external links . anglo-saxon symbel the sumbel rite symbel