Musical bow

history . there is speculation that the hunting bow may have been used as a musical instrument from as early as circa 13,000 b.c . henri breuil surveyed the trois frères in france caves and made an engraving that attempted to reproduce a c . 13,000 & nbsp ; b.c . cave painting into a black-and-white lithograph engraving . his engraving showed a mysterious figure , a '' man camouflaged to resemble a bison , '' in the midst of a mass of herd-animals , '' herding the beasts and playing the musical bow . '' the artwork is confused , and those who are trying to reproduce the art in color have had to work to bring out legible images . one interpretation of the '' magician-hunter '' image considers his hunting-bow to be a musical bow , used as a single-stringed musical instrument . whether the bow in the cave illustration is a musical instrument or the hunting tool in a paleolithic hunt , musicologists have considered whether the bow could be a possible relative or ancestor to the chordophone : the lute , lyre , harp , and zither family . curt sachs said that there was good reason not to consider hunters ' bows as likely musical bows . one reason was that the oldest known musical bows were 10 feet long , useless for hunting , and that '' musical bows were not associated with hunters ' beliefs and ceremonies . '' sachs considered the musical bows important , however . he pointed out that the name for the greek lute , pandura was likely derived from pan-tur , a sumerian word meaning '' small bow . '' he considered this evidence in support of the theory that the musical bow was ancestral to the pierced lute . the bows used for music required a resonator , a hollowed object like a bowl , a gourd , or a musician 's mouth , in order to produce audible sound . although the musical bow could be manipulated to produce more than one tone , instruments were developed from it that used one note per string . since each string played a single note , adding strings added new notes for instrument families such as bow harps , harps , and lyres . in turn , this led to being able to play dyads and chords . another innovation occurred when the bow harp was straightened out and a bridge used to lift the strings off the stick-neck , creating the lute . ravanahatha is also one of the oldest string instrument played with a bow written in 5000 years old indian epic ramayana . musical bows are still used in a number of cultures today . it can be found as far south as swaziland , and as far east as eastern africa , madagascar , and réunion . and also outside of africa , as in the case of berimbau , malunga ( derivations of the african musical bow ) or the appalachian mouth-bow . playing ways . the usual way to make the bow sound is to pluck the string , although sometimes a subsidiary bow is used to scrape the string , much as on a violin . the onavillu of kerala sounds when struck with a thin stick . unlike string instruments used in classical music , however , they do not have a built-in resonator , although resonators may be made to work with the bow in a number of ways . the most usual type of resonator consists of a gourd attached to the back of the string bearer . the bow may also be stood in a pit or gourd on the ground , or one end of it may be partially placed in the mouth . this last method allows the size of the resonator to be varied as the instrument is played , thus allowing a melody to be heard consisting of the notes resonating in the player 's mouth . as well as these various forms of resonators , the bow is frequently played without a resonator at all . in africa , the musical bow is usually played by a solo performer . in capoeira , the berimbau is played as part of the roda , a musical group standing in a circle , in the centre of which the capoeiristas perform or play . the appalachian mouth-bow can be played amplified in old-time music jams . ground bow . the ground-bow or a earth-bow is a single-string bow-shaped folk musical instrument , classified as a chordophone . it is known in cultures of equatorial '' ground bow '' , encyclopædia britannica and south africa , and in other cultures with african roots . it consists of a flexible stick planted into the ground ( possibly a stripped sapling or a branch ) , with a string from its free end to a resonator of some kind based on a pit in the ground . '' arco de tierra '' , referring to françois-rené tranchefort , los instrumentos musicales en el mundo , , 1985 , and later editions it looks like a game trap or a child toy , therefore its distribution over africa used to be overlooked . hornbostel ( 1933 ) classified is in the category of harps , although it has combined characteristics of a harp and a musical bow . jaco kruger , '' rediscovering the venda ground-bow '' , ethnomusicology , vol . 33 , no . 3 ( autumn , 1989 ) , pp . 391-404 the resonator may be a pit covered by a board , with a string attached to it . kruges describes several other constructions by venda , e.g . , the other end of a string is tied to a stone dropped into the pit , with the string passing through the board covering the pit , etc . other names include '' ground harp '' ( sachs , 1940 , history of musical instruments ) and ground-bass . it is called kalinga or galinga by venda people . in their language '' galinga '' means simply a hole in the ground , while the origins of '' kalinga '' are uncertain . it is known as gayumba in haiti , dominican republic , fradique lizardo , instrumentos musicales indígenas dominicanos , 1975 , section '' gayumba '' , p.64 and tumbandera in haitian traditions of cuba . music in latin america and the caribbean : an encyclopedic history , vol.2 , p.210 baka people call it angbindi . it is also known in cuba under the onomatopoeic name tingo-talango ( tingotalango ) . '' cubanism : what is the “ tíngo talángo ” ? '' '' tingo talango , son , auteur : julio cueva julio cueva 's song tingo talango dedicated to this musical instrument describes its construction thus : : si quieren que les describa : cómo es el tingo talango : tráiganme un gajo de güira : o si no uno de mango . : se abre un hueco en el suelo , : encima una hoja de lata , : en el centro un agujero : donde un alambre se ata . tingo talango is also the song by ñico lora . the instrument is reportedly nearly-extinct in the native cultures . . playing techniques . kalinga may be struck by a stick or plucked in various ways . the bow stick may be bent to change the tension of the string , and hence the tone . it can be played in a glissando manner : the stick is bent , struck , and released , producing a peculiar sound . the produced pitches are not always stable . kalinga is usually is played to provide repetitive accompaniment to the choral song . . in africa . due to the nature of their construction and playing , musical bows are quiet instruments , therefore needing a resonator to resound . the resonator can either be a gourd ( as in uhadi , umakhweyana , segankure , xitende , berimbau , etc . ) or the player 's mouth ( as in umrhubhe , umqangala , tshihwana , xizambi , etc . ) musical bows are the main instruments of the nguni and sotho people , the predominant peoples of south africa . historians believe that many of the musical bows came from khoisan peoples . although there are many differences between musical bows , all of them share two things : a resonator , and at least two fundamental notes . the strongest notes are the fundamentals , the deepest notes produced by the string , whereas the higher notes ( the harmonic partials ) are produced by the resonator . there are at least two fundamental notes produced by all musical bows , an open ( when the player does not shorten it or touch it ) and a closed ( where the string is shortened or stopped by the player 's hand ) . in xhosa they are called vu ( from the word vuliwe , 'open ' ) and ba ( from banjiwe , 'held ' ) respectively . these two notes can already be on the string , if it is divided or stopped by a string attached to the gourd , as in the case of umakhweyana , xitende , berimbau , hungu , etc . the pitch difference between a vu and a ba is usually about a whole tone . in certain places , it can be closer to a semitone ( e.g . zulu ) or closer to a minor third ( tsonga ) . some of those instruments have more than two notes , for example the zulu umakhweyana and the tsonga xitende have three , whereas the venda tshihwana has four . . other names . musical bows are known by various names in the different languages of south africa - some refer only to musical bows using gourds as resonators , others using the mouth : akele : ngongo kimbundu : hungu nguni : makhoyane pedi : lekope s . sotho : lesiba , thomo , setolotolo tepehuán : gat tswana : segankure tsonga : xizambi , xitende umbundu : ombulumbumba venda : tshihwana , lugube , tshijolo xhosa : uhadi , umrhubhe , umqunge , inkinge zulu : umakhweyana , ugubu , umqangala , umhubhe ! kung : m'bolumbumba lingala : tolo-tolo umqangala . in other places . the most popular musical bow today is the brazilian adaptation of the musical bow , the berimbau , most commonly associated with the jogo de capoeira . kse diev , a gourd resonated '' musical bow cum stick '' whose string is made out of copper , is used in cambodia and is considered one of the oldest cambodian instruments , with bas-reliefs going back to the 12th century ad . has been thought of as musical bow ; under hornbostel-sachs classification , it is a '' musical bow cum stick '' because it has only one curved end to flex . under hornbostel-sachs , musical bows are defined as flexible and curved string bearers or as stick zithers with both ends flexible and curved . malunga , a musical bow made of bamboo , gut strings , and a coconut gourd is used by the siddi people of india , of african origin . belembaotuyan is found in guam , probably introduced through trade between south america and asia in the nineteenth century . bobre , musical bow of mauritius and réunion . kunkulkawe is the name of a musical bow found among the mapuche people in chile and argentina . piompirintzi is the name of a musical bow found among the ashaninka people in peru . latajkiaswolé is the name of a musical bow found among the wichi , pilaga , and other tribes of the gran chaco region of south america . in the united states a musical bow is primarily found in the appalachian mountains , where it is called a '' mouthbow '' or '' mouth bow '' . in northwestern mexico , the tepehuán indians of durango use the musical bow during their mitote . the tepehuán 's musical bow has a gourd attached to it . the ku is a maori instrument from new zealand , made of matai wood and a fibre string , and is tapped with a rod . the ukeke is a three-stringed musical bow from hawaii , played using the mouth as a resonating chamber . the yelatáj chos woley is a musical bow ( played with another bow ) , from the wichí culture of the argentinian gran chaco . in the caribbean , on the island of curaçao , the benta is a one-stringed musical bow , played using the mouth as a resonating chamber . most probably brought to the island by africans from ghana , angola , nigeria during the slave trade , it is played as a leading instrument in “ muzik di zumbi ” , ghost music ( zumbi means ghost ) . the name refers to the spooky atmosphere on the plantations since there was no electricity , and the hauling wind carries the sound of the music in all directions . it is mostly accompanied by drum , hoe and “ wiri ” ( scraper of a serrated piece of iron ) . the curaçaoan benta resembles the brazilian berimbao , the indian malunga , the hawaiïan ukeke , and string bows of several africa countries . a variant called the '' whizzing bow '' , which is swung with the arm in a circle is played in central america , china , indonesia , and west africa . whizzing bow . oxford music online , published january 20 , 2001 . . see also . ravanahatha berimbau malunga belembaotuyan jew 's harp idiophone