Tree-kangaroo

evolution . the evolutionary history of tree-kangaroos possibly begins with a rainforest floor-dwelling pademelon-like ancestor . this ancestor possibly evolved from an arboreal possum-like ancestor as is suspected of all macropodid marsupials in australia and new guinea . during the late eocene , the australian/new guinean continent began a period of drying that caused a retreat in the area of rainforest , which forced the ancestral pademelons to begin living in a dryer , rockier environment . after some generations of adaptation to the new environment , the pademelons may have evolved into rock-wallaby ( petrogale spp . ) , which developed a generalist feeding strategy due to their dependence on a diverse assortment of vegetation refuges . this generalist strategy allowed the rock-wallabies to easily adapt to malesian rainforest types that were introduced to australia from asia during the mid-miocene . the rock-wallabies that migrated into these introduced forests adapted to spend more time climbing trees . one species in particular , the proserpine rock-wallaby ( petrogale persephone ) , displays equal preference for climbing trees as for living in rocky outcrops . during the late miocene the semi-arboreal rock-wallabies could have evolved into the now extinct tree-kangaroo genus bohra . global cooling during the pleistocene caused continent-wide drying and rainforest retractions in australia and new guinea . the rainforest contractions isolated populations of bohra which resulted in the evolution of today 's tree-kangaroos ( dendrolagus spp . ) , as they adapted to lifestyles in geographically small and diverse rainforest fragments , and became further specialized for a canopy-dwelling lifestyle . they can run up to 44 mph and can sustain a speed of 25 mph for roughly 1.2 miles . taxonomy . species . these species are assigned to the genus dendrolagus : grizzled tree-kangaroo ( d . inustus ) ; northern and western new guinea , plus the island of yapen , and possibly salawati and waigeo lumholtz 's tree-kangaroo ( d . lumholtzi ) ; queensland , australia bennett 's tree-kangaroo ( d . bennettianus ) ; queensland , australia ursine tree-kangaroo ( d . ursinus ) ; the bird 's head peninsula , west papua , new guinea matschie 's tree-kangaroo ( d . matschiei ) ; the huon peninsula , papua new guinea doria 's tree-kangaroo ( d . dorianus ) ; western , central , and southeastern new guinea seri 's tree-kangaroo ( d . stellarum ) ; the highlands of west-central new guinea goodfellow 's tree-kangaroo ( d . goodfellowi ) ; central and southeastern new guinea golden-mantled tree-kangaroo ( d . pulcherrimus ) ; the foja mountains , papua and the torricelli mountains , papua new guinea lowlands tree-kangaroo ( d . spadix ) ; the southwestern lowlands of papua new guinea dingiso ( d . mbaiso ) ; the highlands of west-central new guinea tenkile ( d . scottae ) ; sandaun province , new guinea wondiwoi tree-kangaroo ( d . mayri ) ; the higher areas of the wondiwoi peninsula , west papua ( thought to be extinct until 2018 ) seri 's tree-kangaroo ( dendrolagus stellarum ) has been described as a subspecies of doria 's tree-kangaroo ( d . dorianus stellarum ) , but some recent authorities have treated it as a separate species based on its absolute diagnostability . the wondiwoi tree-kangaroo is among the 25 “ most wanted lost ” species that are the focus of global wildlife conservation 's “ search for lost species ” initiative . the case for the golden-mantled tree-kangaroo ( d . pulcherrimus ) is comparable to that of d . stellarum ; it was first described as a subspecies of d . goodfellowi , though recent authorities have elevated it to species status based on its absolute diagnostability . a population of the tenkile ( scott 's tree-kangaroo ) recently discovered from the bewani mountains may represent an undescribed subspecies . tenkile tree kangaroo tenkile conservation alliance . distribution and habitat . tree-kangaroos inhabit the tropical rainforests of new guinea , far northeastern australia , and some of the islands in the region , in particular , the schouten islands and the raja ampat islands . although most species are found in mountainous areas , several also occur in lowlands , such as the aptly named lowlands tree-kangaroo . most tree-kangaroos are considered threatened due to hunting and habitat destruction . because much of their lifestyle involves climbing and jumping between trees , they have evolved an appropriate method of locomotion . tree-kangaroos thrive in the treetops , as opposed to terrestrial kangaroos which survive on mainland australia . two species of tree-kangaroos are found in australia , bennett 's ( d . bennetianus ) , which is found north of the daintree river and lumholtz 's ( d . lumholtzi ) . tree-kangaroos have adapted better to regions of high altitudes . at least 14 known subspecies of tree-kangaroo are living in papua new guinea and australia . tree-kangaroos must find places comfortable and well-adapted for breeding , as they only give birth to one joey per year . they are known to have one of the most relaxed and leisurely birthing seasons . they breed cautiously in the treetops during the monsoon season . their habitats are breeding grounds for danger , as they can easily fall prey to their natural predator , the amethystine python , which also climbs and lives in the treetops . tree-kangaroos are known to be able to live in both mountainous regions and lowland locations . . description . lumholtz 's tree-kangaroo is the smallest of all tree-kangaroos . its body and head length ranges about 48–65 & nbsp ; cm , and its tail , 60–74 & nbsp ; cm , with males weighing an average of 7.2 & nbsp ; kg ( 16 & nbsp ; lb ) and females 5.9 & nbsp ; kg ( 13 & nbsp ; lb ) . the length of doria 's tree-kangaroo is 51–78 & nbsp ; cm , with a long 44–66 & nbsp ; cm tail , and weighs 6.5–14.5 & nbsp ; kg . matschie 's tree-kangaroo has a body and head length of 81 & nbsp ; cm ( 20 to 32 inches ) , adult males weigh 9–11 & nbsp ; kg ( 20-25 & nbsp ; lb ) and adult females weigh 7–9 & nbsp ; kg ( 15-20 & nbsp ; lb ) . the grizzled tree-kangaroo grows to a length of 75–90 & nbsp ; cm ( 30 to 35 in ) , with males being considerably larger than females , and its weight is 8–15 & nbsp ; kg ( 18-33 & nbsp ; lb ) . tree-kangaroos have several adaptations to an arboreal life-style . compared to terrestrial kangaroos , tree-kangaroos have longer and broader hind feet with longer , curved nails . they also have a sponge-like grip on their paws and soles of their feet . tree-kangaroos have a much larger and pendulous tail than terrestrial kangaroos , giving them enhanced balance while moving about the trees . locomotion on the ground is by hopping , as with true kangaroos . like terrestrial kangaroos , tree-kangaroos do not sweat to cool their bodies , rather , they lick their forearms and allow the moisture to evaporate in an adaptive form of behavioural thermoregulation . . behaviour . locomotion . tree-kangaroos are slow and clumsy on the ground . they move at approximately human walking pace and hop awkwardly , leaning their body far forward to balance the heavy tail . however , in trees , they are bold and agile . they climb by wrapping their forelimbs around the trunk of a tree and , while allowing the forelimbs to slide , hop up the tree using their powerful hind legs . they are expert leapers ; downward jumps from one tree to another have been recorded and they have the extraordinary ability to jump to the ground from or more without being hurt . diet . the main diet of the tree-kangaroo is leaves and fruit that it gathers from the trees , but occasionally scavenged from the ground . tree-kangaroos will also eat grains , flour , various nuts , sap and tree bark . some captive tree-kangaroos ( perhaps limited to new guinea species ) eat protein foods such as eggs , birds and snakes , making them omnivores . . reproduction . little is known about the reproduction of tree-kangaroos in the wild . the only published data are from captive individuals . female tree-kangaroos reach sexual maturity as early as 2.04 years of age and males at 4.6 years . the female 's fertile period is estimated to be approximately two months . they have one of the longest marsupial offspring development/maturation periods ; pouch life for the young is 246–275 days long and weaning occurs 87–240 days later . . orphan . at the adelaide zoo , an orphaned tree-kangaroo joey was transferred to the pouch of a yellow-footed rock-wallaby when his mother was killed by a falling branch in november 2014 . the joey survived , having been successfully reared by the surrogate mother rock-wallaby . adelaide zoo transfer orphaned joey surrogate wallaby mother - abc news - 30 june 2015 . . threats . the two most significant threats to tree-kangaroos are habitat loss and hunting . tree-kangaroo habitats are being destroyed or replaced by logging and timber production , along with coffee , rice and wheat production . this habitat loss can make tree-kangaroos more exposed to predators such as free-ranging dogs . being hunted by local community members also contributes markedly to the declines in tree-kangaroo populations . research conducted on lumholtz 's tree-kangaroo , a species that dwells in the rain forests of northeastern australia , determined the frequency of causes of death . this showed that of 27 deceased tree-kangaroos , 11 had been killed by vehicles , six by dogs , four by parasites and the remaining six died from other causes . . gallery . image : buergers ' tree-kangaroo back and tail.jpg the back and tail of a buergers ' tree-kangaroo ( dendrolagus goodfellowi buergersi ) file : tree_kangaroo2.jpg two goodfellow 's tree-kangaroos , ( dendrolagus goodfellowi ) file : lumholtz 's tree kangaroo-03.jpg lumholtz 's tree-kangaroo ( dendrolagus lumholtzii ) file : buergers ' tree-kangaroo , dendrolagus goodfellowi redeye correction.jpg buergers ' tree-kangaroo ( dendrolagus goodfellowi buergersi ) file : tree kangaroo skeleton.jpg a matschie 's tree-kangaroo ( dendrolagus matschiei ) skeleton . see also . fauna of australia fauna of new guinea . references . external links . images of goodfellow 's tree-kangaroo ( dendrolagus goodfellowi ) — arkive tree-kangaroo conservation program at woodland park zoo national geographic coverage of tree-kangaroos