Linköping University

history . left thumb thumb thumb thumb thumbthumb thumb image : linköping university cray x-mp.jpeg thumb a retired cray x-mp/416 supercomputer was used as a bench in one of the buildings on campus valla until 2015 . it is now in the northeast foyer of the b building . 150px the origins of linköping university date back to the 1960s . in 1965 , the swedish national legislative assembly ( riksdag ) decided to locate some programmes within the fields of technology and medicine to linköping . in 1967 a branch of stockholm university was placed in linköping , offering education within humanities , social sciences and natural sciences . two years later a unit for medical training and the institute of technology were established . in 1970 all activities were brought together in three faculties within the linköping university college : the faculty of arts and sciences , the faculty of medicine and the institute of technology . linköping university was established in 1975 . in 1977 former teacher training colleges in linköping and norrköping were transferred to linköping university and in 1986 the faculty of health sciences was formed , based on the faculty of medicine and regional funded education in health care professions . in 1997 a campus was opened in the neighbouring city of norrköping . the renowned carl malmsten school of furniture ( malmstens linköping university ) has been part of linköping university since 2000 . after almost 60 years at the city centre , the school moved into new premises on the outskirts of stockholm in 2009 . in june 2017 the gender studies faculty arranged a workshop where humans could speed date plants and do yoga . . research . linköping university pursues research and postgraduate studies within the fields of technology , medicine , and humanities , natural , educational , social and behavioural sciences . it is particularly noted for its openness to multidisciplinary research and , in 1980 , was the first swedish university to introduce interdisciplinary thematic research at the faculty of arts and sciences , and a cross-subject , interdisciplinary perspective in graduate schools for phd students . linköping university receives research grants from the swedish government within five strategic research areas : it and mobile communication , materials science , security and emergency management , e-science and transport research . . education . linköping university offers education at the basic and advanced levels via 120 study programmes , 550 single-subject courses and specialised as well as interdisciplinary postgraduate studies . a large number of the degree programmes lead to qualified professional degrees in fields such as medicine , business and economics , teacher education and engineering . many of the programmes are interdisciplinary , combining for example industrial management and engineering , medicine and engineering , or integrating economics , law and languages . in 1986 the faculty of health sciences became the first faculty in sweden to put problem-based learning into practice within medical training and health-care programmes . in 2007 , the medical programme and the department of electrical engineering , control systems were recognised as centres of excellence in higher education by the swedish national agency for higher education . the recognition was based on a thorough quality assessment by a panel of experts . . faculties . faculty of arts and sciences ( filosofiska fakulteten ) faculty of medicine and health sciences ( medicinska fakulteten/hälsouniversitetet ) and linköping university hospital linköping institute of technology ( linköpings tekniska högskola ) faculty of educational sciences ( utbildningsvetenskap ) . university campuses . education and research are conducted at three campuses in the cities of linköping and norrköping , situated approximately 200-160 kilometres south of stockholm , and a fourth campus in lidingö , stockholm . campus valla , about three kilometers from the city centre of linköping , is where the majority of students and researchers study and work . the university hospital campus in linköping houses the faculty of medicine and health sciences . campus norrköping , is a city campus 40 kilometres northeast of linköping . about one-fourth of the students are enrolled here . the carl malmsten school of furniture ( malmstens linköping university ) has been part of linköping university since 2000 . after almost 60 years at the city centre , the school moved into new premises in lidingö , on the outskirts of stockholm in 2009 . research centres , selection of . control , autonomy , and decision-making in complex systems ( linnaeus centre cadics ) disaster medicine ( kckm/z ) , centre of gender excellence ( gexcel ) , the swedish research council centre of hearing and deafness ( linnaeus centre head ) , research on the national supercomputer centre , a provider of national supercomputing resources novel functional materials ( linnécentrum lili-nfm ) , linköping linnaeus initiative for organic bioelektronics ( oboe ) , strategic research centre for norrköping visualization center c , in cooperation with the city of norrköping and norrköping science park and interactive institute . the dome theater , constructed in 2009 , is the most technically advanced dome in northern europe . for a complete list of centres , see organisation . science parks . thumb two science parks are closely connected to linköping university . science park mjärdevi mjärdevi science park in linköping hosts 350 technology companies , from start-ups to multinationals , with 6,500 employees ( 2017 ) . the largest residents of mjärdevi are ericsson , ifs and infor . major multinationals such as arris group , flextronics , autoliv and toyota industries are also represented . norrköping science park in norrköping hosts approximately 130 companies . main areas for research and development are printed electronics , interactivity and visualisation . . notable faculty . gerhard andersson , professor of clinical psychology anders blomqvist , professor of pain research christian berggren , professor of industrial management magnus berggren , professor of organic electronics per-erik ellström , professor of education fredrik gustafsson , professor of sensor informatics lars hultman , professor of materials science olle inganäs , professor of organic electronics lennart ljung , professor of control theory nina lykke , professor of gender studies jan-ove palmberg , professor of mechanical engineering jerker rönnberg , professor of psychology carl-ulrik schierup , professor of ethnicity stefan thor , professor of biology anthony turner , professor of biosensors and bioelectronics . notable former faculty . stig hagström , professor emeritus of materials science one of the founders of linköping university leading researcher in materials science harold lawson , former professor of telecommunications and computer systems credited with the invention of the pointer in programming languages acm fellow ingemar lundström , professor emeritus of applied physics leading researcher in biosensors and chemical sensors chairman for the nobel committee for physics hans rådström , former professor of applied mathematics mathematician who made many important contributions erik sandewall , professor emeritus of computer science leading researcher in artificial intelligence aaai vladimir mazya , professor emeritus of mathematics known for his work on sobolev spaces åke öberg , professor emeritus of biomedical engineering leading researcher in circulatory physiology , bio-optics , biomedical instrumentation , sensors and clinical engineering . notable alumni . carl-henric svanberg , chairman of volvo , former ceo of ericsson and chairman of bp nashwa eassa henry radamson , swedish professor of microelectronics and semiconductor , member of chinese academy of science anders flodström , professor of materials physics at the royal institute of technology , former rector of the royal institute of technology , former university chancellor of sweden and head of the swedish national agency for higher education gustav fridolin , former minister for education in the government of sweden therése sjömander magnusson , head of the nordic africa institute jan malm , former ceo , ericsson china , 2000–2004 jan-eric sundgren , former rector of chalmers institute of technology , now senior vice president , volvo group ola tunander , former research professor at the peace research institute oslo åke svensson , director general of teknikföretagen ( employers ' organisation for engineering companies ) , former president and ceo saab ab björn von sydow , former speaker of the riksdag and minister for defence 1997-2002 cecilia widegren , member of the riksdag and vice chairman in the parliamentary defense committee and group zhong zhihua , rector of tongji university , member of the chinese academy of engineering bertil andersson , former president of nanyang technological university . see also . list of universities in sweden lysator , the oldest computer society in sweden . founded in 1973 . notes . external links . linköping university - official site in english campuses at liu visualization center c