Hupmobile

history . founding . in 1909 , bobby hupp co-founded hupp motor car company , with charles hastings , formerly of oldsmobile , who put up the first us 8,500 toward manufacturing hupp 's car . wise , david burgess . '' hupmobile : mass-production pioneer '' , in ward , ian , executive editor . the world of automobiles ( london : orbis , 1974 ) , volume 9 , p . 991 caption . they were joined by investors j . walter drake , joseph drake , john baker , and edwin denby . drake was elected president ; hupp was vice president and general manager . emil nelson , formerly of oldsmobile and packard , joined the company as chief engineer . hastings was named assistant general manager . in late 1909 bobby 's brother , louis gorham hupp left his job with the michigan central railroad in grand rapids and joined the company . ; hupp motors obtained 25,000 ( equal to today ) in cash deposits at the 1909 automobile show ( the lowest capitalization of detroit 's eight major car makers wise , p . 990 . ) to begin manufacturing the hupp 20 . the first cars were built in a small building at 345 ( now 1161 ) bellevue avenue in detroit , michigan . the company immediately outgrew this space and began construction of a factory a few blocks away at e . jefferson avenue and concord , next to the former oldsmobile plant . the company produced 500 vehicles by the end of the 1909 model year ( the fall of 1909 ) . production increased to more than 5,000 in the 1910 model year . henry ford paid the hupp 20 the ultimate compliment . '' i recall looking at bobby hupp 's roadster at the first show where it was exhibited and wondering whether we could ever build as good a small car for as little money . '' when hupp left hupp motors in 1913 , he informed the company his supplier companies would devote their full capacity to make parts for rch . facing the loss of manufactured parts from hupp corporation and increasing demand for the hupmobile , hupp motors acquired seven acres for a new factory at mt . elliott and milwaukee . it moved into the new plant in late april 1912 . ( this factory was demolished as part of site clearance for general motors ' '' poletown '' assembly plant in the early 1980s . ) hupp motors sold the jefferson avenue plant to the king motor car company . . the “ all-steel ” hupp 32 . in 1911 hupp became one of two automakers pioneering the use of all-steel bodies , joining bsa in the u.k . , p . 63 . nelson approached hale & kilburn company in philadelphia looking for help with developing an all-metal body for the hupp 32 . hale & kilburn had pioneered the replacement of cast iron with pressed steel for many parts for the interiors of railway carriages . according to nelson , “ none of the detroit plants would contract ” to make an all-steel body for the hupp 32 . edward budd and joseph ledwinka were employed at hale & kilburn at the time , budd as the general manager and ledwinka as engineer . budd was interested in the project . hale & kilburn had built some body panels for king and paige but budd had grander aspirations the hupp project would permit him to pursue . budd and ledwinka worked with nelson to develop means to manufacture nelson 's design for this body . they devised a system where the body 's numerous steel stampings were welded together by hand and supported by a crude system of angle iron supports that held the welded subassemblies together . the disassembled bodies were shipped by rail to detroit where they were put back together , painted and trimmed in the hupmobile factory . both the touring car and a coupe were made by this process and even one hupmobile limousine . in 1911 no one , not nelson , ledwinka or budd , thought to patent the process to manufacture all-steel bodies . while the hupp 32 bodies were in production , budd and ledwinka left and formed the budd company . in 1914 , ledwinka filed for and received a patent for the process of making all-steel bodies . however , budd later lost a patent infringement litigation it brought against wilson body company when the court held that the ledwinka patent was invalid . '' after the art had developed.ledwinka has endeavored to go back and cover by a patent that which had become public property . he is endeavoring to bring under his patent those things which belong to the public . '' the court relied on the production of the hupp 32 in 1911 as a major example of the prior art . the opinion does provide insight as to what was or was not novel about the process to manufacture the hupp 32 's body . several thousand all steel touring cars were made before nelson resigned as chief engineer in 1912 . hupmobile 's commitment to this leading edge approach did not survive his departure . the rest of the hupp 32 production used conventional body assembly processes . expansion . carl wickman , a car dealer in hibbing , minnesota , used an unsold 7-passenger model as the first vehicle for what became greyhound . lewis , mary beth . '' ten best first facts '' , in car and driver , 1/88 , p . 92 . in 1913 frank e . watts was hired as a designer . hupp motor car company continued to grow after its founder left . hupp competed strongly against ford and chevrolet . dubois young became company president in 1924 , advancing from vice-president of manufacturing . by 1928 sales had reached over 65,000 units . to increase production and handle sales growth , hupp purchased the chandler-cleveland motors corporation ( chandler motor car ) for its manufacturing facilities . decline . sales and production began to fall even before the depression in 1930 . a strategy to make the hupmobile a larger , more expensive car began with the 1925 introduction of an 8-cylinder model , followed by the elimination of the 4-cylinder hupmobile after 1925 . ( hupmobile made only 4-cylinder cars from 1909 to 1924 . ) while aiming for a more lucrative market segment , hupp turned its back on its established clientele . this was the same mistake that many other medium-priced carmakers made at the same time . in an attempt to capture every possible sale , they offered many different models . with hupmobile 's low production volume , the result was that no model could be produced in sufficient quantity to achieve economy of scale . new models . hupp abandoned its more conservatively styled product line and turned to industrial designer raymond loewy to design its 1932 hupp cyclefender , a flashy roadster that did well at the track , but sales continued to decline . 1934 saw the introduction of a striking restyle called the '' aerodynamic '' by loewy , as well as the lower-priced series 417-w using murray-built slightly-modified ford bodies . despite technical innovations , squabbles among stockholders and an attempted hostile takeover in 1935 took their toll on the company . by 1936 the company was forced to sell some of its plants and assets and in 1937 hupmobile suspended manufacturing . a new line of six- and eight-cylinder cars was fielded for 1938 , but by this time hupp had very few dealers , and sales were disappointingly low . desperate for a return to market strength , on february 8 , 1938 , hupmobile acquired the production dies of the gordon buehrig-designed cord 810 , paying us 900,000 for the tooling . connersville chamber of commerce retrieved 4 may 2015 . hupmobile hoped using the striking cord design in a lower-priced conventional car , called the skylark , would return the company to financial health . enthusiastic orders came in by the thousands , but production delays soured customer support . joint venture . lacking adequate production facilities , hupmobile partnered with the ailing graham-paige to share the cord dies . hupmobile and graham both sold similar models , all to be built at graham-paige 's facilities . while each marque used its own power train , the graham edition , called the hollywood , differed from the skylark in a few minor details . closure . in 1939 , deliveries of the hupmobile skylark finally began . odin , l.c . world in motion 1939 , the whole of the year 's automobile production . belvedere publishing , 2015 . unfortunately , it had taken too many years to produce and most of the orders had been canceled . production lasted only a couple of months , and only 319 skylarks were produced . hupmobile ceased production in late summer . graham-paige suspended production shortly after the last hupmobile rolled off the line . technical innovations . in a constant effort to remain competitive , hupp introduced a number of new features . they were one of the first u.s . automakers to equip their cars with '' free wheeling '' , a device that enjoyed immense , but brief , popularity in automobiles in the 1930s . hupmobile also pioneered fresh-air car heaters with the evanair-conditioner . legacy . in 1914 , eric wickman tried to establish a hupmobile dealership but could not sell them so he started transporting miners in one of the vehicles and founded greyhound lines . the national football league was created at ralph hay 's hupmobile dealership in canton , ohio in 1920 . the skylark 's grille later inspired the grilles used on lincoln continental models in the 1940s . their heater technology became widely adopted in the industry . buick picked up the skylark name for buick skylark in 1953 . the hupmobile building in omaha , nebraska is a prominent historic landmark . '' the endangered list '' landmark news . april 2007 . retrieved 5/12/08 . the dealership building in washington , d.c . is now the h street playhouse . models . for specifications on various hupmobile models : hupmobile club sedan – r hupmobile touring – e . gallery . mhv hupmobile 01.jpg 1915 model n touring car – four cylinder 1925 hupmobile model r ( 16209383894 ) . jpg 1925 model r touring car – four cylinder hupmobile m opera coupe.jpg 1929 model m opera coupe – eight cylinder 1933 hupmobile kk-321 convertible at hatfield heath festival 2017 - 03.jpg 1933 model kk coupe – six cylinder hupmobile model j aero-dynamic sedan 1934 ( 5115709734 ) . jpg 1934 model j aero-dynamic sedan – six cylinder hupmobile skylark 1941 ( 4172297873 ) . jpg 1941 skylark – six cylinder . see also . list of defunct united states automobile manufacturers homer b . roberts . references . external links . hupmobiles in manitoba museum hupmobile building hupmobile welcomed at universalcity hupmobile at universalcity motorbase '' hupmobile '' '' skylark/hollywood ''