Advanced Photo System

design . the film is 24 & nbsp ; mm wide , and has three image formats : h for '' high definition '' ( 30.2 × 16.7 & nbsp ; mm ; aspect ratio 16:9 ; 4×7 '' print ) ( 1.25 crop compared to 36x24mm full frame ) c for '' classic '' ( 25.1 × 16.7 & nbsp ; mm ; aspect ratio 3:2 ; 4×6 '' print ) ( 1.44 crop compared to 36x24mm full frame ) p for '' panorama '' ( 30.2 × 9.5 & nbsp ; mm ; aspect ratio 3:1 ; 4×11 '' print ) ( 1.36 crop compared to 36x24mm full frame ) the '' c '' and '' p '' formats are formed by cropping the 30.2 × 16.7 & nbsp ; mm '' high definition '' image . the full image is recorded on the film , and an image recorded in one aspect ratio can be reprinted in another . the '' c '' format has an equivalent aspect ratio to a 135 film image . most aps cameras ( with the exception of some disposable cameras ) can record all three formats ; the format selection is indicated on the film by a series of exposed squares alongside the image area or recorded on the magnetic coating depending on the camera . in the absence of an operator-specified format , the machine printing an aps roll will use these indicators to determine the output format of each print . . film and cartridge . the film is on a polyethylene naphthalate ( pen ) base , and is housed in a single-spool 39 & nbsp ; mm long plastic cartridge . the basic diameter is 21 & nbsp ; mm , while it measures 30 & nbsp ; mm at the slot where the film exits . the slot is protected by a lightproof door . it is available in 40 , 25 and 15 exposure lengths . the film surface has a transparent magnetic coating , and the camera uses this information exchange ( ix ) system for recording information about each exposure . the camera handles winding and rewinding automatically , to the extent that partially exposed films can , in certain cameras , be removed and used later . numbered symbols ( called 'visual indicators ' ) on the cartridge end indicate the status : full circle : unexposed half circle : partly exposed cross sign : fully exposed but not processed rectangle : processed additionally , a tab on this end of the cartridge indicates that the cartridge has been processed . information exchange . a major distinction of aps film was the ability to record information other than the image . this information exchange was most commonly used for print aspect ratio , but could also be used to record the date and time that the photograph was taken , store a caption , and record exposure data such as shutter speed and aperture setting . this information could be read by the photo printing equipment to determine the print aspect ratio , print information on the back ( or , rarely , the front ) of the photograph , or to improve print quality . two methods for storing information on the film were employed : '' magnetic ix '' and '' optical ix '' . optical ix was employed on less expensive cameras and disposable cameras , and employed a light source to expose a small section of the film , outside of the image negative area . this method was limited to determining the print aspect ratio of the finished print . magnetic ix was used in the more expensive cameras and allowed for more information exchange . most cameras with magnetic ix automatically recorded the exposure date and time on the magnetic layer , with more advanced models allowing the user to specify a predetermined caption to be printed on the photo or record the exposure settings , as well as determine print aspect ratio . magnetic ix caused some problems for photo processors , who found their magnetic reading heads had to be cleaned frequently , or that their equipment 's ability to print this information was limited . processing . unlike 135 film , processed ( developed ) aps film is stored in the original cartridge . for identification , every roll of aps film has a six-digit id code on the label , which is also stored magnetically and is visible on either end of the processed negative . this id is usually printed on the back of every individual print . this id was designed to be an additional convenience both for the photoprocessor ( who can easily match each strip of processed film with its cartridge , and each cartridge to a particular customer 's order ) and for the consumer , who can easily locate the correct cartridge if reprints are desired . to facilitate automatic processing of film , a unique dx number is assigned to the different types of film . aps film is typically processed by using a small machine to transfer the exposed aps film from the original cartridge to a reloadable one , then re-attached to the original cartridge and rewound using another machine after processing . thumb . cameras . thumb the format was introduced in 1996 by kodak , fujifilm , minolta , nikon , canon and others . aps was mainly used for point and shoot amateur cameras , although some slr systems were also created : canon eos ix , minolta vectis , nikon pronea with nikon ix lenses . of these the canon eos ix and the nikon pronea could use the existing 35 & nbsp ; mm slr lenses , whereas minolta opted to create a new lens line-up later shared with an early digital slr . nikon developed the ix series of lens that were lighter and had a smaller image circle ( similar to the nikon dx format used since 2004 ) . although the nikon ix series of lenses were not compatible with the nikon 35 & nbsp ; mm slr , lenses for the nikon 35 & nbsp ; mm slr were compatible with the nikon pronea . using existing lenses meant that the field of view was reduced by around 1.6× , but had the advantage of a larger lens selection . creating a new lens system on the other hand gave the possibility of creating smaller and lighter lenses as they had a smaller image circle to cover . aps slr cameras were too expensive for the high-end amateur market when they first appeared , and professional photographers stuck with 35 & nbsp ; mm cameras , which offered greater image quality and resolution . presently the terms aps-c and aps-h are most often used in reference to various makes of digital slr that contain imaging sensors that are ( very ) roughly equivalent to their respective film dimensions given above ( see crop factor ) . concurrently to their aps slr film cameras , some manufacturers released lenses intended for use on aps film cameras - such as the canon ef 22-55mm - which had a wider field of view to account for the relative-to-35mm crop factor . some of these lenses have survived and are now marketed towards use on '' aps '' digital slrs for the same reason . in reference to digital cameras , aps may also mean active pixel sensor , a type of cmos image sensor . adoption . the advanced photo system was an attempt of a major upgrade of photographic technology for amateurs , but was soon overtaken by the popularity of digital photography . despite the added features , aps never really caught on with professional photographers because of the significantly smaller film area ( 58 % of 135 film ) . color slide film , popular with professional photographers , proved unpopular in aps format and was soon discontinued ( although chromogenic black-and-white ix240 film continued to be produced ) . color print film was normally available only in a limited selection of film speeds . these developments , combined with the fact that auto-loading 35mm cameras could be made almost as compact , as convenient , and as inexpensive as aps-format cameras , prevented aps from attaining greater popularity . aps cameras found most of their success among the consumer point and shoot camera market , but this was too little too late : within five years of the format 's launch , sales had dropped significantly . this was mainly due to the increasing quality and falling prices of digital cameras . in january 2004 , kodak announced it was ceasing aps camera production . both fuji and kodak , the last two manufacturers of aps film , discontinued production in 2011 .