Web Accessibility Initiative

organization . wai develops guidelines and other technical reports through the same process as other parts of the w3c . like other w3c initiatives , the wai consists of several working groups and special interest groups , each with its own focus . only working groups can produce technical reports that become w3c recommendations . a working group can sometimes delegate specific work to a task force , which then presents its results back to the working group for approval . interest groups may produce reports ( for example , as w3c notes ) , but not recommendations . each of these types of groups ( working group , task force , interest group ) can have one or more mailing lists . they meet through conference calls at regular intervals ( typically every week or every other week ) and sometimes use web-based surveys to collect input or comments from participants . they can also meet face to face ( one to five times per year ) . in 1997 judy brewer has been the director of the wai . in this role she has championed improving accessibility of the web for people with disabilities and older users . authoring tool accessibility guidelines working group ( auwg ) . the authoring tool accessibility guidelines working group develops guidelines , techniques and supporting resources for tools that create web content , ranging from desktop html editors to content management systems . the accessibility requirements apply to two types of things : the user interface on the one hand , and the content produced by the tool on the other . the working group consists of representatives from organizations that produce authoring tools , researchers , and other accessibility experts . the working group produced the authoring tool accessibility guidelines 1.0 in 2000 and completed authoring tool accessibility guidelines ( atag ) 2.0 in 2015 . a supporting document , implementing atag 2.0 , provides additional explanation , examples and resources for atag 2.0 . it also published a document on selecting and using authoring tools for web accessibility . . education and outreach working group ( eowg ) . the education and outreach working group develops materials for training and education on web accessibility . this working group has produced documents on a wide range of subjects , including : accessibility features of css curriculum for web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 evaluating web sites for accessibility , a suite of documents about subjects such as conformance evaluation , evaluation approaches for specific contexts , involving users in web accessibility evaluation , and selecting web accessibility evaluation tools planning web accessibility training developing a web accessibility business case for your organization how people with disabilities use the web , a document that describes various fictitious characters with disabilities and how they use the web in different scenarios many introduction pages on the wai website . currently , the working group has a task force to support the work done in the wai-age project . this project published a document that reviews literature about the needs of older users and compares these needs with those of people with disabilities as already addressed in wai guidelines . wai-age project ( ist 035015 ) the education and outreach working group can also review working drafts produced by other wai working groups . evaluation and repair tools working group ( ert wg ) . the evaluation and repair tools working group develops technical specifications that support the accessibility evaluation and repair of web sites . it also maintains a database of tools for evaluating web sites and for making them more accessible ( '' repair '' , '' retrofitting '' ) . the working group consists mainly of developers of such tools and researchers . current work focuses on evaluation and report language ( earl ) : a language for expressing evaluation reports in a machine-readable way evaluation and report language 1.0 guide http vocabulary in rdf , which specifies how http requests and responses can be expressed in rdf representing content in rdf , which specifies how content ( retrieved from the web or a local storage device ) can be represented in rdf representing content in rdf pointer methods in rdf , early work on how locations in and parts of online documents can be expressed in rdf . . protocols & formats working group ( pfwg ) . the protocols & formats working group reviews all w3c technologies for accessibility before they are published as a recommendation . it has also published a note on accessibility issues of captcha , inaccessibility of captcha : alternatives to visual turing tests on the web – w3c working group note 23 november 2005 a paper on natural language usage for people with cognitive disabilities , and initial work on accessibility requirements for xml-based markup languages ( xml accessibility guidelines ) . in 2006 , the working group started development of a set of document and specifications for accessible rich internet application : wai-aria . roadmap for accessible rich internet applications ( wai-aria roadmap ) – w3c working draft 26 september 2006 . this is the first public working draft ; the most recent version can always be found at www.w3.org/tr/wai-aria-roadmap/ w3.org wai-aria implementation guide – w3c working draft 24 february 2009 . research and development interest group ( rdig ) . the goal of the research and development interest group is to increase the incorporation of accessibility considerations into research on web technologies , and to identify projects researching web accessibility and suggest research questions that may contribute to new projects . this interest group has seen very little activity since 2004 . its current charter expired at the end of 2006 . . user agent accessibility guidelines working group ( uawg ) . the user agent accessibility guideline working group develops guidelines , techniques and other documents to promote the accessibility of user agents : browsers and plug-ins . the working group consists mainly of organizations that develop user agents , researchers , and other accessibility experts . uawg published user agent accessibility guidelines ( uaag ) 2.0 in december 2015 . supporting documentation includes : uaag 2.0 reference and uaag mobile examples . the working group published user agent accessibility guidelines 1.0 ( uaag 1.0 ) as a w3c recommendation in 2002 . wai interest group ( wai ig ) . the wai interest group is an open group with a mailing list to which anyone can subscribe . w3c staff post announcements of new wai documents to this mailing list to invite reviews and comments . members of the list also post announcements of relevant events and publications , and ask advice on issues related to web accessibility . the language of the mailing list is english ; there are no parallel mailing lists in other languages . web content accessibility guidelines working group ( wcag wg ) . the web content accessibility guidelines working group produces guidelines , techniques and other supporting documents relating to the accessibility of web content . web content refers to any information you may find on a web site : text , images , forms , sound , video , etcetera , regardless whether these were produced on the server side or on the client side ( with a client-side scripting such as javascript ) . thus , the guidelines also apply to rich internet application . the working group consists of representatives from industry , accessibility consultancies , universities , organizations that represent end users , and other accessibility experts . the working group published the web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 ( wcag 1.0 ) as w3c recommendation in 1999 , followed by techniques documents in 2000 . in 2001 , the working group started work on wcag 2.0 , which became a w3c recommendation on 11 december 2008 . web content accessibility guidelines ( wcag ) 2.0 – w3c recommendation 11 december 2008 w3c : w3c web standard defines accessibility for next generation web ( press release , 11 december 2008 ) . . wai coordination group . the wai coordination group co-ordinates that activities of the wai working groups ( and interest groups ) . its activities are not public . guidelines and technical reports . web content accessibility guidelines ( wcag ) . the web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 ( known as wcag ) were published as a w3c recommendation on 5 may 1999 . a supporting document , techniques for web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 was published as a w3c note on 6 november 2000 . wcag 1.0 is a set of guidelines for making web content more accessible to persons with disabilities . they also help make web content more usable for other devices , including mobile devices ( pdas and cell phones ) . the web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 are recognized as a de facto standard and have served as a basis for legislation and evaluation methodologies in many countries . the wcag working group published wcag 2.0 as a recommendation on 11 december 2008 . wcag 2.0 is based on very different requirements from wcag 1.0 : the guidelines needed to be technology-neutral , whereas wcag 1.0 was strongly based on html and css ; the guidelines needed to be worded as testable statements instead of instructions to authors . the combination of more general applicability and higher precision proved very challenging . in 2018 , the wcag working group published wcag 2.1 . this remains fundamentally similar to the guidance in wcag 2.0 , with some additional recommendations made in particular areas : mobile device accessibility low vision users . authoring tool accessibility guidelines ( atag ) . developed by the authoring tool accessibility guidelines working group , the atag 2.0 became a w3c recommendation on 24 september 2015 . atag is a set of guidelines for developers of any kind of authoring tool for web content : simple html editors , tools that export content for use on the web ( for example , word processors that can save as html ) , tools that produce multimedia , content management systems , learning management systems , social media , etc . the goal is for developers to create tools that : are accessible to authors regardless of disability ; produce accessible content by default ; support and encourage authors to create accessible content . implementing atag 2.0 is a companion document that provides guidance on understanding and implementing atag 2.0 . it gives an explanation of the intent of each success criterion , examples of the success criterion , and additional resources . implementing atag 2.0 recommendations can reduce the costs for accessibility because authors are given the tools they need to create accessible content . list of authoring tools looking to implement atag 2.0 : ckeditor drupal authoring tool accessibility guidelines 1.0 was published in 2000 by the authoring tool accessibility guidelines working group . user agent accessibility guidelines ( uaag ) . developed by the user agent accessibility guidelines working group , the uaag 1.0 became a w3c recommendation on 17 december 2002 . the uaag is a set of guidelines for user agent developers ( such as web browsers and media players ) aimed at making the user agent accessible to users with disabilities . techniques for user agent accessibility guidelines 1.0 was published as a w3c note on the same day ; it provides techniques for satisfying the checkpoints defined in uaag 1.0 . working group members also produced other supporting documents , including initial notes on how to evaluate a user agent for conformance to uaag 1.0 ; this document was not formally approved by the working group . no user agents have been reported as fully conforming to uaag 1.0 . the working group is currently working on a new version of the guidelines . the first public draft of user agent accessibility guidelines 2.0 was published on 12 march 2008 . user agent accessibility guidelines 2.0 : w3c working draft 12 march 2008 . . xml accessibility guidelines ( xag ) . the xag explains how to include features in xml applications ( i.e . markup languages conforming to the xml specification ) that promote accessibility . work on these guidelines stopped in 2002 ; the guidelines are still a working draft . accessible rich internet applications ( wai-aria ) . wai-aria ( web accessibility initiative – accessible rich internet applications ) is a technical specification which became a w3c w3c recommendation on 20 march 2014 . it allows web pages ( or portions of pages ) to declare themselves as applications rather than as static web page , by adding role , property , and state information to dynamic web applications . aria is intended for use by developers of web applications , web browsers , assistive technology , and accessibility evaluation tools . . see also . knowbility section 508 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 – a federal law requiring us government electronic and information technology ( eit ) to meet accessibility requirements web accessibility . references . external links . official website web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 web content accessibility guidelines 2.0 ( w3c recommendation 11 december 2008 ) authoring tool accessibility guidelines ( atag ) 2.0 implementing atag 2.0 authoring tool accessibility guidelines 1.0 user agent accessibility guidelines 1.0 xml accessibility guidelines working draft education & outreach working group research and development interest group getting started wai early days