Name

etymology . the word name comes from old english nama ; cognate with old high german ( ohg ) namo , sanskrit ( nāman ) , latin nomen , greek ( onoma ) , and persian ( nâm ) , from the proto-indo-european ( pie ) h₁nómn̥ . ; the asterisk before a word indicates that it is a hypothetical construction , not an attested form . outside indo-european , it can be connected to proto-uralic nime . naming conventions . a naming convention is a set of agreed , stipulated , or generally accepted convention ( norm ) for naming things parents may follow a naming convention when selecting names for their children . some have chosen alphabetical names by birth order . in some east asian cultures it is common for one syllable in a two-syllable given name to be a generation name which is the same for immediate siblings . in many cultures it is common for the son to be named after the father or a grandfather . in certain african cultures , such as in cameroon , the eldest son gets the family name for his given name . in other cultures , the name may include the place of residence , or the place of birth . the roman naming convention denotes social rank . major naming conventions include : in astronomy , planetary nomenclature in classics , roman naming conventions in computer programming , identifier naming conventions in computer networking , computer naming schemes in the sciences , systematic names for a variety of things products may follow a naming convention . automobiles typically have a binomial name , a '' make '' ( manufacturer ) and a '' model '' , in addition to a model year , such as a 2007 chevrolet corvette . sometimes there is a name for the car 's '' decoration level '' or '' trim line '' as well : e.g . , cadillac escalade ext platinum , after the precious metal . computers often have increasing numbers in their names to signify the next generation . courses at schools typically follow a naming convention : an abbreviation for the subject area and then a number ordered by increasing level of difficulty . many numbers ( e.g . , bank accounts , government ids , credit cards , etc . ) are not random but have an internal structure and convention . virtually all organizations that assign names or numbers will follow some convention in generating these identifiers . airline flight numbers , space shuttle flight numbers , even phone numbers all have an internal convention . personal name . a personal name is an identifying word or words by which an individual is intimately known or designated . it is traditional for individuals to have a personal name ( also called a given name or first name ) and a surname ( also called a last name or family name because it is shared by members of the same family ) . middle names are also used by many people as a third identifier , and can be chosen for personal reasons including signifying relationships , preserving pre-marital/maiden names ( a popular practice in the united states ) , and to perpetuate family names . a common practice in many countries is patronym which means that a component of a personal name is based on the given name of one 's father . a less common practice in countries is matronym which means that a component of a personal name is based on the given name of one ’ s mother . the practice of using middle names dates back to ancient rome , where it was common for members of the elite to have a praenomen ( a personal name ) , a nomen ( a family name , not exactly used the way middle names are used today ) , and a cognomen ( a name representing an individual attribute or the specific branch of a person 's family ) . middle names eventually fell out of use , but regained popularity in europe during the nineteenth century . besides first , middle , and last names , individuals may also have nicknames , aliases , or titles . nicknames are informal names used by friends or family to refer to a person ( '' chris '' may be used as a short form of the personal name '' christopher '' ) . a person may choose to use an alias , or a fake name , instead of their real name , possibly to protect or obscure their identity . people may also have titles designating their role in an institution or profession ( members of royal families may use various terms such as king , queen , duke , or duchess to signify their positions of authority or their relation to the throne ) . . names of names . in onomastic terminology , personal names of men are called andronyms ( from ancient greek ἀνήρ / man , and ὄνομα / name ) , while personal names of women are called gynonyms ( from ancient greek γυνή / woman , and ὄνομα / name ) . brand names . developing a name for a brand or product is heavily influenced by marketing research and strategy to be appealing and marketable . the brand name is often a neologism or pseudoword , such as kodak or sony . religious names . thumb in the ancient world , particularly in the ancient near-east ( israel , mesopotamia , egypt , persia ) names were thought to be extremely powerful and act , in some ways , as a separate manifestation of a person or deity . '' egyptian religion '' , e . a . wallis budge '' , arkana 1987 edition , this viewpoint is responsible both for the reluctance to use the yhwh of god in hebrew writing or speech , as well as the common understanding in ancient magic that magical rituals had to be carried out '' in someone 's name '' . by invoking a god or spirit by name , one was thought to be able to summon that spirit 's power for some kind of miracle or magic ( see luke 9:49 , in which the disciples claim to have seen a man driving out demons using the name of jesus ) . this understanding passed into later religious tradition , for example the stipulation in catholic exorcism that the demon can not be expelled until the exorcist has forced it to give up its name , at which point the name may be used in a stern command which will drive the demon away . biblical names . in the old testament , the names of individuals are meaningful , and a change of name indicates a change of status . for example , the patriarch abram and his wife sarai were renamed '' abraham '' and '' sarah '' at the institution of the abrahamic covenant ( genesis 17:4 , 17:15 ) . simon was renamed peter when he was given the keys to heaven . this is recounted in the gospel of matthew chapter 16 , which according to roman catholic teaching catechism of the catholic church , para 881 : '' the episcopal college and its head , the pope '' was when jesus promised to saint peter the power to take binding actions . the routledge companion to the christian church by gerard mannion and lewis s . mudge ( jan 30 , 2008 ) page 235 proper names are '' saturated with meaning '' . baruch hochman , character in literature ( cornell university press , 1985 ) , 37 . throughout the bible , characters are given names at birth that reflect something of significance or describe the course of their lives . for example : solomon meant peace , and the king with that name was the first whose reign was without war . likewise , joseph named his firstborn son manasseh ( hebrew : '' causing to forget '' ) ( genesis 41:51 ) ; when joseph also said , '' god has made me forget all my troubles and everyone in my father 's family . '' biblical jewish people did not have surnames which were passed from generation to generation . however , they were typically known as the child of their father . for example : דוד בן ישי ( david ben yishay ) meaning , david , son of jesse ( 1 samuel 17:12,58 ) . today , this style of name is still used in jewish religious rites . indian name . indian names are based on a variety of systems and naming conventions , which vary from region to region . names are also influenced by religion and caste and may come from epics . india 's population speaks a wide variety of languages and nearly every major religion in the world has a following in india . this variety makes for subtle , often confusing , differences in names and naming styles . due to greater india , several names across south and southeast asia are influenced by or adapted from indian names or words . for some indians , their birth name is different from their official name ; the birth name starts with a randomly selected name from the hindu astrology ( based on the nakshatra or lunar mansion corresponding to the person 's birth ) . many children are given three names , sometimes as a part of religious teaching . quranic names ( arabic names ) . we can see many arabic names in the quran and in muslim people . like the names allah , muhammad , khwaja , ismail , mehboob , suhelahmed , shoheb ameena , aaisha , sameena , rumana , swaleha , etc . the name mohammed and ahmed are same , for example suhel ahmad or mohammad suhel are same . in islam and in christianity we can see many similar names like ( the first name is islamic name and the second name is christian name islamic/christian ) adam/adam , yusuf/joseph , dawood/david , rumana/romana , maryam/mary , nuh/noah , etc . name use by animals . the use of personal names is not unique to humans . dolphins and green-rumped parrotlets also use symbolic names to address contact call to specific individuals . individual dolphins have distinctive signature whistles , to which they will respond even when there is no other information to clarify which dolphin is being referred to . see also . references . sources . . further reading . '' names '' by sam cumming , stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ( sep ) , a philosophical dissertation on the syntax and semantics of names matthews , elaine ; hornblower , simon ; fraser , peter marshall , greek personal names : their value as evidence , proceedings of the british academy ( 104 ) , oxford university press , 2000 . name and form – from sacred texts buddhism . external links . lexicon of greek personal names , oxford ( over 35,000 published names ) behind the name , the etymology of first names the name tradition in the christian culture kate monk 's onomastikon names over the world throughout the history