Brain transplant

existing challenges . one of the most significant barriers to the procedure is the inability of nerve tissue to heal properly ; scarred nerve tissue does not transmit signals well , which is why a spinal cord injury is so devastating . research at the wistar institute of the university of pennsylvania involving tissue-regenerating mice ( known as mrl mice ) may provide pointers for further research as to how to regenerate nerves without scarring . it is possible that a completely clean cut will not generate scarred tissue . alternatively , a brain–computer interface can be used connecting the subject to their own body . a study using a monkey as a subject shows that it is possible to directly use commands from the brain , bypass the spinal cord and enable hand function . an advantage is that this interface can be adjusted after the surgical interventions are done where nerves can not be reconnected without surgery . also , for the procedure to be practical , the age of the donated body must be sufficient : an adult brain can not fit into a skull that has not reached its full growth , which occurs at age 9–12 years . when organs are transplanted , aggressive rejection by the host 's immune system can occur . because immune cells of the cns contribute to the maintenance of neurogenesis and spatial learning abilities in adulthood , the brain has been hypothesized to be an immune privilege ( unrejectable ) organ . mike darwin : but what will the neighbors think ? a discourse on the history and rationale of neurosuspension . cryonics , october 1988 . however , immunorejection of a functional transplanted brain has been reported in monkeys . . partial brain transplant . in 1982 , dr . dorothy t . krieger , chief of endocrinology at mount sinai medical center in new york city , achieved success with a partial brain transplant in mice . in 1998 , a team of surgeons from the university of pittsburgh medical center attempted to transplant a group of brain cells to alma cerasini , who had suffered a severe stroke that caused the loss of mobility in her right limbs as well as limited speech . the team 's hope was that the cells would correct the listed damage . . in science fiction . the whole-body transplant is just one of several means of putting a consciousness into a new body that have been explored in science fiction . in the film get out ( 2017 ) , written and directed by jordan peele , a young , white woman , rose armitage ( allison williams ) , lures her young , black boyfriend , chris washington ( daniel kaluuya ) , to her family 's estate to be auctioned-off for a brain transplant procedure that enables older , white residents of the armitage community to obtain a pseudo-immortality in a black person 's body . the armitage family is the founder of the cult the order of the coagula , in which missy armitage ( catherine keener ) , a psychiatrist , uses hypnosis to subdue the consciousness of black persons to the sunken place , and dean armitage ( bradley whitford ) , a neurosurgeon , transplants the brain of the white person into the black person 's body . due to the human body 's need for motor functions , only a partial brain transplant is possible . the sunken place is essential to suppressing the conscious minds of the hosts while the brain tissue is implanted into their skulls . once the brain transplant has been completed , the white person 's consciousness takes control over the black host body ; meanwhile , the consciousness of the black person remains in the sunken place . while in the sunken place , the black person 's consciousness is completely intact and aware of what is going on , yet has no control over their body . in maxwell atoms ' cartoon network series evil con carne ( 2003–2004 ) , hector con carne was reduced to a brain and a stomach and both of them were put in jars attached to the body of a russian circus bear . hector 's brain is the main character of the cartoon . edgar rice burroughs ' barsoom involves a surgeon who does this as his main operation , and a man from earth , the narrator and main character , who is trained to do it as well . in neil r . jones professeur jameson stories ( 1931 ) , the main character is the last earthman , whose brain is saved by some alien cyborgs called the zoromes , and is inserted into a robotic body , making him immortal . robert heinlein 's 1970 science fiction novel , i will fear no evil , features a main character named johann sebastian bach smith whose entire brain is transplanted into his deceased secretary 's skull . in the horror film the skeleton key , the protagonist , caroline , discovers that the old couple she is looking after are poor voodoo witch doctors who stole the bodies of two young , privileged children in their care using a ritual which allows a soul to swap bodies . unfortunately the evil old couple also trick caroline and their lawyer into the same procedure , and both end up stuck in old dying bodies unable to speak while the witch doctors walk off with their young bodies . in anne rice 's the tale of the body thief , the vampire lestat discovers a man , raglan james , who can will himself into another person 's body . lestat demands that the procedure be used on him to allow him to be human once again , but soon finds that he has made an error and is forced to recapture james in his vampiric form so he can take his body back . similar in many ways to this is the idea of mind uploading , promoted by marvin minsky and others with a mechanistic view of natural intelligence and an optimistic outlook regarding artificial intelligence . it is also a goal of raëlism , a small cult based in florida , france , and quebec . while the ultimate goal of transplanting is transfer of the brain to a new body optimized for it by genetics , proteomics , and/or other medical procedures , in uploading the brain itself moves nowhere and may even be physically destroyed or discarded ; the goal is rather to duplicate the information patterns contained within the brain . another similar literary theme , though different from either procedure described above , is the transplanting of a human brain into an artificial , usually robotic , body . examples of this include : caprica ; ghost in the shell ; robocop ; the dc comics superhero robotman ; the cybermen from the doctor who television series ; the cymeks in the legends of dune series ; or full-body cyborgs in many manga or works in the cyberpunk genre . in one episode of star trek , spock 's brain is stolen and installed in a large computer-like structure ; and in '' i , mudd '' uhura is offered immortality in an android body . the novel harvest of stars by poul anderson features many central characters who undergo such transplants , and deals with the difficult decisions facing a human contemplating such a procedure . in the star wars expanded universe the shadow droids were created by taking the brains of grievously wounded tie fighter pilot aces . after surgically transplanting them into a protective cocoon filled with nutrient fluids . they were surgically connected to cybernetic hardware that gave them external sensors , flight control and tactical computers that augmented their reflexes beyond the biological limit ; at the cost of their humanity . emperor palpatine also imbued them with the dark side giving them a sixth sense , and making them into extensions of his own will .