Aristide Briand

early life . he was born in nantes , loire-atlantique of a petit bourgeois family . he attended the nantes lycée , where , in 1877 , he developed a close friendship with jules verne . he studied law , and soon went into politics , associating himself with the most advanced movements , writing articles for the syndicalist journal le peuple , and directing the lanterne for some time . from this he passed to the petite république , leaving it to found l'humanité , in collaboration with jean jaurès . . activism . at the same time he was prominent in the movement for the formation of trade unions , and at the congress of workers at nantes in 1894 , he secured the adoption of the labor union idea against the adherents of jules guesde . from that time , briand was one of the leaders of the french socialist party . in 1902 , after several unsuccessful attempts , he was elected deputy . he declared himself a strong partisan of the union of the left in what was known as the bloc , to check the reactionary deputies of the right . from the beginning of his career in the chamber of deputies , briand was occupied with the question of the separation of church and state . he was appointed the reporter of the commission charged with the preparation of the 1905 law on separation , and his report at once marked him out as one of the coming leaders . he succeeded in carrying his project through with but slight modifications , and without dividing the parties upon whose support he relied . he was the principal author of the law of separation , but , not content with preparing it ; he wished to apply it as well . the ministry of maurice rouvier was allowing disturbances during the taking of inventories of church property , a clause of the law for which briand was not responsible . consequently , he accepted the portfolio of public instruction and worship in the sarrien ministry ( 1906 ) . so far as the chamber was concerned , his success was complete . but the acceptance of a position in a bourgeois ministry led to his exclusion from the unified socialist party ( march 1906 ) . as opposed to jaurès , he contended that the socialists should co-operate actively with the radicals in all matters of reform , and not stand aloof to await the complete fulfillment of their ideals . he himself was atheist . he became a freemason in the lodge le trait d'union in july 1887 while the lodge did not record his name in spite of his repeated requests . the lodge declared '' unworthy '' to him on 6 september 1889 . in 1895 he joined the lodge les chevaliers du travail that was established in 1893 . . prime minister of france . pre-war . briand served as minister of justice under clemenceau in 1908–9 , before succeeding clemenceau as prime minister on 24 july 1909 , serving until 2 march 1911 . in social policy , briand 's first ministry was notable for the passage of a bill in april 1910 for workers ' and farmers ' pensions . that same year , compulsory sickness and old-age insurance was introduced for 8 million rural and urban workers . however , a law court decision in 1912 that questioned the legality of compulsion '' enabled a large proportion of employers and workers to evade the law . '' foundations of the welfare state , 2nd edition by pat thane , published 1996 briand again served as minister of justice 1912-13 under the premiership of the rightwinger raymond poincaré ( soon to become president of france ) , before again becoming prime minister for a few months from 21 january 1913 until 22 march 1913 . first world war . . 1914-15 . at the end of august 1914 , following the outbreak of the first world war , briand again became minister of justice when rené viviani reconstructed his ministry . in the winter of 1914-15 briand was one of those who pushed for an expedition to salonika , in the hope of helping serbia , and perhaps bringing greece , romania , bulgaria and italy into the war as a pro-french bloc , which would also act as a barrier to future russian expansion in the balkans . he got on well with lloyd george , who was also , contrary to military advice , keen for operations in the balkans , and had a long talk with him on 4 february 1915 . briand was the main mover in persuading maurice sarrail to accept the salonika command in august 1915 . greenhalgh 2014 , p.100 & 108 in october 1915 following second battle of champagne and the entry of bulgaria , briand again became prime minister ( 29 october 1915 ) , succeeding rené viviani . he also became foreign minister for the first time , a post held by théophile delcassé until the final weeks of the previous government . he was also pledged to '' unité de front '' , not just between the military and parliament but also closer links with the other allies , a pledge met with '' prolonged , thunderous applause '' by the deputies . greenhalgh 2005 , p . 36 & 38-9 draft proposals for allied cooperation , prepared by lord esher and maurice hankey were on the table by the time british prime minister h . h . asquith visited paris on 17 november ( mainly to discuss greece , and only his second wartime talks with france ; the first had been with viviani in july 1915 ) . the opening weeks of briand 's ministry required him to broker an agreement between joseph gallieni , the new war minister , and joseph joffre , newly ( 2 december ) promoted to '' commander-in-chief of the french armies '' ( generalissimo ) over all theatres apart from north africa . there had already been friction between the two men when gallieni , joffre 's former superior , had been recalled from retirement to be military governor of paris during the first battle of the marne earlier in the war . doughty 2005 , pp . 229–32 . 1916 . in the poisonous atmosphere after the opening of the battle of verdun ( 21 february 1916 ) , gallieni read an angry report at the council of ministers on 7 march criticising joffre 's conduct of operations over the last eighteen months and demanding ministerial control , then resigned . he was falsely suspected of wanting to launch a military takeover of the government . clayton 2003 , pp . 97–8 briand knew that publication of the report would damage morale and might bring down the government . gallieni was persuaded to remain in office until a replacement had been agreed . doughty 2005 , pp . 284–5 pierre roques was appointed after it had been ensured that joffre had no objections . doughty 2005 , p . 285 the first formal allied conference met in paris on 26 march 1916 ( italy did not participate ) but initially made little impact , perhaps because briand had vetoed the british suggestion of a permanent secretariat , french ministers ' meetings were not then minuted , whereas in the uk at that time the prime minister had to write a report of meetings to the king , until the end of the year when formal agenda and minutes , drawn up by hankey , were introduced by lloyd george or perhaps because there had been three informal sets of anglo-french talks in the last quarter of 1915 , one of which , the chantilly meeting , had already seen strategy plans drawn up . late in march 1916 joffre and briand blocked the withdrawal of five british divisions from salonika . briand was widely suspected of wanting to make his mistress princess marie bonaparte , who was born a bonaparte . palmer 1998 , p . 55 in the spring of 1916 briand urged sarrail to take the offensive in the balkans to take some of the heat off verdun , although the british , preoccupied with the upcoming somme offensive , declined to send further troops and sarrail 's offensive that summer was not a success . greenhalgh 2014 , p.159 briand also attended the conference at saleux on 31 may 1916 about the upcoming anglo-french offensive on the somme , with president poincaré ( on whose train it was held ) , general foch ( commander , army group north ) and the british commander-in-chief general haig . greenhalgh 2005 , p.50 the first secret session of the chamber of deputies was held in june 1916 to discuss the shortcomings of the defence at verdun . the government won a vote of confidence but with a clause demanding '' effective supervision '' of the army . the parliamentary army commission elected abel ferry as a commissioner ( 1 august ) . by october ferry was presenting his fourth report on army railways , to joffre 's fury . greenhalgh 2014 , p . 167-8 late in 1916 roques had been sent on a fact-finding mission to salonika after britain , italy and russia had pushed for the dismissal of the theatre commander sarrail . to briand 's and joffre 's surprise , roques returned recommending that sarrail be reinforced and that sarrail no longer report to joffre . coming on the back of the disappointing results of the somme campaign and the defeat of romania , roques ' report further discredited briand and joffre and added to the parliamentary deputies ' demands for a closed session . doughty 2005 , p318-20 in november ferry presented a report on the shortage of manpower . a secret session was held on 21 november about calling up the class of 1918 i.e . teenagers who would not normally have been liable for military service until that year followed by another a week later . on 27 november briand proposed that joffre be effectively demoted to commander-in-chief in northern france , with both he and sarrail reporting to the war minister , although he withdrew this proposal after joffre threatened resignation . the closed session began on 28 november and lasted until 7 december . briand had little choice but to make concessions to preserve his government , and in a speech of 29 november he promised to repeal joffre 's promotion of december 1915 and in vague terms to appoint a general as technical adviser to the government . briand survived a confidence vote by 344-160 ( six months earlier he had won a confidence vote 440-80 ) . . reconstructed government . on 13 december briand formed a new government , reducing the size of the council of ministers from 23 to 10 and replacing roques with hubert lyautey . that day his government survived a vote of confidence by 30 votes , and joffre was appointed '' general-in-chief of the french armies , technical adviser to the government , consultative member of the war committee '' ( he was persuaded to accept by briand , but soon found that he had been stripped of real power and asked to be relieved altogether on 26 december ) , with nivelle replacing him as commander-in-chief of the armies of the north and northeast . doughty 2005 , p320-1 a senate secret session on 21 december attacked briand 's plans for a smaller war cabinet as '' yet another level of bureaucracy '' ; on 23 december briand pledged that he would continue to push for a '' permanent allied bureau '' to secure constant cooperation between the allied nations . greenhalgh 2005 , p.137 briand 's reduced war cabinet was formed in imitation of the small executive body formed by lloyd george , just appointed prime minister of britain , but in practice briand 's often met just prior to meetings of the main cabinet . painlevé declined the job of war minister as he would have preferred petain as commander-in-chief rather than the inexperienced nivelle . greenhalgh 2014 , p.172 like president poincaré briand had thought petain too cautious to be suitable . greenhalgh 2014 , p.170 nivelle 's appointment caused great friction between the british and french high commands , after lloyd george attempted to have haig placed under nivelle 's command at the calais conference in january . briand only reluctantly agreed to attend another allied conference in london ( 12–13 march 1917 ) to resolve the matter . greenhalgh 2005 , p.139 briand resigned as prime minister on 20 march 1917 as a result of disagreements over the prospective nivelle offensive , to be succeeded by alexandre ribot . 1920s . briand returned to power in 1921 . he supervised the french role in the washington naval conference of 1921–22 . three factors guided the french strategy and necessitated a mediterranean focus : the french navy needed to carry a great many goods , the mediterranean was the axis of chief interest , and a supply of oil was essential . the primary goal was to defend french north africa , and briand made practical choices , for naval policy was a reflection of overall foreign policy . the conference agreed on the american proposal that capital ships be limited to a ratio of 5 to 5 to 3 for the united states , britain , and japan , with italy and france allocated 1.7 each . france 's participation reflected its need to deal with its diminishing power and reduced human , material , and financial resources . briand 's efforts to come to an agreement over reparations with the germans failed in the wake of german intransigence , and he was succeeded by the more bellicose raymond poincaré . in the wake of the ruhr crisis , however , briand 's more conciliatory style became more acceptable , and he returned to the quai d'orsay in 1925 . he would remain foreign minister until his death in 1932 . during this time , he was a member of 14 cabinets , four of which he headed himself in 1925-1926 and 1929 . briand negotiated the briand-ceretti agreement with the vatican , giving the french government a role in the appointment of catholic bishops . kellogg–briand pact . aristide briand received the 1926 nobel peace prize together with gustav stresemann of germany for the locarno treaties ( austen chamberlain of the united kingdom had received a share of the peace prize a year earlier for the same agreement ) . a 1927 proposal by briand and united states secretary of state frank b . kellogg for a universal pact outlawing war led the following year to the pact of paris , aka the kellogg–briand pact . . briand plan for european union . as foreign minister briand formulated an original proposal for a new economic union of europe . described as briand 's locarno diplomacy and as an aspect of franco-german rapprochement , it was his answer to germany 's quick economic recovery and future political power . briand made his proposals in a speech in favor of a european union in the league of nations on 5 september 1929 , and in 1930 , in his '' memorandum on the organization of a regime of european federal union '' for the government of france . the idea was to provide a framework to contain france 's former enemy while preserving as much of the 1919 versailles settlement as possible . the briand plan entailed the economic collaboration of the great industrial areas of europe and the provision of political security to eastern europe against soviet threats . the basis was economic cooperation , but his fundamental concept was political , for it was political power that would determine economic choices . the plan , under the memorandum on the organization of a system of european federal union , was in the end presented as a french initiative to the league of nations . with the death of his principal supporter , german foreign minister gustav stresemann , and the onset of the great depression in 1929 , briand 's plan was never adopted but it suggested an economic framework for developments after world war ii that eventually resulted in the european union . d . weigall and p . stirk , eds . , the origins and development of the european community ( leicester university press , 1992 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 11–15 . in evaluating his internationalism , historian douglas houston concludes : : briand 's internationalism is easy to deride ; nothing he achieved was durable , and his aim seemed no more than old-fashioned security fired by a personal ambition he made little effort to hide . yet no one worked harder or more imaginatively to give the new international system life . his internationalism sprang from the realization that france could not be secure until everyone else was . he may have embraced principle for reasons of realpolitik , but there is little doubt that he became convinced of the justice of his cause . douglas w . houston , '' briand , aristede pierre henri '' in warren f . kuehl , ed . , biographical dictionary of internationalists ( 1983 ) p 111-13 . . governments . briand 's first government , 24 july 1909 – 3 november 1910 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of the interior and worship stéphen pichon – minister of foreign affairs jean brun – minister of war georges cochery – minister of finance rené viviani – minister of labour and social security provisions louis barthou – minister of justice auguste boué de lapeyrère – minister of marine gaston doumergue – minister of public instruction and fine arts joseph ruau – minister of agriculture georges trouillot – minister of colonies alexandre millerand – minister of public works , posts , and telegraphs jean dupuy – minister of commerce and industry . briand 's second government , 3 november 1910 – 2 march 1911 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of the interior and worship stéphen pichon – minister of foreign affairs jean brun – minister of war louis lucien klotz – minister of finance louis lafferre – minister of labour and social security provisions théodore girard – minister of justice auguste boué de lapeyrère – minister of marine maurice faure – minister of public instruction and fine arts maurice raynaud – minister of agriculture jean morel – minister of colonies louis puech – minister of public works , posts , and telegraphs jean dupuy – minister of commerce and industry changes 23 february 1911 – briand succeeds brun as interim minister of war . briand 's third and fourth governments , 21 january – 22 march 1913 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of the interior charles jonnart – minister of foreign affairs eugène étienne – minister of war louis lucien klotz – minister of finance rené besnard – minister of labour and social security provisions louis barthou – minister of justice pierre baudin – minister of marine théodore steeg – minister of public instruction and fine arts fernand david – minister of agriculture jean morel – minister of colonies jean dupuy – minister of public works , posts , and telegraphs gabriel guist'hau – minister of commerce and industry . briand 's fifth government , 29 october 1915 – 12 december 1916 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of foreign affairs joseph galliéni – minister of war louis malvy – minister of the interior alexandre ribot – minister of finance albert métin – minister of labour and social security provisions rené viviani – minister of justice lucien lacaze – minister of marine paul painlevé – minister of public instruction and fine arts jules méline – minister of agriculture gaston doumergue – minister of colonies marcel sembat – minister of public works étienne clémentel – minister of commerce , industry , posts , and telegraphs léon bourgeois – minister of state denys cochin – minister of state émile combes – minister of state charles de freycinet – minister of state jules guesde – minister of state changes 15 november 1915 – paul painlevé becomes minister of inventions for the national defense in addition to being minister of public instruction and fine arts . 16 march 1916 – pierre auguste roques succeeds galliéni as minister of war . briand 's sixth government , 12 december 1916 – 20 march 1917 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of foreign affairs hubert lyautey – minister of war albert thomas – minister of armaments and war manufacturing louis malvy – minister of the interior alexandre ribot – minister of finance étienne clémentel – minister of commerce , industry , labour , social security provisions , agriculture , posts , and telegraphs rené viviani – minister of justice , public instruction , and fine arts lucien lacaze – minister of marine édouard herriot – minister of supply , public works , and transport gaston doumergue – minister of colonies changes 15 march 1917 – lucien lacaze succeeds lyautey as interim minister of war . briand 's seventh government , 16 january 1921 – 15 january 1922 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of foreign affairs louis barthou – minister of war pierre marraud – minister of the interior paul doumer – minister of finance charles daniel-vincent – minister of labour laurent bonnevay – minister of justice gabriel guist'hau – minister of marine léon bérard – minister of public instruction and fine arts andré maginot – minister of war pensions , grants , and allowances edmond lefebvre du prey – minister of agriculture albert sarraut – minister of colonies yves le trocquer – minister of public works georges leredu – minister of hygiene , welfare work , and social security provisions lucien dior – minister of commerce and industry louis loucheur – minister of liberated regions . briand 's eighth government , 28 november 1925 – 9 march 1926 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of foreign affairs paul painlevé – minister of war camille chautemps – minister of the interior louis loucheur – minister of finance antoine durafour – minister of labour , hygiene , welfare work , and social security provisions rené renoult – minister of justice georges leygues – minister of marine édouard daladier – minister of public instruction and fine arts paul jourdain – minister of pensions jean durand – minister of agriculture léon perrier – minister of colonies anatole de monzie – minister of public works charles daniel-vincent – minister of commerce and industry changes 16 december 1925 – paul doumer succeeds loucheur as minister of finance . briand 's ninth government , 9 march – 23 june 1926 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of foreign affairs paul painlevé – minister of war louis malvy – minister of the interior raoul péret – minister of finance antoine durafour – minister of labour , hygiene , welfare work , and social security provisions pierre laval – minister of justice georges leygues – minister of marine lucien lamoureux – minister of public instruction and fine arts paul jourdain – minister of pensions jean durand – minister of agriculture léon perrier – minister of colonies anatole de monzie – minister of public works charles daniel-vincent – minister of commerce and industry changes 10 april 1926 – jean durand succeeds malvy as minister of the interior . françois binet succeeds durand as minister of agriculture . briand 's tenth government , 23 june – 19 july 1926 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of foreign affairs adolphe guillaumat – minister of war jean durand – minister of the interior joseph caillaux – minister of finance antoine durafour – minister of labour , hygiene , welfare work , and social security provisions pierre laval – minister of justice georges leygues – minister of marine bertrand nogaro – minister of public instruction and fine arts paul jourdain – minister of pensions françois binet – minister of agriculture léon perrier – minister of colonies charles daniel-vincent – minister of public works fernand chapsal – minister of commerce and industry . briand 's eleventh government , 29 july – 3 november 1929 . aristide briand – president of the council and minister of foreign affairs paul painlevé – minister of war andré tardieu – minister of the interior henry chéron – minister of finance louis loucheur – minister of labour , hygiene , welfare work , and social security provisions louis barthou – minister of justice georges leygues – minister of marine laurent eynac – minister of air pierre marraud – minister of public instruction and fine arts louis antériou – minister of pensions jean hennessy – minister of agriculture andré maginot – minister of colonies pierre forgeot – minister of public works georges bonnefous – minister of commerce and industry