Petronia gens

origin . the petronii were of sabine origin , as indicated by the surname sabinus , belonging to the legendary figure from the time of tarquin , and alluded to by coins minted by publius petronius turpilianus , depicting the death of tarpeia , whom according to legend was persuaded by the sabines under titus tatius to open the citadel to them , in the time of romulus . eckhel , vol . v , p . 270 ff , vol . vi . , p . 99 . the nomen petronius appears to be a patronymic surname derived from the oscan praenomen petro or petrus , the oscan equivalent of the latin quartus , fourth , and making petronius cognate with a number of obscure latin gentilicia , such as quartius and quartinius . petersen , '' the numerical praenomina of the romans '' , p . 353 and note 24 . an alternative derivation would be from the cognomen petrus , a rustic , although this may also derive from the oscan praenomen . petronius belongs to a large class of gentilicia derived from other names ending in -o , most of which are plebeian . chase , pp . 118–120 . . praenomina . the early petronii used the praenomina gaius , marcus , and publius , all of which were very common throughout roman history . other names occur toward the end of the second century ad , including quintus , lucius , and sextus , but these may have been inherited from other families . members . petronius sabinus , said to have copied the sibylline books during the reign of lucius tarquinius superbus , with the assistance of a certain marcus tullius or atilius . valerius maximus , i . 1 . § 13 . dionysius , iv . 62 . gaius petronius , one of the legatus sent to anatolia in 156 bc , in order to study the conflict between attalus of pergamon and prusias of bithynia . polybius , xxxii . 26 . marcus petronius passer , mentioned in passing by varro in rerum rusticarum , his treatise on agriculture . varro , rerum rusticarum , iii . 2 . § 2 . petronius , a military tribune serving in the army of marcus licinius crassus , the triumvir , in 55 bc . petronius was with crassus when his commander was slain by the parthians . plutarch , '' the life of crassus '' , 30 , 31 . petronius , one of the conspirators in the assassination of caesar , was apprehended by mark antony in asia , and put to death . appian , bellum civile , v . 4 . gaius petronius , governor of egypt , circa 25 to 21 bc , fought against amanirenas of kush , also known as '' candace of aethiopia '' , and took a number of towns . a friend of herod , petronius supplied judaea with grain during a famine . cassius dio , liv . 5 . strabo , xvii . p . 820 . josephus , antiquitates judaïcae , xv . 9 . § 2 . publius petronius turpilianus , triumvir monetalis in the time of augustus , is known from a number of remarkable coins . dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology , vol . iii , p . 1192 ( '' publius petronius turpilianus '' ) . petronius , perhaps the same person as the physician marcus petronius heras , a writer on pharmacy mentioned by a number of sources . he must have lived toward the beginning of the first century ad . dioscorides , de materia medica , praef . vol . i , p . 2 . pliny the elder , xx . 32 . galen , de compositione medicamentorum per genera , ii . 5 , vol . xiii , p . 502 , v . 11 , p . 831 . marcus petronius heras , a physician mentioned in an inscription recorded by jan gruter , perhaps the same person as the writer on pharmacy . . publius petronius , consul suffectus in ad 19 , serving from the kalends of july to the end of the year . tacitus , annales , iii . 49 , vi . 45 . gaius petronius umbrinus , consul suffectus for the months of september to december , ad 25 . fasti arvalium , ; 1991 , 306 ; 1991 , 307 . petronius , the centurion charged with guarding the tomb of jesus , in the non-canonical gospel of peter . publius petronius , succeeded lucius vitellius as governor of syria from ad 37 to 41 , with orders to install a statue of caligula in the temple at jerusalem . he was a legatus under claudius . josephus , antiquitates judaïcae , xviii . 9 . § 2 , bellum judaïcum , ii . 10 . seneca the younger , apocolocyntosis . gaius petronius pontius nigrinus , consul in ad 37 , the year which saw the death of tiberius . cassius dio , lviii . 27 . suetonius , '' the life of tiberius '' , 73 . tacitus , annales , vi . 45 . gallivan , '' the fasti for the reign of gaius '' . aulus petronius lurco , consul suffectus in ad 58 , serving from the kalends of july to the end of the year . gallivan , '' the fasti for the reign of nero '' , pp . 291 , 309 . gaius petronius arbiter an intimate friend of nero , noted for his luxury and decadence . he was appointed proconsul of bithynia , and later held the consulship . accused of treason , he slowly weakened himself by bloodletting , until his death in ad 66 . he is best known as the author of the satyricon . tacitus , annales , xvi . 17–19 . pliny the elder , xxxvii . 2 . dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology , vol . iii , pp . 215–218 ( '' gaius petronius '' ) . publius petronius turpilianus , consul in ad 61 , and governor of britain from 61 to 63 . after the suppression of the pisonian conspiracy , he was among those to whom nero awarded the triumphal insignia ; but nero 's favour caused galba to have him put to death . tacitus , annales , xiv . 29 , 39 , xv . 72 , agricola , 16 , historiae , i . 6 , 37 . plutarch , '' the life of galba '' , 15 . publius petronius niger , consul suffectus for the months of may to august in ad 62 . eck , '' miscellanea prosopographica '' , pp . 227 ff . titus petronius niger , consul suffectus for the months of july and august in ad 63 . gallivan , '' the fasti for the reign of nero '' , pp . 302 , 303 , 310 . petronius priscus , banished by nero in ad 66 , after the conspiracy of piso was suppressed . tacitus gives no indication that priscus was in any way involved in the conspiracy , instead suggesting that his exile was arbitrary . he was permitted to settle in the islands of the aegean . tacitus , annales , xv . 71 . marcus petronius umbrinus , consul suffectus in ad 81 , probably for the months of september and october . . gallivan , '' the fasti for a.d . 70–96 '' , pp . 189 , 215 . titus petronius secundus , praetorian prefect under domitian , joined the conspiracy that led to the emperor 's assassination . cassius dio , lxvii . 15 . eutropius , viii . 1 . petronius quadratus , praefectus of roman egypt c . 126 bastianini , '' lista dei prefetti d'egitto '' , p . 284 . lucius petronius sabinus , consul suffectus for the months of september and october , ad 145 . eck , '' die fasti consulares der regungszeit des antoninus pius '' . marcus petronius honoratus , praefectus of roman egypt from 147 to 148 . bastianini , '' lista dei prefetti d'egitto '' , pp . 290–291 . marcus petronius mamertinus , consul suffectus in ad 150 . marcus petronius sura mamertinus , consul in ad 182 . leunissen , konsuln und konsulare , pp . 129–137 . marcus petronius m . f . sura septimianus , brother of sura mamertinus , consul in ad 190 . petronia m . f . , sister of marcus petronius sura mamertinus , married the senator marcus antoninus antius lupus . petronius m . f . m . n . antoninus , son of marcus petronius sura mamertinus . quintus petronius didius severus , father of the emperor didius julianus . lucius fulvius gavius ( numisius ? ) petronius aemilianus , consul in ad 206 . lucius petronius taurus volusianus , consul in ad 261 , , and praetorian prefect under the emperor gallienus . samuel , greek and roman chronology , pp . 272 ff . petronius annianus , consul in ad 314 . petronius probianus , consul in ad 322 . . petronius probinus , consul in ad 341 . . sextus claudius petronius probus , consul in ad 371 . . icur , 1 , 1936 , 2088 . anicius petronius probus , consul in ad 406 . icur , 1 , 1358 . saint petronius , fifth century bishop of bologna . petronius maximus , emperor for seventy-five days in ad 455 , was torn apart by the mob at rome . petronius probinus , consul in ad 489 . rufius petronius nicomachus cethegus , consul in ad 504 . others . peter i of trani ( fl . eleventh century ) , called '' petronius '' in contemporary sources . petronius paperonius , donald duck 's ancestor , in comics . petronius ( oil platform ) , an oil rig in the gulf of mexico . petronius the arbiter , the protagonist 's cat in robert a . heinlein 's the door into summer . footnotes . see also . list of roman gentes . references . bibliography . polybius , historiae ( the histories ) . marcus terentius varro , rerum rusticarum ( rural matters ) . dionysius of halicarnassus , romaike archaiologia ( roman antiquities ) . strabo , geographica . valerius maximus , factorum ac dictorum memorabilium ( memorable facts and sayings ) . lucius annaeus seneca ( seneca the younger ) , apocolocyntosis ( the gourdification of the divine claudius ) . gaius plinius secundus ( pliny the elder ) , historia naturalis ( natural history ) . pedanius dioscorides , materia medica ( on medical subjects ) . josephus , antiquitates judaïcae ( antiquities of the jews ) , the jewish war ( the jewish war ) . tacitus , annales , historiae , agricola ( book ) ( on the life and mores of julius agricola ) . plutarchus , parallel lives . suetonius , de vita caesarum ( lives of the caesars , or the twelve caesars ) . appianus alexandrinus ( appian ) , bellum civile ( the civil war ) . aelius galenus ( galen ) , de compositione medicamentorum per genera ( on the composition of medications according to their kind ) . lucius cassius dio cocceianus ( cassius dio ) , roman history . eutropius , breviarium historiae romanae ( abridgement of the history of rome ) . dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology , william smith , ed . , little , brown and company , boston ( 1849 ) . theodor mommsen et alii , corpus inscriptionum latinarum ( the body of latin inscriptions , abbreviated cil ) , berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften ( 1853–present ) . giovanni battista de rossi , inscriptiones christianae urbis romanae septimo saeculo antiquiores ( christian inscriptions from rome of the first seven centuries , abbreviated icur ) , vatican library , rome ( 1857–1861 , 1888 ) . rené cagnat et alii , l'année épigraphique ( the year in epigraphy , abbreviated ae ) , presses universitaires de france ( 1888–present ) . george davis chase , '' the origin of roman praenomina '' , in harvard studies in classical philology , vol . viii ( 1897 ) . hans petersen , '' the numeral praenomina of the romans '' , in transactions of the american philological association , vol . xciii , pp . 347–354 ( 1962 ) . alan e . samuel , greek and roman chronology : calendars and years in classical antiquity , c . h . beck , munich ( 1972 ) . paul a . gallivan , '' some comments on the fasti for the reign of nero '' , in classical quarterly , vol . 24 , pp . 290–311 ( 1974 ) , '' the fasti for the reign of gaius '' , in antichthon , vol . 13 , pp . 66–69 ( 1979 ) , '' the fasti for a.d . 70–96 '' , in classical quarterly , vol . 31 , pp . 186–220 ( 1981 ) . guido bastianini , '' lista dei prefetti d'egitto dal 30 a al 299 p '' ( list of the prefects of egypt from 30 bc to ad 299 ) , in zeitschrift für papyrologie und epigraphik , vol . 17 ( 1975 ) . paul m . m . leunissen , konsuln und konsulare in der zeit von commodus bis severus alexander ( consuls and consulars from the time of commodus to severus alexander ) , verlag gieben , amsterdam , ( 1989 ) . werner eck , '' miscellanea prosopographica '' , in zeitschrift für papyrologie und epigraphik , vol . 42 ( 1981 ) , '' die fasti consulares der regungszeit des antoninus pius , eine bestandsaufnahme seit géza alföldys konsulat und senatorenstand '' ( the consular fasti for the reign of antoninus pius : an inventory since géza alföldy 's konsulat und senatorenstand ) , in studia epigraphica in memoriam géza alföldy , werner eck , bence fehér , péter kovács , eds . , bonn , pp . 69–90 ( 2013 ) .