Lens flare

manifestation . the spatial distribution of the lens flare typically manifests as several starbursts , rings , or circles in a row across the image or view . lens flare patterns typically spread widely across the scene and change location with the camera 's movement relative to light sources , tracking with the light position and fading as the camera points away from the bright light until it causes no flare at all . the specific spatial distribution of the flare depends on the shape of the aperture of the image formation elements . for example , if the lens has a 6-bladed aperture , the flare may have a hexagonal pattern . such internal scattering is also present in the human eye , and manifests in an unwanted veiling glare most obvious when viewing very bright lights or highly reflective surfaces . in some situations , eyelashes can also create flare-like irregularities , although these are technically diffraction artifacts . when a bright light source is shining on the lens but not in its field of view , lens flare appears as a haze that washes out the image and reduces contrast . this can be avoided by shading the lens using a lens hood . in a studio , a gobo or set of barn doors can be attached to the lighting to keep it from shining on the camera . filters can be attached to the camera lens which will also minimise lens flare , which is especially useful for outdoor photographers . when using an anamorphic lens , as is common in analog cinematography , lens flare can manifest itself as horizontal lines . this is most commonly seen in car headlights in a dark scene , and may be desired as part of the '' film look '' . deliberate use . a lens flare is often deliberately used to invoke a sense of drama . a lens flare is also useful when added to an artificial or modified image composition because it adds a sense of realism , implying that the image is an un-edited original photograph of a '' real life '' scene . for both of these reasons ( implying realism and/or drama ) artificial lens flare is a common effect in various graphics editing programs , although its use can be a point of contention among professional graphic designers . lens flare was one of the first special effects developed for computer graphics because it can be imitated using relatively simple means . basic flare-like effects , for instance in video game , can be obtained using static or animated starburst , ring , and disc textures that are moved according to the position of the light source . more sophisticated rendering techniques have been developed based on ray tracing or photon mapping . lens flare was typically avoided by hollywood cinematographers , but when filming easy rider , harrison arnold was forced to modify a camera car for his arriflex , which resulted in numerous lens flares as he shot motorcycle footage against southwestern u.s . landscapes . costume designer rita riggs would sometimes purposely dress bea arthur in maude in a red that would flare to make a statement , to match maude 's personality as a '' red flag '' . director j . j . abrams added numerous lens flares to his films star trek and super 8 by aiming powerful off-camera light sources at the lens . he explained in an interview about star trek : '' i wanted a visual system that felt unique . i know there are certain shots where even i watch and think , 'oh that 's ridiculous , that was too many . ' but i love the idea that the future was so bright it could n't be contained in the frame . '' many complained of the frequent use ; abrams admitted it was '' overdone , in some places . '' david boyd , the director of photography of the sci-fi firefly series , desired this style so much ( harkening back to 1970s television ) , that he sent back cutting-edge lenses that reduced lens flare in exchange for cheaper ones . whedon , firefly : the complete series : '' serenity '' commentary the first deliberate lens flare was made by cinematographer hiroshi segawa in the movie woman in the dunes in 1964 . earlier in the movies , lens flare was considered as defect and was strongly avoided . director michael bay , well known for heavy use of cgi in his films , digitally adds lens flares to most light sources in his films . other forms of photographic flare . filter flare . the use of photographic filters can cause flare , particularly ghosts of bright lights ( under central inversion ) . filter flare , paul van walree 2003–2010 this can be eliminated by not using a filter , and reduced by using higher-quality filters or narrower aperture . diffraction artifact in digital cameras . one form of flare is specific to digital cameras . with the sun shining on an unprotected lens , a group of small rainbows appears . this artifact is formed by internal diffraction on the image sensor , which acts like a diffraction grating . unlike true lens flare , this artifact is not visible in the eyepiece of a digital slr camera , making it more difficult to avoid . gallery . file : lens flare.jpg photograph of nasa lunar lander containing lens flare . besides the obvious flare around the sun , the light artifacts at the bottom right are also caused by flare . file : artificial lens flare.png sample of artificial lens flare , as might be used in an animated movie or video game . file : high-quality lens flare rendering.png high-end lens flare rendering using a recent technique file : edinburgh-princesstreet2.jpg lens flare is extremely difficult to control when a bright light source like the sun is just outside the frame . file : firework with lens flare.jpg when the subject of a photo is the light source itself , lens flare can be a desirable and dramatic effect . file : solar eclipse austria 2011 jan 04.jpg lens flare used to capture details of too bright motive ( partial solar eclipse ) . file:20100525 imbros marmaros turkey example of lens flare.jpg lens flare - the sun is outside the frame . file : 'perception of christ ascending to heaven ' dome of the rotunda of the church of the holy sepulchre jerusalem victor grigas 2011 -1-19.jpg dome of the rotunda of the church of the holy sepulchre , jerusalem file : mograph lensflare.png lens flare commonly associated with the use of anamorphic format which are often used in the production of films . file : kensington palace gardens - london - uk.jpg lens flare example in picture of kensington gardens - london , uk file : man playing guitar in a portrait with lens flare.jpg alt lens flare example lens flare example in picture in a portrait . 50 & nbsp ; mm at f1.4 file : antony leung - oresteia - stairwell theater , 2019.jpg lens flare over anthony leung using theatre lighting during stairwell theater 's oresteia - brooklyn , ny , 2019