Frederick Temple

early life . temple was born in santa maura , one of the ionian islands , the son of major octavius temple , who was subsequently appointed lieutenant-governor of sierra leone . on his retirement , major temple settled in devon and contemplated a farming life for his son frederick , giving him a practical training to that end . temple 's grandfather was william johnson temple , rector of mamhead in devon , who is mentioned several times in james boswell 's life of johnson . temple was sent to blundell 's school , tiverton , and soon showed signs of being suited to a different career . he retained a warm affection for the school , where he did well both academically and at physical activities , especially walking . the family was not wealthy , and temple knew he would have to earn his own living . he took the first step by winning a blundell scholarship at balliol college , oxford , before he was seventeen . the tractarian movement had begun five years earlier , but the memorable tract 90 had not yet been written . in the intellectual and religious excitement , he drew closer to the camp of '' the oxford liberal movement . '' in 1842 he took a double first and was elected fellow of balliol , and lecturer in mathematics and logic . four years later he was ordained , and , with the aim of improving the education of the very poor , he accepted the headship of kneller hall , a college founded by the government for the training of masters of workhouses and penal schools . the experiment was not successful , and temple himself advised its abandonment in 1855 . he then accepted a school-inspectorship , which he held until he went to teach at rugby school in 1858 . in the meantime he had attracted the admiration of prince albert of saxe-coburg-gotha , and in 1856 he was appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to queen victoria . in 1857 he was select preacher at his university . rugby . at rugby school , thomas arnold had died in 1842 and had been succeeded by archibald campbell tait , who again was followed by edward meyrick goulburn . upon the resignation of the latter the trustees appointed temple , who in that year ( 1858 ) had taken the degrees of b.d . and d.d . his life at rugby school was marked by great energy and bold initiative . temple strengthened the school 's academic reputation in the classics , but also instituted scholarships in natural science , built a laboratory , and recognised the importance of these subjects . he reformed the sporting activities , in spite of all the traditions of the playing fields . his own tremendous powers of work and rough manner intimidated the pupils , but he soon became popular , and raised the school 's reputation . his school sermons made a deep impression on the boys , teaching loyalty , faith and duty . it was two years after he had taken up his work at rugby that the volume entitled essays and reviews caused a controversy . the first essay in the book , '' the education of the world , '' was by temple . the authors of the volume were responsible only for their respective articles , but some of these were deemed so destructive that many people banned the whole book , and a noisy demand , led by samuel wilberforce , bishop of oxford , called on the headmaster of rugby to dissociate himself from his comrades . temple 's essay had dealt with the intellectual and spiritual growth of the race , and had pointed out the contributions made respectively by the hebrews , the egyptians , the greeks , the romans , and others . though accepted as harmless , it was blamed for being in the book . temple refused to repudiate his associates , and it was only at a much later date ( 1870 ) that he decided to withdraw his essay . in the meantime , he printed a volume of his rugby sermons , to show definitely what his own religious position was . in politics temple was a follower of william ewart gladstone , and he approved of the disestablishment of the church of ireland . he also wrote and spoke in favour of the elementary education act 1870 of william edward forster , and was an active member of the endowed schools commission . in 1869 , gladstone offered him the deanery of durham , but he declined because he wanted to stay at rugby school . when later in the same year , however , henry phillpotts , bishop of exeter , died , the prime minister turned again to temple , and he accepted the bishopric of the city he knew so well . bishoprics . the appointment caused a fresh controversy ; george anthony denison , archdeacon of taunton , anthony ashley cooper , 7th earl of shaftesbury , and others formed a strong committee of protest , while edward pusey declared that '' the choice was the most frightful enormity ever perpetrated by a prime minister '' . at the confirmation of his election , counsel was instructed by bishop walter trower to object to it , and in the voting the chapter was divided . gladstone stood firm , and temple was consecrated on 21 december 1869 , by john jackson , bishop of london . there were murmurings among his clergy against what they deemed his harsh control , but his real kindness soon made itself felt , and , during the sixteen years of his tenure , he overcame the prejudices against him , so that when , on the death of john jackson in 1885 , he was translated to london , the appointment gave general satisfaction . in 1884 he was bampton lecturer , taking for his subject '' the relations between religion and science . '' in 1885 he was elected honorary fellow of exeter college , oxford . temple 's tenancy of the bishopric of london saw him working harder than ever . his normal working day at this time was one of fourteen or fifteen hours , though under the strain blindness was rapidly coming on . many of his clergy and candidates for ordination thought him a rather terrifying person , enforcing almost impossible standards of diligence , accuracy and preaching efficiency , but his manifest devotion to his work and his zeal for the good of the people won him general confidence . in london he continued as a tireless temperance worker , and the working class instinctively recognised him as their friend . when , in view of his growing blindness , he offered to resign the bishopric , he was urged to reconsider his proposal , and on the sudden death of edward white benson in 1896 , though now seventy-six years of age , he accepted the see of canterbury . archbishop of canterbury . as archbishop he presided in 1897 over the decennial lambeth conference . in the same year temple and archbishop of york william maclagan issued a joint response to apostolicae curae , an encyclical of the pope which denied the validity of anglican orders . in 1899 the archbishops again acted together , when an appeal was addressed to them by the united episcopate , to rule on the use of incense in divine service and on the carrying of lights in liturgical processions . after hearing the arguments the two archbishops decided against both practices . the archbishops on the lawfulness of the liturgical use of incense and the carrying of lights in procession . lambeth palace , 31 july 1899 during his archbishopric temple was deeply distressed by the divisions which were weakening the anglican church , and many of his most memorable sermons were calls for unity . his first charge as primate on '' disputes in the church '' was felt to be a most powerful plea for a more catholic and a more charitable temper , and again and again during the closing years of his life he came back to this same theme . he was zealous also in the cause of foreign missions , and in a sermon preached at the opening of the new century he urged that a supreme obligation rested upon britain at this epoch in the world 's history to seek to evangelise all nations . in 1900 he presided over the world temperance congress in london , and on one occasion preached in the interests of women 's education . on 9 august 1902 , he discharged the important duties of his office at the coronation of king edward vii and queen alexandra , and two days later was received in private audience by the king and queen to be presented with the royal victorian chain , a new decoration founded by the king in honour of his mother . in early october that year he visited university of wales , lampeter in lampeter , wales , for its 75th anniversary . the strain at his advanced age told upon his health , however . during a speech which he delivered in the house of lords on 2 december 1902 on the education act 1902 , he was taken ill , and , though he revived sufficiently to finish his speech , he never fully recovered , and died on 23 december 1902 . he was interred in canterbury cathedral four days later , where his grave is located in the cloister garden . his second son , william temple , became archbishop of canterbury thirty-nine years later and is buried close to him . science and religion . temple had a lifelong interest in the relationship between science and religion . in 1860 at the famous meeting of the british association which saw the debate between thomas huxley and samuel wilberforce , temple preached a sermon welcoming the insights of evolution . in his eight brampton lectures on the relations between religion and science ( 1884 ) temple stated clearly that '' doctrine of evolution is in no sense whatever antagonistic to the teachings of religion '' . these lectures also addressed the origin and nature of scientific , and of religious belief and the apparent conflicts between science and religion on free will and supernatural power . memorials . the temple reading room and museum at rugby school is named after him , and contains an 1869 bust of him by thomas woolner . there is a fine memorial in canterbury cathedral at the east end in the corona depicting temple kneeling in prayer . the west window of exeter cathedral also depicts him amongst the great figures of the cathedral 's history shown there . honours . 1842 fellow of balliol college , oxford . 1885 honorary fellow of exeter college , oxford . 1897 elected a member of the american antiquarian society . 1902 awarded the royal victorian chain by edward vii . notes . references . . attribution . endnotes : , with biographical introduction by william temple . further reading . . external links . archbishop temple 's papers are held at lambeth palace library