Alfred Stock

life . stock was born in danzig ( gdańsk ) and educated at the friedrich-werder grammar school in berlin . in 1894 he began studies in chemistry at the friedrich wilhelm-university in berlin . after finishing his dissertation about the quantitative separation of arsenic and antimony a . piloty , a . stock : über eine quantitative trennung des arsens vom antimon . band 30 , 1649 , 1897 in the works of emil fischer he got his doctoral degree . in 1899 he worked with the french chemist and toxicologist henri moissan in paris for one year . he was given the task of synthesizing still unknown compounds of boron and silicon . five years later he became professor at the university of breslau . in 1916 he succeeded richard willstätter as director at the kaiser wilhelm institute for chemistry in berlin . after a severe mercury poisoning he became the director of the chemistry department at the university of karlsruhe from 1926 to 1936 . in 1932 he was a visiting professors at cornell university in ithaca , new york for four months . a member of the nsdap ( national socialist german workers ' party ) since 1933 , stock was anti-semitic . alfred neubauer : alfred stock und die judenfrage . in : nachrichten aus der chemie . band 53 , nr . 6 , 2005 , , s . 633–637 . from february 6 , 1936 , to may 7 , 1938 stock was the president of the german chemical society . bombs in the second world war damaged the house of stock . in september 1943 he and his wife moved to bad warmbrunn in silesia , but the flow of refugees forced them to move again towards west in february 1945 . they found accommodation in aken ( near dessau ) . after the war in 1946 , stock endeavoured to revitalize the german chemistry by lectures and memoirs . he was renowned for his pioneering research on boron hydrides . . research on the hydrides of boron and silicon . in 1909 stock began studying the boron hydrides—the boron hydrogen chemical compounds with general formula b x h y —at breslau . due to their extreme reactivity and flammability in air , boron hydrides could not be purified until his development of methods for separation using high-vacuum manifolds around 1912 . he performed similar work on the hydrides of silicon . the hydrides of boron and silicon represented the first family of binary compounds to approach the richness of hydrocarbons in terms of structural diversity . not only did the boron hydrides exhibit challenging properties , their structures were also unusual . elucidation of the structures and the associated bonding models dramatically expanded the scope of inorganic chemistry . boron hydrides such as diborane later developed into a range of reagents for organic synthesis as well as a source of diverse ligands and building blocks for researchers . with henri moissan , stock discovered silicon boride . research in other areas of inorganic chemistry . in 1921 , stock first prepared metallic beryllium by electrolyzing a fused mixture of sodium and beryllium fluorides . this method made beryllium available for industrial use , such as in special alloys and glasses and for making windows in x-ray tubes . he was also influential in complex ( chemistry ) . the term '' ligand '' ( from ligare latin , to bind ) was first used by stock in 1916 . h . irving and r.j.p . williams adopted the term in a paper published in 1948 . monodentate , bidentate , tridentate characterized the number of ligands attached to a metal . given the introduction of ligand concept , he was also able to further derive the idea of bite angle and other aspects of chelation . the '' stock system , '' first published in 1919 , was a system of nomenclature on binary compounds . in his own words , he considered the system to be '' simple , clear , immediately intelligible , capable of the most general application . '' in 1924 , a german commission recommended stock system to be adopted with some accommodations . fecl 2 , which would have been named iron ( 2 ) -chloride according to stock 's original idea , became iron ( ii ) chloride in the revised proposal . in 1934 stock agreed to the use of roman numerals but preferred keeping the hyphen and dropping the parentheses . although this suggestion has not been followed , the stock system remains in use worldwide . interests in mercury and mercury poisoning . stock published over 50 papers on different aspects of mercury and mercury poisoning . he also introduced sensitive tests and devised improved laboratory techniques for dealing with mercury which minimized poisoning risk , possibly initiated by his chronic mercury poisoning in 1923 , due to his use of liquid mercury in some novel laboratory apparatus he invented . he became more vocal on protesting the mercury usage after realizing the toxicity of its organic derivatives . german dentists abandoned his warning in 1928 against copper amalgam usage . nevertheless , a paper from fleischmann , in which removal of mercury in amalgam-related illness had led to complete recovery , supported his idea . ( deutsche medizinische wochenschrift 1928 , no . 8 ) . a committee was founded in berlin to investigate cases of possible mercury intoxication and hence the term micromercurialism was first used . . translated by birgit calhoun . . retirement and death . after retirement in 1936 , stock moved from karlsruhe to berlin . he died in aken , a small town near dessau , in august 1946 at the age of 70 . posthumous recognition . in recognition of his contributions to the field of inorganic chemistry , the german chemical society ( gesellschaft deutscher chemiker ) created in 1950 the alfred stock memorial prize . the prize , consisting of a gold medal and money , is awarded every other year for '' an outstanding independent scientific experimental investigation in the field of inorganic chemistry . '' . publications . praktikum der quantitativen anorganischen analyse . berlin 1909 , ( 6 . auflage , münchen 1979 ) . ultrastrukturchemie . berlin 1920 . hydrides of boron and silicon . ithaca ( usa ) 1933 , ( neuausgabe ithaca ( uas ) 1957 ) . die gefährlichkeit des quecksilbers und der amalgam-zahnfüllungen . berlin 1928 . das atom in : angewandte chemie band 37 , nr . 6 , 1924 , , , s . 65–67 . inventions and discoveries . the tension thermometer the stock high vacuum apparatus - an apparatus made of glass which allows work with highly combustible and poisonous substances to be undertaken in high vacuum . the principles of the chemistry of metal-chelate complexes stock nomenclature or the stock system - the system of naming the oxidation state of an atom in a compound alfred stock : zur nomenklatur und registrierung anorganischer stoffe . in : chem.-ztg . band 33 , 205 , 1909 . . references . external links . list of recipients of the alfred-stock-gedächtnispreis