Trent and Mersey Canal

history . the trent and mersey canal ( t & m ) was built to link the river trent at derwent mouth in derbyshire to the river mersey , and thereby provide an inland route between the major ports of hull and liverpool . the mersey connection is made via the bridgewater canal , which it joins at preston brook in cheshire . although mileposts measure the distance to preston brook and shardlow , derwent mouth is about beyond shardlow . the plan of a canal connection from the mersey to the trent ( '' the grand trunk '' ) came from canal engineer james brindley . it was authorised by an act of parliament in 1766 and the first sod was cut by josiah wedgwood in july that year at brownhills , burslem . in 1777 , the canal was completed , including more than 70 locks and five tunnels , with the company headquarters in stone . the first known idea to build a canal between the river mersey and the river trent was put forward in 1755 , though no action was taken at that time . in 1760 , lord gower , a local businessman and brother-in-law of the duke of bridgewater , drew up a plan for the trent and mersey canal . if his plan had gone ahead , this would have been the first modern canal constructed in england . james brindley , the engineer behind many of the canals in england , did his first canal work on the trent and mersey , though his first job in charge of construction was on the bridgewater canal . in 1761 , josiah wedgwood showed an interest in the construction of a canal through stoke-on-trent , the location of his wedgwood pottery , as his business depended on the safe and smooth transport of his pots . pots transported by road were liable to be damaged and broken , and a canal near to his factory would provide fast and safe transport for his wares . wedgwood 's plan was not to connect the two rivers by canal , but to connect the potteries to the river mersey . there was much debate about possible routes that a canal could take . coal merchants in liverpool felt threatened about a canal that could bring coal in from cheshire . the owners of the river weaver navigation were also not happy about the proposals , because the route would almost parallel that of the river . yet another route was published which , much to the shock of wedgwood , did not at all include the potteries . wedgwood , intent to have a waterway connection to his potteries , managed to send his proposal to parliament , with the help of two of his friends , thomas bentley and erasmus darwin . john gilbert 's plan for the '' grand trunk '' canal met opposition at the eastern end where , in burton on trent , the locals objected to the canal passing parallel to the upper trent navigation . in 1764 , wedgwood managed to convince gilbert to include the potteries in his route . in 1766 , gilbert 's plan was authorised by an act of parliament . later that year , '' on july 26th a massive celebration was held in the potteries where josiah wedgwood cut the first sod of soil . james brindley was employed as engineer and work got under way . '' six years before the complete opening of the trent and mersey canal in 1771 , wedgwood built the factory village of etruria on the outskirts of stoke-on-trent , close to the canal . by this time , much of the canal had been built towards preston brook . the only obstacle that still had to be tackled by the canal company was the hill at kidsgrove , through which a tunnel was being dug . up until 1777 , pots had to be carried on the short journey from etruria , over the top of kidsgrove hill , and to the other side , where the canal had been constructed to preston brook . on 15 january 1847 the trent and mersey canal was acquired by the north staffordshire railway company ( nsr ) . this was done to stifle the opposition of the canal company to the creation of the railway company . in particular , the nsr had plans for a railway from stoke-on-trent to liverpool , however , this line was abandoned due to opposition from other rail interests . the grand trunk was a part of a larger scheme of james brindley 's to link the four main rivers of england ( trent , mersey , severn and thames ) in a project known as the '' grand cross '' . the trent and mersey canal provided the northwestern arm of the cross ( to the mersey ) , and the northeastern arm ( to the trent ) . it also provided the central hub of the cross , between great haywood , and fradley junctions . the southwestern arm , to the severn , was built as the staffordshire and worcestershire canal , whilst the southeastern arm ( to the thames ) traversed the coventry and oxford canals . map and gallery . image : barnton tunnel east entrance.jpg barnton tunnel east entrance image : tandmmacclesfield.jpg hall green branch crosses the t & m at poole aqueduct image : doublelock.jpg a typical set of double locks on the t & m image : tandmjunctionmacclesfield.jpg hardings wood junction with the hall green branch . features . anderton lift . on the cheshire stretch of the canal , between middlewich and the northern end of the canal in preston brook tunnel , is the victorian anderton boat lift , which lowers boats fifty feet from the t & m to the river weaver . it was restored to full operation in 2002 after twenty years of disuse , and was then the only operational boat-lift in the united kingdom until the construction of the falkirk wheel in scotland . harecastle tunnel . another major feature is the harecastle tunnel , near kidsgrove in the city of stoke-on-trent , north staffordshire . there are actually two tunnels ; the first was built by brindley and was long , and boats were moved through by men lying on their backs and pushing against the roof with their feet . this was a physically demanding and slow process and created major delays , so civil engineer thomas telford was commissioned to provide a second , wider , parallel tunnel with a towpath . this tunnel was opened in 1827 . in the 1900s , the brindley tunnel was closed due to severe subsidence , but the telford tunnel – although also prone to the same problems – remains in use , and is the fourth-longest navigable canal tunnel in the united kingdom . flyover junction . just north of harecastle tunnel , the t & m features a 'flyover ' junction . the hall green branch leaves the t & m mainline ( which runs east–west here ) on the south side , but then crosses over the main line and travels a short distance north to join the macclesfield canal at hall green stop lock ( some guides do not refer to the hall green branch , simply treating it as part of the macclesfield canal ) . the actual junction where the branch leaves the main line is a normal right-angle junction called hardings wood junction . the branch leaves the main line on the south side , then immediately turns 90 degrees clockwise . it runs westwards alongside the main line , maintaining the original level while the main line drops through two locks . at the red bull settlement , the branch turns 90 degrees right , to head north and cross the main line on poole lock aqueduct . it then immediately crosses the a50 on red bull aqueduct , carrying boats north to join the macclesfield canal at hall green . stoke-on-trent . the canal passes through the city of stoke-on-trent , where it meets the caldon canal . the canal formed an integral part of the 1986 stoke-on-trent garden festival and in 1988 was declared a linear conservation area . the towpath was upgraded in the 1990s and forms part of the national cycle network ( route 5 ) . route . the route is conveniently divided into a northern and southern section by the harecastle tunnel . northern trent and mersey . the northern end of the canal makes an end-on junction with the bridgewater canal within preston brook tunnel , from which one can access runcorn ( but no longer the mersey or ship canal ) in one direction and manchester ( with its many canal links ) in the other direction . from the junction with the bridgewater canal , the t & m travels south through preston brook tunnel ( one-way operation , alternating each half-hour ) and two smaller tunnels at saltersford ( since 2008 also one-way operation , alternating each half-hour ) , and barnton to the '' junction '' with the river weaver at anderton boat lift near northwich . after anderton , the next major destination is middlewich , where a junction with the wardle canal leads to the middlewich branch of the shropshire union canal which gives access to chester , llangollen and ( heading south on the shropshire union ) a parallel route to birmingham via wolverhampton . south of middlewich , having passed through wheelock , the t & m climbs out of the cheshire plain via the 'heartbreak hill ' locks ( more traditionally known as the 'cheshire locks ' ) to the summit-level and the junction with the hall green branch , leading to the macclesfield canal at red bull kidsgrove . most of the locks in this flight are doubled , although not all of the duplicates are still usable . of particular note was lock 53 where , due to subsidence from brine pumping , the 'spare ' lock was replaced by a steel contrivance with guillotine gates . theoretically , this was adjustable to compensate for further subsidence although , in practice it was less than successful and was ultimately removed altogether . little evidence of 'thurlwood steel lock ' remains today . the boater can use the macclesfield canal to head for marple , and the junction with the peak forest canal ( and hence , via the ashton , rochdale and bridgewater canal ) to complete the 'cheshire ring ' . 2012 breach at dutton hollow . in september 2012 a serious breach occurred at dutton hollow near preston brook , which cost around £2.1 & nbsp ; million to repair . the breach was south of bridge 213 and the canal was unusable between there and middlewich big lock 75 . the canal was officially reopened on 2 may 2013 . . southern trent and mersey . after the harecastle tunnel ( one way , alternating roughly every two hours ) , the canal emerges in the outskirts of stoke-on-trent , and is soon in the middle of the city and then at etruria , and the junction with the caldon canal . leaving etruria , the canal is soon back in open country . it is now in the upper valley of the river trent , which the canal follows until the river becomes navigable and the canal is no longer needed . the next sizeable place is the market town of stone . after more countryside , the canal reaches great haywood junction and the towpath bridge across the junction with the staffordshire and worcestershire canal , which heads south to skirt wolverhampton and join with the river severn at stourport-on-severn , thus connecting the mersey with the severn . the next event is a right-angle bend , of no apparent significance from the boat , but this is where the canal ( and the trent itself ) changes its basic direction from south-east to north-east ( heading towards nottingham ) . very near is fradley junction ( with the coventry canal ) . the coventry soon leads to the birmingham and fazeley canal and branches off to birmingham or ( via another stretch of the coventry canal ) to coventry and a junction with the oxford canal and thence to the thames and the 'southern half ' of the english canals . the canal now heads directly to its terminus , passing through burton upon trent , mercia marina at findern , the largest inland waterway marina in the united kingdom , and then through wide locks ( the first being at stenson ) to shardlow and finally derwent mouth . it is not far from derwent mouth , via the river trent , to trentlock , the four-way junction with the erewash canal ( dead end at great northern basin , formerly a link with the cromford canal ) , cranfleet cut ( bypassing thrumpton weir to continue navigation towards nottingham ) and the river soar navigation ( linking via leicester to the grand union canal ) . beyond the cranfleet cut the trent is navigable all the way to its mouth at trent falls on the humber estuary . see also . canals of the united kingdom history of the british canal system four counties ring , a canal cruising ring that includes part of the trent and mersey . references . external links . trent and mersey canal general information . archive material relating to the trent and mersey canal company , from stoke-on-trent museums . further reading . peter lead , the trent and mersey canal , ashbourne ( 1980 ) ,