Camera lens

theory of operation . typical rectilinear lenses can be thought of as '' improved '' pinhole camera . as shown , a pinhole '' lens '' is simply a small aperture that blocks most rays of light , ideally selecting one ray to the object for each point on the image sensor . pinhole lenses have a few severe limitations : a pinhole camera with a large aperture is blurry because each pixel is essentially the shadow of the aperture stop , so its size is no smaller than the size of the aperture ( third image ) . here a pixel is the area of the detector exposed to light from a point on the object . making the pinhole smaller improves resolution ( up to a limit ) , but reduces the amount of light captured . at a certain point , shrinking the hole does not improve the resolution because of the diffraction limit . beyond this limit , making the hole smaller makes the image blurrier as well as darker . practical lenses can be thought of as an answer to the question : '' how can a pinhole lens be modified to admit more light and give a smaller spot size ? '' . a first step is to put a simple convex lens at the pinhole with a focal length equal to the distance to the film plane ( assuming the camera will take pictures of distant objects if the object is at a distance , one can assume the light rays will arrive perpendicular to the plane of the lens , and thus converge at the focal point . ) . this allows the pinhole to be opened up significantly ( fourth image ) because a thin convex lens bends light rays in proportion to their distance to the axis of the lens , with rays striking the center of the lens passing straight through . the geometry is almost the same as with a simple pinhole lens , but rather than being illuminated by single rays of light , each image point is illuminated by a focused pencil ( optics ) . from the front of the camera , the small hole ( the aperture ) , would be seen . the virtual image of the aperture as seen from the world is known as the lens 's entrance pupil ; ideally , all rays of light leaving a point on the object that enter the entrance pupil will be focused to the same point on the image sensor/film ( provided the object point is in the field of view ) . if one were inside the camera , one would see the lens acting as a projector . the virtual image of the aperture from inside the camera is the lens 's exit pupil . in this simple case , the aperture , entrance pupil , and exit pupil are all in the same place because the only optical element is in the plane of the aperture , but in general these three will be in different places . practical photographic lenses include more lens elements . the additional elements allow lens designers to reduce various aberrations , but the principle of operation remains the same : pencil beam are collected at the entrance pupil and focused down from the exit pupil onto the image plane . construction . image : telephoto.jpg thumb the zoom lens assembly of the canon elph a camera lens may be made from a number of elements : from one , as in the box brownie 's meniscus lens , to over 20 in the more complex zooms . these elements may themselves comprise a group of lenses cemented together . the front element is critical to the performance of the whole assembly . in all modern lenses the surface is coated to reduce abrasion , flare , and surface reflectance , and to adjust color balance . to minimize aberration , the curvature is usually set so that the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction are equal . in a prime lens this is easy , but in a zoom there is always a compromise . the lens usually is focused by adjusting the distance from the lens assembly to the image plane , or by moving elements of the lens assembly . to improve performance , some lenses have a cam system that adjusts the distance between the groups as the lens is focused . manufacturers call this different things : nikon calls it crc ( close range correction ) ; canon calls it a floating system ; and hasselblad and mamiya call it fle ( floating lens element ) . glass is the most common material used to construct lens elements , due to its good optical properties and resistance to scratching . other materials are also used , such as quartz glass , fluorite , plastics like acrylic ( plexiglass ) , and even germanium and meteorite . plastics allow the manufacturing of strongly aspheric lens which are difficult or impossible to manufacture in glass , and which simplify or improve lens manufacturing and performance . plastics are not used for the outermost elements of all but the cheapest lenses as they scratch easily . molded plastic lenses have been used for the cheapest disposable cameras for many years , and have acquired a bad reputation : manufacturers of quality optics tend to use euphemisms such as '' optical resin '' . however many modern , high performance ( and high priced ) lenses from popular manufacturers include molded or hybrid aspherical elements , so it is not true that all lenses with plastic elements are of low photographic quality . the 1951 usaf resolution test chart is one way to measure the resolving power of a lens . the quality of the material , coatings , and build affect the resolution . lens resolution is ultimately limited by diffraction , and very few photographic lenses approach this resolution . ones that do are called '' diffraction limited '' and are usually extremely expensive . today , most lenses are multi-coated in order to minimize lens flare and other unwanted effects . some lenses have a uv coating to keep out the ultraviolet light that could taint color . most modern optical cements for bonding glass elements also block uv light , negating the need for a uv filter . uv photographers must go to great lengths to find lenses with no cement or coatings . a lens will most often have an aperture adjustment mechanism , usually an iris diaphragm , to regulate the amount of light that passes . in early camera models a rotating plate or slider with different sized holes was used . these waterhouse stops may still be found on modern , specialized lenses . a shutter , to regulate the time during which light may pass , may be incorporated within the lens assembly ( for better quality imagery ) , within the camera , or even , rarely , in front of the lens . some cameras with leaf shutters in the lens omit the aperture , and the shutter does double duty . aperture and focal length . the two fundamental parameters of an optical lens are the focal length and the maximum aperture . the lens ' focal length determines the magnification of the image projected onto the image plane , and the aperture the light intensity of that image . for a given photographic system the focal length determines the angle of view , short focal lengths giving a wider field of view than longer focal length lenses . a wider aperture , identified by a smaller f-number , allows using a faster shutter speed for the same exposure . the camera equation , or g , is the ratio of the radiance reaching the camera sensor to the irradiance on the focal plane of the camera lens . the maximum usable aperture of a lens is specified as the focal ratio or f-number , defined as the lens 's focal length divided by the effective aperture ( or entrance pupil ) , a dimensionless number . the lower the f-number , the higher light intensity at the focal plane . larger apertures ( smaller f-numbers ) provide a much shallower depth of field than smaller apertures , other conditions being equal . practical lens assemblies may also contain mechanisms to deal with measuring light , secondary apertures for flare reduction , and mechanisms to hold the aperture open until the instant of exposure to allow slr cameras to focus with a brighter image with shallower depth of field , theoretically allowing better focus accuracy . focal lengths are usually specified in millimetres ( mm ) , but older lenses might be marked in centimetres ( cm ) or inches . for a given film or sensor size , specified by the length of the diagonal , a lens may be classified as a : normal lens : angle of view of the diagonal about 50° and a focal length approximately equal to the image diagonal . wide-angle lens : angle of view wider than 60° and focal length shorter than normal . long-focus lens : any lens with a focal length longer than the diagonal measure of the film or sensor . angle of view is narrower . the most common type of long-focus lens is the telephoto lens , a design that uses special optical configurations to make the lens shorter than its focal length . a side effect of using lenses of different focal lengths is the different distances from which a subject can be framed , resulting in a different perspective . photographs can be taken of a person stretching out a hand with a wideangle , a normal lens , and a telephoto , which contain exactly the same image size by changing the distance from the subject . but the perspective will be different . with the wideangle , the hands will be exaggeratedly large relative to the head . as the focal length increases , the emphasis on the outstretched hand decreases . however , if pictures are taken from the same distance , and enlarged and cropped to contain the same view , the pictures will have identical perspective . a moderate long-focus ( telephoto ) lens is often recommended for portraiture because the perspective corresponding to the longer shooting distance is considered to look more flattering . the widest aperture lens in history of photography is believed to be the carl zeiss planar 50mm f/0.7 , which was designed and made specifically for the nasa apollo lunar program to capture the far side of the moon in 1966 . three of these lenses were purchased by filmmaker stanley kubrick in order to film scenes in his movie barry lyndon , using candlelight as the sole light source . guy , 2012 , p 43 . . number of elements . the complexity of a lens — the number of elements and their degree of asphericity — depends upon the angle of view , the maximum aperture , and intended price point , among other variables . an extreme wideangle lens of large aperture must be of very complex construction to correct for optical aberrations , which are worse at the edge of the field and when the edge of a large lens is used for image-forming . a long-focus lens of small aperture can be of very simple construction to attain comparable image quality : a doublet ( two elements ) will often suffice . some older cameras were fitted with convertible lenses ( german : of normal focal length . the front element could be unscrewed , leaving a lens of twice the focal length , and half the angle of view and half the aperture . the simpler half-lens was of adequate quality for the narrow angle of view and small relative aperture . obviously the bellows had to extend to twice the normal length . good-quality lenses with maximum aperture no greater than f/2.8 and fixed , normal , focal length need at least three ( triplet ) or four elements ( the trade name '' tessar '' derives from the greek tessera , meaning '' four '' ) . the widest-range zooms often have fifteen or more . the reflection of light at each of the many interfaces between different optical media ( air , glass , plastic ) seriously degraded the contrast and color saturation of early lenses , particularly zoom lenses , especially where the lens was directly illuminated by a light source . the introduction many years ago of optical coatings , and advances in coating technology over the years , have resulted in major improvements , and modern high-quality zoom lenses give images of quite acceptable contrast , although zoom lenses with many elements will transmit less light than lenses made with fewer elements ( all other factors such as aperture , focal length , and coatings being equal ) . . lens mounts . many single-lens reflex cameras and some rangefinder cameras have detachable lenses . a few other types do as well , notably the mamiya tlr cameras and slr , medium format cameras ( rz67 , rb67 , 645-1000s ) other companies that produce medium format equipment such as bronica , hasselblad and fuji have similar camera styles that allow interchangeability in the lenses as well , and mirrorless interchangeable-lens cameras . the lenses attach to the camera using a lens mount , which contains mechanical linkages and often also electrical contacts between the lens and camera body . the lens mount design is an important issue for compatibility between cameras and lenses . there is no universal standard for lens mounts , and each major camera maker typically uses its own proprietary design , incompatible with other makers . guy 2012 , page 53 a few older manual focus lens mount designs , such as the leica m39 lens mount for rangefinders , m42 lens mount for early slrs , and the pentax k mount are found across multiple brands , but this is not common today . a few mount designs , such as the olympus/kodak four thirds system mount for dslrs , have also been licensed to other makers . guy 2012 , page 266 most large-format cameras take interchangeable lenses as well , which are usually mounted in a lensboard or on the front standard . the most common interchangeable lens mounts on the market today include the canon ef , ef-s and ef-m autofocus lens mounts , the nikon f manual and autofocus mounts , the olympus/kodak four thirds and olympus/panasonic micro four thirds digital-only mounts , the pentax k mount and autofocus variants , the sony alpha mount ( derived from the minolta mount ) and the sony e digital-only mount . types of lens . '' close-up '' or macro . a macro lens used in macro or '' close-up '' photography ( not to be confused with the compositional term close up ) is any lens that produces an image on the focal plane ( i.e . , film or a digital sensor ) that is one quarter of life size ( 1:4 ) to the same size ( 1:1 ) as the subject being imaged . there is no official standard to define a macro lens , usually a prime lens , but a 1:1 ratio is , typically , considered '' true '' macro . magnification from life size to larger is called '' micro '' photography ( 2:1 , 3:1 etc . ) . this configuration is generally used to image close-up very small subjects . a macro lens may be of any focal length , the actual focus length being determined by its practical use , considering magnification , the required ratio , access to the subject , and illumination considerations . it can be a special lens corrected optically for close up work or it can be any lens modified ( with adapters or spacers , which are also known as '' extension tubes '' . ) to bring the focal plane '' forward '' for very close photography . depending on the camera to subject distance and aperture , the depth-of-field can be very narrow , limiting the linear depth of the area that will be in focus . lenses are usually stopped down to give a greater depth-of-field . zoom . some lenses , called zoom lenses , have a focal length that varies as internal elements are moved , typically by rotating the barrel or pressing a button which activates an electric motor . commonly , the lens may zoom from moderate wide-angle , through normal , to moderate telephoto ; or from normal to extreme telephoto . the zoom range is limited by manufacturing constraints ; the ideal of a lens of large maximum aperture which will zoom from extreme wideangle to extreme telephoto is not attainable . zoom lenses are widely used for small-format cameras of all types : still and cine cameras with fixed or interchangeable lenses . bulk and price limit their use for larger film sizes . motorized zoom lenses may also have the focus , iris , and other functions motorized . special-purpose . thumb apochromat ( apo ) lenses have added correction for chromatic aberration . process lenses have extreme correction for aberrations of geometry ( pincushion distortion , barrel distortion ) and are generally intended for use at a specific distance and at small aperture . enlarger lenses are made to be used with photographic enlargers ( specialised projectors ) , rather than cameras . lenses for aerial photography . shift lens allow the lens to be raised or lowered relative to the film of sensor plane to correct or exaggerate perspective distortion . fisheye lenses : extreme wide-angle lenses with an angle of view of up to 180 degrees or more , with very noticeable ( and intended ) distortion . stereoscopy , to produce pairs of photographs which give a 3-dimensional effect when viewed with an appropriate viewer . soft focus lenses which give a soft , but not out-of-focus , image and have an imperfection-removing effect popular among portrait and fashion photographers . infrared lenses ultraviolet lenses swivel lenses rotate while attached to a camera body to give unique perspectives and camera angles . shift lenses and tilt/shift lenses ( collectively perspective control lenses ) allow special control of perspective on slr cameras by mimicking view camera movements . history and technical development of photographic camera lenses . lens designs . some notable photographic optical lens designs are : angenieux retrofocus cooke triplet double-gauss goerz dagor leitz elmar rapid rectilinear zeiss sonnar zeiss planar zeiss tessar . see also . anti-fogging treatment of optical surfaces large format lens lens ( optics ) lens hood lens cover lenses for slr and dslr cameras teleconverter teleside converter william taylor ( inventor ) optical train . references . sources . . external links . photo.net lens tutorial optical glass