Febrile seizure

mechanism . the exact underlying mechanism of febrile seizures is still unknown , but it is thought to be multi-factorial involving genetic and environmental factors . speculation includes immaturity of the central nervous system at younger ages , making the brain more vulnerable to the effects of fever . the increased activity of neurons during rapid brain development , may help explain why children , particularly younger than age 3 , are prone to febrile seizures , with occurrences decreasing after age 5 . other proposed mechanisms include the interactions of inflammation , particularly cytokines , which are released during a fever , causing elevated temperatures in the brain , which may somehow lead to a seizure . specific cytokines implicated include elevated csf il-1β and serum il-6 . . diagnosis . the diagnosis is made by eliminating more serious causes of seizure and fever : in particular , meningitis and encephalitis . however , in children who are immunized against pneumococcal and haemophilus influenzae , the risk of bacterial meningitis is low . if a child has recovered and is acting normally , bacterial meningitis is very unlikely , making further procedures such as a lumbar puncture unnecessary . diagnosis involves gathering a detailed history including the value of highest temperature recorded , timing of seizure and fever , seizure characteristics , time to return to baseline , vaccination history , illness exposures , family history , etc . ; and performing a physical exam that looks for signs of infection including meningitis and neurological status . blood tests , neuroimaging and an electroencephalogram are generally not needed . however , for complex febrile seizures , eeg and imaging with an mri of the brain may be helpful . lumbar puncture is recommended if there are obvious signs and symptoms of meningitis or if there is high clinical suspicion . however , lumbar puncture is an option that may be considered in children younger than 12 months of age since signs and symptoms of meningitis may be atypical , if the child does not return to baseline , or if the child lacks immunization against haemophilus influenzae and pneumococcal or vaccination status is unknown . differential diagnosis includes other causes of seizures such as cns infections ( i.e . meningitis , encephalitis ) , metabolic disorder ( i.e . electrolyte imbalances ) , cns trauma , drug use and/or withdrawal , genetic conditions ( i.e . gefs+ ) , fires , shivering , febrile delirium , febrile myoclonus , breath-holding spell , and convulsive syncope . however , febrile seizures are still the most likely cause of convulsions in children under the age of 5 years old . . prevention . there is no benefit from the use of phenytoin , valproate , pyridoxine , ibuprofen , zinc sulfate , diclofenac , or paracetamol . there is no evidence to support administering fever reducing medications such as acetaminophen at the time of a febrile seizure or to prevent the rate of recurrence . rapid cooling methods such as an ice bath or a cold bath should be avoided as a method to lower the child 's temperature , especially during a febrile seizure . there is a decrease of recurrent febrile seizures with intermittent diazepam and phenobarbital but there is a high rate of adverse effects . they are thus not recommended as an effort to prevent further seizures . . treatment . if a child is having a febrile seizure , the following recommendations are made for caregivers : note the start time of the seizure . if the seizure lasts longer than 5 minutes , call an ambulance . medication to stop seizure , such as rectal diazepam or intranasal midazolam may be used . the child should be taken immediately to the nearest medical facility for further diagnosis and treatment . gradually place the child on a protected surface such as the floor or ground to prevent accidental injury . do not restrain or hold a child during a convulsion . position the child on his or her side or stomach to prevent choking . when possible , gently remove any objects from the child 's mouth . nothing should ever be placed in the child 's mouth during a convulsion . these objects can obstruct the child 's airway and make breathing difficult . seek immediate medical attention if this is the child 's first febrile seizure and take the child to the doctor once the seizure has ended to check for the cause of the fever . this is especially urgent if the child shows symptoms of stiff neck , extreme lethargy , or abundant vomiting , which may be signs of meningitis , an infection over the brain surface . in those with a single seizure lasting greater than 5 minutes or two consecutive seizures lasting greater than 5 minutes in which the person has not returned to their baseline mental status , defined as status epilepticus , intravenous lorazepam , rectal diazepam , or intranasal midazolam is recommended . anti-seizure medication are used in status epilepticus in an effort to prevent complications such as injury to the hippocampus or temporal lobe epilepsy . secondary causes of a seizure should be addressed if present . questions that may be asked of the caregivers who witnessed the seizure include , length of seizure , timing of day , loss of consciousness , loss of bowel or urinary continence , a period of altered level of consciousness of confusion once the seizure stopped , movement of the eyes to a specific side , recent infections , recent medication usage including antibiotics or fever reducer medications , family history of febrile and afebrile seizures , vaccination and travel history . vital signs should be monitored in the emergency department along with observation for 6 hours . evaluation for the cause of fever should be performed including signs of an infection such as a bulging tympanic membrane ( otitis media ) , red pharynx , enlarged tonsils , enlarged cervical lymph nodes ( streptococcal pharyngitis or infectious mononucleosis ) , and a widespread rash . cns infections such as meningitis , encephalitis and brain abscesses should be ruled out , along with electrolyte abnormalities . prognosis . long term outcomes are generally good with little risk of neurological problems or epilepsy . those who have one febrile seizure have an approximately 30- 40 % chance of having another one in the next two years , with the risk being greater in those who are younger . simple febrile seizures do not tend to recur frequently ( children tend to outgrow them ) and do not make the development of adult epilepsy significantly more likely ( about 3–5 % ) compared with the general public ( 1 % ) . children with febrile convulsions are more likely to have a febrile seizure in the future if they were young at their first seizure ( less than 18 months old ) , have a family history of a febrile convulsions in first-degree relatives ( a parent or sibling ) , have a short time between the onset of fever and the seizure , had a low degree of fever before their seizure , or have a seizure history of abnormal neurological signs or developmental delay . similarly , the prognosis after a complex febrile seizure is excellent , although an increased risk of death has been shown for complex febrile seizures , partly related to underlying conditions . . epidemiology . febrile seizures happen between the ages of 6 months and 5 years . the peak age for a febrile seizure is 18 months , with the most common age range being 12–30 months of age . they affect between 2-5 % of children . they are more common in boys than girls . febrile seizures can occur in any ethnic group , although there have been higher rates in guamanians ( 14 % ) , japanese ( 6-9 % ) and indians ( 5-10 % ) .