Howl

writing . according to ginsberg 's bibliographer and archivist bill morgan , it was a terrifying peyote vision that was the principal inspiration for howl . this occurred on the evening of october 17 , 1954 , in the nob hill apartment of shiela williams , then ginsberg 's girlfriend , with whom he was living . ginsberg had the terrifying experience of seeing the façade of the sir francis drake hotel in the san francisco fog as the monstrous face of a child-eating demon . as was his wont , ginsberg took notes on his vision , and these became the basis for part ii of the poem . bill morgan , the typewriter is holy : complete , uncensored history of the beat generation ( new york : free press , 2010 ) , pp . 86-87 . in the introduction , morgan states : '' for the last two decades of allen ginsberg 's life , i assisted him daily as his bibliographer and archivist . during that period , i managed to track down nearly everything that he had ever published and a good deal of what had been printed about him . it was a mammoth task . every day , as i walked to the apartment that served both as allen 's home and office , i wondered what new treasures i 'd uncover . after i sold his archive to stanford university for a million dollars , allen referred everyone with questions about their papers to me '' ( p . xvi ) . in late 1954 and 1955 , in an apartment he had rented at 1010 montgomery street in the north beach neighborhood of san francisco , ginsberg worked on the poem , originally referring to it by the working title '' strophes . '' morgan , the typewriter is holy ( 2010 ) , pp . 92 & 96 . some drafts were purportedly written at a coffeehouse known today as the caffe mediterraneum in berkeley , california ; ginsberg had moved into a small cottage in berkeley a few blocks from the campus of the university of california on september 1 , 1955 . morgan , the typewriter is holy ( 2010 ) , p . 97 . many factors went into the creation of the poem . a short time before the composition of '' howl '' , ginsberg 's therapist , dr . philip hicks , encouraged him to realize his desire to quit his market-research job and pursue poetry full-time and to accept his own homosexuality . allen ginsberg . journals mid-fifties : 1954-1958 . ed . gordon ball . harpercollins , 1995 . 0060167718 . james breslin . '' allen ginsberg : the origins of howl and kaddish . '' poetry criticism . ed . david m . galens . vol . 47 . detroit : gale , 2003 . morgan , the typewriter is holy ( 2010 ) , p . 92 he experimented with a syntactic subversion of meaning called parataxis in the poem '' dream record : june 8 , 1955 '' about the death of joan vollmer , a technique that became central in '' howl '' . miles , barry . ginsberg : a biography . london : virgin publishing ltd . ( 2001 ) , paperback , 628 pages , , pg . 182 ginsberg showed this poem to kenneth rexroth , who criticized it as too stilted and academic ; rexroth encouraged ginsberg to free his voice and write from his heart . journals mid-fifties , pg.9 miles , pg . 183 ginsberg took this advice and attempted to write a poem with no restrictions . he was under the immense influence of william carlos williams and jack kerouac and attempted to speak with his own voice spontaneously . journals mid-fifties , pg . 167 ginsberg began the poem in the stepped triadic form he took from williams but , in the middle of typing the poem , his style altered such that his own unique form ( a long line based on breath organized by a fixed base ) began to emerge . ginsberg experimented with this breath-length form in many later poems . the first draft contained what later became part i and part iii . it is noted for relating stories and experiences of ginsberg 's friends and contemporaries , its tumbling , hallucinatory style , and the frank address of sexuality , specifically homosexuality , which subsequently provoked an obscenity trial . although ginsberg referred to many of his friends and acquaintances ( including neal cassady , jack kerouac , william s . burroughs , peter orlovsky , lucien carr , and herbert huncke ) , the primary emotional drive was his sympathy for carl solomon , to whom it was dedicated ; he met solomon in a mental institution and became friends with him . ginsberg later stated this sympathy for solomon was connected to bottled-up guilt and sympathy for his mother 's schizophrenia ( she had been lobotomy ) , an issue he was not yet ready to address directly . in 2008 , peter orlovsky told the co-directors of the 2010 film howl that a short moonlit walk—during which orlovsky sang a rendition of the hank williams song '' howlin ’ at the moon '' —may have been the encouragement for the title of ginsberg 's poem . '' i never asked him , and he never offered , '' orlovsky told them , '' but there were things he would pick up on and use in his verse form some way or another . poets do it all the time . '' the dedication by ginsberg states he took the title from kerouac . performance and publication . the poem was first performed at the six gallery in san francisco on october 7 , 1955 . heidi benson , '' howl '' , san francisco chronicle '' , october 4 , 2005 the reading was conceived by wally hedrick—a painter and co-founder of the six—who approached ginsberg in mid-1955 and asked him to organize a poetry reading at the six gallery . '' at first , ginsberg refused . but once he 'd written a rough draft of howl , he changed his 'fucking mind ' , as he put it . '' further evidence that this was not performance art but poetry—a written piece that ginsberg would not and has not ever described as anything but a poem not a performance piece . jonah raskin , american scream : allen ginsberg 's '' howl '' and the making of the beat generation ginsberg was ultimately responsible for inviting the readers ( gary snyder , philip lamantia , philip whalen , michael mcclure and kenneth rexroth ) and writing the invitation . '' howl '' was the second to the last reading ( before '' a berry feast '' by snyder ) and was considered by most in attendance the highlight of the reading . many considered it the beginning of a new movement , and the reputation of ginsberg and those associated with the six gallery reading spread throughout san francisco . in response to ginsberg 's reading , mcclure wrote : '' ginsberg read on to the end of the poem , which left us standing in wonder , or cheering and wondering , but knowing at the deepest level that a barrier had been broken , that a human voice and body had been hurled against the harsh wall of america . '' poets.org , from the academy of american poets : allen ginsberg jack kerouac gave a first-hand account of the six gallery performance ( in which ginsberg is renamed 'alvah goldbrook ' and the poem becomes 'wail ' ) in chapter 2 of his 1958 novel , the dharma bums : anyway i followed the whole gang of howling poets to the reading at gallery six that night , which was , among other important things , the night of the birth of the san francisco poetry renaissance . everyone was there . it was a mad night . and i was the one who got things jumping by going around collecting dimes and quarters from the rather stiff audience standing around in the gallery and coming back with three huge gallon jugs of california burgundy and getting them all piffed so that by eleven o'clock when alvah goldbrook was reading his poem 'wail ' drunk with arms outspread everybody was yelling 'go ! go ! go ! ' ( like a jam session ) and old rheinhold cacoethes the father of the frisco poetry scene was wiping his tears in gladness . soon afterwards , it was published by lawrence ferlinghetti , who ran city lights bookstore and the city lights press . ginsberg completed part ii and the '' footnote '' after ferlinghetti had promised to publish the poem . '' howl '' was too short to make an entire book , so ferlinghetti requested some other poems . thus the final collection contained several other poems written at that time ; with these poems , ginsberg continued the experimentation with long lines and a fixed base he 'd discovered with the composition of '' howl '' and these poems have likewise become some of ginsberg 's most famous : '' america '' , '' sunflower sutra '' , '' a supermarket in california '' , etc . the earliest extant recording of '' howl '' was thought to date from march 18 , 1956 . ( the blackburn collection recordings show otherwise . ) ginsberg and snyder , after hitch-hiking from san francisco , read from their poems in the anna mann dormitory at reed college , snyder 's alma mater . this recording , discovered in mid-2007 on a reel-to-reel tape in the reed college archives , contains only part i of '' howl '' . after beginning to read part ii , ginsberg said to the audience , '' i do n't really feel like reading anymore . i just sorta have n't got any kind of steam . '' jeff baker , '' 'howl ' tape gives reed claim to first '' , the oregonian , 2008-02-12 . overview and structure . the poem consists of 112 paragraph-like lines , which are organized into three parts , with an additional footnote . part i . called by ginsberg '' a lament for the lamb in america with instances of remarkable lamb-like youths '' , part i is perhaps the best known , and communicates scenes , characters , and situations drawn from ginsberg 's personal experience as well as from the community of poets , artists , political radicals , jazz musicians , drug addicts , and psychiatric patients whom he encountered in the late 1940s and early 1950s . ginsberg refers to these people , who were underrepresented outcasts in what the poet believed to be an oppressively conformist and materialistic era , as '' the best minds of my generation '' . he describes their experiences in graphic detail , openly discussing drug use and homosexual activity at multiple points . most lines in this section contain the fixed base '' who '' . in '' notes written on finally recording howl , '' ginsberg writes , '' i depended on the word 'who ' to keep the beat , a base to keep measure , return to and take off from again onto another streak of invention '' . ginsberg , allen . '' notes written on finally recording 'howl . ' '' deliberate prose : selected essays 1952-1995 . ed . bill morgan . new york : harper collins , 2000 . . part ii . ginsberg says that part ii , in relation to part i , '' names the monster of mental consciousness that preys on the lamb '' . part ii is about the state of industrial civilization , characterized in the poem as '' moloch '' . ginsberg was inspired to write part ii during a period of peyote-induced visionary consciousness in which he saw a hotel façade as a monstrous and horrible visage which he identified with that of moloch , the bible idol in leviticus to whom the canaanites sacrificed children . ginsberg intends that the characters he portrays in part i be understood to have been sacrificed to this idol . moloch is also the name of an industrial , demonic figure in fritz lang 's metropolis , a film that ginsberg credits with influencing '' howl , part ii '' in his annotations for the poem ( see especially howl : original draft facsimile , transcript & variant versions ) . most lines in this section contain the fixed base '' moloch '' . ginsberg says of part ii , '' here the long line is used as a stanza form broken into exclamatory units punctuated by a base repetition , moloch . '' . part iii . part iii , in relation to parts i , ii and iv , is '' a litany of affirmation of the lamb in its glory '' , according to ginsberg . it is directly addressed to carl solomon , whom ginsberg met during a brief stay at a psychiatric hospital in 1949 ; called '' rockland '' in the poem , it was actually columbia presbyterian psychological institute . this section is notable for its refrain , '' i 'm with you in rockland '' , and represents something of a turning point away from the grim tone of the '' moloch '' -section . of the structure , ginsberg says part iii is '' pyramidal , with a graduated longer response to the fixed base '' . . footnote . the closing section of the poem is the '' footnote '' , characterized by its repetitive '' holy ! '' mantra , an ecstatic assertion that everything is holy . ginsberg says , '' i remembered the archetypal rhythm of holy holy holy weeping in a bus on kearny street , and wrote most of it down in notebook there . i set it as 'footnote to howl ' because it was an extra variation of the form of part ii . '' . rhythm . the frequently quoted and often parodied opening lines set the theme and rhythm for the poem : ginsberg 's own commentary discusses the work as an experiment with the '' long line '' . for example , part i is structured as a single run-on sentence with a repetitive refrain dividing it up into breaths . ginsberg said , '' ideally each line of 'howl ' is a single breath unit . my breath is long—that 's the measure , one physical-mental inspiration of thought contained in the elastic of a breath . '' on another occasion , he explained : '' the line length . you 'll notice that they 're all built on bop—you might think of them as a bop refrain—chorus after chorus after chorus—the ideal being , say , lester young in kansas city in 1938 , blowing 72 choruses of 'the man i love ' until everyone in the hall was out of his head . '' . 1957 obscenity trial . '' howl '' contains many references to illicit drugs and sexual practices , both heterosexual and homosexual . claiming that the book was obscene , customs officials seized 520 copies of the poem on 25 march 1957 , being imported from england . on june 3 shig murao , the bookstore manager , was arrested and jailed for selling howl and other poems to an undercover san francisco police officer . city lights publisher lawrence ferlinghetti was subsequently arrested for publishing the book . at the obscenity trial , nine literary experts testified on the poem 's behalf ; ferlinghetti , a published poet himself , is credited ( by david skover and ronald k . l . collins ) with breathing '' publishing life '' into ginsberg 's poetic career . supported by the american civil liberties union , ferlinghetti won the case when superior courts of california judge clayton horn decided that the poem was of '' roth v . united states '' . how '' howl '' changed the world , allen ginsberg 's anguished protest broke all the rules—and encouraged a generation of artists to do the same . by fred kaplan , slate , sept . 24 , 2010 the case was widely publicized . ( articles appeared in both time and life magazines . ) an account of the trial was published by ferlinghetti 's lead defense attorney jake ehrlich in a book called howl of the censor . the 2010 film howl depicts the events of the trial . james franco stars as the young allen ginsberg and andrew rogers portrays ferlinghetti . . 1969 broadcast controversy in finland . part one of '' howl '' was broadcast in finland on september 30 , 1969 , on yleisradio 's ( finland 's national public-broadcasting company ) '' parallel programme '' at 10:30 & nbsp ; p.m . the poem was read by three actors with jazz music specially composed for this radio broadcast by henrik otto donner . the poem was preceded by an eight-minute introduction . the finnish translation was made by anselm hollo . lounela , pekka & mäntylä , jyrki : huuto ja meteli , p . 16 . howl and turmoil . hämeenlinna , karisto . 1970 . the translation was published already in 1961 in parnasso literary magazine , and caused no turmoil then . a liberal-party member of the finnish parliament , arne berner , heard the broadcast , and started an interpellation , addressed to the minister of transport and public works . it was signed by him and 82 other members of the 200 members of parliament . lounela & mäntylä , p . 17 . it is unclear how many of the other signatories actually had heard the broadcast . the interpellation text only contained a short extract of six lines ( considered to be offensive , and representative of the poem ) of over seventy from the poem , and the debate was mainly based upon them . lounela & mäntylä , p . 102 . also , a report of an offence was filed to the criminal investigation department of helsinki police district because the obscenity of the poem allegedly offended modesty and delicacy . the report was filed by suomen kotien radio- ja televisioliitto ( the radio and television association of finnish homes ) , a christian and patriotic organization , and it was only based on the six-line fragment . in connection with that , yleisradio was accused of copyright violation . lounale & mäntylä , pp . 39–41 . no charges followed . at that time , homosexual acts were still illegal in finland . finally , the ministry of transport and public works considered in december 1969 that the broadcast of '' howl '' contravened the licence of operation of yleisradio : it was neither educational nor useful . yleisradio received a reprimand , and was instructed to be more careful when monitoring that no more such programs should be broadcast . lounela & mäntylä , pp . 5 , 78–79 . . biographical references and allusions . part i . . references . further reading . collins , ronald & skover , david . mania : the story of the outraged & outrageous lives that launched a cultural revolution ( top-five books , march 2013 ) charters , ann ( ed . ) . the portable beat reader . penguin books . new york . 1992 . ( hc ) ; ( pbk ) ginsberg , allen . howl . 1986 critical edition edited by barry miles , original draft facsimile , transcript & variant versions , fully annotated by author , with contemporaneous correspondence , account of first public reading , legal skirmishes , precursor texts & bibliography ( pbk . ) howl of the censor . jake ehrlich , editor . lounela , pekka & nbsp ; — mäntylä , jyrki : huuto ja meteli . howl and turmoil . hämeenlinna , karisto . 1970 . miles , barry . ginsberg : a biography . london : virgin publishing ltd . ( 2001 ) , paperback , 628 pages , jonah raskin . american scream : allen ginsberg 's '' howl '' and the making of the beat generation . berkeley : university of california press , 2004 . external links . allen ginsberg.org the poetry archive : allen ginsberg allen ginsberg on poets.org with audio clips , poems , and related essays , from the academy of american poets full text of '' howl '' and '' footnote to howl '' at the poetry foundation allen ginsberg reads howl . 27 minutes of audio . naropa audio archives : allen ginsberg class ( august 6 , 1976 ) streaming audio and 64 kbit/s mp3 zip naropa audio archives : anne waldman and allen ginsberg reading , including howl ( august 9 , 1975 ) streaming audio and 64 kbit/s mp3 zip allen ginsberg live in london -- live film from october 19 , 1995 after 50 years , ginsberg 's '' howl '' still resonates reading of howl and other poems at reed college , portland , oregon , february 1956 howls of anger , and of liberation by the nation '' howl for carl solomon '' , manuscript and typescript , with autograph corrections and annotations , stanford digital repository