What the Tortoise Said to Achilles

summary of the dialogue . the discussion begins by considering the following logical argument : a : '' things that are equal to the same are equal to each other '' ( a euclidean relation ) b : '' the two sides of this triangle are things that are equal to the same '' therefore , z : '' the two sides of this triangle are equal to each other '' the tortoise asks achilles whether the conclusion logically follows from the premises , and achilles grants that it obviously does . the tortoise then asks achilles whether there might be a reader of euclid who grants that the argument is logically valid , as a sequence , while denying that a and b are true . achilles accepts that such a reader might exist ( that is , a reader who denies the premises ) , and that he would hold that if a and b are true , then z must be true , while not yet accepting that a and b are true . the tortoise then asks achilles whether a second kind of reader might exist , who accepts that a and b are true , but who does not yet accept the principle that if a and b are both true , then z must be true . achilles grants the tortoise that this second kind of reader might also exist . the tortoise , then , asks achilles to treat the tortoise as a reader of this second kind . achilles must now logically compel the tortoise to accept that z must be true . ( the tortoise is a reader who denies the argument form itself ; the syllogism 's conclusion , structure , or validity . ) after writing down a , b , and z in his notebook , achilles asks the tortoise to accept the hypothetical : c : '' if a and b are true , z must be true '' the tortoise agrees to accept c , if achilles will write down what it has to accept in his notebook , making the new argument : a : '' things that are equal to the same are equal to each other '' b : '' the two sides of this triangle are things that are equal to the same '' c : '' if a and b are true , z must be true '' therefore , z : '' the two sides of this triangle are equal to each other '' but now that the tortoise accepts premise c , it still refuses to accept the expanded argument . when achilles demands that '' if you accept a and b and c , you must accept z , '' the tortoise remarks that that 's another hypothetical proposition , and suggests even if it accepts c , it could still fail to conclude z if it did not see the truth of : d : '' if a and b and c are true , z must be true '' the tortoise continues to accept each hypothetical premise once achilles writes it down , but denies that the conclusion necessarily follows , since each time it denies the hypothetical that if all the premises written down so far are true , z must be true : or , in words : proposition p ( is true ) implies q ( is true ) , and given p , therefore q . the regress problem arises because a prior principle is required to explain logical principles , here modus ponens , and once that principle is explained , another principle is required to explain that principle . thus , if the causal chain is to continue , the argument falls into infinite regress . however , if a formal system is introduced where modus ponens is simply a rule of inference defined within the system , then it can be abided by simply by reasoning within the system . in analogy , chess is played according to a particular set of rules , and when a person plays chess , he can not question or beg to differ from the given rules , but must instead abide by them because they form the very framework of the game . that is not to say that the chess player agrees with these rules ( consider for example , rule changes such as en passant ) . likewise , a formal system of logic consists of inference rules that are to be followed by the user of the system , and when a person reasons according to this formal system , he can not question or differ from these inference rules , but must instead abide by them because they form the very constituents of the system . that is not to say that the user reasoning according to this formal system agrees with these rules ( consider for example , the constructivist 's rejection of the law of the excluded middle and the dialethist 's rejection of the law of noncontradiction ) . in this way , formalising logic as a system can be considered as a response to the problem of infinite regress : modus ponens is placed as a rule within the system , the validity of modus ponens is eschewed to without the system . in propositional logic the logical implication is defined as follows : p implies q if and only if the proposition not p or q is a tautology . hence de modo ponente , p ∧ ( p → q ) ⇒ q , is a valid logical conclusion according to the definition of logical implication just stated . demonstrating the logical implication simply translates into verifying that the compound truth table produces a tautology . but the tortoise does not accept on faith the rules of propositional logic that this explanation is founded upon . he asks that these rules , too , be subject to logical proof . the tortoise and achilles do not agree on any definition of logical implication . in addition , the story hints at problems with the propositional solution . within the system of propositional logic , no proposition or variable carries any semantic content . the moment any proposition or variable takes on semantic content , the problem arises again because semantic content runs outside the system . thus , if the solution is to be said to work , then it is to be said to work solely within the given formal system , and not otherwise . some logicians ( kenneth ross , charles wright ) draw a firm distinction between the material conditional and the logical consequence . these logicians use the phrase not p or q for the conditional connective and the term implies for an asserted implication relation . discussion . several philosophers have tried to resolve carroll 's paradox . bertrand russell discussed the paradox briefly in § 38 of the principles of mathematics ( 1903 ) , distinguishing between implication ( associated with the form '' if p , then q '' ) , which he held to be a relation between unasserted propositions , and inference ( associated with the form '' p , therefore q '' ) , which he held to be a relation between asserted propositions ; having made this distinction , russell could deny that the tortoise 's attempt to treat inferring z from a and b as equivalent to , or dependent on , agreeing to the hypothetical '' if a and b are true , then z is true . '' the wittgensteinian philosopher peter winch discussed the paradox in the idea of a social science and its relation to philosophy ( 1958 ) , where he argued that the paradox showed that '' the actual process of drawing an inference , which is after all at the heart of logic , is something which can not be represented as a logical formula . learning to infer is not just a matter of being taught about explicit logical relations between propositions ; it is learning to do something '' ( p . & nbsp ; 57 ) . winch goes on to suggest that the moral of the dialogue is a particular case of a general lesson , to the effect that the proper application of rules governing a form of human activity can not itself be summed up with a set of further rules , and so that '' a form of human activity can never be summed up in a set of explicit precepts '' ( p . & nbsp ; 53 ) . carroll 's dialogue is apparently the first description of an obstacle to conventionalism about logical truth , later reworked in more sober philosophical terms by w.v.o . quine . . see also . deduction theorem homunculus argument münchhausen trilemma paradox regress argument rule of inference . references . sources . reprinted in the penguin complete lewis carroll ( harmondsworth , penguin , 1982 ) , pp 1104–1108 . douglas hofstadter . gödel , escher , bach . see the second dialogue , entitled '' two-part invention '' . hofstadter appropriated the characters of achilles and the tortoise for other , original , dialogues in the book which alternate contrapuntally with prose chapters . a number of websites , including '' what the tortoise said to achilles '' at digital text international , and '' what the tortoise said to achilles '' at fair use repository . further reading . moktefi , amirouche & abeles , francine f . ( eds . ) . “ ‘ what the tortoise said to achilles ’ : lewis carroll 's paradox of inference . ” the carrollian : the lewis carroll journal , no . 28 , november 2016 . special issue . external links .