Alexander of Greece

public scandal . with the help of aspasia 's brother-in-law , christo zalocostas , and after three unsuccessful attempts , the couple eventually married in secret before a royal chaplain , archimandrite zacharistas , on the evening of 17 november 1919 . after the ceremony , the archimandrite was sworn to silence but soon broke his promise by confessing to the archbishop of athens , meletios metaxakis . van der kiste , pp . 118–119 . according to the greek constitution , members of the royal family had to obtain permission to marry from both the sovereign and the head of the greek orthodox church . van der kiste , pp . 120–121 . by marrying aspasia without the permission of the archbishop , alexander caused a major scandal . despite his disapproval of the union , venizelos allowed aspasia and her mother to move into the royal palace on condition that the marriage remain secret . the information leaked , however , and to escape public opprobrium aspasia was forced to leave greece . she fled to rome , and then to paris , where alexander was allowed to join her , six months later , on condition that they did not attend official functions together . on their parisian honeymoon , while motoring near fontainebleau , the couple witnessed a serious car crash in which count de kergariou 's chauffeur lost control of his master 's vehicle . alexander avoided the count 's car , which swerved and hit a tree . the king drove the injured to hospital in his own car , '' the king in a motor accident '' , the times , 29 may 1920 , p . 13 . while aspasia , who had trained as a nurse during world war i , rendered first aid . the count was seriously injured and died shortly afterward , after having both legs amputated . '' narrow escape while motoring '' , the argus , 31 may 1920 , p . 8 . the government allowed the couple to return to greece in mid-1920 . although their marriage was legalized , aspasia was not recognized as queen , but was instead known as '' madame manos '' . at first , she stayed at her sister 's house in the greek capital before transferring to tatoi , sáinz de medrano , p . 178 . and it was during this period that she became pregnant with alexander 's child . alexander visited the newly acquired territories of west thrace , and on 8 july 1920 the new name for the region 's main town—alexandroupoli ( meaning '' city of alexander '' in greek ) —was announced in the king 's presence . the city 's previous name of dedeagatch was considered too turkish . kargakos , pp . 325–331 on 7 september , venizelos , counting on a surge of support in the wake of the signing of the treaty of sèvres and the expansion of greek territory , announced a general election for early november . llewellyn smith , p . 135 . . death . on 2 october 1920 , alexander was injured while walking through the grounds of the tatoi estate . a domestic barbary macaque belonging to the steward of the palace 's grapevines attacked or was attacked by the king 's german shepherd , fritz , and alexander attempted to separate the two animals . as he did so , another monkey attacked alexander and bit him deeply on the leg and torso . eventually servants arrived and chased away the monkeys , '' monkey bites king of greece '' , the portsmouth herald , 14 october 1920 , p.1 ; van der kiste , p . 122 . and the king 's wounds were promptly cleaned and dressed but not cauterized . he did not consider the incident serious and asked that it not be publicized . van der kiste , pp . 122–123 . that evening , his wounds became infected ; he suffered a strong fever and sepsis set in . his doctors considered amputating his leg , but none wished to take responsibility for so drastic an act . van der kiste , p . 123 . on 19 october , he became delirious and called out for his mother , but the greek government refused to allow her to re-enter the country from exile in switzerland , despite her own protestations . finally , the queen dowager , olga , george i 's widow and alexander 's grandmother , was allowed to return alone to athens to tend to the king . she was delayed by rough waters , however , and by the time she arrived , alexander had already died of sepsis twelve hours previously at a little after 4 p.m . on 25 october 1920 . van der kiste , pp . 123–124 . the other members of the royal family received the news by telegram that night . two days later , alexander 's body was conveyed to athens cathedral , where it lay in state until his funeral on 29 october . once again , the royal family were refused permission to return to greece , and queen olga was the only member who attended . foreign powers were represented by the prince regent of serbia with his sister princess helen wife of john constantinovich of russia , the crown prince of sweden with his uncle prince eugen , duke of närke , and rear-admirals sir george hope of britain and dumesnil of france , as well as members of the athens diplomatic corps . '' royal funeral in athens '' , the times , 2 november 1920 , p . 11 . after the cathedral service , alexander 's body was interred on the grounds of the royal estate at tatoi . van der kiste , p . 125 . the greek royal family never regarded alexander 's reign as fully legitimate . in the royal cemetery , while other monarchs are given the inscription '' king of the hellenes , prince of denmark '' , alexander 's reads '' alexander , son of the king of the hellenes , prince of denmark . he ruled in the place of his father from 14 june 1917 to 25 october 1920 . '' according to alexander 's favorite sister , queen helen of romania , this feeling of illegitimacy was also shared by alexander himself , a sentiment that helps explain his mésalliance with aspasia manos . . legacy . alexander 's death raised questions about the succession to the throne as well as the nature of the greek regime . as the king had contracted an unequal marriage , his descendants were not in the line of succession . the hellenic parliament demanded that constantine i and crown prince george be excluded from the succession but sought to preserve the monarchy by selecting another member of the royal house as the new sovereign . on 29 october 1920 , the greek minister in berne , acting under the direction of the greek authorities , offered the throne to alexander 's younger brother , prince paul . van der kiste , pp . 125–126 . paul , however , refused to become king while his father and elder brother were alive , insisting that neither of them had renounced their rights to the throne and that he therefore could never legitimately wear the crown . llewellyn smith , p . 139 ; van der kiste , p . 126 . the throne remained vacant and the legislative elections of 1920 turned into an open conflict between the venizelists , who favored republicanism , and the supporters of the ex-king constantine . llewellyn smith , pp . 144–148 ; van der kiste , p . 126 . on 14 november 1920 , with the war with turkey dragging on , the monarchists won , and dimitrios rallis became prime minister ; venizelos ( who lost his own parliamentary seat ) chose to leave greece in self-exile . rallis asked queen olga to become regent until constantine 's return . van der kiste , p . 126 . under the restored king constantine i , whose return was endorsed overwhelmingly in a referendum , greece went on to lose the greco–turkish war with heavy military and civilian casualties . the territory gained on the turkish mainland during alexander 's reign was lost . alexander 's death in the midst of an election campaign helped destabilize the venizelos regime , and the resultant loss of allied support contributed to the failure of greece 's territorial ambitions . fry , goldstein and langhorne , p . 201 ; goldstein , p . 49 . winston churchill wrote , '' it is perhaps no exaggeration to remark that a quarter of a million persons died of this monkey 's bite . '' churchill , p . 409 , quoted ( for example ) in pentzopoulos , p . 39 . . issue . alexander 's daughter by aspasia manos , alexandra ( 1921–1993 ) , was born five months after his death . initially , the government took the line that since alexander had married aspasia without the permission of his father or the church , his marriage was illegal and his posthumous daughter was illegitimate . however , in july 1922 , parliament passed a law which allowed the king to recognize royal marriages retroactively on a non-dynastic basis . diesbach , p . 225 . that september , constantine—at sophia 's insistence—recognized his son 's marriage to aspasia and granted her the style of '' princess alexander '' . van der kiste , p . 132 . her daughter ( constantine i 's granddaughter ) was legitimized as a princess of greece and denmark , and later married king peter ii of yugoslavia in london in 1944 . they had one child : alexander , crown prince of yugoslavia . montgomery-massingberd , pp . 327 , 536 , 544 . . ancestry . footnotes and references . notes . . references . . sources . . further reading . . external links . film of king alexander 's funeral , british pathé