Edwin McMillan

world war ii . mcmillan 's abrupt departure was caused by the outbreak of world war ii in europe . in november 1940 , he began working at the mit radiation laboratory in cambridge , massachusetts , where he participated in the development and testing of airborne microwave radar during world war ii . he conducted tests in april 1941 with the radar operating from an old douglas b-18 bolo medium bomber . flying over the naval submarine base new london with luis walter alvarez and air chief marshal hugh dowding , they showed that the radar was able to detect the conning tower of a partly submerged submarine . mcmillan married elsie walford blumer in new haven , connecticut , on june 7 , 1941 . her father was george blumer , dean emeritus of the yale medical school . her sister mary was lawrence 's wife . the mcmillans had three children : ann bradford , david mattison and stephen walker . mcmillan joined the navy electronics laboratory near san diego in august 1941 . there he worked on a device called a polyscope . the idea , which came from lawrence , was to use sonar to build up a visual image of the surrounding water . this proved to be far more difficult that doing so with radar , because of objects in the water and variations in water temperature that caused variations in the speed of sound . the polyscope proved to be impractical , and was abandoned . he also , however , developed a sonar training device for submariners , for which he received a patent . oppenheimer recruited mcmillan to join the manhattan project , the wartime effort to create atomic bombs , in september 1942 . initially , he commuted back and forth between san diego , where his family was , and berkeley . in november he accompanied oppenheimer on a trip to new mexico on which the los alamos ranch school was selected as the site of the project 's weapons research laboratory , which became the los alamos laboratory . with oppenheimer and john h . manley , he drew up the specifications for the new laboratory 's technical buildings . he recruited personnel for the laboratory , including richard feynman and robert r . wilson , established the test area known as the anchor ranch , and scoured the country for technical equipment from machine tools to a cyclotron . as the laboratory took shape , mcmillan became deputy head of the gun-type nuclear weapon effort under navy captain william s . parsons , an ordnance expert . the plutonium gun , codenamed thin man , needed a muzzle velocity of at least per second , which they hoped to achieve with a modified navy 3 '' /50 caliber gun . the alternative was to build an implosion-type nuclear weapon . mcmillan took an early interest in this , watching tests of this concept conducted by seth neddermeyer . the results were not encouraging . simple explosions resulted in distorted shapes . john von neumann looked at the implosion program in september 1943 , and proposed a radical solution involving explosive lenses . this would require expertise in explosives , and mcmillan urged oppenheimer to bring in george kistiakowsky . kistiakowsky joined the laboratory on february 16 , 1944 , and parsons 's e ( explosives ) division was divided in two , with mcmillan as deputy for the gun and kistiakowsky as deputy for implosion . mcmillan heard disturbing news in april 1944 , and drove out to pajarito canyon to confer with segrè . segrè 's group had tested samples of plutonium bred in the manhattan project 's nuclear reactors and found that it contained quantities of plutonium-240 , an isotope that caused spontaneous fission , making thin man impractical . in july 1944 , oppenheimer reorganised the laboratory to make an all-out effort on implosion . mcmillan remained in charge of the gun-type weapon , which would now be used only with uranium-235 . this being the case , thin man was replaced by a new , scaled-back design called little boy . mcmillan was also involved with the implosion as the head of the g-3 group within the g ( gadget ) division , which was responsible for obtaining measurements and timings on implosion , and served as the laboratory 's liaison with project camel , the aerial test program being carried out by caltech . on july 16 , 1945 , he was present at the trinity nuclear test , when the first implosion bomb was successfully detonated . later life . in june 1945 , mcmillan 's thoughts began to return to cyclotrons . over time they had gotten larger and larger . a 184-inch cyclotron was under construction at the radiation laboratory , but he realised that a more efficient use could be made of the energy used to accelerate particles . by varying the magnetic field used , the particles could be made to move in stable orbits , and higher energies achieved with the same energy input . he dubbed this the '' phase stability principle '' , and the new design a '' synchrotron '' . unknown to mcmillan , the synchrotron principle had already been invented by vladimir veksler , who had published his proposal in 1944 . mcmillan became aware of veksler 's paper in october 1945 . the two began corresponding , and eventually became friends . in 1963 they shared the atoms for peace award for the invention of the synchrotron . in 1964 , mcmillan received the golden plate award of the academy of achievement . the phase stability principle was tested with the old 37-inch cyclotron at berkeley after mcmillan returned to the radiation laboratory in september 1945 . when it was found to work , the 184-inch cyclotron was similarly modified . he became a full professor in 1946 . in 1954 he was appointed associate director of the radiation laboratory . he was promoted to deputy director in 1958 . on the death of lawrence that year , he became director , and he stayed in that position until his retirement in 1973 . the laboratory was renamed the lawrence radiation laboratory in 1958 . in 1970 , it split into the lawrence berkeley laboratory and the lawrence livermore laboratory , and mcmillan became director of the former . mcmillan was elected to the national academy of sciences in 1947 , serving as its chairman from 1968 to 1971 . he served on the influential general advisory committee ( gac ) of the atomic energy commission from 1954 to 1958 , and the commission on high energy physics of the international union of pure and applied physics from 1960 to 1967 . after his retirement from the faculty at berkeley in 1974 , he spent 1974–75 at cern , where he worked on the g minus 2 experiment to measure the magnetic moment of the muon . he was awarded the national medal of science in 1990 . mcmillan suffered the first of a series of strokes in 1984 . he died at his home in el cerrito , california , from complications from diabetes on september 7 , 1991 . he was survived by his wife and three children . his gold nobel prize medal is in the national museum of american history , a division of the smithsonian , in washington dc . . publications . mcmillan , e . m . '' focusing in linear accelerators '' , university of california radiation laboratory , lawrence berkeley national laboratory , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( august 24 , 1950 ) . mcmillan , e . m . '' a thick target for synchrotrons and betatrons '' , university of california radiation laboratory , lawrence berkeley national laboratory , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( september 19 , 1950 ) . mcmillan , e . m . '' the transuranium elements : early history ( nobel lecture ) '' , university of california radiation laboratory , lawrence berkeley national laboratory , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( december 12 , 1951 ) . mcmillan , e . m . '' notes on quadrupole focusing '' , university of california radiation laboratory , lawrence berkeley national laboratory , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( february 9 , 1956 ) . mcmillan , e . m . '' some thoughts on stability in nonlinear periodic focusing systems '' , university of california radiation laboratory , lawrence berkeley national laboratory , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( september 5 , 1967 ) . notes . references . . external links . audio lecture by edwin mcmillan at los alamos national laboratory voices of the manhattan project audio lecture by elsie mcmillan at los alamos national laboratory voices of the manhattan project mcmillan 's nobel lecture : the transuranium elements : early history including the nobel lecture on december 12 , 1951 the transuranium elements : early history