Cycle (graph theory)

definitions . circuit , cycle . a circuit is a non-empty trail in which the first vertex is equal to the last vertex ( closed trail ) . : let be a graph . a circuit is a non-empty trail with a vertex sequence . a cycle or simple circuit is a circuit in which the only repeated vertex is the first/last vertex . the length of a circuit or cycle is the number of edges involved . directed circuit , cycle . a directed circuit is a non-empty directed trail in which the first vertex is equal to the last vertex . : let be a directed graph . a directed circuit is a non-empty directed trail with a vertex sequence . a directed cycle or simple directed circuit is a directed circuit in which the only repeated vertex is the first/last vertex . chordless cycles . a chordless cycle in a graph , also called a hole or an induced cycle , is a cycle such that no two vertices of the cycle are connected by an edge that does not itself belong to the cycle . an antihole is the complement of a graph hole . chordless cycles may be used to characterize perfect graphs : by the strong perfect graph theorem , a graph is perfect if and only if none of its holes or antiholes have an odd number of vertices that is greater than three . a chordal graph , a special type of perfect graph , has no holes of any size greater than three . the girth of a graph is the length of its shortest cycle ; this cycle is necessarily chordless . cages are defined as the smallest regular graphs with given combinations of degree and girth . a peripheral cycle is a cycle in a graph with the property that every two edges not on the cycle can be connected by a path whose interior vertices avoid the cycle . in a graph that is not formed by adding one edge to a cycle , a peripheral cycle must be an induced cycle . cycle space . the term cycle may also refer to an element of the cycle space of a graph . there are many cycle spaces , one for each coefficient field or ring . the most common is the binary cycle space ( usually called simply the cycle space ) , which consists of the edge sets that have even degree at every vertex ; it forms a vector space over the two-element field . by veblen 's theorem , every element of the cycle space may be formed as an edge-disjoint union of simple cycles . a cycle basis of the graph is a set of simple cycles that forms a basis of the cycle space . . using ideas from algebraic topology , the binary cycle space generalizes to vector spaces or modules over other rings such as the integers , rational or real numbers , etc . . . cycle detection . the existence of a cycle in directed and undirected graphs can be determined by whether depth-first search ( dfs ) finds an edge that points to an ancestor of the current vertex ( it contains a back edge ) . all the back edges which dfs skips over are part of cycles . in an undirected graph , the edge to the parent of a node should not be counted as a back edge , but finding any other already visited vertex will indicate a back edge . in the case of undirected graphs , only o ( n ) time is required to find a cycle in an n-vertex graph , since at most n & nbsp ; − & nbsp ; 1 edges can be tree edges . many topological sorting algorithms will detect cycles too , since those are obstacles for topological order to exist . also , if a directed graph has been divided into strongly connected components , cycles only exist within the components and not between them , since cycles are strongly connected . for directed graphs , distributed message based algorithms can be used . these algorithms rely on the idea that a message sent by a vertex in a cycle will come back to itself . distributed cycle detection algorithms are useful for processing large-scale graphs using a distributed graph processing system on a computer cluster ( or supercomputer ) . applications of cycle detection include the use of wait-for graphs to detect deadlocks in concurrent systems . . covering graphs by cycles . in his 1736 paper on the seven bridges of königsberg , widely considered to be the birth of graph theory , leonhard euler proved that , for a finite undirected graph to have a closed walk that visits each edge exactly once , it is necessary and sufficient that it be connected except for isolated vertices ( that is , all edges are contained in one component ) and have even degree at each vertex . the corresponding characterization for the existence of a closed walk visiting each edge exactly once in a directed graph is that the graph be strongly connected and have equal numbers of incoming and outgoing edges at each vertex . in either case , the resulting walk is known as an euler cycle or euler tour . if a finite undirected graph has even degree at each of its vertices , regardless of whether it is connected , then it is possible to find a set of simple cycles that together cover each edge exactly once : this is veblen 's theorem . . when a connected graph does not meet the conditions of euler 's theorem , a closed walk of minimum length covering each edge at least once can nevertheless be found in polynomial time by solving the route inspection problem . the problem of finding a single simple cycle that covers each vertex exactly once , rather than covering the edges , is much harder . such a cycle is known as a hamiltonian cycle , and determining whether it exists is np-complete . . much research has been published concerning classes of graphs that can be guaranteed to contain hamiltonian cycles ; one example is ore 's theorem that a hamiltonian cycle can always be found in a graph for which every non-adjacent pair of vertices have degrees summing to at least the total number of vertices in the graph . . the cycle double cover conjecture states that , for every bridgeless graph , there exists a multiset of simple cycles that covers each edge of the graph exactly twice . proving that this is true ( or finding a counterexample ) remains an open problem . . . graph classes defined by cycles . several important classes of graphs can be defined by or characterized by their cycles . these include : bipartite graph , a graph without odd cycles ( cycles with an odd number of vertices ) . cactus graph , a graph in which every nontrivial biconnected component is a cycle cycle graph , a graph that consists of a single cycle . chordal graph , a graph in which every induced cycle is a triangle directed acyclic graph , a directed graph with no cycles line perfect graph , a graph in which every odd cycle is a triangle perfect graph , a graph with no induced cycles or their complements of odd length greater than three pseudoforest , a graph in which each connected component has at most one cycle strangulated graph , a graph in which every peripheral cycle is a triangle strongly connected graph , a directed graph in which every edge is part of a cycle triangle-free graph , a graph without three-vertex cycles