Kite aerial photography

camera rig and stabilisation . the camera can be attached directly to the kite but is usually secured to an adjustable rig suspended from the kite line at a distance from the kite . this distance reduces excessive movement being transmitted from the kite to the camera and allows the kite to be flown into higher , stable air before the camera is attached . if possible , the camera is set to a high shutter speed to reduce motion blur . cameras using internal image stabilization features can increase the number of sharp photos . in order to take photographs that are oriented correctly with the horizon , a suspension method is used to allow the rig to automatically level itself under the kite line . pendulum suspension . this simple levelling method involves suspending the camera from a rigid length of material below the kite line . gravity naturally keeps the rig level , irrespective of the angle of the kite line . the pendulum will oscillate due to movement from the kite line and wind pressure , but the camera will remain steadier and more level than without a pendulum . picavet suspension . a picavet suspension , named after its french inventor pierre picavet , consists of a rigid cross suspended below the kite line from two points . a single line is threaded several times between the points of the cross and the points of attachment to the kite line and the rig is attached to the cross . the picavet line runs through eye hooks or small pulleys so that the weight of the rig causes it to settle naturally into a level position . the dimensions and shape of the picavet have been adapted many times in attempts to increase stability or to improve portability . shutter release and camera positioning . the shutter of the camera can be released in several ways , depending on the type of camera and complexity of the rig electronics , if used . shutter release mechanisms include using a radio controlled servo to press the shutter release button , using an infrared signal or wired connection to instruct the camera to release the shutter , or by using the camera 's inbuilt intervalometer . ideally the camera is allowed to reach its final altitude before the shutter is released to avoid taking photos during launch . fixing the camera directly to the kite or line makes changes to positioning awkward . if the camera is fitted within a frame , this 'rig ' can be designed to rotate horizontally and vertically and to change the picture format from portrait to landscape by rotating the camera . adjustments to these angles can be made by manually setting the rig on the ground or by adjusting the rig while it is airborne using a remote control or an automatic controller in the rig . commonly a radio control system , as used for model aircraft is used . the servos in these systems are readily adaptable to adjust rig positioning . several automatic controllers have been developed that can take a photo , move the camera by a set angle , take the next photo and so on . kites . image : bartlow hills - cc by-sa bill blake.jpg thumb right a picture of bartlow hills , taken using kite aerial photography . the most important aspect of any kite used to lift a camera is stability . generally , single lined kites are used as they allow very long line lengths and need less intervention from the flyer than steerable designs . almost any stable kite design can be used to lift lightweight camera rigs ( up to approx 500g/1 & nbsp ; lb ) . as weight increases , specific designs are chosen for their additional flying characteristics , such as line pull , wind speed , flying angle and ease of launch . widely used designs are parafoil , rokkaku , delta ( including variations such as delta conyne ) and the new lighter-than-air helikite design . of these , the parafoil is most popular as it generates a strong pull for its size , and can be easily stored in a small space due to its sparless construction . sparred kites such as the rokkaku or delta tend to fly at a higher angle than parafoils , which is of benefit when the space between the launch site and photographic subject is limited . a higher flying angle permits the kite to lift more weight , as more of the generated force is acting vertically . helikites allow reliable kap in difficult conditions , thus opening up the use of kap for professional photography . history . the first kite aerial photography were taken by british meteorologist douglas archibald in 1887 archibald , douglas ( 1897 ) . '' the story of the earth 's atmosphere '' . p . 174 . retrieved 2011-04-16 . and arthur batut in labruguière ( france ) in 1888 . manned kite flying and aerial photography was advanced also by french marcel maillot , british robert baden-powell , americans charles lamson and william abner eddy , australian lawrence hargrave ( inventor of box kite in 1893 and kite train in 1884 ) and french captain saconney . see kite timeline 1800-1900 on a website dedicated to kites history . the famous kite image of san francisco after the 1906 earthquake ( right ) was taken by an early pioneer in kap , george lawrence using a large panoramic camera and stabilizing rig he designed . . kap today . with the advent of the internet , light and affordable digital cameras , radio control and microelectronics , kite aerial photography has become increasingly popular . in latter years , kits have become available that enable a beginner to quickly assemble a functional kap rig and start taking aerial pictures in the visible part of the spectrum and , with more experience , in the ultra-violet , near and thermal infra-red parts of the spectrum too . practical and commercial use of kap is limited by the unpredictability of the weather ( notably wind , sun and rain ) and the fact that not every site is suitable to flying a kite . launching a kite near buildings or downwind of trees can be problematic , due to heavy turbulence . the main applications today are amateur photography , art and , especially , archaeology as described on the webpages of the west lothian archaeological trust . another growing application is its use for community mapping and environmental monitoring by the widespread public laboratory for open technology and science . research scientists are using kite aerial photography for monitoring bird species and also for studies in the geographical and geological sciences , including photogrammetry . increasingly , kites are being employed where the use of a small unmanned aerial vehicle ( suav , commonly known as a drone ) is either impractical , or encounters legal or other constraints . attempts to commercialize kap have so far been largely unsuccessful . see also . balloon experiments with amateur radio panoramic photography aerial archaeology . references . external links . scottish national aerial photography scheme ( snaps ) , west lothian archaeological trust ( uk ) kite aerial photography information kite aerial photography forum kap jargon explained sample kite aerial photographs photographs of kite aerial photography rigs hd-kite-panoramic photos sample kite aerial photography images and information kite aerial photographers - archaeology an in-depth article on medium about kite aerial photography