Atmel

history . thumb . founding and 1980s growth . atmel corporation was founded in 1984 , by george perlegos . atmel was an acronym for “ advanced technology for memory and logic ” . perlegos had worked in the memory group of intel in the 1970s and had co-founded seeq technology to manufacture eprom memory . using only us 30,000 in capital , atmel was initially operated as a fabless company , using sanyo and general instrument to make the chip wafers . fundinguniverse.com , '' atmel corporation history '' the first atmel memory products used less power than competitors . customers included motorola , nokia , and ericsson . in 1987 , intel sued atmel for patent infringement . about.com , '' atmel corporation '' rather than fight the patent claim , atmel redesigned its products to use different intellectual property . these had better performance and even lower power consumption . in addition , atmel then entered the flash memory business that intel had focused on . atmel used us 60 million in venture capital for the 1989 purchase of a fabrication facility from honeywell in colorado springs . atmel then invested another us 30 million in manufacturing technology . 1990s expansion . in 1991 , atmel expanded the colorado facility after acquiring concurrent logic , a field-programmable gate array ( fpga ) manufacturer . the company made its initial public offering ( ipo ) in 1991 which yielded more than us 65 million . 1994 saw atmel enter the microprocessor market . the first atmel flash memory microcontroller was based on the intel 8051 . atmel.com , '' atmel ’ s self-programming flash microcontrollers '' , whitepaper . the controller executed an instruction for every clock cycle , as opposed to the 12 cycles that legacy 8051 parts required . atmel.com , '' 8051 single cycle core microcontrollers '' , flyer . in 1994 , atmel purchased the eerom assets of seeq technology ( lsi corporation acquired the rest of seeq in 1999 ) . in 1995 , atmel was among the first companies to license the arm architecture , creating initially its at91 family of devices , followed by the sam family , and more recently a full selection of cortex-based solutions , including ones based on the ultra-low-power arm cortex-m4 . atmel now has dozens of families of arm-based devices . in 1995 , atmel acquired the pan-european chipmaker european silicon structures ( es2 ) and thus gained a fabrication facility in rousset , france . atmel built a new fab alongside the existing es2 fab . this business unit was named atmel-es2 . atmel acquired digital research in electronic acoustics and music ( dream ) in 1996 . atmel formed a design team in trondheim , norway to develop the atmel avr line of risc microcontrollers . this team combined technology of former students at the norwegian university of science and technology with atmel 's expertise in flash memory . these 8-bit harvard architecture chips were first developed in 1996 . the avr chip is the basis of most arduino open-source development boards . in 1998 , atmel purchased part of temic from vishay intertechnology , which provided them with a fab in germany as well as part of mhs from vishay that gave them a fab in nantes , france . in september 2000 , atmel acquired a fabrication plant in north tyneside , england , from siemens , via a £28 million grant from the uk government and paying siemens around us 35 million . . streamlining . atmel streamlined operations with a strategy called '' fab-lite '' . this started in 2005 when atmel sold the mhs fab in nantes france to xbybus . in february 2006 , steven laub became a director and in august president and chief executive officer . under laub atmel divested more manufacturing plants and business lines . ebn ( electronic buyer news ) . '' grading the chain : atmel ceo steven laub '' atmel announced the sale of its north tyneside facility ( fab9 ) on october 8 , 2007 . the manufacturing equipment was sold to taiwan semiconductor manufacturing company , ltd . ( tsmc ) and the property and associated land to highbridge business park limited . in 2008 , atmel sold their fab in germany to tejas semiconductor . in 2010 , atmel received approval from the french government to sell its fab to germany-based lfoundry gmbh , while retaining their design center there . atmel completed the sale of their secure microcontroller solutions smart card business to inside secure . in february 2011 , atmel sold its digital research in electronics , acoustics and music ( dream ) business , which sold products for karaoke and other entertainment machines , for us 2.3 million . atmel 's dataflash serial interface flash memory products were sold to adesto technologies in october 2012 . . acquisitions . as atmel divested several fabs and ancillary business lines , laub also oversaw acquisitions . one strategy was to participate in the touch screen market , both in the semiconductor chips and the sensors themselves . in 2008 , atmel bought queens award-winning quantum research group ltd . ( now known as atmel technologies ireland limited , a wholly owned subsidiary ) , a supplier of capacitive sensing technology . bloomberg . '' atmel completes acquisition of quantum research group '' work done at quantum , led to the 2012 release of atmel 's xsense product line , a flexible touch screen based on copper mesh electrodes . engadget . '' atmel 's xsense technology will make curved touchscreens possible ( hands-on ) '' atmel moved into internet of things technology . they completed the acquisition of advanced digital design s.a , a spanish company that develops power line communication . ozmo devices , which developed products for wi-fi direct , was acquired by atmel in december 2012 . ozmo was founded in 2004 as h-stream wireless by kateljin vleugels and roel peeters , and was based in palo alto , california . in 2012 , atmel had approximately us 1.4 billion in annual revenue , with over 60 % of their revenue from microcontrollers , and net income of us 30 million . atmel purchased the smart metering product lines of idt corporation in march 2013 . atmel purchased newport media in july 2014 . this will provide atmel further capability in wireless bluetooth and wi-fi . . acquisition by microchip technology . in october 2008 , atmel received an unsolicited offer from microchip technology and on semiconductor , estimated at us 2.3 billion . the offer was eventually rejected and the companies gave up on their hostile takeover attempt . however , in 2016 , microchip agreed to buy atmel for 3.6 billion . jpmorgan chase and qatalyst partners served as financial advisers to microchip and atmel , respectively . the company had previously heard offers from cypress semiconductor and dialog semiconductor in 2015 , dialog semiconductor to buy u.s . peer atmel for 4.6 billion ; reuters ; september 20 , 2015 . and the deal with microchip was expected to be finalized at the end of q2 2016 . atmel finally merged with microchip technology in july 2016 after prolonged negotiations for us 3.56 billion . microchip to boost 8bit avr range following acquisition what ’ s the deal with atmel and microchip ? . the end of atmel way . apple computer purchased the old cul-de-sac where atmel 's hq office sat . paperwork was filed with the city of san jose to change the name from '' atmel way '' to '' orchard place . '' . products . microcontrollers . thumb thumb a large part of atmel 's revenue is from microcontrollers . these include the avr 8- and 32-bit microcontrollers , arm architecture microprocessors , and arm-based flash microcontrollers . in addition atmel still makes microcontrollers that use the 8051 architecture , albeit improved to do single-cycle instructions . supporting the microcontrollers is the atmel studio 7 integrated development environment which atmel offers for free . they also provide an atmel software framework . . wireless / rf . to provide for the internet of things ( iot ) , atmel offers dual-band 2.4 & nbsp ; ghz/5 & nbsp ; ghz a/b/g wi-fi chips from its ozmo acquisition . also , atmel offers 2.4 & nbsp ; ghz b/g/n wi-fi chips wilc1000/wilc3000 and winc1500 from its newport media , inc acquisition . winc1500 provide a full 802.11 b/g/n network controller with full ip stack tcp/ip , udp with upper layer protocols as dhcp , dns , http , sntp , tls etc . also , atmel makes wireless transceivers using regional 700/800/900 & nbsp ; mhz , as well as global 2.4 & nbsp ; ghz frequency bands , some chips are standalone transceivers while others are integrated with a microcontroller . they also sell the zigbit module that comes with fcc certifications . atmel also makes remote control rf products using the license-free ism band ( industrial scientific medical ) frequencies ( 5.8 & nbsp ; ghz , 2.4 & nbsp ; ghz , 868 to 928 & nbsp ; mhz , 433 & nbsp ; mhz , and 315 & nbsp ; mhz ) . the wireless segment also provides rfid chips for tracking , access and identification . finally , atmel offers a line of ir controllers that can support infrared as well as rf wireless . touchscreen . atmel makes both touchscreen controller ics and its xsense flexible touchscreen . the company makes sensor hubs that manage accelerometers , gyroscopes , inertial measurement units and magnetometers . these sensors give consumer products and embedded systems context awareness . the sensor hub offloads the main application processor and allows product functionality without the need to power the main processor . atmel also makes simple touch controller chips for buttons , sliders , and wheels used on industrial and consumer products . the touch wheel interface became popularized by the apple ipod . to support the application of its touch controller chips , atmel provides a free qtouch library of software routines . memory . atmel 's original business was in memory , and it still sells several memory products . it offers serial and parallel eeprom , as well as one-time programmable ( otp ) eprom . in addition , it offers secure memory with its cryptomemory product line of eeproms in capacities from 1 to 256 & nbsp ; kbits . security . in addition to the secure memory mentioned above , they have the cryptoauthentication product lines that provide hardware authentication capability with both symmetric and asymmetric-key algorithm authentication . these ics are used in many applications , including secure access , communications , control , and to prevent cloned products like batteries or ink cartridges not approved by the product manufacturer . atmel 's cryptorf products add hardware encrypted security to rfid applications . finally atmel offers a trusted platform module that gives strong hardware-based public key ( rsa algorithm ) security for both personal computers and embedded processors on a single chip . analog . atmel makes led driver chips . it also has a line of digital-output temperature sensors . the company also makes power management and analog companions ( pmaac ) that combine a group of discrete ics often used in handheld or battery-powered products . integrated functions include audio codecs ( compressor-decompressor ) , lithium-ion battery chargers , and stereo digital-to-analog converters . custom . these products include custom integrated circuits designed to meet specialized single-customer requirements . products include fpgas , products with military and aerospace applications , and application-specific standard products ( assp ) for space applications , power management , and secure cryptographic memory products . automotive . atmel modified or specialized many of its products for the automotive market . these products often have a wider temperature range or are specially qualified for automotive applications . these products include car access , touch control , radio , can , van , and lin bus networking , battery management , high-temperature drivers , and serial eeproms . . smart energy . atmel also has chips specialized for the smart energy and smart metering markets . these chips combine microprocessors with tamper-proof hardware security and power line communication modems . the parts also integrate analog front-ends for accurate metrology . . see also . image : mck glamor 320.jpg thumb right the make controller kit with an atmel at91sam7x256 ( arm ) microcontroller atmel avr , a family of 8-bit microcontrollers atmel arm-based processors , a family of arm-based microcontrollers avr32 , family of 32-bit microcontrollers at91cap , 32-bit arm + gate array dataflash , serial interface flash memory arduino , open hardware single-board prototyping platform using an avr microcontroller atmega88 , 8-bit microcontroller atmega see also avr instruction set atmel at89 series , 8-bit microcontrollers , compatible with intel 8051 . references . external links . microchip technology corporate site