Motion blur

usages / effects of motion blur . photography . image : london bus and telephone box on haymarket.jpg thumb an example of motion blur showing a london bus passing a telephone box in london when a camera creates an image , that image does not represent a single instant of time . because of technological constraints or artistic requirements , the image may represent the scene over a period of time . most often this exposure time is brief enough that the image captured by the camera appears to capture an instantaneous moment , but this is not always so , and a fast moving object or a longer exposure time may result in blurring artifacts which make this apparent . as objects in a scene move , an image of that scene must represent an integral of all positions of those objects , as well as the camera 's viewpoint , over the period of exposure determined by the shutter speed . in such an image , any object moving with respect to the camera will look blurred or smeared along the direction of relative motion . this smearing may occur on an object that is moving or on a static background if the camera is moving . in a film or television image , this looks natural because the human eye behaves in much the same way . because the effect is caused by the relative motion between the camera , and the objects and scene , motion blur may be manipulated by panning the camera to track those moving objects . in this case , even with long exposure times , the moving objects will appear sharper while the background will become more blurred , with the resulting image conveying a sense of movement and speed . motion blur in photography , click and learn photography . animation . in computer animation this effect must be simulated as a virtual camera actually does capture a discrete moment in time . this simulated motion blur is typically applied when either the camera or objects in the scene move rapidly . without this simulated effect each frame shows a perfect instant in time ( analogous to a camera with an infinitely fast shutter ) , with zero motion blur . this is why a video game with a frame rate of 25-30 frames per second will seem staggered , while natural motion filmed at the same frame rate appears rather more continuous . many modern video games feature motion blur , especially vehicle simulation games . some of the better-known games that utilise this are the recent need for speed titles , unreal tournament iii , the legend of zelda : majora 's mask , among many others . there are two main methods used in video games to achieve motion blur : cheaper full-screen effects , which typically only take camera movement ( and sometimes how fast the camera is moving in 3-d space to create a radial blur ) into mind , and more '' selective '' or '' per-object '' motion blur , which typically uses a shader to create a velocity buffer to mark motion intensity for a motion blurring effect to be applied to or uses a shader to perform geometry extrusion . classic '' motion blur '' effects prior to modern per-pixel shading pipelines often simply drew successive frames on top of each other with slight transparency , which is strictly speaking a form of video feedback . in pre-rendered computer animation , such as cgi movies , realistic motion blur can be drawn because the renderer has more time to draw each frame . temporal anti-aliasing produces frames as a composite of many instants . frames are not points in time , they are periods of time . if an object makes a trip at a linear speed along a path from 0 % to 100 % in four time periods , and if those time periods are considered frames , then the object would exhibit motion blur streaks in each frame that are 25 % of the path length . if the shutter speed is shortened to less than the duration of a frame , and it may be so shortened as to approach zero time in duration , then the computer animator must choose which portion of the quarter paths ( in our 4 frame example ) they wish to feature as '' open shutter '' times . they may choose to render the beginnings of each frame , in which case they will never see the arrival of the object at the end of the path , or they may choose to render the ends of each frame , in which case they will miss the starting point of the trip . most computer animations systems make the classic '' fence-post error '' in the way they handle time , confusing the periods of time of an animation with the instantaneous moments that delimit them . thus most computer animation systems will incorrectly place an object on a four frame trip along a path at 0 % , 0.33 % , 0.66 % , and 1.0 % and when called upon to render motion blur will have to cut one or more frames short , or look beyond the boundaries of the animation , compromises that real cameras do n't do and synthetic cameras need n't do . motion lines in cel animation are drawn in the same direction as motion blur and perform much the same duty . go motion is a variant of stop motion animation that moves the models during the exposure to create a less staggered effect . computer graphics . in 2d computer graphics , motion blur is an artistic filter that converts the digital image motion blur effect , tutorialsroom /bitmap photoshop - motion blur , tizag.com /raster image in order to simulate the effect . many graphical software products ( e.g . adobe photoshop or gimp ) offer simple motion blur filters . however , for advanced motion blur filtering including curves or non-uniform speed adjustment , specialized software products ( e.g . virtualrig studio ) are necessary . traditional motion blur methods , virtualrig-studio.com . biology . when an animal 's eye is in motion , the image will suffer from motion blur , resulting in an inability to resolve details . to cope with this , humans generally alternate between saccades ( quick eye movements ) and fixation ( focusing on a single point ) . saccadic masking makes motion blur during a saccade invisible . similarly , smooth pursuit allows the eye to track a target in rapid motion , eliminating motion blur of that target instead of the scene . negative effects of motion blur . television . in televised sports , where conventional cameras expose pictures 25 or 30 times per second , motion blur can be inconvenient because it obscures the exact position of a projectile or athlete in slow motion . for this reason special cameras are often used which eliminate motion blurring by taking rapid exposures on the order of 1 millisecond , and then transmitting them over the course of the next 30 to 40 milliseconds . although this gives sharper slow motion replays , it can look strange at normal speeds because the eye expects to see motion blurring and is not provided with blurred images . conversely , extra motion blur can unavoidably occur on displays when it is not desired . this occurs with some video displays ( especially lcd ) that exhibits motion blur during fast motion . this can lead to more perceived motion blurring above and beyond the preexisting motion blur in the video material . see display motion blur . sometimes , motion blur can be removed from images with the help of deconvolution . video games . in video games the use or not of motion blur is somewhat controversial . some gamers claim that the blur actually makes gaming worse since it does blur images , making more difficult to recognize objects , especially in fast-paced moments . this does become noticeable the lower the frame rate is . improvements in the visual quality of modern post-process motion blur shaders as well as a tendency towards higher frame rates have lessened the visual detriment of undersampled motion blur effects . wind turbines . birds can not properly see the swirling blades of wind turbines and can get struck by them fatally . a newly published report from norway suggests that painting one of the three blades with a black tip makes the blades more visible and hence more avoidable . this reduces the motion blur of the unpainted blades and cuts bird deaths by up to 70 percent . . restoration . an example of blurred image restoration with wiener deconvolution : . gallery . image : motorbike rider mono.jpg motion blur is frequently employed in sports photography ( particularly motor sports ) to convey a sense of speed . to achieve this effect it is necessary to use a slow shutter speed and pan the lens of the camera in time with the motion of the object image : nightly rotation above san jose international airport.jpg taken aboard an airplane turning above san jose at night . the city lights form concentric strips . image : tj pullingout.jpg the traffic on this street leaves brilliant streaks due to the low shutter speed of the camera and the cars ' relatively fast speed . image : strickland_falls_shadows_lifted.jpg strickland falls in tasmania , australia , taken using a neutral density filter . nd filters reduce light of all colors or wavelengths equally , allowing an increase in aperture and decrease in shutter speed without overexposing the image . to create the motion blur seen here , the shutter must be kept open for a relatively long time , making it necessary to reduce the amount of light coming through the lens . image : moths attracted by floodlight.jpg long exposure photograph of moths showing exaggerated rod effect . . see also . motion lines , a technique found in comics which conveys a sense of motion . references . external links .