Starhawk

early life . starhawk was born in 1951 in saint paul , minnesota . her father jack simos , died when she was five . her mother , bertha claire goldfarb simos , was a professor of social work at ucla . both her parents were the children of jewish immigrants from russia . in high school she and feminist christina hoff sommers were best friends . starhawk received a ba in fine arts from ucla . in 1973 , while she was a graduate student in film there , she won the samuel goldwyn writing award for her novel , a weight of gold , a story about venice , california , where she then lived . she received an ma in psychology , with a concentration in feminist therapy , from antioch university west in 1982 . the spiral dance . following her years at ucla , after a failed attempt to become a fiction writer in new york city , starhawk returned to california . she became active in the neopagan community in the san francisco bay area , and trained with victor anderson , founder of the feri tradition of witchcraft , and with zsuzsanna budapest , a feminist separatist involved in dianic wicca . she wrote a book , the spiral dance , on goddess religion , which she finished in 1977 but was unable to publish at first . feminist religious scholar carol p . christ included an article on witchcraft and the goddess movement in the anthology womanspirit rising ( 1979 ) . christ put starhawk in touch with an editor at harper & row , who eventually published the book . first published in 1979 , the spiral dance : a rebirth of the ancient religion of the great goddess became a best-selling book about neopagan belief and practice . a 10th-anniversary edition was published in 1989 , followed by a 20th-anniversary edition in 1999 . the original text of the spiral dance was left largely intact for these editions , expanded primarily by introductions and commentaries reflecting on the book 's origins , the rituals described , and the evolution of the author 's beliefs and practices . since its publication , the spiral dance has become a classic resource on wicca and modern witchcraft , spiritual feminism , the goddess movement , and ecofeminism . the work is distinguished by its visionary mysticism , '' broad philosophy of harmony with nature , '' and ecstatic consciousness . beliefs . starhawk believes that the earth is a living entity , and that faith-based activism can reconnect oneself to basic human needs . she posits core religious values of community and self-sacrifice as important to eco-pagan movements , as well as the broader environmental justice movement . she advocates combining social justice issues with a nature-based spirituality that begins with spending time in the natural world , saying that doing so '' . can open up your understanding on deeper and more subtle levels where the natural world will speak to you . '' blumberg , antonia ( december 11 , 2013 ) . '' celebrate the winter solstice with los angeles ' own eco-pagans '' . the huffington post . starhawk 's activism is deeply rooted in an anti-war philosophy , as she believes that war teaches one to see people culturally different than themselves as inhuman and dangerous . '' feminist , earth-based spirituality and ecofeminism , '' in healing the wounds by judith plant she has written extensively on activism , including advice for activist organizers , examinations of white privilege within radical communities , and calls for an intersectionality of fighting oppression that includes spirituality , eco-consciousness , and sexual and gender liberation . . feminism . starhawk 's feminism and spirituality are closely interconnected . womanspirit rising : a feminist reader in religion ( 1979 ) by carol p . christ and judith plaskow her ecofeminism links life-giving mother nature with the life-giving of women through birth , as well as the link between ecological destruction and patriarchal oppression under male-dominated western political economies . she calls for a reconceptualization of the way we think about power that is different from what she posits as our typical understanding of 'power over ' others , and believes that patriarchal systems of oppression are dying out and will be replaced by more egalitarian structures that have existed previously with many women in positions of power , including as priestesses , poets , healers , singers , and seers . such matrilineal lineages , she argues , have been erased from history because of their '' political implications . '' starhawk argues that our patriarchal culture of domination has confused the erotic with domination and violence . the spiral dance : a rebirth of the ancient religion of the goddess ( 1979 ) by starhawk sexuality , she says , '' . is sacred because through it we make a connection with another self — but it is misused and perverted when it becomes an arena of power-over , a means of treating another — or oneself — as an object . '' dreaming the dark : magic , sex and politics ( 1982 ) by starhawk such analyses of gendered power relations are explored in her books webs of power : notes from the global uprising ( 2003 ) and truth or dare : encounters with power , authority and mystery ( 1998 ) . in the latter , she links the rise of kinship to patriarchal domination , and traces a psychology of liberation in analyzing an oppressor she argues is embedded deeply in all of us , the 'self-hater . ' truth or dare : encounters with power , authority and mystery ( 1988 ) by starhawk she is interested in how such oppressions can be reformed into new sources of power , particularly amongst women , that arise innately and reject dominion over others . her feminist writings have been used to analyze the differences between mainstream rhetoric and feminist rhetoric , particularly in relation to her motive of writing rhetoric as revealing immanent truths rather than being utilized for persuasion . foss , sonja k . , and cindy l . griffin . '' a feminist perspective on rhetorical theory : toward a clarification of boundaries . '' western journal of communication 56.4 ( 1992 ) : 330–49 . print . she views this latter purpose of mainstream rhetoric as adhering to patriarchal logic , and her vision of 'empowered action ' – which involves rejecting the tenets of the oppressive system and then openly challenging them – attempts to transform persuasive mainstream rhetoric to immanent feminist rhetoric . projects . in 1979 , partly to commemorate the publication of the spiral dance , starhawk and her friends staged a public celebration of the neopagan holiday of samhain ( halloween ) incorporating an actual spiral dance . this group became the reclaiming collective , and their annual spiral dance ritual now draws hundreds of participants . starhawk continues to work with reclaiming , a tradition of witchcraft that she co-founded . this now-international organization offers classes , workshops , camps , and public rituals in earth-based spirituality , with the goal to '' unify spirit and politics '' . she also works internationally as a trainer in nonviolence and direct action , and as an activist within the peace movement , feminism , environmental movement , permaculture , and anti-globalization movement . she travels and teaches widely in north america , europe and the middle east , giving lectures and workshops . she was influential in the decision by the unitarian universalist association to include earth-centered traditions among their sources of faith . she led numerous workshops for , and was an active member of the covenant of unitarian universalist pagans ( cuups ) , an interest group of unitarians honoring goddess-based , earth-centered , tribal , and pagan spiritual paths . starhawk has taught in several san francisco bay area colleges and universities , including john f . kennedy university , antioch university west , the creation spirituality at holy names university , and wisdom university . she is presently adjunct faculty at the california institute of integral studies , and is currently affiliated with united for peace and justice , the rant trainers ' collective , earth activist training , and other groups . works . starhawk has written a number of books , and has also contributed works in other media . her works have appeared in translation in spanish , french , german , danish , dutch , italian , portuguese , polish , czech , greek , japanese , and burmese . non-fiction . the spiral dance ( 1979 , 1989 , 1999 ) dreaming the dark ( 1982 , 1988 , 1997 ) truth or dare : encounters with power , authority , and mystery ( 1988 ) webs of power : notes from the global uprising ( 2003 ) the earth path : grounding your spirit in the rhythms of nature ( 2004 ) the empowerment manual : a guide for collaborative groups ( 2011 ) . as co-author . with m . macha nightmare and the reclaiming collective : the pagan book of living and dying : practical rituals , prayers , blessings , and meditations on crossing over ( 1997 ) with anne hill and diane baker : circle round : raising children in the goddess tradition ( 1998 ) with hilary valentine : the twelve wild swans : a journey into magic , healing , and action ( 2000 ) . fiction . the fifth sacred thing ( 1993 ) walking to mercury ( 1997 ) ( prequel to the fifth sacred thing ) the last wild witch ( 2009 ) ( children 's book ) city of refuge ( 2015 ) ( sequel to the fifth sacred thing ) . other media . starhawk has contributed to films : signs out of time : the story of archaeologist marija gimbutas goddess remembered the burning times full circle permaculture : the growing edge ( 2010 ) united natures ( 2013 ) directed by peter charles downey she participated in the reclaiming cds chants : ritual music , and recorded the guided meditation way to the well . on youtube starhawk speaks on spirituality and activism at uua . she also wrote the call-to-action for the women 's peace organization code pink . personal life . starhawk married edwin rahsman in 1977 . they subsequently divorced . she is currently married to david miller , and they live in san francisco . starhawk also resides partly in sonoma , california . berta , marilyn ( august 15 , 2012 ) . '' we are sacred as the earth : an interview with earth activist starhawk '' treehugger . starhawk identifies as bisexual , and has also commented that her sexuality is fluid and '' has something to do with a deep reluctance to be pinned down . '' her writing and activism promotes equality for people of all sexual orientations and gender identities .