Co-cathedral

catholic europe . albania . in albania , the roman catholic archdiocese of tirana-durrës has a co-cathedral in durrës , saint lucia co-cathedral . belgium . in belgium , the cathedral of the primatial roman catholic archdiocese of mechelen-brussels is the metropolitan st . rumbold 's cathedral in mechelen ( malines ) , the archiepiscopal seat . its co-cathedral is the cathedral of st . michael and st . gudula in brussels , the national capital . a third , larger church in koekelberg ( also in brussels ) has the status of minor basilica , without co-cathedral rank , yet it has received papal visits including a papal beatification . bulgaria . the roman catholic diocese of sofia and plovdiv has , besides the cathedral of st louis in plovdiv , a new co-cathedral of st . joseph in sofia . croatia . the metropolitan archbishop of split-makarska has , in split ( dalmatia ) , the co-cathedral of saint peter the apostle konkatedrala sv . petar apostola , besides his episcopal see , katedrala sv . dujma . czech republic . the roman catholic diocese of ostrava-opava has a co-cathedral of our lady of the assumption co-cathedral in ostravian-opavian diocese in opava besides the ostrava savior cathedral . france . the double-titled bishopric of aire and dax has a co-cathedral of notre dame in dax and a cathedral of st john the baptist in aire the archdiocese of chambéry–saint-jean-de-maurienne–tarentaise has its cathedral in chambéry and co–cathedrals in saint-jean-de-maurienne and in tarentaise the bishop of couserans ( a see suppressed in the french revolution ) had two co-cathedral churches at saint-lizier the bishop of sisteron ( a see also suppressed ) had a second throne in the church of forcalquier , which is still called la con-cathédrale . germany . the roman catholic diocese of augsburg has a co-cathedral of saints peter and paul in dillingen and a cathedral of the visitation of holy mary in augsburg the roman catholic diocese of dresden-meissen has a co-cathedral of saint peter in bautzen and a cathedral of the most holy trinity in dresden the roman catholic archdiocese of munich and freising has a co-cathedral of saints mary and korbinian in freising and a cathedral of our dear lady in munich the roman catholic diocese of rottenburg-stuttgart has a co-cathedral of saint eberhard in stuttgart and a cathedral of saint martin in rottenburg am neckar . hungary . the primatial metropolitan see of the roman catholic archdiocese of esztergom-budapest has its primary cathedral in the old archiepiscopal seat , the cathedral basilica of esztergom , and a co-cathedral basilica in the national state capital budapest . italy . the diocese of adria-rovigo has a concattedrale di s . stefano papa e martire concattedrale dedicated to martyr pope stephen i in rovigo , which never was a diocese , besides adria 's own cattedrale di ss . pietro e paolo dedicated to saints peter and paul the roman catholic diocese of alghero-bosa ( on sardinia ) has a marian co-cathedral concattedrale di beata vergine immaculata concattedrale di beata vergine immaculata , in bosa besides its cathedral episcopal see , the marian cattedrale di beata maria vergine immaculata concezione , in alghero the diocese of diocese of amalfi–cava de ' tirreni has a marian co-cathedral of the visitation of mary in cava de ' tirreni , besides the cathedral of apostle andrew in amalfi . the diocese of avezzano has its cathedral in that city and a co-cathedral in its former see pescina the roman catholic archdiocese of campobasso-boiano has a the roman catholic diocese of lucera-troia has its cathedral in lucera , present see ; troia 's former cathedral serves as co-cathedral the diocese of melfi–rapolla–venosa has a cathedral , a marian minor basilica : basilica cattedrale di s . maria assunta , at melfi , and two co-cathedrals : concattedrale di s . andrea in venosa , and concattedrale di s . michele arcangelo , in rapolla the roman catholic diocese of molfetta-ruvo-giovinazzo-terlizzi has a cathedral in molfetta and three co-cathedral : in ruvo , giovinazzo and terlizzi the roman catholic diocese of pitigliano-sovana-orbetello has a cathedral of peter & paul in pitigliano and a co-cathedral of the assumptio in orbetello the archdiocese of rossano–cariati has a marian cathedral di maria ss . achiropita at rossano and a co-cathedral of the archangel michael in cariati the archdiocese of sant'angelo dei lombardi-conza-nusco-bisaccia has its cathedral in sant'angelo dei lombardi and three co-cathedrals in absorbed former bishoprics : conza di campania , nusco and bisaccia the diocese of teggiano-policastro has a co-cathedral of the assumption in policastro bussentino and a marian cathedral of s . maria maggiore e s . michele arcangelo , in teggiano the diocese of termoli-larino has its cathedral in termoli and a co-cathedral in larino . malta . the metropolitan cathedral of the roman catholic archdiocese of malta is st . paul 's cathedral in the former capital mdina . since the 1820s , the former conventual church of st . john in valletta has been known as st . john 's co-cathedral . poland . the roman catholic diocese of koszalin-kołobrzeg has a cathedral in koszalin and a co-cathedral in kołobrzeg the roman catholic archdiocese of szczecin-kamień has a cathedral of james the elder in szczecin and a co-cathedral of john the baptist in kamień ; the same goes for both its suffragans : the roman catholic diocese of zielona góra-gorzów has a cathedral of the virgi mary in zielona góra and a co-cathedral of st . jadwiga in gorzów the roman catholic diocese of zamość-lubaczów has a cathedral of the resurrection and st . thomas the apostle in zamość and a co-cathedral of st . stanislaus in lubaczów . slovakia . co-cathedral of st . nicholas , prešov . spain . the diocese of calahorra y la calzada-logroño has a co-cathedral of logroño in logroño besides its calahorra cathedral in calahorra and tui , pontevedra of santo domingo de la calzada . the diocese of coria-cáceres has a co-cathedral of st mary in cáceres besides its coria cathedral in coria . the diocese of guadix-baza has a co-cathedral of our lady of the incarnation ( es ) in baza besides its guadix cathedral in guadix . the archdiocese of mérida-badajoz has a co-cathedral of saint mary major in mérida besides its badajoz cathedral in badajoz . the diocese of mondoñedo-ferrol has a ferrol co-cathedral in ferrol beside its mondoñedo cathedral in mondoñedo . the diocese of orihuela-alicante has a co-catedral of st nicholas of bary in alicante besides its orihuela cathedral in orihuela . the diocese of osma-soria has a co-cathedral of st peter in soria besides its burgo de osma cathedral in burgo de osma . the diocese of segorbe-castellón has a castelló cathedral in castellón de la plana besides its segorbe cathedral in segorbe . the diocese of sigüenza-guadalajara has a co-cathedral of guadalajara , spain in guadalajara besides its sigüenza cathedral in sigüenza . the diocese of tui-vigo has a co-cathedral of st mary in vigo besides its tui cathedral in tui . ukraine . latin diocese of kyiv-zhytomyr has a co-cathedral of st . alexander , kiev , besides the cathedral of st . sophia , in zhytomyr . latin diocese of kharkiv-zaporizhia has a co-cathedral of the merciful father , in zaporizhia , besides the cathedral of the blessed virgin mary in kharkiv the roman catholic diocese of odessa-simferopol plans a co-cathedral in simferopol , on crimea , besides its odessa cathedral , but suspended building plans after the russian annexation . catholic asia . india . the bishop of simla and chandigarh has a co-cathedral , christ the king cathedral , at chandigarh , which never was a diocese , besides the cathedral episcopal see of st . michael and st . joseph in shimla , the capital of himachal pradesh state . after the merger of the ecclesiastical provinces of madras and mylapore in 1952 to form the archdiocese of madras-mylapore . the cathedral of the former mylapore province was given co-cathedral standard and is now known as st mary 's co-cathedral . japan . the co-cathedral the basilica of the twenty-six holy martyrs of japan , in nagasaki also known as ōura cathedral , a world heritage site , and the oldest church in japan . nearby is the immaculate conception cathedral , also known as urakami cathedral . korea . the roman catholic archdiocese of daegu has , besides the kyesan cathedral , a new co-cathedral , beomeo cathedral . the roman catholic diocese of suwon has a cathedral of korean martyrs in jeongjadong and a co-cathedral of queen of peace in jowon-dong . philippines . the roman catholic archdiocese of lingayen-dagupan has a cathedral in dagupan , pangasinan and the original cathedral , now co-cathedral , the epiphany of our lord parish church in lingayen . syria . the melkite greek catholic archeparchy of homs has in yabrud ( one of the two former eparchials which were title united with the diocese ) the co-cathedral of saints constantine and helen , besides its cathedral of our lady of peace in homs . asian turkey . the apostolic vicariate of anatolia has a co-cathedral of st . anthony of padua , in mersin , besides the marian episcopal see cathedral of the annunciation , in i̇skenderun ( alexandria ) . catholic africa . egypt . the latin apostolic vicariate of alexandria had a st . catherine cathedral in alexandria and two co-cathedrals : the former cathedrals of the merged-in apostolic vicariates of heliopolis of egypt ( our lady , in that cairo suburb ) and of port said ( our lady and st . michael in that sinai canal port ) . ghana . the diocese of keta–akatsi has its co-cathedral at first-named keta , the cathedral is in second-named akatsi . catholic central america and antilles . belize . our lady of guadalupe co-cathedral in belmopan is the diocesan co-cathedral of belize city-belmopan since the national capital was shifted to belmopan , which was added to the bishopric 's title , but the see and holy redeemer cathedral remained in former capital belize city . guatemala . the metropolitan archdiocese of los altos quetzaltenango-totonicapán has a cocatedral , san miguel arcángel , in totonicapán , besides the episcopal see catedral del espíritu santo , in quetzaltenango . the diocese of zacapa y santo cristo de esquipulas has catedral san pedro ( dedicated to saint peter ) , in zacapa and a virtual co-cathedral , cathedral basilica of esquipulas , which is officially still the cathedral of the ( absorbed ) territorial prelature of santo cristo de esquipulas . martinique . the metropolitan archdiocese of fort-de-france–saint-pierre has a co-cathedral co-cathédrale notre dame de l ’ assomption , in saint-pierre , besides the cathedral cathédrale saint-louis , in fort-de-france . catholic south america . uruguay . the armenian catholic apostolic exarchate of latin america and mexico has a cathedral catedral armênia são gregório iluminador , in são paulo , brazil and a co-cathedral nuestra señora de bzommar , in montevideo , uruguay . brazil . the bishop of primavera do leste–paranatinga has a co-cathedral são francisco xavier , in paranatinga , besides his episcopal see catedral são cristóvão , in primavera do leste . catholic oceania . papua new guinea . the archdiocese of rabaul has besides its episcopal see -a cathedral in vunapope- st francis xavier 's co-cathedral , in the national capital rabaul . polynesia . the diocese of samoa–pago pago has a co-cathedral of st . joseph the worker in fagatogo besides the cathedral of the holy family in tafuna , on tutuila island . united kingdom . church of england . prior to the protestant reformation , the dioceses of 'bath and wells ' and 'coventry and lichfield ' were the only co-cathedrals in england . only one diocese of the church of england has co-cathedrals ; in the anglican diocese of leeds there are three co-cathedrals , ripon , bradford and wakefield . the diocese of leeds was formed in 2014 by the merger of the former anglican dioceses of bradford , ripon , and wakefield , with all three former diocesan cathedrals given co-equal status in the new diocese . in the case of york the collegiate churches of beverley , ripon and southwell were almost in the same position , but although the archbishop had a stall in each , he had no diocesan cathedra in them . the chapters were not united with that of the metropolitan church in the direct government of the diocese , or the election of the archbishop , nor had they those other rights which were held to denote the cathedral character of a church . scottish episcopal church . the diocese of argyll and the isles of the scottish episcopal church has two co-cathedrals : st john 's cathedral , oban and cathedral of the isles , millport , cumbrae . it is the only diocese to have more than one cathedral . . north america . catholic church . in the united states , there are several instances in which a roman catholic diocese maintains two episcopal see cities , each with its own cathedral or co-cathedral . examples include the cathedral of saint paul and the basilica of saint mary in the archdiocese of saint paul and minneapolis ( minnesota ) . other instances include the archdiocese of galveston-houston ( texas ) , archdiocese of galveston-houston : history of the cathedral & co-cathedral the diocese of altoona-johnstown ( pennsylvania ) , the diocese of fort wayne-south bend ( indiana ) , the diocese of great falls-billings ( montana ) , the diocese of houma-thibodaux ( louisiana ) , the diocese of kansas city-saint joseph ( missouri ) , the diocese of pensacola-tallahassee ( florida ) , the diocese of springfield-cape girardeau ( missouri ) , the diocese of wheeling-charleston ( west virginia ) , and the diocese of winona-rochester ( minnesota ) . in the diocese of trenton ( new jersey ) the cathedral , st . mary of the assumption in trenton , and the co-cathedral , st . robert bellarmine in freehold , are in different municipalities , but the diocese 's name does not reflect the dual cathedral status . there are also three instances in the united states in which a cathedral and its co-cathedral are in the same city . cathedrals in the united states this usually occurs when a historically important cathedral becomes too small to serve a growing population , and a larger co-cathedral is constructed to accommodate larger services . examples include : the cathedral basilica of our lady of peace and the co-cathedral of saint theresa of the child jesus in the diocese of honolulu , hawaii . the cathedral of mary our queen and the basilica of the national shrine of the assumption of the blessed virgin mary ( originally the cathedral and now the co-cathedral ) in the archdiocese of baltimore , maryland . the cathedral basilica of st . james and the co-cathedral of st . joseph in the diocese of brooklyn , new york . examples in canada are : the roman catholic archdiocese of halifax-yarmouth has the absorbed diocese 's former see st . ambrose co-cathedral , in yarmouth , besides the metropolitan 's own cathedral minor basilica : st . mary 's cathedral basilica , in halifax , nova scotia the holy family cathedral and st . paul 's cathedral in the roman catholic diocese of saskatoon in saskatchewan . co-cathedral of saint-antoine-de-padoue in vieux-longueuil ( suburb of montréal , quebec ) . episcopal church . in the episcopal church , both the diocese of iowa and the diocese of minnesota each have two cathedrals , both located in different cities ; however , they are not styled '' co-cathedrals . '' the episcopal diocese of lexington maintains a second cathedral of the cathedral church of st . george the martyr at their cathedral domain conference center and camp in irvine , kentucky , but they do not use the term '' co-cathedral '' to describe it .