Dornford Yates

early life . william ( bill ) mercer was born in walmer , kent , the son of cecil john mercer ( 1850–1921 ) and helen wall ( 1858–1918 ) . his father was a solicitor whose sister , mary frances , married charles augustus munro ; their son was saki ( the writer saki ) ; bill mercer is said to have idolised his elder cousin . mercer attended st clare preparatory school in walmer from 1894 to 1899 . the family moved from kent to london when he joined harrow school as a day pupil in 1899 , his father selling his solicitor ’ s practice in kent and setting up office in carey street . leaving harrow in 1903 , he attended university college , oxford in 1904 , where he achieved a third in law . at university , he was active in the oxford university dramatic society ( ouds ) , becoming secretary in 1906 and president in 1907 , his final year . he acted in the 1905 production of aristophanes ’ the clouds , of which the times reviewer said : '' among individual actors the best was mr . c . w . mercer , whose ‘ strepsiades ’ was full of fun , and who possesses real comic talent . '' times review 2 march 1905 after a small part in the 1906 production of measure for measure , in his final year , he appeared as ‘ demetrius ’ in a midsummer night 's dream , and as ‘ pedant ’ in the taming of the shrew , a production which included the professional actresses lily brayton as ‘ katherine ’ , and her sister agnes as ‘ bianca ’ . times review 7 february 1907 among the many useful friends mercer made in the ouds were gervais rentoul , who asked him to be his best man , rentoul , g . this is my case : an autobiography ( 1944 ) hutchinson and lily brayton 's husband , actor oscar asche , later producer of the play kismet , and writer of chu chin chow . after university , mercer took a caravanning holiday in hampshire , with asche , lily , agnes , and another theatrical couple , matheson lang and his wife , hutin britton ; both asche and lang recall that holiday in their memoirs . oscar asche : his life by himself ( 1929 ) hurst & blackett matheson lang mr wu looks back ( 1940 ) stanley paul & co mercer ’ s third-class oxford law degree was insufficient to gain him traditional access to the bar . however , in 1908 his father obtained his son a post as pupil to a prominent barrister , h . g . muskett , whose practice often required his appearing in court on behalf of the police commissioner . as muskett ’ s pupil , mercer saw much of the seedy side of london life , some of which is evident in his novels . in 1909 , he was called to the bar where he worked for several years . in his first memoirs , as berry & i were saying , he recalls his involvement in the trial of the poisoner hawley harvey crippen , when he returned from acting with the old stagers , at canterbury , to have first look at the legal brief . mercer is in a photograph of the bow street court committal proceedings , published in the daily mirror of 30 august 1910 . in his spare time , he wrote short stories that were published in punch , the harmsworth red magazine , pearson 's magazine , and the windsor magazine , maintaining a relationship with this last until the end of the 1930s ; after it closed he wrote for the strand magazine . he also assisted in the writing of what i know ( mills & boon , 1913 ) - us title king edward as i knew him - the memoirs of c . w . stamper , who had been motor engineer to king edward vii . the great war and afterwards . at the outbreak of the great war in 1914 , mercer was commissioned as second lieutenant in the 3rd county of london yeomanry ( sharpshooters ) , although his stories continued to appear in the windsor until march 1915 . in 1915 , his regiment left for egypt and , in november 1915 as part of the 8th mounted brigade , he was sent to the salonika/macedonian front where the war was in stalemate . suffering severe muscular rheumatism he was sent home in 1917 and , although he was still in uniform , the war office did not again post him . he eventually left the army in 1919 . in june of that year the windsor carried his first story since the end of the war . since 1914 , the mercer family home had been elm tree road , behind the north-west side of lord 's cricket ground in st john 's wood , where his friends oscar and lily asche were close neighbours . in autumn of 1919 , he and asche combined to write the stage show eastward ho ! , but the production was not a great success and he did not again attempt to write for the stage . a frequent social – and then romantic – elm tree road visitor was bettine ( athalia ) stokes edwards , an american girl who danced in chu chin chow ( and daughter of robert ewing edwards of philadelphia , pennsylvania ) who became mercer ’ s first wife . who was who ( 1960 ) the new york times announcement of their engagement ( 28 august 1919 ) states : '' mr & mrs glover fitzhugh perin of 57 west fifty-eight street have announced the engagement of mrs perin ’ s oldest daughter miss bettine stokes edwards . '' suggesting that her father either was dead or divorced ; her remarried mother then lived in new york city . mercer and bettine married at st james 's , spanish place , in the marylebone district of london , on 22 october 1919 . the month of october also marked the appearance of a story in the windsor called valerie whose female lead made a living as a dancer ; this story never appeared in book form . mercer decided not to return to the bar , and to concentrate on his writing . he and bettine lived in elm tree road , where their only child , richard , was born on 20 july 1920 . after the great war , many ex-officers found that the rise in the cost of living in london precluded maintaining the style of life of a gentleman to which they had become accustomed ; some looked beyond england . in 1922 , the mercers emigrated to france , where it was possible to live more cheaply , and where the climate was kinder to mercer ’ s muscular rheumatism . french residence . they chose the resort town pau , in the western pyrenees , in the basses–pyrénées département ( now pyrénées-atlantiques ) — where lived a sizable british expat colony , but when the mercers moved in is unknown . in dornford yates – a biography ( 1982 ) , a.j . smithers reports '' exactly how he hit upon the place is not clear '' , but pau figures several times in the memoirs he is presumed to have ghost-written for c.w . stamper , and so that might be the answer — '' anywhere good enough for king edward vii was good enough for him '' . they rented the villa maryland , on rue forster , where mercer proved an exacting husband , while bettine was a social woman , and by 1929 , the failure of their marriage was evident . bettine had been indiscreet in her extra-marital romantic liaisons , and mercer sued for divorce . bettine did not defend , and the divorce was made absolute in september 1933 . in the event , she returned to her family in the u.s . less than a year later , on 10 february 1934 , at chertsey register office , mercer married doreen elizabeth lucie bowie , whom he met on a cruise in 1932 . she was the daughter of london solicitor david mather bowie of virginia water . elizabeth was twenty years younger than her new husband , who felt he had met the incarnation of his fictional '' jill mansel '' , thus did he call her '' jill '' for the rest of his life . for him , villa maryland had many memories of bettine , so he and elizabeth decided to build a new house , named '' cockade '' . they chose a spot twenty-seven miles south of pau , near eaux-bonnes , on the route to the spanish frontier : the project is related in the house that berry built , wherein the name of the house is '' gracedieu '' ( god ’ s grace ) . they did not enjoy long residence in cockade . with france falling to the wehrmacht in june 1940 , the mercers hurriedly arranged caretakers for cockade , and then escaped the country – in company of visiting friends , matheson lang and wife – and traversed spain en route to portugal . they subsequently took ship for south africa , arriving in salisbury , southern rhodesia , in 1941 . . the second world war and the rhodesian years . c.w . mercer was re-commissioned , this time in the royal rhodesian regiment , and attained the rank of major . as the war concluded , the couple realised their plan of returning to cockade – but were disappointed in the decrepitude of the house and the socially conscious , post-war attitude of their one-time servants . after some months , the mercers obtained exit visas and returned to umtali , rhodesia , ( now mutare , zimbabwe ) , where they lived for the rest of his life . mercer supervised the building of a replacement house for cockade , another hillside venture , and , in 1948 , they moved into '' sacradown '' , on oak avenue . the furniture in france was shipped to rhodesia , as were the waterloo bridge balusters ( see the house that berry built ) , which had never reached cockade , but had been stored in england during the second world war . cecil william mercer died in march 1960 . writings . mercer originally wrote short stories for the monthly magazines . his first known published work , temporary insanity , appeared in punch in may 1910 – this is the first known occasion of his use of his pen name – and his second , like a tale that is told appeared in the red magazine in july 1910 . the first known 'berry ' story to be published , babes in the wood , appeared in pearson 's magazine in september 1910 . none of these early stories was ever included in his books . many of his works began as stories in windsor magazine , before being collected in book form by the windsor 's publishers , ward lock . between september 1911 and september 1939 he had 123 stories published in the windsor , and after it closed , the strand magazine carried three of his stories in 1940 and 1941 . four of his novels were serialised in woman 's journal between 1933 and 1938 . in the united states four of his novels were serialized in woman 's home companion between 1933 and 1939 , while others appeared in the saturday evening post and blue book . his first story for the windsor magazine was '' busy bees '' , in september 1911 , and this and fourteen subsequent stories from that publication up to the july 1914 issue were republished in book form as the brother of daphne , in 1914 . some of the stories were edited for the book , to eliminate events , such as marriage , for the leading characters – which suggests that , originally , he had not planned on using the same characters for a story series . the narrator – later identified as '' boy pleydell '' — marries in babes in the wood and possibly in '' busy bees '' , which became a chapter of the same title in the brother of daphne , with the end of the story altered to remove the hint of marriage . his second book , the courts of idleness , was published in 1920 , containing material written before , during , and after the great war . it was divided into three sections . in book i yates introduced a new set of characters similar to , but separate from , berry & co , in four stories that had appeared in the windsor between december 1914 and march 1915 , and a final story from the windsor of june 1919 in which the male characters have their story lines resolved in salonika , during the great war . the interlude has a story entitled '' and the other left '' , from the november 1914 windsor , which is set on the western front with a unique set of characters . book ii returns to the 'berry ' characters , with two pre-war stories from the august and september 1914 windsor , and three post-war stories from the issues of july , august and september 1919 . the book ’ s final story , '' nemesis '' , was written for , but rejected by , punch ; subsequently , it appeared in the windsor in november 1919 , with the main character named '' jeremy '' ; for the book he became '' berry '' . '' nemesis '' was written to the punch length , and so is much shorter than most of the other stories in the courts of idleness . the berry books are semi-autobiographical , humorous romances , often in short story form , and , in particular , feature bertram '' berry '' pleydell ( '' of white ladies , in the county of hampshire '' ) and his family – his wife and cousin , daphne , her brother , boy pleydell ( the narrator ) , and their cousins jonathan '' jonah '' mansel , and his sister , jill . collectively , they are '' berry & co . '' although all five appear in '' babes in the wood '' , their precise relationships there are unstated , and berry and daphne are referred to as second cousins as late as jonah & co ; later stories feature a simple family tree , showing them to be first cousins descended from two brothers and a sister . '' berry & co . '' capture the english upper classes of the edwardian era , still self-assured , but affected by changing social attitudes and the decline of their fortunes . as in many of yates ’ books , grand houses , powerful motor cars , and foreign travel feature prominently in the 'berry ' stories . in the 1950s , c.w . mercer wrote two books of fictionalized memoirs , as berry and i were saying and b-berry and i look back , written as conversations between berry and his family . they contain many anecdotes about his experiences as a lawyer , but are , in the main , an elegy for a past upper-class way of life . the 'chandos ' books , starting with blind corner , in 1927 , marked a change in style and content , being thrillers set mainly in continental europe ( often in carinthia , austria ) , wherein the hero–narrator , richard chandos , and colleagues , including george hanbury and jonathan mansel ( who also featured in the 'berry ' books ) , tackle criminals , protect the innocent , woo beautiful ladies , and hunt for treasure . these were originally published by hodder and stoughton although later they were re-issued by ward lock . it is the 'chandos ' novels to which alan bennett especially refers in naming dornford yates in the play forty years on ( 1972 ) : '' sapper , buchan , dornford yates , practitioners in that school of snobbery with violence that runs like a thread of good-class tweed through twentieth-century literature . '' yates also wrote other thrillers in the same style , but with different characters . besides these two genres , some of yates ' novels do not easily fall into either the humorous or the thriller category . anthony lyveden was dornford yates ’ s first novel , telling the story of an impoverished ex-officer . originally , it was published in monthly instalments in the windsor magazine , valerie french , the sequel to anthony lyveden features mostly the same cast . at the start of the book lyveden is suffering amnesia , and can not recall the events of the previous book , leading to romantic complications . the stolen march is a fantasy set in a lost realm , between spain and france , where travellers encounter characters from nursery rhymes and fairy tales . a planned sequel , the tempered wind , is referred to in the quasi-autobiography , b-berry and i look back , where yates mentions abandoning the book as it failed to '' take charge '' . this publican features a scheming woman and her hen-pecked husband . some critics have suggested that the portrayal of the villainess represented a thinly-veiled attack on mercer 's first wife , although that could imply that the husband was a self-portrait , and as smithers ' states , '' . he would hardly have held himself out in a character so feeble and flaccid . '' lower than vermin ( the title derives from socialist politician aneurin bevan ’ s description of members of the conservative party ) is a novel in which the author defends his views on social class , and criticises the path britain was following under the attlee ministry . ne'er-do-well is a murder story narrated by richard chandos , with whom the investigating detective is staying . wife apparent was yates 's last novel , set in 1956 . stage , cinema , and other media . the 1919 musical play eastward ho ! was written by oscar asche ( author ) with lyrics by dornford yates and music by grace torrens and john ansell . it was produced by edward laurillard and george grossmith jr . , and opened at the alhambra theatre in london on 9 september and ran for 124 performances . the bbc produced an adaptation of she fell among thieves in 1977 , featuring malcolm mcdowell as chandos , michael jayston as mansel , and eileen atkins as vanity fair . this adaptation was also used as the first episode of the us tv series mystery ! in 1980 . an episode of the itv hannay series , '' a point of honour '' , was based on the eponymous short story published in the brother of daphne , but the source was uncredited . an audiobook edition of blind corner , read by alan rickman , was produced by chivers audio books . related works . in 1948 richard usborne wrote an article entitled ladies and gentlemen v . cads and rotters about the works of dornford yates in volume 3 , number 11 of the windmill , a literary magazine . yates was not pleased by the article , but nevertheless usborne went on to write clubland heroes ( 1953 ; reprinted 1974 and 1983 ) in which he examined the work of yates and two contemporary thriller writers , john buchan and sapper . the 1973 novel indecent exposure by tom sharpe plays up the 'englishman ' that dornford yates created in his novels . there is a group of characters in the satirical novel who style themselves as the 'dornford yates ' club and who try to emulate the 'master ' in avoiding reality and a changing world . sharpe was later hired by the bbc to adapt she fell among thieves for television , and used the same satirical approach . in 1983 sharpe wrote an introduction to a reprint of yates ' first chandos thriller blind corner , one of a series issued by j.m.dent & sons under the title classic thrillers . further yates ' books in the series were perishable goods , with an introduction by richard usborne ; blood royal , with an introduction by a.j.smithers ; fire below ; she fell among thieves , with an introduction by ion trewin ; gale warning ; cost price ; red in the morning ; an eye for a tooth ; and the best of berry , with an introduction by jack adrian . following the publication of dornford yates - a biography in 1982 , smithers went on to write combined forces in 1983 , subtitled '' being the latter-day adventures of maj-gen sir richard hannay , captain hugh 'bulldog ' drummond and berry and co '' , which has the heroes ( and some villains ) of buchan , sapper and yates meeting up after world war two and having further adventures together . in 2015 , kate macdonald published novelists against social change : conservative popular fiction , 1920-1960 , which examines the work of buchan , yates and angela thirkell . references . external links . the life and works of dornford yates from ibooknet imdb entry for bbc version of she fell among thieves discussion group with photos of cockade and other information eastward ho ! at modern theatre info eastward ho ! at a book for all reasons