Lincoln County War

war . during november 1876 , a wealthy englishman named john tunstall arrived in lincoln county , new mexico , where he intended to develop a cattle ranch , store , and bank in partnership with the young attorney alexander mcsween and cattleman john chisum . at the time lincoln county was dominated both economically and politically by lawrence murphy and james dolan , the proprietors of lg murphy and co . , later james j . dolan and co . , the only store in the county . the factions were divided along ethnic and sectarian lines , with the murphy faction being mostly irish catholic , while tunstall and his allies were mostly english protestant . lg murphy and co . lent thousands of dollars to the territorial governor , and the territorial attorney general eventually held the mortgage on the company . tunstall learned that murphy and dolan , who bought many of their cattle from rustlers , had lucrative beef contracts from the united states government to supply forts and indian agencies . the government contracts , along with their monopoly on merchandise and financing for farms and ranches , allowed murphy , dolan and their partner riley to become wealthy . the fritz insurance policy . the main event that resulted in the beginning of the lincoln county war was controversy over the disbursement of emil fritz 's insurance policy . emil fritz was a partner of l . g . murphy . when he died in 1874 , the executors of the estate hired alexander mcsween to collect his insurance policy . after collecting the policy , mcsween refused to give the money to the executor of the estate because the house claimed that the money was owed to them as a debt and mcsween suspected that the executor of the estate would give the money to them . mcsween also knew how badly needy for cash the house was and as a business competitor was likely loath to have the money go to them , whether their claim was legitimate or not . during february 1878 , in a court case that was eventually dismissed , they obtained a court order to seize all of mcsween 's assets , but mistakenly included all of tunstall 's assets with those of mcsween . sheriff brady formed a posse to attach tunstall 's remaining assets at his ranch 70 miles from lincoln . dolan also enlisted the john kinney gang , seven rivers warriors and the jesse evans gang , and their job was mainly to harass and rustle cattle from tunstall 's and chisum 's ranches , as well as being the faction 's hired gunmen . . killing of john tunstall . on february 18 , 1878 , members of the sheriff 's posse caught up to tunstall while he and his ranch-hands , richard '' dick '' brewer , billy the kid , john middleton , henry newton brown , robert a . widenmann , and fred waite , were herding his last nine horses back to lincoln . frank warner angel , a special investigator for the secretary of the interior , later determined that tunstall was shot in '' cold blood '' by jesse evans , william morton , and tom hill . record group 60 , na in the matter of the cause and circumstances of the death of j.h . tunstall , a british subject 44-4-8-3 tunstall 's murder was witnessed from a distance by several of his men , including richard brewer and billy the kid . tunstall 's murder began the lincoln county war . tunstall 's cowhands and other local citizens formed a group known as the regulators to avenge his murder , since the territorial criminal justice system was controlled by allies of murphy and dolan . while the regulators at various times consisted of dozens of american and mexican cowboys , the main dozen or so members were known as the '' iron clad '' , including mccarty , richard '' dick '' brewer , frank mcnab , doc scurlock , jim french , john middleton , george coe , frank coe , jose chavez y chavez , charlie bowdre , tom o'folliard , fred waite ( a chickasaw ) , and henry newton brown . the regulators set out to apprehend the sheriff 's posse members who had murdered tunstall . after the regulators were deputized by the lincoln county justice of the peace , together with constable martinez , they attempted to serve the legally issued warrants to tunstall 's murderers . sheriff brady arrested and jailed martinez and his deputies in defiance of their deputized status . they gained release and searched for tunstall 's murderers . they found buck morton , dick lloyd , and frank baker near the rio peñasco . morton surrendered after a five-mile ( 8 & nbsp ; km ) running gunfight on the condition that he and his fellow deputy sheriff , frank baker – who had no part in the tunstall murder but was riding with morton and lloyd – would be returned alive to lincoln . the regulators ' captain dick brewer assured them they would be taken to lincoln , but other regulators insisted on killing the prisoners . one regulator , william mccloskey , who was a friend of morton 's , resisted such action . blackwater massacre . on march 9 , 1878 , the third day of the journey back to lincoln , the regulators killed mccloskey , morton , and baker in the capitan foothills along the blackwater creek . they claimed that morton murdered mccloskey and tried to escape with baker , forcing them to kill the two prisoners . few believed the story , as they thought it unlikely that morton would have killed his only friend in the group . as the bodies of morton and baker each bore eleven bullet holes , one for each regulator , utley believes that the regulators murdered them and killed mccloskey for opposing them . nolan writes that morton took ten bullets , and baker was shot five times . that same day , tunstall 's other two killers , tom hill and jesse evans , were shot while trying to rob a sheep drover near tularosa , new mexico . hill died and evans was severely wounded . while evans was at fort stanton for medical treatment , he was arrested on an old federal warrant for stealing stock from an indian reservation . . killing of william brady . sheriff brady asked for assistance from the territorial attorney general , thomas benton catron , to end this '' anarchy '' . catron referred the topic to the territorial samuel beach axtell . the governor decreed that john wilson , the justice of the peace , had been appointed illegally by the lincoln county commissioners . wilson had deputized the regulators and issued the warrants for tunstall 's murderers . axtell 's decree meant that the regulators ' actions , formerly considered legal , were now illegal . axtell also was able to revoke widenmann 's status as a deputy us marshal , making sheriff brady and his men the only law officers of lincoln county . on april 1 , 1878 , the regulators french , mcnab , middleton , waite , brown and mccarty ( billy the kid ) made ready in the corral behind tunstall 's store before attacking brady and his deputies on the main street of lincoln . brady died of at least a dozen gunshot wounds ; deputy george w . hindman was also wounded fatally . mccarty and french broke cover and dashed to brady 's body , possibly to get his arrest warrant for mcsween or to recover mccarty 's rifle , which brady had kept from a prior arrest . a surviving deputy , billy matthews , wounded both men with one bullet that passed through both of them . french 's wound was so severe that he had to be temporarily harbored by sam corbet in a crawlspace in corbet 's house . widenmann was also in the corral , but whether he participated was never ascertained : he claimed he was feeding tunstall 's dog . battle of blazer 's mill . three days after the murders of brady and hindman , the regulators headed southwest from the area around lincoln , reaching blazer 's mill , a sawmill and trading post that supplied beef to the mescalero apaches . they came upon the rancher buckshot roberts , listed on their arrest warrant as one of tunstall 's murderers . in the ensuing shootout the regulators mortally wounded roberts , but he killed brewer and wounded middleton , scurlock , coe , and mccarty . gunfight at fritz ranch . after brewer 's death , the regulators elected mcnab as their captain . on april 29 , 1878 , sheriff peppin was directing a posse that included the jesse evans gang and the seven rivers warriors . they engaged in a shootout with the regulators mcnab , saunders , and frank coe at the fritz ranch . mcnab died in the gunfire , saunders was badly wounded , and frank coe was captured . the next day , the seven rivers members tom green , charles marshall , jim patterson and john galvin were killed in lincoln , and although the regulators were blamed , this was never proven . frank coe escaped custody some time after his capture , allegedly with the assistance of deputy sheriff wallace olinger , who gave him a pistol . the day after mcnab 's death the regulators known as the '' iron clad '' assumed defensive positions in the town of lincoln , trading shots with dolan men and , allegedly , members of the us army cavalry . '' dutch charley '' kruling , a dolan man , was wounded by rifle fire by george coe . by allegedly shooting at government troops , the regulators gained a new set of enemies . on may 15 , the regulators tracked down and captured the jesse evans gang member manuel segovia , who is believed to have shot mcnab . they shot him during an alleged escape . around the time of segovia 's death , the regulator '' iron clad '' gained a new member , a young texas cowboy named tom o'folliard , who soon became mccarty 's best friend . battle of lincoln . a large confrontation between the two forces occurred on the afternoon of july 15 , 1878 , when the regulators were surrounded in lincoln in two different positions ; the mcsween house and the ellis store . opposing them were the dolan/murphy/seven rivers cowboys . in the ellis store were scurlock , bowdre , middleton , frank coe , and several others . about 20 mexican regulators , commanded by josefita chavez , were also positioned around town . in the mcsween house were alex mcsween and his wife susan , billy the kid , henry brown , jim french , tom o'folliard , jose chavez y chavez , george coe , and a dozen mexican vaqueros . during the next three days , the men exchanged shots and shouts . tom cullens , one of the mcsween house defenders , was killed by a stray bullet . the dolan cowboy charlie crawford was shot at a distance of by doc scurlock 's father-in-law , fernando herrera . around this time , henry brown , george coe , and joe smith left the mcsween house and went to the tunstall store , where they chased two dolan men into an outhouse with rifle fire and forced them to dive into the bottom to escape . the impasse continued until the arrival of us army troops commanded by colonel nathan dudley . when these troops pointed cannons at the ellis store and other positions , billy the kid , doc scurlock and his men fled from their positions , as did chavez 's cowboys , leaving those remaining in the mcsween house to their fate . on the afternoon of july 19 , the murphy-dolan faction set the house afire . as the flames spread and night began , susan mcsween and the other woman and five children were granted safe passage out of the house , while the men inside continued to fight the fire . by 9 & nbsp ; pm , those left inside got set to flee out the back door of the burning house . billy the kid and jim french assessed their situation , and figured out a way to escape by using pistol fire as cover and escaping . jim french went out first , followed by billy the kid , o'folliard , and jose chavez y chavez . the dolan men saw them running and began shooting , killing harvey morris , mcsween 's law partner . some troopers moved into the back yard to take those left into custody when a close-quarters gunfight erupted . alexander mcsween and the seven rivers cowboy bob beckwith both died . three other mexican regulators got away in the confusion , to rendezvous with the '' iron clad '' members yards away . aftermath . the lincoln county war accomplished little other than to foster distrust and animosity in the area . the surviving regulators , most notably billy the kid , continued as fugitives . gradually , his fellow gunmen scattered to their various fates . billy rode with bowdre , o'folliard , dave rudabaugh , and a few other friends , with whom he rustled cattle and committed other crimes . eventually sheriff pat garrett and his posse tracked and killed o'folliard , bowdre , and , in july 1881 , the '' kid '' . the three men were buried at fort sumner , new mexico . murphy died of cancer on october 20 , 1878 , about the age of 47 . susan mcsween hired lawyer huston chapman to pursue charges against dolan and others , in addition to working for amnesty for the regulators . on february 18 , 1879 , one year to the day after tunstall was murdered , evans and billy campbell killed chapman , then fled the territory . that murder also was attributed to dolan , though his involvement was never proven . dolan was indicted for the murder of tunstall , but was acquitted . he later acquired all of tunstall 's property before dying on his ranch in 1898 , aged 49 . susan mcsween took over a large sum of land in the years after the lincoln county war ended , establishing a ranch in three rivers , new mexico . by the mid-1890s her ranch holdings were some of the largest in the territory . she averaged during this time between 3,000 and 5,000 head of cattle . she died a wealthy woman on january 3 , 1931 , aged 85 . in popular culture . billy the kid ( 1930 ) the kid from texas ( 1950 ) the left handed gun ( 1958 ) chisum ( 1970 ) pat garrett and billy the kid ( 1973 ) young guns ( 1988 ) young guns ii ( 1990 ) jury of six , a novel by matt braun . references . bibliography . . . external links . seven rivers riders battle of lincoln old west gunfighters legends of the west , lincoln county war '' lincoln county war , competition was n't welcome '' , southern new mexico