White-rumped vulture

description . the white-rumped vulture is a typical , medium-sized vulture , with an unfeathered head and neck , very broad wings , and short tail feathers . it is much smaller than the eurasian griffon . it has a white neck ruff . the adult 's whitish back , rump , and underwing coverts contrast with the otherwise dark plumage . the body is black and the secondaries are silvery grey . the head is tinged in pink and bill is silvery with dark ceres . the nostril openings are slit-like . juveniles are largely dark and take about four or five years to acquire the adult plumage . in flight , the adults show a dark leading edge of the wing and has a white wing-lining on the underside . the undertail coverts are black . it is the smallest of the gyps vultures , but is still a very large bird . it weighs , measures in length , and has a wingspan of . ferguson-lees , j . and christie , d.a . ( 2001 ) . raptors of the world . houghton mifflin harcourt . this vulture builds its nest on tall trees often near human habitations in northern and central india , pakistan , nepal , bangladesh and southeast asia , laying one egg . birds form roost colonies . the population is mostly resident . like other vultures it is a scavenger , feeding mostly on carcasses , which it finds by soaring high in thermals and spotting other scavengers . a 19th century experimenter who hid a carcass of dog in a sack in a tree considered it capable of finding carrion by smell . it often flies and sits in flocks . at one time , it was the most numerous vulture in india . within the well-supported clade of the genus gyps which includes asian , african , and european populations , it has been determined that this species is basal with the other species being more recent in their species divergence . . behaviour and ecology . white-rumped vultures usually become active when the morning sun is warming up the air so that thermals are sufficient to support their soaring . they were once visible above calcutta in large numbers . when they find a carcass , they quickly descend and feed voraciously . they perch on trees nearby and are known to sometimes descend also after dark to feed . at kill sites , they are dominated by red-headed vultures sarcogyps calvus . in forests , their soaring often indicated a tiger kill . they swallow pieces of old , dry bones such as ribs and of skull pieces from small mammals . where water is available they bathe regularly and also drink water . a pack of vultures was observed to have cleaned up a whole bullock in about 20 minutes . trees on which they regularly roost are often white from their excreta , and this acidity often kills the trees . this made them less welcome in orchards and plantations . they sometimes feed on dead vultures . one white-rumped vulture was observed when getting caught in the mouth of a dying calf . jungle crows have been sighted to steal food brought by adults and regurgitated to young . allan octavian hume observed '' hundreds of nests '' and noted that white-rumped vultures used to nest on large trees near habitations even when there were convenient cliffs in the vicinity . the preferred nesting trees were banyan , peepul , arjun , and neem . the main nesting period was november to march with eggs being laid mainly in january . several pairs nest in the vicinity of each other and isolated nests tend to be those of younger birds . nests are lined with green leaves . in mudumalai tiger reserve , white-rumped vultures used foremost terminalia arjuna and spondias mangifera trees for nesting at a mean height of . their nests were long , wide and deep . hatchlings were seen from the first to the second week of january . solitary nests are not used regularly and are sometimes taken over by the red-headed vulture and large owls such as bubo coromandus . the male initially brings twigs and arranges them to form the nest . during courtship the male bills the female 's head , back and neck . the female invites copulation , and the male mounts and hold the head of the female in his bill . usually , the female lays a single egg , which is white with a tinge of bluish-green . female birds destroy the nest on loss of an egg . they are usually silent but make hissing and roaring sounds at the nest or when jostling for food . the eggs hatch after about 30 to 35 days of incubation . the young chick is covered with grey down . the parents feed them with bits of meat from a carcass . the young birds remain for about three months in the nest . mycoplasmas have been isolated from tissues of a white-rumped vulture . mallophagan parasites such as falcolipeurus and colpocephalum turbinatumhave been collected from the species . ticks , argas ( persicargas ) abdussalami , have been collected in numbers from the roost trees of these vultures in pakistan . a captive individual lived for at least 12 years . . status and decline . in the indian subcontinent . the white-rumped vulture was originally very common especially in the gangetic plains of india , and often seen nesting on the avenue trees within large cities in the region . hugh whistler noted for instance in his guide to the birds of india that it “ is the commonest of all the vultures of india , and must be familiar to those who have visited the towers of silence in bombay . ” t . c . jerdon noted that “ this is the most common vulture of india , and is found in immense numbers all over the country , . at calcutta one may frequently be seen seated on the bloated corpse of some hindoo floating up or down with the tide , its wing spread , to assist in steadying it . ” before the 1990s they were even seen as a nuisance , particularly to aircraft as they were often involved in bird strikes . in 1941 charles mccann wrote about the death of borassus palms due to the effect of excreta from vultures roosting on them . in 1990 , the species had already become rare in andhra pradesh in the districts of guntur and prakasham . the hunting of the birds for meat by the bandola ( banda ) people there was attributed as a reason . a cyclone in the region during 1990 resulted in numerous livestock deaths and no vultures were found at the carcasses . this species , as well as the indian vulture and slender-billed vulture has suffered a 99 % population decrease in india and nearby countries since the early 1990s . the decline has been widely attributed to poisoning by diclofenac , which is used as veterinary non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug ( nsaid ) , leaving traces in cattle carcasses which when fed on leads to kidney failure in birds . diclofenac was also found to be lethal at low dosages to other species in the genus gyps . other nsaids were also found to be toxic , to gyps as well as other birds such as storks . it was shown between 2000-2007 annual decline rates in india averaged 43.9 % and ranged from 11-61 % in punjab . organochlorine pesticide residues were found from egg and tissue samples from around india varying in concentrations from 0.002 μg/g of dde in muscles of vulture from mudumalai to 7.30 μg/g in liver samples from vultures of delhi . dieldrin varied from 0.003 and 0.015 μg/g . higher concentrations were found in lucknow . these pesticide levels have not however been implicated in the decline . an alternate hypothesis is an epidemic of avian malaria , as implicated in the extinctions of birds in the hawaiian islands . evidence for the idea is drawn from an apparent recovery of a vulture following chloroquine treatment . yet another suggestion has been that the population changes may be linked with long term climatic cycles such as the el niño–southern oscillation . affected vultures were initially reported to adopt a drooped neck posture and this was considered a symptom of pesticide poisoning , but subsequent studies suggested that this may be a thermoregulatory response as the posture was seen mainly during hot weather . it has been suggested that rabies cases have increased in india due to the decline . . in southeast asia . in southeast asia , the near-total disappearance of white-rumped vultures predated the present diclofenac crisis , and probably resulted from the collapse of large wild ungulate populations and improved management of dead livestock , resulting in a lack of available carcasses for vultures . . conservation . currently , only the cambodia and burma populations are thought to be viable though those populations are still very small ( low hundreds ) . it has been suggested that the use of meloxicam ( another nsaid ) as a veterinary substitute that is safer for vultures would help in the recovery . campaigns to ban the use of diclofenac in veterinary practice have been underway in several south asian countries . conservation measures have included reintroduction , captive-breeding programs and artificial feeding or '' vulture restaurants '' . two chicks , which were apparently the first captive-bred white-rumped vultures ever , hatched in january 2007 , at a facility at pinjore . however , they died after a few weeks , apparently because their parents were an inexperienced couple breeding for the first time in their lives – a fairly common occurrence in birds of prey .