James Tyler Kent

life and career . early years . james tyler kent was born on march 31 , 1849 in woodhull , new york , the son of steven kent and his wife caroline tyler . '' james tyler kent , '' lectures on homoeopathic materia medica . philadelphia : boericke & tafel , 1905 . kent was raised as a staunch baptist . kent attended secondary school at the franklin academy of prattsburgh , new york before enrolling at madison university ( today 's colgate university ) , from which he was graduated with a bachelor 's degree in 1868 . he earned a masters degree from the same institution in 1870 . kent attended the institute of eclectic medicine at cincinnati , ohio , where , in addition to standard medicine , he studied naturopathy , homeopathy , and chiropractic . kent graduated from the institute in 1873 . career . in 1874 , kent married ellen and settled in st . louis , missouri , where he took up medical practice . his wife died shortly after marriage at the age of 19 . he set up practice as an eclectic physician in st louis , missouri and soon became a distinguished member of the eclectic national medical association . he took a post as a professor of anatomy at american college in st . louis two years later . in 1878 , kent 's second wife , lucy , became ill . in spite of lucy 's symptoms of '' nervous weakness , insomnia , and anaemia '' being treated by both orthodox and eclectic physicians , her condition continued to deteriorate and she was bedridden for months . on kent 's wife 's request , richard phelan , a homeopathic physician , was called in to see lucy . following his prescription , she made a dramatic recovery . as a result , kent elected to study with phelan and changed from eclecticism to homeopathy . it was at this time that he became a fervent adherent of the precepts of homeopathy , a branch of alternative medicine that purports to treat patients through the administration of '' remedies '' containing massively diluted forms of substances that , if given to a healthy person would supposedly cause symptoms similar to the disease . it is believed by homeopaths that the introduction of such '' similars '' into the body effectively stimulates it to defeat the ailment or disease . in 1881 , kent accepted a position as professor of anatomy at the homeopathic college of missouri , an institution with which he remained affiliated until 1888 . during this period , kent 's second wife died . in 1890 , kent moved to pennsylvania to take a position as dean of professors at the post-graduate homeopathic medical school of philadelphia . he remained in that position until 1899 . clara louis tobey , a doctor turned homeopath , was treated by kent and she , later on , became his wife and she helped him in completing his famous works which were published . in 1897 kent published his magnum opus , repertory of the homœopathic materia medica . this guidebook to ailments and their associated '' similars '' remains the repertory on which much of the modern practice of homeopathy is based . kent edited the journal of homeopathics from 1897 to 1903 , producing seven volumes of the journal . peter morrell , '' kent 's influence on british homeopathy , '' journal of the american institute of homeopathy , vol . 92 ( 1999-2000 ) . republished on the internet as part of articles on homeopathy by peter morrell , www.homeoint.org/ kent moved to chicago in 1903 , where he taught at hahnemann medical college . kent remained at that post until his departure in 1909 to become professor and dean of hering medical college and hospital , an institution also located in chicago . in november 1910 , kent was instrumental in the establishment of the society of homeopathicians as a means of disseminating the principles of homeopathy promulgated by hahnemann . a . eugene austin , '' james tyler kent : an appreciation , '' alpha sigma semi-annual , vol . 2 , no . 1 ( may 1917 ) , reprinted in lectures on homoeopathic philosophy . 1900 memorial edition . chicago : ehrhart and karl , 1919 ; pp . 8–9 . the group published its own journal , the homeopathician . kent wrote voluminously and his works were published into several non-english languages during the course of his life . he gained a significant number of adherents in india , a country in which several publishers of his work of the late 20th and early 21st centuries are located . see the list of kent 's publishers between 1990 and 2010 at worldcat . . ideas . thumb kent is remembered for his naive arguments against the germ theory of infectious disease : '' the microbe is not the cause of disease . we should not be carried away by these idle allopathic dreams and vain imaginations but should correct the élan vital . '' morrell , peter . ( 2000 ) . vaccines - cause celebre or bete noir ? . the british medical journal 320 : 240 . '' the bacteria is an innocent feller , and if he carries disease he carries the simple substance which causes disease , just as an elephant would . '' as a follower of a mystical christian religious sect headed by emanuel swedenborg , kent believed that illness had spiritual causes : '' you can not divorce medicine and theology . man exists all the way down from his innermost spiritual , to his outermost natural . '' kent was a vitalism and believer in a '' vital force '' . wood , matthew . vitalism : the history of herbalism , homeopathy , and flower essences . north atlantic books . p . 197 . . death and legacy . kent died of bright 's disease on june 5 , 1916 , in stevensville , montana . he was 67 years old at the time of his death . not long after his death , kent was eulogy by one contemporary as '' genial , gentle , devoted friend to his patients and pupils ; jealous guardian of pure homeopathy against the criticisms of those whom he considered his enemies ; sensitive , embittered , retiring man in later years as he thought one after another did him wrong . ; most of his patients and pupils were devoted to him and he basked in the sunshine of that devotion . '' julia minerva green , '' james tyler kent , '' february 1919 . published in kent , lectures on homoeopathic philosophy , memorial edition , p . 11 . british scholar of homeopathy francis treuherz has characterized james tyler kent as '' the ultimate homeopath of the period when homeopathy flourished in america . '' francis treuherz , '' the origins of kent 's homeopathy , '' journal of the american institute of homeopathy , vol . 77 , no . 4 ( 1984 ) . treuherz has noted kent 's pioneering use of extremely high dilutions ( called '' high potencies '' by adherents of homeopathy ) and '' meticulous scholarship in the creation of his repertory '' as among kent 's primary attributes as the homeopathic exemplar of his generation . . students . among his pupils , some of the most notable are : frederika eugenie gladwin ( 1856–1931 ) practised in philadelphia and became one of kent 's closest students . kent appointed her clinical assistant for teaching homeopathy . two of her students gained worldwide fame , elizabeth wright hubbard and pierre schmidt . margaret lucy tyler ( 1857–1943 ) , another of his pupils , was an english physician and was dean of the rlh hospital from 1913 to 1943 . she founded the newspaper '' homeopathy '' in 1942 , george elias dienst ( 1858–1932 ) was an american homeopath and a member of the iha ( international hahnemannian association ) , collaborator of the homepathic reorder . robert gibson miller ( 1862–1919 ) promoted homeopathy in glasgow . julia minerva green ( 1871–1963 ) was the president of the aih ( american institute of homepathy ) around the 1930s . arthur hill grimmer ( 1874–1967 ) became secretary to kent and was the president of iha in 1934 and in 1953 president of aih . sir john weir gcvo ( 1879–1971 ) was a scottish doctor who served as a royal physician to several twentieth century monarchs including king george v , queen elizabeth ii . douglas morris borland mb , ch.b . ( 1885–1961 ) was an english physician and was a clinical teacher , practised in royal homeopathic hospital in london , he was the teacher of margery blackie who was appointed as the first woman royal physician to queen elizabeth ii , harold fergie woods ( 1883–1961 ) had a long association with the royal london homeopathic hospital . works . sexual neuroses . st . louis , mo : maynard and tedford , 1879 . address before the international hahnemannian association at its seventh annual meeting . 1887 . repertory of the homœopathic materia medica . lancaster , pa : examiner printing house , 1897 . lectures on homoeopathic philosophy . 1900 memorial edition . chicago : ehrhart and karl , 1919 . lectures on homoeopathic materia medica . philadelphia : boericke & tafel , 1905 . new remedies , clinical cases , lesser writings , aphorisms and precepts . chicago : ehrhart and karl , 1926 . notes . further reading . glen irving bidwell , how to use the repertory : with a practical analysis of forty homeopathic remedies . philadelphia : boericke & tafel , 1915 . amir cassam , '' was kent a hahnemannian ? '' british homoeopathic journal , vol . 88 , no . 2 ( april 1999 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 78–83 . john s . haller and michael a . flannery , the history of american homeopathy : from rational medicine to holistic health care . new brunswick , nj : rutgers university press , 2009 . francis treuherz , '' the origins of kent 's homeopathy , '' journal of the american institute of homeopathy , vol . 77 , no . 4 ( 1984 ) . external links . peter morrell , '' essays on american homeopathy , '' www.homeoint.org/ materia medica by james tyler kent , full book