The Nine Tailors

plot . stranded after a car accident in the fenland village of fenchurch st . paul on new year 's eve , lord peter wimsey helps ring a nine-hour peal on the church bells overnight after william thoday , one of the ringers , is struck down with influenza . lady thorpe , wife of sir henry , the local squire , dies the next morning and wimsey hears how the family has been blighted by the theft 20 years previously of a valuable emerald necklace which was never recovered . the family 's then butler , deacon , and his accomplice from london , cranton , were convicted and imprisoned . in 1918 , long before the end of deacon 's prison term , he killed a warder and escaped . he apparently died shortly afterwards : the body lay in a quarry pit , where it was found two years later , still in his prison clothes . after deacon 's death became known his widow , mary , had married william thoday . when sir henry himself dies the following easter , his wife 's grave is opened for his burial and a man 's body is found , mutilated beyond recognition . it is possibly that of an out-of-work labourer calling himself 'stephen driver ' who had arrived in the village in early january ; although , oddly , the dead man was wearing underclothes that had been made in france . bunter , wimsey 's manservant , enquires at the post office for any uncollected letters . he gets hold of one that has been posted in france , addressed not to 'driver ' but to 'paul taylor ' – a possible reference to 'tailor paul ' , the name of the tenor bell , the largest of the 'ring ' in the parish church . the writer of the letter is traced and found to be the french wife of a british soldier listed as missing in action in 1918 but who evidently deserted . the soldier , arthur cobbleigh , appears to have known where the emeralds were hidden and plotted to recover them with 'driver ' – who is discovered to be cranton . it appears that the dead man may in fact be cobbleigh , cranton having killed him after retrieving the emeralds . an odd document found in the bell chamber proves to be a cipher , written on the same paper as the letter but in a different hand . wimsey decodes it ( which requires knowledge of change ringing ) and it leads him to the emeralds , still untouched in their hiding place . he also shows the document to mary thoday . the thodays abscond to london . wimsey realises that they have gone there to be remarried , as mary recognised the handwriting on the cipher as that of deacon , her first husband , and realised that her wedding to william was void because deacon was still alive at the time . wimsey is now able to identify the dead man : it was deacon himself , who had not in fact died at the quarry as had been thought . after his escape , deacon had killed a soldier named cobbleigh and swapped clothes and identities with him . after marrying bigamy in france he had waited several years to return for the emeralds that he had hidden in the church before his arrest . he had asked cranton for help , sending him the cipher as a token of good faith . cranton had nevertheless feared a double-cross and had broken into the church . he discovered deacon 's body but fled , saying nothing . william thoday and his brother jim , a merchant seaman , are interviewed together in london . william confesses that on 30 december he had encountered deacon , whom he had long believed to be dead , prowling around the church . desperate to protect his wife from the scandal of a bigamous marriage , he had tied deacon up and locked him in the bell chamber , planning to bribe him to leave the country the next day . unfortunately , his bout of influenza prevented him from returning , and it was only his delirious talk that led jim to discover deacon 's dead body still tied up in the same place two days later . jim , appalled at william 's apparent brutality but loyal to him , had waited until the night following lady thorpe 's funeral , when he had made the body unrecognisable , hidden it in her grave , then returned to his ship . when the body was rediscovered at easter , each of the thoday brothers thought that the other had killed deacon . neither can explain how he had in fact died . when wimsey returns to fenchurch the following christmas , floods are threatening the countryside , and wimsey climbs the tower as the bells are sounding out the alarm . the appalling noise in the bell chamber convinces him that deacon , tied there for hours during the all-night new year peal , could not have survived : deacon had been killed by the bells themselves . wimsey explains , '' we need n't look for a murderer now . because the murderers of geoffrey deacon are hanging already , and a good deal higher than haman '' . william thoday is drowned in the flood trying to save another man . wimsey speculates that '' i think perhaps he guessed at last how geoffrey deacon died and felt himself responsible '' . principal characters . lord peter wimsey bunter , his manservant the reverend theodore venables , rector of fenchurch st paul ; his wife , mrs venables sir henry thorpe , the local squire ; his wife lady thorpe ; their daughter hilary superintendent blundell geoffrey deacon , once the thorpes ' butler , convicted of the theft of a necklace 20 years previously nobby cranton , london jewel-thief and deacon 's accomplice william thoday , absent bell ringer , struck down with influenza mary thoday , william thoday 's wife , previously married to deacon jim thoday , william 's brother , merchant navy potty peake , village idiot the bell ringers : hezekiah lavender , leader ; harry gotobed , sexton ; joe hinkins , gardener ; ezra wilderspin , blacksmith ; alf donnington , landlord of the red cow inn ; jack godfrey , churchwarden ; walter pratt , trainee ringer . title . the nine tailors of the book 's title are taken from the old saying '' nine tailors make a man '' , which sayers quotes at the end of the novel . as explained by john shand in his 1936 spectator article the bellringers ' art , '' 'nine tailors ' means the nine strokes which at the beginning of the toll for the dead announce to the villagers that a man is dead . a woman 's death is announced with 'six tailors ' . hence the old saying . which might otherwise be construed as a slander on a worthy profession '' . . awards and nominations . in 1996 the crime writers ' association awarded the story a rusty dagger award for the best crime novel of the 1930s , an award devised and organised for the association by the noir writer , russell james . . literary significance and criticism . writing in the new york times on the book 's first publication , isaac anderson said , '' it may be that you , like this reviewer , do not know the difference between a kent treble bob major and a grandsire triple , but even so , you will probably enjoy what dorothy sayers has to say about them and about other things concerned with the ancient art of change-ringing , since her dissertation is all woven into a most fascinating mystery tale . this is , most emphatically , dorothy sayers at her very best '' . john shand , writing in the spectator in 1936 , said '' those who would appreciate an artist 's picture of a group of village bellringers – of the kind who can pull a rope with any londoner – may find one in this novel , which contains the best description known to me of the bells , the ringers and the art . it is probably , indeed , the only novel based on a study of campanology . its very title and chapter-headings pay tribute to the peculiar vocabulary of the art '' . shand considered the means of death to be '' novelist 's licence , i am afraid . but a trifle like that can not spoil a good story '' . in his 1941 book murder for pleasure : the life and times of the detective story , howard haycraft noted that sayers has been called by some critics the greatest of living mystery writers . he went on , '' whether or not the reader agrees with this verdict , he can not , unless he is both obtuse and ungrateful , dispute her preëminence as one of the most brilliant and prescient artists the genre has yet produced . this book is in the writer 's estimation her finest achievement and one of the truly great detective stories of all time '' . taking the opposite view , the american critic edmund wilson , in his excoriating 1945 essay attacking the entire genre of detective fiction , who cares who killed roger ackroyd ? , criticised the nine tailors in particular for being dull , overlong and far too detailed . he considered the bell-ringing prose to be '' a lot of information of the kind that you might expect to find in an encyclopaedia article on campanology '' . in his view , sayers does not , really , write very well : '' it is simply that she is more consciously literary than most of the other detective story-writers and that she thus attracts attention in a field which is mostly on a sub-literary level '' . the review was first published on 20 january 1945 . sayers ’ obituarist , writing in the new york times in 1957 , noted that many critics regarded the nine tailors as her finest literary achievement . in their review of crime novels ( revised edn 1989 ) , the us writers barzun and taylor called this novel '' for many reasons , no great favourite . despite dorothy 's swotting up of bell-ringing and the two good maps . the cause of death , however , is original , and the rescue scene in the church amid the flood shows the hand of the master . it should be added that this work is a favourite with many readers . sinclair lewis judged it the best of his four 'indispensables ' '' . jacques barzun ; taylor , wendell hertig . a catalogue of crime . new york : harper & row . 1971 , revised and enlarged edition 1989 . also writing in 1989 , hrf keating said that the author '' incautiously entered the closed world of bell-ringing in the nine tailors on the strength of a sixpenny pamphlet picked up by chance – and invented a method of killing which would not produce death , as well as breaking a fundamental rule of that esoteric art by allowing a relief ringer to take part in her famous nine-hour champion peal '' . . background . as a child and young teenager , sayers lived on the southern edge of the fens at bluntisham-cum-earith , where her father was rector . she also was inspired by her father 's restoration of the bluntisham church bells in 1910 . much of the technical detail of the novel was taken from charles troyte 's change ringing , quotations from which are placed at the start of many of the chapters . in a letter discussing the book , sayers said '' i wrote the novel without ever having seen bells rung , by brooding over troyte on change-ringing and trying to translate its technical descriptions into visual effects . that . 'came out ' beyond expectation '' . . adaptations . the nine tailors has been adapted several times for bbc radio : as a four-part serialisation by giles cooper for the bbc light programme in 1954 , with alan wheatley as lord peter wimsey ; as an eight-part adaptation by alistair beaton for radio 4 in 1980 , with ian carmichael as wimsey ; and as a single two-hour murder for christmas programme by michelene wandor in 1987 , with gary bond as wimsey . in 1974 the novel was adapted for bbc television by anthony steven as a series of four hour-long episodes , starring ian carmichael as wimsey .