Essanay Studios

founding . image : essanay.jpg thumb the essanay film manufacturing company building , at 1345 w . argyle st , is a chicago landmark in uptown . the studio was founded in 1907 in chicago by george k . spoor and gilbert m . anderson , originally as the peerless film manufacturing company . on august 10 , 1907 , playing on the founders initials the name was changed to essanay ( '' s and a '' ) . arnie bernstein , hollywood on lake michigan : 100 years of chicago & the movies , lake claremont press , 1998 , p . 37 . essanay was originally located at 501 wells street ( modern numbering : 1360 n . wells ) . essanay 's first film , '' an awful skate , or the hobo on rollers '' ( july 1907 ) , starring ben turpin ( then the studio janitor ) , produced for only a couple hundred dollars , grossed several thousand dollars in release . the studio prospered and in 1908 moved to its more famous address at 1333–45 w . argyle st in uptown , chicago . . leading players and staff . essanay produced silent films with such stars ( and stars of the future ) as george periolat , ben turpin , wallace beery , thomas meighan , colleen moore , francis x . bushman , gloria swanson , ann little , helen dunbar , lester cuneo , florence oberle , lewis stone , virginia valli , edward arnold , edmund cobb and rod la rocque . the mainstay of the organization , however , were studio co-owner , anderson , starring in the very popular '' broncho billy '' westerns , and charlie chaplin was at one time its biggest star . allan dwan was hired by essanay studios as a screenwriter and developed into a famous hollywood director . louella parsons was also hired as a screenwriter and went on to be a famous hollywood gossip columnist . both george k . spoor ( in 1948 ) and broncho billy anderson ( in 1958 ) received oscars , specifically academy honorary awards , for their pioneering efforts with essanay . . productions . essanay 's famous movies , include the first american film version of a christmas carol and the first jesse james movie , the james boys of missouri in 1908 . they also produced the very first american sherlock holmes film in 1916 with william gillette . the first film comedy pie in the face gag is believed to have hit essanay star ben turpin in mr . flip ( 1909 ) . finally , essanay produced some very early cartoons ; dreamy dud was the most popular character . due to chicago 's seasonal weather patterns and the popularity of westerns , gilbert anderson took a part of the company west , first to colorado . he told the denver post in 1909 , '' colorado is the finest place in the country for wild west stuff , '' '' the essanay company out west '' from the denver post , reprinted in the moving picture world , vol . 5 , no . 23 , december 4 , 1909 . excerpted in pratt , george c . , spellbound in darkness : a history of the silent film new york graphic society . p 127 . the western operations moved to california , but traveled between northern to southern california seasonally . this included locations in san rafael , just outside san francisco , and santa barbara . essanay opened the essanay-west studio in niles , california , in 1912 , at the foot of niles canyon , where many broncho billy westerns were shot , along with the tramp featuring charlie chaplin . the chicago studio , as well as the new niles studio , continued to produce films for another five years , reaching a total of well over 1,400 essanay titles during its ten-year history . chaplin . in late 1914 , essanay succeeded in hiring charlie chaplin away from mack sennett 's keystone studios , offering chaplin a higher salary and his own production unit . chaplin made 14 short comedies for essanay in 1915 , at both the chicago and niles studios , plus a cameo appearance in one of the broncho billy westerns . chaplin 's essanays are more disciplined than the chaotic roughhouse of chaplin 's keystones , with better story values and character development . the landmark film of the chaplin series is the tramp ( 1915 ) , in which chaplin 's vagabond character finds work on a farm and is smitten with the farmer 's daughter . chaplin injected moments of drama and pathos unheard of in slapstick comedies ( the tramp is felled by a gunshot wound , and then disappointed in romance ) . the film ends with the famous shot of the lonely tramp with his back to the camera , walking down the road dejectedly , and then squaring his shoulders optimistically and heading for his next adventure . audiences responded to the humanity of chaplin 's character , and chaplin continued to explore serious or sentimental themes within comic situations . attempting to capitalize on the popularity of chaplin , the studio in 1915 had its cartoon character dreamy dud in a chaplin themed short dreamy dud sees charlie chaplin in which dud watches a chaplin short . kevin scott collier . the animated silent charlie chaplin cartoons . cartoon research ( may 20 , 2019 ) . chaplin 's stock company at essanay included ben turpin , who disliked working with the meticulous chaplin and appeared with him in only a couple of films ; ingenue edna purviance , who became his off-screen sweetheart as well ; leo white , almost always playing a fussy continental villain ; and all-purpose authority figures bud jamison and john rand . chaplin disliked the unpredictable weather of chicago and left after only one year for more money and more creative control elsewhere . his departure caused a rift between founders spoor and anderson . chaplin was the studio 's biggest moneymaker , and essanay resorted to creating '' new '' chaplin comedies from file footage and out-takes . finally , with chaplin off the essanay scene for good , essanay signed french comedian max linder , whose clever pantomime , often compared to chaplin 's , failed to match chaplin 's popularity in america . v-l-s-e , incorporated . in 1915 , the essanay entered into an agreement , in a last-ditch effort to save the studio , with vitagraph studios , lubin manufacturing company , and selig polyscope company to form a film distribution partnership known as v-l-s-e , incorporated . it was orchestrated by chicago distributor george kleine . only the vitagraph brand name continued into the 1920s , and was absorbed by warner brothers in 1925 . final years . george k . spoor continued to work in the motion picture industry , introducing an unsuccessful 3-d system in 1923 , '' natural vision picture '' , the new york times , august 21 , 1923 , p . 6 . and spoor-berggren natural vision , a 65 & nbsp ; mm widescreen format , in 1930 . he died in chicago in 1953 . g . m . anderson became an independent producer , sponsoring stan laurel in a series of silent comedies . anderson died in los angeles in 1971 . the essanay building in chicago was later taken over by independent producer norman wilding , who made industrial films . wilding 's tenancy was much longer than essanay 's . in the early 1970s , a portion of the studio was offered to columbia college ( chicago ) for a dollar but the offer lapsed without action . then it was given to a non-profit television corporation which sold it . one tenant was the midwest office of technicolor . today the essanay lot is the home of st . augustine 's college , and its main meeting hall has been named the charlie chaplin auditorium . . see also . chicago film industry niles essanay silent film museum