Piano trio

form . works titled '' piano trio '' tend to be in the same overall shape as a sonata . initially this was in the three movement form , though some of haydn 's have two movements . mozart , in five late works , is generally credited with transforming the accompanied keyboard sonata , in which the essentially optional cello doubles the bass of the keyboard left hand , into the balanced trio which has since been a central form of chamber music . with the early 19th century , particularly beethoven , this genre was felt to be more appropriate to cast in the four movement form . piano trios that are set in the sonata tradition share the general concerns of such works for their era , and often are reflective directly of symphonic practice with individual movements laid out according to the composer 's understanding of the sonata form . in the classical era , home music-making made the piano trio a very popular genre for arrangements of other works . for example , beethoven transcribed his first two symphonies for piano trio . thus a large number of works exist for the arrangement of piano , violin and violoncello which are not generally titled or numbered as piano trios , but which are nonetheless part of the overall genre . these include single movements as well as sets of variations such as beethoven 's variations on 'ich bin der schneider kakadu ' op . 121a and variations in e flat major op . 44 . after the classical era , works for piano and two instruments continue to be written which are not presented as in the sonata tradition , or are arrangements of other works . many of these individual works are popular on concert programs , for example suk 's elegie . for individual articles treating works for piano trio , see : category : compositions for piano trio . the role of the three instruments . the piano trios of the classical era , notably those of haydn , are dominated by the piano part . the violin plays the melody only a certain amount of the time , and when it does , is often doubled by the piano . the cello part is very much subordinated , usually just doubling the bass line in the piano . it is thought that this practice was quite intentional on haydn 's part and was related to the sonority of the instruments of haydn 's day : the piano was fairly weak and '' tinkling '' in tone , and benefited from the tonal strengthening of other instruments . mozart 's five late ( k . 496 and later ) trios are generally felt to mark the assured arrival of the form , attentive to balanced voices and three-part dialogue . beethoven 's trios continued the compositional objectives inaugurated by mozart . the new idea of equality was never implemented completely ; the extent to which it is realized varies from one composition to the next , as well as among movements within a single composition . certainly by the mid nineteenth century , all three instruments had been modified to have a very powerful sound , and each can hold its own in a modern ensemble . the earlier trios are now frequently performed and recorded using authentic performance , of the kind for which they were originally written . such performances restore the sonic balance the composer would have expected , and have proven popular . other combinations . some rather rare combinations of instruments have nonetheless inspired a few outstanding works . haydn wrote three trios for flute-cello-piano trio ( h . 15/15-17 ) , a combination for which carl maria von weber also wrote one work ( op . 63 ) . beethoven wrote his trio in g major , woo 37 ( 1786 ) for flute-bassoon-piano trio . mikhail glinka wrote his trio pathétique in d minor for clarinet , bassoon and piano , although is also performed with a violin or cello substituting the clarinet or the bassoon , respectively . francis poulenc 's trio for oboe , bassoon and piano op . 43 ( 1926 ) . the horn-violin-piano trio is exemplified by brahms ' horn trio ( brahms ) and györgy ligeti 's 1982 trio for violin , horn and piano . trios with clarinet include masterpieces such as mozart 's kegelstatt trio and works by beethoven , brahms and bartók ; many more works are listed in clarinet-violin-piano trio , clarinet-viola-piano trio and clarinet-cello-piano trio . ignaz lachner wrote all of his six piano trios for violin , viola and piano . the jazz trio formation of saxophone , piano and percussion has been taken up as an alternative '' piano trio '' in the field of contemporary classical music , initially by trio accanto who since 1994 have commissioned more than 100 works for this combination . several other trios have been formed to perform this repertoire . example piano trios , extant and defunct . among the best known of such groups are or have been : altenberg trio ( austria ) ( berlin , germany ) maria baptist trio ( berlin , germany ) istomin-stern-rose trio , consisting of eugene istomin , isaac stern and leonard rose . ( united states ) one consisting of alfred cortot , jacques thibaud and pablo casals , earlier in the 20th century the spivakovsky trio , consisting of jascha spivakovsky , tossy spivakovsky and edmnd kurtz , earlier in the 20th century the kalichstein-laredo-robinson trio ( united states ) the beaux arts trio ( united states ) , whose commitment to using the same players in every concert pioneered a new generation of similarly committed groups ; defunct the sitkovetsky trio ( united kingdom ) consisting of alexander sitkovetsky , wu qian and isang enders trio di trieste ( italy ) consisting of dario de rosa , renato zanettovich and libero lana/amedeo baldovino ; defunct the '' ax-kim-ma '' trio , consisting of emanuel ax , young-uck kim , and yo-yo ma ( united states ) eroica trio ( united states ) ahn trio ( united states/korea ) the borodin trio ( united states ) trio fontenay ( germany ) trio céleste ( united states ) , consisting of kevin kwan loucks , iryna krechkovsky , and ross gasworth suk trio ( czech republic ) the florestan trio ( united kingdom ) the greenwich trio ( united kingdom ) the gryphon trio ( canada ) the oberlin trio ( united states ) the alma trio ( united states ) trio vega ( spain ) the kandinsky trio ( united states ) trio wanderer ( france ) haydn trio eisenstadt ( austria ) : harald kosik , hannes gradwohl , bernd gradwohl/verena stourzh . bamberg trio ( germany ) petrof piano trio ( czech republic ) manhattan piano trio ( united states ) spirale piano trio ( belgium ) xonor trio ( united states ) vanic trio ( united states ) vienna piano trio ( austria ) stuttgart piano trio ( german ) foto : touring southern africa the dutch trio ( germany/the netherlands ) . famous works for piano trio . anton arensky 's piano trio no . 1 ( arensky ) ludwig van beethoven 's trios , especially piano trio no . 7 ( beethoven ) johannes brahms 's piano trios no . 1 in b major , op . 8 , no . 2 in c major , op . 87 and piano trio no . 3 ( brahms ) frédéric chopin 's piano trio ( chopin ) antonín dvořák 's piano trio no . 4 ( dvořák ) gabriel fauré 's piano trio , op . 120 joseph haydn 's 45 piano trios , particularly those composed from the mid-1780s onwards franz liszt 's hungarian rhapsodies no . 9 and no . 12 felix mendelssohn 's two piano trios wolfgang amadeus mozart 's piano trios , particularly no . 3 , 4 and 5 sergei rachmaninoff 's elegiac trios no . 1 in g minor and no . 2 in d minor maurice ravel 's piano trio ( ravel ) franz schubert 's piano trio no . 1 and no . 2 clara schumann 's piano trio robert schumann 's piano trio no . 1 in d minor and piano trio no . 3 in g minor dmitri shostakovich 's piano trio no . 2 in e minor bedřich smetana 's trio for piano , violin and cello pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky 's piano trio in a minor , op . 50