Finsbury Park Mosque

history . 1988–1997 : opening . in the 1960s a small room in a guest house at 7 woodfall road , london n4 was used as a prayer room and community centre for the handful of bangladeshi muslims then working and living in the district , and had become inadequate for the growing muslim community by the time the building was compulsorily purchased by the local authority as part of a housing action plan . the community formed a muslim welfare centre , and in 1975 purchased its own property at st . thomas ’ s road , later also acquiring neighbouring plots . a mosque first came into use on the site in 1988 , when it was one of the largest mosques in the uk . in 1994 a new 5-storey mosque building was officially opened in a ceremony attended by prince charles and king fahd of saudi arabia who had contributed funds for the building . inisde finsbury park mosque , time , january 2003 maceoin , denis . '' the hijacking of british islam . '' how extremist literature is subverting mosques in the uk ( policy exchange 2007 ) ( 2007 ) , page 77 . hard law and soft power : counter-terrorism , the power of sacred places , and the establishment of an anglican islam , peter w . edge , rutgers journal of law & religion , spring 2010 , pages 366-371 . 1997–2003 : under abu hamza al-masri . the mosque rose to notoriety after abu hamza al-masri became its imam in 1997 . in the late 1990s and early 2000s , he consolidated his control of the mosque , with his followers preventing anyone they did not trust from entering it . abu hamza profile , bbc news ( january 9 , 2015 ) . according to the mosque 's current administration , although originally appointed by the trustees , abu hamza gradually took over the mosque from them . when the mosque 's trustees asked him to leave , they allege that he resorted to intimidation . in october 1998 , the trustees went to the high court to stop abu hamza from preaching at the mosque . they were granted an injunction , but it was not enforced . many trustees reported being barred from their own mosque by abu hamza 's supporters and even being assaulted . in april 2002 , the charity commission for england and wales suspended abu hamza from preaching , but he continued anyway . djamal beghal used the mosque as his '' base , '' as he planned a foiled 2001 attack u.s . embassy paris plot . during abu hamza 's control , the mosque 's attendance dropped . most of the attendees were his followers . the mosque also became a meeting point for many radical muslims . according to classified american documents released by wikileaks , finsbury park mosque previously served '' as a haven '' for islamic extremists who subsequently fought against allied forces in afghanistan . al qaeda operatives including '' shoebomber '' richard reid and zacarias moussaoui attended the mosque . in 2002 , the guardian reported that weapons training had taken place inside the building . on 11 september 2002 , a conference was held at the mosque titled '' a towering day in history '' to praise the september 11 hijackers on the anniversary of the attack with the participation of anjem choudary , abu hamza , omar bakri mohammed , mohammad al-massari and others . radicals meet at north london mosque to mark 'towering day ' , guardian , 12 september 2002 wiktorowicz , quintan . '' joining the cause : al-muhajiroun and radical islam . '' , the roots of islamic radicalism conference , yale . devji , f ( 2005 ) landscapes of the jihad : militancy , morality and modernity . london : c hurst & co publishers ltd . 2004 . , ( page 13 ) in the late 1990s , abu hamza and the mosque became the leading international spiritual reference supporting the armed islamic group of algeria ( gia ) in the algerian civil war , at a time when the gia was spurned even by most salafi-jihadist groups for their massacres of civilians . the united states charged abu hamza as a '' terrorist facilitator with a global reach '' in 2004 ; he was arrested , sentenced in the uk to a seven-year prison sentence in 2006 , archive : abu hamza guilty of inciting murder , bbc news ( february 7 , 2006 ) and subsequently extradited to the united states where he was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole . nicky woolf , abu hamza sentenced to life in prison on us terrorism conviction , the guardian ( january 9 , 2015 ) . according to disclosures via wikileaks , several guantanamo bay detention camp detainees passed through the mosque prior to their subsequent activities . wikileaks : how britain 'became a haven for migrant extremists ’ , telegraph , 25 april 2011 responding to the threat of violent extremism : failing to prevent , by paul thomas , 2012 , , page 28 the mosque 's role in facilitating terror operations during these years is often mentioned in the context of the londonistan , which was widely used by the international espionage community to describe london , due to the liberty afforded to muslim extremists by british authorities . londonistan calling , vanity fair , june 2007 abu hamza trial : finsbury park mosque informant reda hassaine sees his enemy jailed , the daily telegraph , january 2015 . 2003–2005 : shutdown and re-opening . in 2003 , 150 anti-terrorist police officers conducted a nighttime raid on the building as part of the investigation into the alleged wood green ricin plot . police seized a stun gun and a cs gas canister , among other items , and arrested seven men under the terrorism act 2000 . the police action had the effect of removing abu hamza and his supporters from the mosque . after the raid , the police handed the mosque to its trustees , who promptly closed it for repairs . the trustees also stated that they were closing it “ while it was cleaned of the physical and spiritual filth . '' . ramirez , debbie and quinlan , tara lai , '' the greater london experience : essential lessons learned in law enforcement - community partnerships and terrorism prevention '' ( 2011 ) . school of law faculty publications . 351 . abu hamza continued to preach each friday in the street outside the closed mosque until his arrest in may 2004 . in august 2004 the mosque was reopened , but after reports '' hardliners '' again asserted control in december 2004 , the charity commission intervened again and appointed a new board of trustees with the support of the muslim association of britain ( mab ) , who were asked by the police , the former trustees , and others to try to turn it around . after changing the locks and taking physical control of the building , the mosque was reopened under heavy police presence . new start for 'extremist ' mosque , bbc , 11 february 2005 dr . azzam tamimi , a leading member of mab , described the mosque takeover as '' one of the very rare success stories where the muslim community and others came together and decided to rescue the mosque '' , although a minority complained of lack of consultation , with ashgar bukhari of the campaign group muslim public affairs committee uk saying that the committee should have been elected . the new management condemned former imam abu hamza . . 2006–2013 : reformation . since reopening , it is widely acknowledged that the mosque has not been associated with radical views . british authorities have described the transformation of the mosque to be a major accomplishment . the telegraph reported that finsbury park mosque 's transformation from '' radical hotbed '' to '' model of community relations '' has '' since been widely regarded as a success story '' . the finsbury park mosque : radical hotbed transformed to model of community relations , the daily telegraph , 19 june 2017 the mosque made an effort to build ties with the local community , including local mp jeremy corbyn , and started engaging non-muslims and local authorities . in 2007 the policy exchange think tank , in a report titled the hijacking of british islam , said they had purchased a number of allegedly extremist islamic books at the mosque . the mosque disputed the allegation , and sued for libel , tories ' favourite think-tank sued by muslim group , independent , august 2008 a case that was struck on the technicality that the mosque as an unincorporated charitable trust is not a corporate entity or legal person and thus not able to claim defamation . north london central mosque trust v policy exchange & anor , reference 2009 ewhc 3311 ( qb ) , court queen 's bench division , 29 november 2009 eady : mosque charitable trust ca n't sue for libel , press gazette , 22 december 2009 mills , tom , tom griffin , and david miller . '' the cold war on british muslims : an examination of policy exchange and the centre for social cohesion . '' ( 2011 ) . pages 40-42 subsequent action by the mosque and its trustees was settled out of court , with the mosque paying some of policy exchange 's legal fees and with policy exchange , while neither retracting nor apologising for their claim of sale , stating that they '' never sought to suggest that the literature cited in the report was sold or distributed at the mosque with the knowledge or consent of the mosque ’ s trustees or staff . '' ; both sides claimed the settlement as a victory . north london central mosque 's case against policy exchange ends . mosque 's appeal dismissed . statement agreed . . 2014–2016 : incidents . in 2014 , hsbc bank closed finsbury park mosque 's bank account , and the mosque was unable to open an account with another high street bank being forced to turn to a small islamic bank . the closure was prompted by information in world-check , a confidential database owned by thomson reuters , that was due to reported links to terrorism before 2005 as well as purported muslim brotherhood links of a current mosque trustee . ‘ why did hsbc shut down bank accounts ? ’ , bbc , 28 july 2005 in response the mosque filed a legal case against thomson reuters , which was settled in 2017 , with reuters agreeing to issue an apology and pay damages . in august 2014 , police arrived at the mosque after a dispute between an al arabiya reporter and the mosque 's manager . both men called the police : the mosque manager claimed the reporter was engaged in '' malicious journalism '' , while the reporter claimed he was detained by the manager until the police arrived ( 30 minutes ) . ‘ locked up : finsbury park mosque detains journalist after tricky questions ’ , al-arabiya , august 2014 . ‘ boss of finsbury park mosque hits back at imprisonment claims ’ , the islington gazette , august 2014 . in january 2015 , after the charlie hebdo shooting , the mosque 's '' former links with radical preachers resurfaced after the paris attacks as it was alleged that the charlie hebdo gunmen were followers of djamel beghal , a radical preacher based there in the late 1990s . '' lizzie dearden , 'london mosques receive death threats and prophet mohamed drawings after charlie hebdo attack ' , the independent , january 2015 . the mosque received death threats and hate mail . hind hassan , 'death threats received at london mosque ' , sky news , january 2015 . in november 2015 , following a mail threat , a man attempted to set fire to the mosque , 'finsbury park mosque targeted in suspected arson attack ' , the guardian , november 2015 . an attack which reportedly failed due to heavy rain . '' finsbury park mosque : rain 'saved us from arson attack ' '' , bbc , november 2015 . '' attempt to burn down prominent london mosque a 'terrorist attack ' '' , the middle east eye , november 2015 . in july 2016 , a man threw rotten pork meat at the mosque . 'man throws rotten pork meat at mosque in hate crime ' , newsweek , april 2016 '' police hunt man after rotten meat thrown at finsbury park mosque in 'hate crime ' '' , the independent , july 2016 . . 2017 terrorist attack . shortly after midnight on 19 june 2017 , several worshippers leaving the nearby muslim welfare house were struck by a hired van in a terrorist attack . one person died of multiple injuries and ten were injured . the attack was widely condemned and seen by local muslim leaders as part of rising islamophobia in the united kingdom . following the attack , mohammed kozbar , the chairman of the finsbury park mosque , said that the mosque had received multiple death threats . london mosque targeted in terror attack now receiving death threats , vice news , hind hassan , 30 june 2017 islamophobic 'rivers of blood ' threats to finsbury park mosque in wake of terror attack , international business times , ewan palmer , 30 june 2017 in february 2018 the perpetrator , darren osborne , was sentenced to life imprisonment in england and wales with simultaneous terms for murder and attempted murder . . community outreach . the mosque received the '' best outreach programme '' award at the british beacon mosque awards in 2018 . the mosque is a member of the islington faith forum , which received the queen 's award for voluntary service in 2018 , and an affiliate of the muslim council of britain . it was the recipient of a visible quality mark by the national body community matters in 2014 , the first time being awarded to a muslim place of worship in the uk . the venue has often been used by the local mp , jeremy corbyn , local police and local councillors for constituency surgeries , meetings and speeches . finsbury park mosque in 'new era ' following 'hostile ' abu hamza days , islington gazette , 5 june 2014 the mosque organises various community events throughout the year , including an annual open day for the local community and schools , and since 2014 , this has been held in association with muslim council of britain as part of the national visit my mosque scheme . this event consists of a tour of the mosque , an exhibition on islam and the mosque and a wide range of activities that are also organised by members of the wider community . since 2017 , following the 2017 finsbury park attack where a worshipper was killed , and many were injured , the mosque has held an annual street iftar event during the holy month of ramadan , in which the local and wider community are invited to share a meal that coincides with the breaking of the fast . this event has been attended by various faith and community leaders , local councillors and mps including dominic grieve and anna soubry . the mosque was part of macmillan coffee morning initiative to raise money to cancer victims and organised the first ever '' autism hour '' in a mosque with the national autistic society . the mosque has held various hate crime awareness events throughout the years , and in 2015 , it launched the meals for all initiative , in which the mosque provides a hot meal for the homeless people from the local community and those in need , once every week . . see also . islam in london islamic schools and branches islam in the united kingdom list of mosques in the united kingdom . references . external links . north london central mosque trust website