Battle of Rivoli

forces . see rivoli 1797 campaign order of battle . prelude . alvinczi 's plan was to rush and overwhelm barthélemy joubert in the mountains east of lake garda by concentrating 28,000 men in five separate columns , and thereby gain access to the open country north of mantua where austrian superior numbers would be able to defeat bonaparte 's smaller army of italy . alvinczi attacked joubert 's 10,000 men on 12 january . however joubert held him off and was subsequently joined by louis-alexandre berthier and , at 2 am on 14 january , by bonaparte , who brought up elements of andré masséna 's division to support joubert 's efforts to form a defensive line on favorable ground just north of rivoli on the trambasore heights . the battle would be a contest between alvinczi 's efforts to concentrate his dispersed columns versus the arrival of french reinforcements . battle . the morning of saturday 14 january found alvinczi engaging the division of joubert . he had united three austrian columns between caprino on the right and the chapel of san marco on the left ; the brigade of franz josef de lusignan was advancing to the north of monte baldo ; and the troops of peter vitus von quosdanovich and josef philipp vukassovich were pouring down the roads on either side of the adige . before daybreak as the french were moving on the road from rivoli to incanale joubert attacked and drove the austrians from the chapel of san marco . reginald george burton ( 2010 ) . napoleon 's campaigns in italy 1796–1797 & 1800 , p . 84 . at 9 a.m . , the austrian brigades of samuel koblos and anton lipthay counterattacked the french forces on the trambasore heights . another column under prince heinrich of reuss-plauen attempted to turn the french right via the rivoli gorge . meanwhile , on the french right flank , vukassovich had advanced down the east bank of the adige and had established batteries opposite osteria . the fire of his guns and the pressure from quosdanovich forced the french out of the village of osteria and onto the rivoli plateau . by about 11 a.m . the position of bonaparte was becoming desperate : an austrian column under lusignan was cutting off his retreat south of rivoli . to reopen his line of retreat bonaparte turned to massena 's 18th demi-brigade ( '' the brave '' ) , newly arrived from lake garda . meanwhile , alvinczi was on the trambasore heights urging his victorious battalions forward , though they were unformed by combat and rough terrain . with the 18th dispatched to check lusignan , bonaparte turned all his attention to quosdanovich . he understood the defeat of this column was the key to the battle . unfortunately the french had very few reserves left and mostly had to accomplish this with troops already at hand . making the best of interior lines and his advantage in artillery , bonaparte thinned out joubert 's lines facing the austrians frontally at the trambasore heights as much as possible and concentrated them before the gorge . a battery of 15 french guns were massed and poured canister shot at point blank range into the advancing austrian column that was emerging from the gorge . this devastating firepower struck first on the advancing austrian dragoons who broke and stampeded through their own infantry causing mass chaos . at this juncture the brigade of charles leclerc assaulted the column frontally while joubert laid down heavy flanking fire from san marco . here antoine charles de lasalle with just 26 horseman of the 22nd horse chasseurs charged into the melee . lasalle 's men captured a whole austrian battalion and seized 5 enemy flags . in the centre the battle was not yet won ; joseph ocskay renewed his attack from san marco and drove back the brigade of honoré vial . but at midday french cavalry under joachim murat charged the flanks of ocskay 's troops , which were driven back to the positions they occupied in the morning . reginald george burton ( 2010 ) . napoleon 's campaigns in italy 1796–1797 & 1800 , p . 85 . quosdanovich realized he could not force the defile and ordered his troops to fall back out of artillery range . meanwhile , while lusignan was being engaged frontally by the brigade of guillaume brune , the division of gabriel rey , coming up from castelnuovo and the brigade of claude victor ( reserve ) began to arrive . they crushed the austrian column of lusignan who fled west with less than 2,000 men remaining . reginald george burton ( 2010 ) . napoleon 's campaigns in italy 1796–1797 & 1800 , p . 85 . the french lost 3,200 killed and wounded and 1,000 captured , while the austrians suffered 4,000 killed and wounded , plus 8,000 men and 40 guns captured . smith , p . 131 rothenberg , p . 248 one authority gives the french 5,000 and the austrians 14,000 total losses . chandler , p . 328 . aftermath . the next day joubert and ray began a successful pursuit of alvinczi , all but destroying his columns , the remnants of which fled north up into the adige valley in confusion . the battle of rivoli was bonaparte 's greatest victory at the time . after that he turned his attention to giovanni di provera . on 13 january his corps ( 9,000 men ) had crossed north of legnano and driven straight for the relief of mantua which was besieged by french forces under jean sérurier . at night on 15 january provera sent a message to dagobert sigmund von wurmser to break out in a concerted attack . on 16 january , when wurmser attacked he was driven back into mantua by sérurier . the austrians were attacked from the front by masséna ( who had force marched from rivoli ) and from the rear by the division of pierre augereau , and were thus forced to surrender the entire force . the austrian army in north italy had ceased to exist . on 2 february mantua surrendered with its garrison of 16,000 men , all that remained of an army of 30,000 . the troops marched out with the 'honours of war ' , and laid down their arms . wurmser with his staff and an escort were allowed to go free . the remainder were sent to austria after swearing an oath to not serve against the french for a year , 1,500 guns were found in the fortress . reginald george burton ( 2010 ) . napoleon 's campaigns in italy 1796–1797 & 1800 , p . 88 . on 18 february bonaparte proceeded with 8,000 men to rome , determined to come to a settlement with the papal states , which had shown covert hostility so long as the campaign had proceeded with uncertainty as to the fate of italy . but with the fall of mantua the austrians were finally driven from italian soil , and pope pius vi agreed to an armistice dictated by bonaparte in tolentino . reginald george burton ( 2010 ) . napoleon 's campaigns in italy 1796–1797 & 1800 , p . 88 . snow had closed the alps passes , but austria still refused bonaparte terms of a peace agreement . he prepared one last campaign to the east , into the heartland of austria to the gates of vienna itself . legacy . the rue de rivoli , a street in central paris , is named after the battle . references . boycott-brown , martin . the road to rivoli . cassell ; new ed edition , 2002 . chandler , david . dictionary of the napoleonic wars . new york : macmillan , 1979 . . footnotes . . external links . photographs of the battlefield of rivoli