Casus belli

reasons for use . countries need a public justification for attacking another country , both to galvanize internal support for the war and to gain the support of potential allies . in the post–world war ii era , the un charter prohibits signatory countries from engaging in war except : 1 ) as a means of defending themselves—or an ally where treaty obligations require it—against aggression ; 2 ) unless the un as a body has given prior approval to the operation . the un also reserves the right to ask member nations to intervene against non-signatory countries that embark on war of aggression . . historical examples . this section outlines a number of the more famous and/or controversial cases of casus belli which have occurred in modern times . american civil war . while long-term conflict between the northern and southern states ( mainly due to the economic disparities and moral questions caused by slavery ) was the cause of the american civil war , the confederate battle of fort sumter ( april 12–14 , 1861 ) served as casus belli for igniting the deadliest war in american history . spanish–american war . while the destruction of the maine did not result in an immediate declaration of war with spain , it did create an atmosphere that precluded a peaceful solution . the spanish investigation found that the explosion had been caused by spontaneous combustion of the coal bunkers , but the us sampson board 's court of inquiry ruled that the explosion had been caused by an external explosion from a torpedo . the mckinley administration did not cite the explosion as a casus belli , but others were already inclined to go to war with spain over perceived atrocities and loss of control in cuba . advocates of war used the rallying cry , '' remember the maine ! to hell with spain ! '' . second opium war . europeans had access to chinese ports as outlined in the treaty of nanking from the first opium war . france used the execution of auguste chapdelaine as a casus belli for the second opium war . on february 29 , 1856 , chapdelaine , a french missionary , was killed in the province of guangxi , which was not open to foreigners . in response , british and french forces quickly took control of guangzhou ( canton ) . world war i . austria-hungary 's casus belli against serbia in july 1914 was based upon serbia 's refusal to investigate the involvement of serbian government officials in the equipping , training and paying the assassins who murdered archduke franz ferdinand of austria at sarajevo . the serbian government refused the austrian démarche , and austria-hungary declared war . in 1917 , the german empire sent the zimmermann telegram to mexico , in which they tried to persuade mexico to join the war and fight against the united states , for which they would be rewarded texas , new mexico , and arizona , all former mexican territories . this telegram was intercepted by the british , then relayed to the u.s . , which led to president woodrow wilson then using it to convince congress to join world war i alongside the allies . the mexican president at the time , venustiano carranza , had a military commission assess the feasibility , which concluded that this would not be feasible for multiple reasons . world war ii . in his autobiography mein kampf , adolf hitler had in the 1920s advocated a policy of lebensraum ( '' living space '' ) for the germans , which in practical terms meant german territorial expansion into eastern europe . image : alfred naujocks.jpg thumb alfred naujocks , who organized and led the gleiwitz incident on the orders of heydrich . in august 1939 , to implement the first phase of this policy , germany 's nazi government under hitler 's leadership staged the gleiwitz incident , which was used as a for the invasion of poland the following september . nazi forces used concentration camp prisoners posing as poles on 31 august 1939 , to attack the german radio station sender gleiwitz in gleiwitz , upper silesia , germany ( since 1945 : gliwice , poland ) on the eve of world war ii in europe . poland 's allies , the uk and france , subsequently declared war on germany in accordance with their alliance . in 1941 , acting once again in accordance with the policy of lebensraum , nazi germany operation barbarossa , using the casus belli of preemptive war to justify the act of aggression . vietnam war . many historians have suggested that the second gulf of tonkin incident was a manufactured pretext for the vietnam war . north vietnamese naval officials have publicly stated that during the second incident the was never fired on by north vietnamese naval forces . '' mcnamara asks giap : what happened in tonkin gulf ? '' . ( november 9 , 1995 ) . associated press cnn cold war – interviews : robert mcnamara , retrieved january 23 , 2007 in the documentary film '' the fog of war '' , then-us defense secretary robert mcnamara concedes the attack during the second incident did not happen , though he says that he and president johnson believed it did so at the time . the first gulf of tonkin incident ( the 2nd of august ) should not be confused with the second gulf of tonkin incident ( 4 august ) . the north vietnamese claimed that on august 2 , us destroyer uss maddox was hit by one torpedo and that one of the american aircraft had been shot down in north vietnamese territorial waters . the pavn museum in hanoi displays '' part of a torpedo boat . which successfully chased away the uss maddox august 2nd , 1964 '' . the casus belli for the vietnam war was the second incident . on august 4 , uss maddox was launched to the north vietnamese coast to '' show the flag '' after the first incident . the us authorities claimed that two vietnamese boats tried to attack uss maddox and were sunk . the government of north vietnam denied the second incident completely . deniability played favorably into the propaganda efforts of north vietnam throughout the war , and for some years to follow . 1967 arab-israeli war . a casus belli played a prominent role during the six-day war of 1967 . the israeli government had a short list of , acts that it would consider provocations justifying armed retaliation . the most important was a blockade of the straits of tiran leading into eilat , israel 's only port to the red sea , through which israel received much of its oil . after several border incidents between israel and egypt 's allies syria and jordan , egypt expelled unef peacekeepers from the sinai peninsula , established a military presence at sharm el-sheikh , and announced a blockade of the straits , prompting israel to cite its casus belli in opening hostilities against egypt . china-vietnam war . during the 1979 sino-vietnamese war , china 's leader deng xiaoping told the united states that its plan to fight the vietnamese was revenge for vietnam 's toppling of the khmer rouge regime of cambodia , an ally of china . however chinese nationalists have argued that the real casus belli was vietnam 's poor treatment of its ethnic chinese population , as well as suspicion of vietnam trying to consolidate cambodia with soviet backing . . 1982 israeli invasion of lebanon . the cited by israel for its june 1982 1982 lebanon war was the attempted assassination of the israeli ambassador in london , which the israeli government blamed on the palestinian liberation organization . sachar , howard m . : a history of israel from the rise of zionism to our time , alfred a . knopf 1996 , , page 904 . a possible invasion plan had been prepared in advance by israel . '' as early as january 1982 , therefore , with begin 's approval , sharon paid a secret visit to beirut . by the following month . operational plans for the offensive were well advanced . israeli liaison officers repeatedly visited beirut to coordinate strategy with the phalange . in the end , the lebanon expedition would be the most thoroughly prepared campaign in israel 's history . '' – sachar , a history of israel , p . 903 . . invasion of panama . when the united states invaded panama in 1989 , president george h.w . bush cited '' democracy '' as the second casus belli to justify the operation . . war on terror . the for the bush administration 's conceptual war on terror , which resulted in the 2001 afghanistan war , was the september 11 attacks in 2001 on the world trade center in new york city , the pentagon in arlington , virginia , and the intended attack on the united states capitol in washington , d.c . 2003 invasion of iraq . image : powell-anthrax-vial.jpg thumb 240px february 5 , 2003 – u.s . secretary of state colin powell holding a model vial of anthrax while giving the presentation to the un security council . when the united states invaded iraq in 2003 , it cited iraq 's non-compliance with the terms of cease-fire agreement for the 1990–1991 gulf war , as well as planning in the 1993 attempted assassination of former president george h . w . bush and firing on coalition aircraft enforcing the no-fly zones as its stated . cited by the presidency of george w . bush was saddam hussein 's weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) program . the administration claimed that iraq had not conformed with its obligation to disarm under past un resolutions , and that saddam hussein was actively attempting to acquire a nuclear weapons capability as well as enhance an existing arsenal of chemical and biological weapons . secretary of state colin powell addressed a plenary session of the united nations security council on february 5 , 2003 citing these reasons as justification for military action . since-declassified national intelligence estimates ( nie 's ) indicate that any certainty may have been overstated in justification of armed intervention ; the extent , origin and intent of these overstatements can not be conclusively determined from the nie . . annexation of crimea . after the annexation of crimea by the russian federation in 2014 , russian president vladimir putin mentioned that crimea and other regions '' were not part of ukraine '' after it was taken in the 18th century . the ethnic russian population in crimea and eastern ukraine has been seen as a casus belli for russia 's annexation . the foreign ministry claimed that ukraine tried to seize crimean government buildings , citing this as a casus belli .