Thomas Coventry, 1st Baron Coventry

education and early legal career . he entered balliol college , oxford , in 1592 , and the inner temple in 1594 , becoming bencher of the society in 1614 , reader in 1616 , and holding the office of treasurer from 1617 till 1621 . his exceptional legal abilities were rewarded early with official promotion . on 16 november 1616 he was made recorder of london in spite of francis bacon 's opposition , who , although allowing him to be '' a well trained and an honest man , '' objected that he was '' bred by my lord coke and seasoned in his ways . '' spedding 's bacon , vi . 97 . on 14 march 1617 he was appointed solicitor general and was knighted . political and judicial career . he was returned for droitwich to the parliament of 1621 ; and on 11 january in that year was made attorney-general . he took part in the proceedings against bacon for corruption , and was manager for the house of commons in the impeachment of edward floyd for insulting the elector and electress palatine . on 1 november 1625 he was made lord keeper of the great seal ; in this capacity he delivered charles i 's reprimand to the commons on 9 march 1626 , when he declared that '' liberty of counsel '' alone belonged to them and not '' liberty of control . '' on 10 april 1628 he received the title of baron coventry of aylesborough in worcestershire . at the opening of parliament in 1628 he threatened that the king would use his prerogative if further thwarted in the matter of supplies . in the subsequent debates , however , while strongly supporting the king 's prerogative against the claims of the parliament to executive power , he favoured a policy of moderation and compromise . he defended the right of the council in special circumstances to commit people to prison without showing cause , and to issue general warrants . he disapproved of the king 's sudden dissolution of parliament , and agreed to the liberation on bail of the seven imprisoned members on condition of their giving security for their good behaviour . he showed less subservience than bacon to the duke of buckingham , and his resistance to the latter 's pretensions to the office of lord high constable greatly incensed the duke . buckingham taunted coventry with having gained his place by his favour ; coventry replied , '' did i conceive i had my place by your favour , i would presently unmake myself by returning the seal to his majesty . '' hacket 's life of bishop williams , ii . 19 . after this defiance buckingham 's sudden death alone probably prevented coventry 's displacement . he passed sentence of death on lord audley in 1631 , drafted and enforced the proclamation of 20 june 1632 ordering the country gentlemen to leave london , and in 1634 joined in william laud 's attack on the earl of portland for peculation . the same year , in an address to the judges , he supported the proposed levy of ship money on the inland as well as the maritime counties on the plea of the necessity of effectually arming , '' so that they might not be enforced to fight , '' '' the wooden walls '' being in his opinion '' the best walls of this kingdom . '' rushworth ( 1680 ) , part ii . vol i . 294 . he voted in star chamber in 1633 to remove the irish judge lord sarsfield from office for corruption , censuring him severely for hearing a murder case in private and for bullying the jury into returning a guilty verdict . crawford , jon g . a star chamber court in ireland - the court of castle chamber 1571-1641 four courts press dublin 2005 in the star chamber coventry was one of john lilburne 's judges in 1637 , but he generally showed conspicuous moderation , inclining to leniency in the cases of richard chambers in 1629 for seditious speeches , and of henry sherfield in 1632 for breaking painted glass in a church . he prevented also the hanging of men for resistance to impressment , and pointed out its illegality , since the men were not subject to martial law . while contributing thirty horse to the scottish expedition in 1638 , and lending the king £10,000 in 1639 , he gave no support to the forced loan levied upon the city in the latter year . summary . lord coventry held the great seal for nearly fifteen years ( 1625–40 ) , and was enabled to collect a large fortune . he was an able judge , and he issued some important orders in chancery , probably alluded to by wood , who ascribes to him a tract on '' the fees of all law officers '' . anthony wood , athenae oxonienses ii . 650 . bulstrode whitelocke accuses him of mediocrity , but his contemporaries in general have united in extolling his judicial ability , his quick despatch of business and his sound and sterling character . clarendon in particular praises his statesmanship , and compares his capacity with lord strafford 's , adding , however , that he seldom spoke in the council except on legal business and had little influence in political affairs ; to the latter circumstance he owed his exceptional popularity . he describes him as having '' in the plain way of speaking and delivery a strange power of making himself believed , '' as a man of '' not only firm gravity but a severity and even some morosity , '' as '' rather exceedingly liked than passionately loved . '' . family . lord coventry was the eldest son of sir thomas coventry , judge of the common pleas ( a descendant of john coventry , lord mayor of london in the reign of henry vi ) , and of margaret jeffreys of earls croome , or croome d'abitot , in worcestershire . he married : 1 . sarah , ( sister of sebright baronets of besford in worcestershire , and daughter of john sebright by anne bullingham ) , by whom besides a daughter he had one son , : thomas , who succeeded him as 2nd baron , and 2 . elizabeth , daughter of john aldersley of spurstow , cheshire , and widow of william pitchford , by whom he had four more sons and four more daughters : : john , father of sir john coventry : francis , : henry , secretary of state ( 1672–1680 ) and : william coventry , the statesman ; : anne married sir william savile , 3rd baronet ( 1629 ) and then thomas chicheley of wimpole ( 1645 ) : mary married sir henry frederick thynne , 1st baronet : margaret married sir anthony ashley-cooper , later earl of shaftesbury : dorothy married sir john pakington , 2nd baronet . burke 's peerage ( 1939 edition ) . thomas coventry , 5th baron ( died 1699 ) , was created earl of coventry in 1697 with a special limitation , on failure of his own male issue , to that of walter , youngest brother of the lord keeper , from whom the present earl of coventry is descended . references . attribution