Magic and religion

magical practices in prehistory . anthropological and psychological perspectives . it is a postulate of modern anthropology , at least since early 1930s , that there is complete continuity between magic and religion . ernst cassirer ( 1944 ) an essay on man , pt.ii , ch.7 myth and religion , pp.122-3 . quotation : robert ranulph marett ( 1932 ) faith , hope and charity in primitive religion , in gifford lectures . lecture ii hope . quotation : . functional differences between religion and magic . early sociological interpretations of magic by marcel mauss and henri hubert emphasized the social conditions in which the phenomenon of magic develops . pasi , m . 2006 . '' magic '' . in kocku von stuckrad ( ed . ) the brill dictionary of ancient religion . volume iii . m-r . leiden and boston , brill . 1134-1140 . according to them , religion is the expression of a social structure and serves to maintain the cohesion of a community ( religion is therefore public ) and magic is an individualistic action ( and therefore private ) . ralph merrifield , the british archaeologist credited as producing the first full-length volume dedicated to a material approach to magic , houlbrook , c . and armitage , n . 'introduction : the materiality of the materiality of magic ' , in houlbrook , c . and armitage , n . ( eds . ) the materiality of magic : an artefactual investigation into ritual practices and popular beliefs.oxford and philadelphia , oxbow books . 1-13 . defined the differences between religion and magic : '' 'religion ' is used to indicate the belief in supernatural or spiritual beings ; 'magic ' , the use of practices intended to bring occult forces under control and so to influence events ; 'ritual ' , prescribed or customary behaviour that may be religious , if it is intended to placate or win favour of supernatural beings , magical if it is intended to operate through impersonal forces of sympathy or by controlling supernatural beings , or social if its purpose is to reinforce a social organisation or facilitate social intercourse '' . merrifield , r . 1987 . the archaeology of ritual and magic . london , guild publishing . in 1991 henk versnel argued that magic and religion function in different ways and that these can be broadly defined in four areas : intention - magic is employed to achieve clear and immediate goals for an individual , whereas religion is less purpose-motivated and has its sights set on longer-term goals ; attitude – magic is manipulative as the process is in the hands of the user , “ instrumental coercive manipulation ” , opposed to the religious attitude of “ personal and supplicative negotiation ” ; action – magic is a technical exercise that often requires professional skills to fulfil an action , whereas religion is not dependent upon these factors but the will and sentiment of the gods ; social – the goals of magic run counter to the interests of a society ( in that personal gain for an individual gives them an unfair advantage over peers ) , whereas religion has more benevolent and positive social functions . versnel , h . s . 1991 . “ some reflections on the relationship magic-religion . ” numen 38 ( 2 ) . 177-195 . this separation of the terms 'religion ' and 'magic ' in a functional sense is disputed . it has been argued that abandoning the term magic in favour of discussing '' belief in spiritual beings '' will help to create a more meaningful understanding of all associated ritual practices . otto , b-c . 2013 . '' towards historicizing 'magic ' in antiquity '' , numen 60 . 308-347 . however using the word 'magic ' alongside 'religion ' is one method of trying to understand the supernatural world , even if some other term can eventually take its place . . religious practices and magic . both magic and religion contain rituals . most cultures have or have had in their past some form of magical tradition that recognizes a shamanistic interconnectedness of spirit . this may have been long ago , as a folk tradition that died out with the establishment of a major world religion , such as judaism , christianity , islam or buddhism , or it may still co-exist with that world religion . magic and religion coptic christians were writing magical spells from the 1st to 12th centuries . . names of the gods . there is a long-standing belief in the power of true names , this often descends from the magical belief that knowing a being 's true name grants power over it . if names have power , then knowing the name of a god regarded as supreme in a religion should grant the greatest power of all . this belief is reflected in traditional wicca , where the names of the goddess and the horned god - the two supreme deities in wicca - are usually held as a secret to be revealed only to initiates . this belief is also reflected in ancient judaism , which used the tetragrammaton ( yhwh , usually translated as '' lord '' in small caps ) to refer to god in the tanakh . the same belief is seen in hinduism , but with different conclusions ; rather , attaining transcendence and the power of god is seen as a good thing . thus , some hindus chant the name of their favorite deities as often as possible , the most common being krishna . . magic and abrahamic religion . magic and abrahamic religions have had a somewhat checkered past . the king james version of the bible included the famous translation '' thou shalt not suffer a witch to live '' ( exodus 22:18 ) , and saul is rebuked by god for seeking advice from a diviner who could contact spirits . on the other hand , seemingly magical signs are documented in the bible : for example , both the staff of pharaoh 's sorcerers as well as the staff of moses and aaron could be turned into snakes ( exodus 7:8-13 ) . however , as scott noegel points out , the critical difference between the magic of pharaoh 's magicians and the non-magic of moses is in the means by which the staff becomes a snake . for the pharaoh 's magicians , they employed '' their secret arts '' whereas moses merely throws down his staff to turn it into a snake . to an ancient egyptian , the startling difference would have been that moses neither employed secret arts nor magical words . in the torah , noegel points out that yhwh does not need magical rituals to act . the words 'witch ' and 'witchcraft ' appear in some english versions of the bible . one verse that is probably responsible for more deaths of suspected witches than any other passage from the hebrew scriptures ( old testament ) is exodus 22:18 . in the king james version , this reads : '' thou shalt not suffer a witch to live . '' the precise meaning of the hebrew word mechshepha ( root kashaph ) here translated as 'witch ' and in some other modern versions , 'sorceress ' , is uncertain . in the septuagint it was translated as pharmakeia , meaning 'pharmacy ' , and on this basis , reginald scot claimed in the 16th century that 'witch ' was an incorrect translation and poisoners were intended . reginald scot ( c . 1580 ) the discoverie of witchcraft booke vi ch . 1 .