Oristano

history . oristano was previously known by the byzantines as aristanis ( in byzantine greek : αριστάνις ) , and founded close to the ancient phoenician settlement of othoca ( now santa giusta ) . it acquired importance in 1070 , when , as a result of the frequent saracen attacks , archbishop torcotorio made it the seat of the bishopric , which was previously in the nearby coastal town of tharros . it also became the capital of the '' judicate '' ( equivalent to a kingdom ) of arborea . consequently , fortifications were designed , but the building thereof went on until judge mariano ii rose to power . in medieval times oristano vied for power over the whole island of sardinia , and therefore waged wars against the other sardinian kingdoms which culminated in the attempt to conquer the whole island during the reign ( 1347–75 ) of mariano iv and that of his son hugh iii ( 1376–1383 ) and his daughter eleanor ( 1383–1404 ) . the judicate of arborea held out to be the last sardinian kingdom to cease to exist in 1420 , about 10 years after the battle of sanluri . it was transformed in marchesato by the aragonese and conquered , following a revolt by the last marquess leonardo alagon , by the catalan troops of the kingdom of aragon , in 1478 after the battle of macomer . thereafter , oristano 's history was that of the island of sardinia , characterised by the aragonese-spanish ( until 1708 ) and piedmontese ( from 1720 ) dominations , and then the unification of italy . in april 1921 , david cova , emilio lussu , camillo bellieni and other sardinian veterans of world war i founded in the city the sardinian action party . main sights . the tower of st . christophoros , otherwise known as tower of mariano ii , was built in 1290 , is tall and the most striking remaining evidence of the old walls built at the time of the judicate , as it was one of the main gates thereof . torrione ( '' big tower '' ) of portixedda . st . mary 's cathedral ( 1130 ) was rebuilt during the reign of mariano ii after being destroyed in a siege . of the original structure of mariano , only parts of the apse and base of the campanile are left , as well as the gothic chapel of the rimedio , which houses some medieval sculptures . parts of a more ancient byzantine edifice can be seen in the court . to the 17th century renovation belongs the chapel of the archivietto ( '' chapel of the small archive '' ) . the current baroque style is largely from the 19th-century restoration . it has been supposed that the cathedral was used for the burials of the judges and their families , but the subsequent dominations have deleted all traces of them . in the interior is a wooden statue of the annunziata , attributed to nino pisano . the church of st . francis of assisi was built around 1200 and is currently in neo-classical style . therewithin is the christ of nicodemus , a wooden sculpture believed to be the work of valencian masters , dating back to the 14th century . the franciscan church of santa chiara ( consecrated in 1428 ) is an edifice in french-gothic style with a single nave and a square apse . the church and cloister of the carmine is one of the best examples of baroque-roccoco architecture in oristano . the church of saint sebastian is the only medieval extramural church , i.e . it is located outside the walls . the church of saint dominic ( san domenico ) was built in 1634 at the initiative of friar pietro flores and financially supported by local nobleman baldassarre dedoni . citizens also made donations in exchange for of floor space for a tomb therewithin . the building is a rectangularly-shaped chamber with two chapels formed in its right side wall : one of them is dedicated to saint vincent and the other one to the name of jesus . most notably , it has a wood retable that served as the main altar and includes several niches dedicated to saint dominic and other saints . upon the suppression of religious orders in 1832 the dominicans , who had been in charge until then , bequeathed the church to the archconfraternity of the saint name of jesus . it was thereafter refurbished several times , deconsecrated and currently serves as an auditorium for congresses and concerts . in the village of massama is the small pre-romanesque church called oratory of the souls , showing influences from the visigothic art of the 8th century . government . culture . sa sartiglia and other events . sa sartiglia , otherwise known at its inception as sartilla , is an equestrian tournament held in oristano for the past 500 years on carnival sunday and mardi gras . the tournament on sunday is organized by the corporation ( gremio ) of farmers , whereas that on mardi gras is organised by the gremio of carpenters . it has arguably an ancient castillan origin . researchers m . falchi and m . zucca found a manuscript dating the first tournament to 1543 , whereas pau , a late local historian , believed it originated in oristano before the spaniards set foot on the island . in fact , in a letter written to an english friar in the 14th century , st . catherine of siena stated that the judge of arborea could provide two galleys and one thousand horsemen to fight in a crusade for ten years . while being far from conclusive evidence that the tournament had already been , or was about to be held , this letter is certainly a testament to the importance of horse-breeding in oristano and its surrounding countryside at the time . the name '' sartiglia '' comes from sortija which , in turn , evolved from the latin word sorticola , the diminutive form of sors which does not only mean fate and fortune , but also '' ring '' . the ring is a tin star provided with a hole at its centre , hanging from a ribbon strung above horseman 's height across the street near the cathedral , at which masked horsemen aim with their swords on steeds galloping at breath-taking speed , after being announced by trumpets and drums and having gathered pace down a route , covered with sand , snaking across the town centre . the number of stars caught on each day is a sign of the wealth that the harvest and carpentry work will bring to the corporations . at the end of sa sartiglia , elsewhere within the old walls , another sand covered route will be trodden by horses ridden by those same masked horsemen and women showing their stunning prowess , while engaging in all sorts of acrobatics on two and three galloping steeds at a time . this is called la pariglia , and ends at sunset . the leader of both trials is called su componidori , meaning '' the one who marshals '' . he is chosen by the members of the corporations , who do not disclose his name until candlemas , when su majorale announces it directly to the appointee and a careful selection of the horses as well as adequate practice can start . he is neither a man , nor a woman but androgynous , much akin to the land and , at the end of the tournament , blesses bystanders and the town with the '' little doll of may '' ( sa pippia ' e maiu ) , a bunch of flowers swaddled in a ribbon , believed to pre-date the tournament itself , followed by the other horsemen at a canter first , and then alone , riding with his back on his galloping steed 's , face up gazing at the heavens . transport . oristano can be reached by train from sardinia 's ports of olbia and porto torres , and the island 's main cities cagliari and sassari . from oristano all villages of the province can be reached by buses departing the bus station close to centrally-located piazza g.manno . moreover , a private concern provides a twice-daily bus service to and from cagliari elmas airport . the journey takes approximately 2 hours . oristano is served by the fenosu airport , far from the city , and by a cargo sea port . the airport isn ’ t operating anymore . geography . climate . oristano has a subtropical mediterranean climate with hot summers and mild winters . as manifests a mediterranean climate , precipitation patterns are highly seasonally defined , with the vast majority falling during winter . summers are still retaining warmth and humidity during night in spite of the dry weather . twin towns – sister cities . oristano is twinned with : ciutadella de menorca , spain , since 1991 garden city , kansas , united states . see also . arborea roman catholic archdiocese of oristano . references . ; bibliography ; notes . external links . oristano official website