Roy Eldridge

biography . early life . eldridge was born on the north side of pittsburgh , pennsylvania on january 30 , 1911 , to parents alexander , a wagon teamster , and blanche , a gifted pianist with a talent for reproducing music by ear , a trait that eldridge claimed to have inherited from her . chilton , pp . 4–5 . eldridge began playing the piano at the age of five ; he claims to have been able to play coherent blues licks at even this young age . chilton , p . 5 . the young eldridge looked up to his older brother , joe eldridge ( born joseph eldridge , 1908 , north side of pittsburgh , pennsylvania , died march 5 , 1952 ) , particularly because of joe 's diverse musical talents on the violin , alto saxophone , and clarinet . chilton , pp . 5–6 . roy took up the drums at the age of six , taking lessons and playing locally . chilton , p . 6 . joe recognized his brother 's natural talent on the bugle , which roy played in a local church band , and tried to convince roy to play the trumpet . when roy began to play drums in his brother 's band , joe soon convinced him to pick up the trumpet , but roy made little effort to gain proficiency on the instrument at first . chilton , p . 7 . it was not until the death of their mother , when roy was eleven , and his father 's subsequent remarriage that roy began practicing more rigorously , locking himself in his room for hours , and particularly honing the instrument 's upper register . chilton , p . 8 . from an early age , roy lacked proficiency at sight-reading , a gap in his musical education that would affect him for much of his early career , but he could replicate melodies by ear very effectively . chilton , p . 9 . . career . . early career and traveling bands . eldridge led and played in a number of bands during his early years , moving extensively throughout the american midwest . eldridge , ( david ) roy in oxford music online gunther schuller , oxford music online . retrieved march 26 , 2012 . he absorbed the influence of saxophonists benny carter and coleman hawkins , setting himself the task of learning hawkins 's 1926 solo on '' the stampede '' ( by fletcher henderson 's orchestra ) in developing an equivalent trumpet style . lyttelton , p . 410 . eldridge left home after being expelled from high school in ninth grade , joining a traveling show at the age of sixteen ; the show soon folded , however , and he was left in youngstown , ohio . chilton , pp . 12–13 . he was then picked up by the '' greater sheesley carnival , '' but returned to pittsburgh after witnessing acts of racism in cumberland , maryland that significantly disturbed him . chilton , pp . 14–16 . eldridge soon found work leading a small band in the traveling '' rock dinah '' show , chilton , p . 16 . his performance therein leading swing-era bandleader count basie to recall young roy eldridge as '' the greatest trumpet i 'd ever heard in my life . '' basie , quoted in chilton , p . 18 . eldridge continued playing with similar traveling groups until returning home to pittsburgh at the age of 17 . chilton , p . 22 . at the age of 20 , eldridge led a band in pittsburgh , billed as '' roy elliott and his palais royal orchestra '' , balliett , p . 151 . the agent intentionally changing eldridge 's name because '' he thought it more classy . '' eldridge , quoted in chilton , p . 22 . roy left this position to try out for the orchestra of horace henderson , younger brother of famed new york city bandleader fletcher henderson , and joined the ensemble , generally referred to as the fletcher henderson stompers , under the direction of horace henderson . chilton , p . 25 . eldridge then played with a number of other territory bands , staying for a short while in detroit before joining speed webb 's band which , having garnered a degree of movie publicity , began a tour of the midwest . chilton , pp . 32–34 , 37 . many of the members of webb 's band , annoyed by the leader 's lack of dedication , left to form a practically identical group with eldridge as bandleader . chilton , pp . 39–40 . the ensemble was short-lived , and eldridge soon moved to milwaukee , where he took part in a celebrated cutting contest with trumpet player jabbo smith , with whom he later became good friends . chilton , pp . 40–42 . . new york and chicago . eldridge moved to new york in november 1930 , playing in various bands in the early 1930s , including a number of harlem dance bands with cecil scott , elmer snowden , charlie johnson , and teddy hill . robinson , p . 691 . it was during this time that eldridge received his nickname , 'little jazz ' , from ellington saxophonist otto hardwick , who was amused by the incongruity between eldridge 's raucous playing and his short stature . at this time , eldridge was also making records and radio broadcasts under his own name . he laid down his first recorded solos with teddy hill in 1935 , which gained almost immediate popularity . for a brief time , he also led his own band at the reputed famous door nightclub . eldridge recorded a number of small group sides with singer billie holiday in july 1935 , including '' what a little moonlight can do '' and '' miss brown to you '' , employing a dixieland-influenced improvisation style . oliphant , pp . 343–44 . in october 1935 , eldridge joined fletcher henderson 's orchestra , playing lead trumpet and occasionally singing . until he left the group in early september 1936 , eldridge was henderson 's featured soloist , his talent highlighted by such numbers as '' christopher columbus '' and '' blue lou . '' oliphant , pp . 51–52 . his rhythmic power to swing a band was a dynamic trademark of the jazz of the time . it has been said that '' from the mid-thirties onwards , he had superseded louis armstrong as the exemplar of modern 'hot ' trumpet playing '' . lyttelton , p . 414 . in the fall of 1936 , eldridge moved to chicago to form an octet with older brother joe eldridge playing saxophone and arranging . the ensemble boasted nightly broadcasts and made recordings that featured his extended solos , including '' after you 've gone '' and '' wabash stomp . '' eldridge , fed up with the racism he had encountered in the music industry , quit playing in 1938 to study radio engineering . he was back to playing in 1939 , when he formed a ten-piece band that gained a residency at new york 's arcadia ballroom . . with gene krupa 's orchestra . in april 1941 , after receiving many offers from white swing bands , eldridge joined gene krupa 's orchestra , and was successfully featured with rookie singer anita o'day . robinson , p . 692 . in accepting this position , eldridge became one of the first black musicians to become a permanent member of a white big band . oliphant , p . 326 . eldridge was instrumental in changing the course of krupa 's big band from schmaltz to jazz . olipihant , pp . 304–305 . the group 's cover of jimmy dorsey 's '' green eyes , '' previously an entirely orchestral work , was transformed into jazz via eldridge 's playing ; critic dave oliphant notes that eldridge '' lifted '' the tune '' to a higher level of intensity . '' oliphant , p . 307 . eldridge and o'day were featured in a number of recordings , including the novelty hit '' let me off uptown '' and '' knock me a kiss '' . one of eldridge 's best known recorded solos is on a rendition of hoagy carmichael 's tune , '' rockin ' chair '' , arranged by benny carter as something like a concerto for eldridge . oliphant , p . 308 . jazz historian gunther schuller referred to eldridge 's solo on '' rockin ' chair '' as '' a strong and at times tremendously moving performance '' , although he disapproved of the '' opening and closing cadenzas , the latter unforgivably aping the corniest of operatic cadenza traditions . '' schuller , quoted in oliphant , p . 308 . critic and author dave oliphant describes eldridge 's unique tone on '' rockin ' chair '' as '' a raspy , buzzy tone , which enormously heightens his playing 's intensity , emotionally and dynamically '' and writes that it '' was also meant to hurt a little , to be disturbing , to express unfathomable stress . '' after complaints from eldridge that o'day was upstaging him , the band broke up when krupa was jailed for marijuana possession in july 1943 . o'day , pp . 102–123 . . touring , freelancing , and small group work . after leaving krupa 's band , eldridge freelanced in new york during 1943 before joining artie shaw 's band in 1944 . owing to racial incidents that he faced while playing in shaw 's band , he left to form a big band , but this eventually proved financially unsuccessful , and eldridge returned to small group work . in the postwar years , he became part of the group which toured under the jazz at the philharmonic banner . and became one of the stalwarts of the tours . the jatp 's organiser norman granz said that roy eldridge typified the spirit of jazz . '' every time he 's on he does the best he can , no matter what the conditions are . and roy is so intense about everything , so that it 's far more important to him to dare , to try to achieve a particular peak , even if he falls on his ass in the attempt , than it is to play safe . that 's what jazz is all about . '' quoted in steve voce , obituary norman granz , the independent , november 26 , 2001 . retrieved november 20 , 2008 . eldridge moved to paris in 1950 while on tour with benny goodman , before returning to new york in 1951 to lead a band at the birdland jazz club . he additionally performed from 1952 until the early 1960s in small groups with coleman hawkins , ella fitzgerald and earl hines among others , and also began to record for granz at this time . eldridge also toured with ella fitzgerald from late 1963 until march 1965 and with count basie from july until september 1966 before returning to freelance playing and touring at festivals . in 1960 , eldridge participated , alongside abbey lincoln , charles mingus , eric dolphy , kenny dorham and others , in recordings by the jazz artist 's guild , a short-lived grouping formed by mingus and max roach as a reaction to the perceived commercialism of the newport festival . referred to in the liner notes of the lp by nat hentoff , quoted here : these resulted in the newport jazz rebels lp . racial barriers . as the featured soloist in artie shaw and gene krupa 's bands , eldridge was something of an exception , as black musicians in the 1930s were not allowed to appear in public with white bands . artie shaw commented on the difficulty roy had in his band , noting that '' droves of people would ask him for his autograph at the end of the night , but later , on the bus , he would n't be able to get off and buy a hamburger with the guys in the band . '' krupa , on at least one occasion , spent several hours in jail and paid fines for starting a fistfight with a restaurant manager who refused to let eldridge eat with the rest of the band . '' gene krupa fined '' , cleveland gazette , january 3 , 1942 . . late life . eldridge became the leader of the house band at jimmy ryan 's jazz club on manhattan 's west 54th street for several years , beginning in 1969 . although ryan 's was primarily a dixieland venue , eldridge tried to combine the traditional dixieland style with his own more brash and speedy playing . eldridge was incapacitated by a stroke in 1970 , but continued to lead the group at ryan 's soon after and performing occasionally as a singer , drummer and pianist . wilson , '' roy eldridge 's ambition '' . writer michael zirpolo , seeing eldridge at ryan 's in the late 1970s , noted , '' i was amazed that he still could pop out those piercing high notes , but he did , with frequency.i worried about his health , because the veins at his temples would bulge alarmingly . '' zirpolo , p . 54 . as leader at ryan 's , eldridge was noted for his occasional hijinx , including impromptu '' amateur night '' sessions during which he 'd invite inexperienced players on stage to lead his band , often for comedic effect and to give himself a break . zirpolo , p . 55 . in 1971 , eldridge was inducted into the down beat down beat . after suffering a heart attack in 1980 , eldridge gave up playing . he died at the age of 78 at the franklin general hospital in valley stream , new york , three weeks after the death of his wife , viola . . influences . according to roy , his first major influence on the trumpet was rex stewart , who played in a band with young roy and his brother joe in pittsburgh . chilton , p . 10 . but unlike many trumpet players , the young eldridge did not derive most of his inspiration from other trumpeters , but from saxophonists . roy first developed his solo style by playing along to recordings of coleman hawkins and benny carter , and later said that , after hearing these musicians , '' i resolved to play my trumpet like a sax . '' chilton , pp . 11–12 . following these musicians was evidently beneficial to roy , who got one of his first jobs by auditioning with an imitation of coleman hawkin 's solo on fletcher henderson 's '' stampede '' of 1926 . giddins , p . 69 . eldridge additionally purports to have studied the styles of white cornettist red nichols and theodore '' cuban '' bennett , whose style was also very much influenced by the saxophone . chilton , p . 14 . eldridge , by his own report , was not significantly influenced by trumpeter louis armstrong during his early years , but did undertake a major study of armstrong 's style in 1932 . . style . eldridge was very versatile on his horn , not only quick and articulate with the low to middle registers , but the high registers as well ; jazz critic gary giddins described eldridge as having a '' flashy , passionate , many-noted style that rampaged freely through three octaves , rich with harmonic ideas impervious to the fastest tempos . '' eldridge is frequently grouped among those jazz trumpeters of the '30s and '40s , including red allen , hot lips page , shad collins , and rex stewart who eschewed louis armstrong 's lyrical style for a rougher and more frantic style . giddins , p . 70 . of these players , critic gary giddins names eldridge '' the most emotionally compelling , versatile , rugged , and far-reaching . '' giddins , p . 71 . eldridge was also lauded for the intensity of his playing ; ella fitzgerald once said : '' he 's got more soul in one note that a lot of people could get into the whole song . '' the high register lines that eldridge employed were one of many prominent features of his playing , and eldridge expressed a penchant for the expressive ability of the instrument 's highest notes , frequently incorporating them into his solos . eldridge was also known for his fast style of playing , often executing blasts of rapid double-time notes followed by a return to standard time . his rapid-fire style was noted by jazz trumpeter bill coleman when roy was as young as seventeen ; when asked by coleman how he achieved his speed , eldridge replied : '' well , i 've taken the tops off my valves and now they really fly . '' quoted in chilton , p . 1 . eldridge attributes these virtuosic elements of his style to a rigorous practice regime , particularly as a teen : '' i used to spend eight , nine hours a day practicing every day . '' eldridge , quoted in chilton , p . 2 . critic j . bradford robinson sums up his style of playing as exhibiting '' a keen awareness of harmony , an unprecedented dexterity , particularly in the highest register , and a full , slightly overblown timbre , which crackled at moments of high tension . '' giddins also notes that eldridge '' never had a pure or golden tone ; his sound was always underscored by a vocal rasp , an urgent , human roughness . '' as for eldridge 's singing style , jazz critic whitney balliett describes eldridge as '' a fine , scampish jazz singer , with a light , hoarse voice and a highly rhythmic attack , '' comparing him to american jazz trumpeter and vocalist hot lips page . balliett , p . 153 . . musical impact . eldridge 's fast playing and extensive development of the instrument 's upper register were heavy influences on dizzy gillespie , who , along with charlie parker , brought bebop into existence . tracks such as '' heckler 's hop '' , from eldridge 's small group recordings with alto saxophonist and clarinettist scoops carry , in which eldridge 's use of the high register is particularly emphasized , were especially influential for dizzy . oliphant , p . 388 . dizzy got the chance to engage in numerous jam sessions and '' trumpet battles '' with eldridge at new york 's minton 's playhouse in the early 1940s . robinson , pp . 692–93 . referring to eldridge , dizzy went so far as to say : '' he was the messiah of our generation . '' gillespie , quoted in giddins , p . 70 . eldridge first heard dizzy on bandleader lionel hampton 's 1939 recording of '' hot mallets '' , and later recalled : '' i heard this trumpet solo and i thought it was me . then i found out it was dizzy . '' eldridge , quoted in wilson , '' roy eldridge 's ambition '' . a careful listening to bebop standards , such as the song '' bebop '' , reveals how much eldridge influenced this genre of jazz . eldridge also claimed that he was not impressed with dizzy 's bop solo style , saying once to bebop trumpeter howard mcghee after jamming with dizzy at the heat wave club in harlem : '' i do n't dig it.i really do n't understand him . '' eldridge , quoted in deveaux , p . 73 . although frequently touted as the bridge between louis armstrong and dizzy gillespie , eldridge always insisted : '' i was never trying to be a bridge between armstrong and something . '' wilson , '' roy eldridge : jazz trumpeter for all decades '' . other significant musicians influenced by roy eldridge include shorty sherock of the bob crosby orchestra , oliphant , p . 294 . and bebop pioneers howard mcghee and fats navarro . deveaux , p . 66 . . personality . eldridge was famously considered competitive by those who knew him with pianist chuck folds saying : '' i ca n't imagine anyone more competitive than he roy was in the 1970s . i 've never met anyone scrappier than roy , ever , ever , ever . '' folds , quoted in chilton , p . 3 . eldridge fully admitted to his competitive spirit , saying '' i was just trying to outplay anybody , and to outplay them my way . '' eldridge , quoted in wilson , '' roy eldridge : jazz trumpeter for all decades '' . jazz trumpeter jonah jones reports that eldridge 's willingness to '' go anywhere and play against anyone '' even led to a cutting contest with his own hero , rex stewart . jones , quoted in chilton , p . 30 . roy could also become antagonistic , particularly in the face of those he deemed racist . chilton , p . 3 . many noted roy 's constant restlessness with saxophonist billie bowen noting that roy '' could never , even as a youngster , sit down for more than a few minutes , he was always restless . '' bowen , quoted in chilton , p . 32 . eldridge is also said to have suffered from sporadic stage fright . he occasionally found himself in trouble with women which included an incident that involved his being forced to sell his trumpet temporarily in order to reclaim a portion of the money that had been stolen from him by a woman with whom he had drunkenly spent the night . chilton , p . 38 . roy is also said to have developed a fiery temper later in life according to clarinettist joe muranyi . muranyi worked with eldridge at ryan 's and has called eldridge 's temper '' mt . vesuvius to the fifth power . '' . discography . the big band of little jazz ( topaz , 1935–45 ) with dickie wells , benny goodman , benny carter , teddy wilson , gene krupa , john kirby after you 've gone ( decca/grp , 1936–46 ) with ike quebec , cecil payne , billy taylor , sahib shihab , wilbur de paris heckler 's hop ( hep , 1936–1939 ) with gene krupa , benny goodman , helen ward roy eldridge 1943–1944 ( classics ) ; 1945–1947 ( classics ) nuts ( disques vogue , 1950 ) with zoot sims , dick hyman , pierre michelot french cooking ( vogue , 1950–51 ) with raymond fol , barney spieler rockin ' chair ( clef , 1951–52 , 1955 ) dale 's wail ( clef , 1953 , 1955 ) the strolling mr . eldridge with the oscar peterson trio ( clef , 1954 ) little jazz ( clef , 1954 ) roy and diz ( clef , 1954 ) with dizzy gillespie swingin ' on the town ( verve , 1960 ) the nifty cat ( new world ) with budd johnson , benny morton , nat pierce oscar peterson and roy eldridge roy eldridge in paris ( vogue , 1950/51 ) roy 's got rhythm ( emarcy , 1951 ) little jazz ( 1957 ; 7 '' ; emarcy mercury ) ( plus charlie shavers , joe thomas , jonah jones & emmett berry ) ( prebop jazz/swing style ) the coleman hawkins , roy eldridge , pete brown , jo jones all stars at newport ( verve , 1957 ) the complete verve roy eldridge studio sessions by roy eldridge ( verve-kompilation ) '' newport rebels '' ( candid , 1960 ) the trumpet kings meet joe turner ( pablo , 1974 ) with big joe turner , dizzy gillespie , sweets edison and clark terry roy eldridge and oscar peterson ( ojc , 1974 ) duo-aufnahmen little jazz and the jimmy ryan all-stars ( pablo , 1975 ) with dick katz , major holley happy time ( pablo , 1975 ) jazz maturity.where it 's coming from ( pablo , 1975 ) oscar peterson and the trumpet kings - jousts ( pablo , 1975 ) the trumpet kings at montreux '75 ( pablo ) with dizzy gillespie , clark terry the tatum group masterpieces with art tatum , john simmons ( bass ) , alvin stoller ( drums ) ( 1955 , pablo 1975 ) what it 's all about ( pablo , 1976 ) with milt jackson , budd johnson montreux 1977 ( pablo , 1977 ) with oscar peterson , niels-henning ørsted pedersen , bobby durham roy eldridge & vic dickenson ( storyville , 1978 ) with tommy flanagan heckler 's hop ( hep , 1995 ) . as sideman . with count basie count basie at newport ( verve , 1957 ) basie swingin ' voices singin ' ( abc-paramount , 1966 ) broadway basie's.way ( command , 1966 ) count basie jam session at the montreux jazz festival 1975 ( pablo , 1975 ) with ella fitzgerald ella at juan-les-pins ( verve , 1964 ) with coleman hawkins disorder at the border ( spotlite , 1952 1973 ) coleman hawkins and confrères ( verve , 1958 ) hawkins ! eldridge ! hodges ! alive ! at the village gate ! ( verve , 1962 ) with johnny hodges blues-a-plenty ( verve , 1958 ) not so dukish ( verve , 1958 ) triple play ( rca victor , 1967 ) with illinois jacquet swing 's the thing ( clef , 1956 ) with jo jones the main man ( pablo , 1977 ) with gene krupa and buddy rich the drum battle ( verve , 1952 1960 ) with anita o'day and the three sounds anita o'day & the three sounds ( verve , 1962 ) - 1 track with buddy tate buddy tate and his buddies ( chiaroscuro , 1973 ) with ben webster ben webster and associates ( verve , 1959 ) with lester young laughin ' to keep from cryin ' ( verve , 1958 ) with paul gonsalves mexican bandit meets pittsburgh pirate ( fantasy , 1973 ) . notes .