1910 in literature

events . january 8 – serialisation of gaston leroux 's novel the phantom of the opera ( le fantôme de l'opéra ) concludes in the paris newspaper le gaulois . april 20 – halley 's comet reappears after 76 years , and mark twain dies the day after the comet 's perihelion . in his autobiography , twain wrote , '' i came in with halley 's comet in 1835 . it 's coming again next year ( 1910 ) , and i expect to go out with it . the almighty has said no doubt , 'now here are these two unaccountable freaks ; they came in together , they must go out together . ' '' march – lesotho author thomas mofolo completes his novel chaka ; he leaves morija suddenly and it is not published . march 18 – the first movie version of mary shelley 's frankenstein ( 1818 ) is released in the u.s . by edison studios . one of the first horror films , it features unbilled the actor charles ogle as the monster . march 30 – william johnston and paul west 's novel the innocent murderers is published in new york city , as the first work of academic crime fiction . august 11 – the buenos aires convention is signed , providing for international recognition of copyright . september – g . k . chesterton 's fictional detective father brown makes a first u.k . appearance in the short story '' the blue cross '' in the story-teller magazine ( london ) , having previously appeared on june 23 in '' valentin follows a curious trail '' in the saturday evening post ( philadelphia ) . september 1 – herbert beerbohm tree 's elaborate revival of shakespeare 's henry viii opens in london . it will run for 254 consecutive performances . october – filippo tommaso marinetti 's first novel mafarka il futurista is cleared of obscenity charges . , p . 181 . fall – damon runyon begins working as a journalist on the new york american . unknown dates boris pasternak drops out of the moscow conservatory and begins to study law , moving on to study philosophy at the university of marburg . new books . fiction . c . r . ashbee – the building of thelema arnold bennett – clayhanger ( first volume in the eponymous trilogy – actually four books ) oskar braaten – kring fabrikken rhoda broughton – the devil and the deep sea john buchan – prester john ivan bunin – the village ( деревня , derévnya , originally published as novelet ( повесть ) ) gilbert cannan – devious ways dikran chökürian – hayreni dzayner ( հայրենի ձայներ ) colette – la vagabonde william t . cox – fearsome creatures of the lumberwoods walter de la mare – the return grazia deledda – sino al confine ( '' until the border '' ) jeffery farnol – the broad highway douglas morey ford – the raid of dover : a romance of the reign of woman : a.d . 1940 e . m . forster – howards end zane grey – the heritage of the desert gerhart hauptmann – der narr in christo emanuel quint ( the fool in christ , emanuel quint ) hermann hesse – gertrud gaston leroux – un homme dans la nuit hermann löns – der wehrwolf lu shi ' e – xin zhongguo ( 新中國 , new china ) iain maccormaic – dùn aluinn ( serialization ) thomas mofolo – pitseng natsume sōseki ( 夏目 漱石 ) – the gate ( mon 門 ) martin andersen nexø – pelle the conqueror ( final volume ) baroness orczy lady molly of scotland yard petticoat government john oxenham – a maid of the silver sea louis pergaud – de goupil à margot ( short stories ) aleksey remizov – the indefatigable cymbal rainer maria rilke – the notebooks of malte laurids brigge ( die aufzeichnungen des malte laurids brigge ) j.-h . rosny aîné – la mort de la terre fráňa šrámek – stříbrný vítr katherine thurston – max edgar wallace – the nine bears mary augusta ward – canadian born h.g . wells the history of mr polly the new machiavelli ( serialization ) jerzy żuławski – zwycięzca ( '' the conqueror '' ) , second of the trylogia księżycowa ( lunar trilogy ) . children and young people . victor appleton - tom swift and his motor cycle l . frank baum the emerald city of oz aunt jane 's nieces in society ( as edith van dyne ) thornton burgess – old mother west wind frances hodgson burnett – the secret garden grace james – japanese fairy tales rudyard kipling – rewards and fairies walter de la mare – the three mulla mulgars ( also the three royal monkeys ) john masefield – a book of discoveries lucy maud montgomery – kilmeny of the orchard e . nesbit – the magic city beatrix potter – the tale of mrs . tittlemouse . drama . hall caine the bishop 's son ( new version of ben-my-chree ) the eternal question ( new version of the eternal city ) george diamandy bestia ( the beast ) tot înainte ( carry on ) terence macswiney – the last warriors of coole maurice maeterlinck – mary magdalene eduardo marquina – en flandes se ha puesto el sol ( the sun has set in flanders ) john masefield – the tragedy of pompey the great louis n . parker – pomander walk edmond rostand – chantecler george bernard shaw – misalliance j . m . synge – deirdre of the sorrows rabindranath tagore – raja ( রাজা , the king of the dark chamber ) . poetry . paul claudel – cinq grandes odes rabindranath tagore – gitanjali ( bengali language version ) . non-fiction . jane addams – twenty years at hull house norman angell – the great illusion ( revision of europe 's optical illusion published 1909 ) hall caine – king edward : a prince and a great man g . k . chesterton – what 's wrong with the world emily davies – thoughts on some questions relating to women emma goldman – anarchism and other essays robert hichens – the spell of egypt dumitru c . moruzi – înstrăinații ezra pound – the spirit of romance gerhard ritter – ein historisches urbild zu goethes faust ( agrippa von nettesheym ) percy sykes – the glory of the shia world henri stahl – bucureștii ce se duc wallace d . wattles – the science of getting rich andrew dickson white – seven great statesmen in the warfare of humanity with unreason alfred north whitehead and bertrand russell – principia mathematica , vol . 1 . births . february 6 – irmgard keun , german author ( died 1982 ) february 10 – joan g . robinson , english children 's writer and illustrator ( died 1988 ) february 11 – l . t . c . rolt , english biographer and writer of ghost stories ( died 1974 ) march 22 – nicholas monsarrat , english novelist ( died 1979 ) may 8 – andrew e . svenson , american author and publisher ( died 1975 ) may 23 – margaret wise brown , american children 's writer ( died 1952 ) june 15 – marie de garis ( marie le messurier ) , guernsey ethnographer and lexicographer ( died 2010 ) june 21 – clive sansom , english-born tasmanian poet and playwright ( died 1981 ) june 23 – jean anouilh , french dramatist ( died 1987 ) july 14 – vincent brome , english biographer and novelist ( died 2004 ) july 27 – julien gracq , french novelist , critic and playwright ( died 2007 ) august 5 – jacquetta hawkes ( née hopkins ) , english writer and archeologist ( died 1996 ) september 8 – julián padrón , venezuelan novelist , journalist and lawyer ( died 1954 ) september 11 – manuel mujica láinez , argentine novelist ( died 1984 ) september 18 – bernard kangro , estonian journalist , author , and poet ( died 1994 ) october 15 – haddis alemayehu , ethiopian politician and novelist ( died 2003 ) november 17 – rachel de queiroz , brazilian author ( died 2003 ) december 19 jean genet , french novelist , playwright and poet ( died 1986 ) josé lezama lima , cuban writer and poet ( died 1976 ) december 24 jean-paul crespelle , french writer ( died 1994 ) fritz leiber , american writer of fantasy and science fiction ( died 1992 ) uncertain date betty miller , irish-born jewish writer ( died 1965 ) . deaths . january 29 – edouard rod , french-swiss novelist ( born 1857 ) april 9 – vittoria aganoor , italian poet ( born 1855 ) april 21 – mark twain , american writer ( born 1835 ) may 7 – emil friedrich kautzsch , german bible scholar ( born 1841 ) may 10 – anna laetitia waring , welsh poet and hymnist ( born 1823 ) may 22 – jules renard , french novelist ( born 1864 ) july 2 – frederick james furnivall , english lexicographer ( born 1825 ) august 4 – heinrich julius holtzmann , german new testament commentator ( born 1832 ) august 26 – william james , american philosopher ( born 1842 ) october 17 william vaughn moody , american dramatist and poet ( born 1869 ) julia ward howe , american poet and abolitionist ( born 1819 ) november 6 – george panu , romanian memoirist , literary critic , journalist and politician ( born 1848 ) november 15 – wilhelm raabe , german novelist ( born 1831 ) november 20 – leo tolstoy , russian novelist ( born 1828 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : paul johann ludwig heyse newdigate prize : charles bewley . references .