Overboard (comic strip)

the strip . overboard derives much of its humor from having its characters anachronistically placed in modern times . for instance , they put quarters in dockside parking meters , order pizza by cellphone , and have a company health insurance plan . these pirates are much less fearsome than their ruthless predecessors . in the early years of the strip , much of their activity involved standing around on deck drinking coffee and reading the newspaper . recent strips feature golf , pet care and gardening . their enemy is the green ship and its rival band of pirates , but giant rabbits attacking the garden , sharks , octopuses , and the internal revenue service also are threats . competence is also an issue . while the overboard crew carries cutlasses and makes raids , most often their treasure is stolen by disgruntled shipmates or by more able pirates . the captain has made a horrendous mess of the investments for their pension fund ( at one point , he adjusts his failed investment strategy by flushing cash straight down the toilet ) . the pirates actively pursue dates with women but instead repulse them with poor hygiene , fleas , disgusting table manners , immaturity , cheapness , and a lack of interest in the arts . the captain impresses women and other outsiders with his incredibly boring personality ( in one strip , the captain 's psychiatrist dies of boredom during a therapy session ) . despite occasional friendships with women , it appears that none of the pirates has ever had an official girlfriend , other than the captain who has had a mermaid girlfriend . cast . the main characters are : captain henry crow - the bland skipper of their ship , the '' revenge '' . crow seems a little smarter and more sophisticated than the crew , but he is far too decent to be a successful pirate , even if he were otherwise capable . regularly participates in large battles but , curiously , reacts to duels with cowardice . charley duff - along with crow 's other crew members , the diminutive charley was originally portrayed as lying , lazy , stupid , selfish , and childlike . yet , like the others , he was the best crow could do , owing to recruitment woes such as scurvy . in recent years , charley has been more productive and responsible , perhaps for two reasons . several years ago , charley attempted to reform his character so as to win the affection of marlene . though he failed in his goal , the changes seem permanent . also , charley has become a conscientious pet owner , which has mitigated his selfishness , it seems . perhaps all this makes it not too surprising that charley has become an ardent if hapless gardener . nate - crew member who at first glance looks most like a pirate : hulking , fearsome , with a massive and impenetrable black beard . despite some rough ways and bad hygiene , nate is a gentle giant who often acts with honor and respect toward others , especially women and children . nate and the captain often conspire to keep charley out of trouble . louie - captain crow 's pet dog . he does n't speak but rather projects thought balloons , in the manner of snoopy or garfield . louie is extremely spoiled , always helping himself to human luxuries such as beds and steaks . he seems to have a better lifestyle than the subordinate pirates and usually gets his way . he is a yellow labrador retriever , as mentioned in the strip repeatedly , and many of louie 's behaviours are considered stereotypical of the breed . his birthday is september 14th ; in 2019 the celebration involved a series of toppled trash cans full of goodies . the green pirates - a gang of rival pirates from another ship , they are always around to start a fight or to steal their treasure . while more ruthless than crow 's crew , the green pirates have not generally proven to be much smarter or more competent . guy with clover in hat - one of the pirates from the green ship . has been seen to be nice to louie , unlike most of the green ship pirates . this led to louie asking the cartoonist to make sure he does n't get to hurt in one of the strips . cecilia - a female pirate from the green ship , she made a covert attempt to seduce captain crow and raid his ship . when her cover was blown , she became a regular aboard crow 's ship ; he encouraged her visits because he remained in love with her , despite her duplicity . curiously , cecilia became friends with crow and no longer posed any threat , though she never came to love him . this storyline lasted several months and cecilia stayed in the strip for a long time after her plot was exposed . it seemed that she had become a regular character , but cecilia silently disappeared from the strip sometime in 2003 , though her dog raymond remains . ( during cecilia 's storyline , it was stated that she was captain of the green ship , but she was not seen before or after . in the strip for january 3 , 2007 , crow states that he and the green ship captain became enemies in high school . the green ship captain is shown to be a man . ) raymond - another dog . unlike louie , raymond walks on two legs , wears a hat , smokes cigarettes , and talks directly to humans . he can also understand louie 's thought balloons , however , and still retains many dog-like characteristics such as a love of eating garbage and carrion . raymond was originally depicted as belonging to the villainous cecilia and serving as a henchman in her schemes against crow 's crew , but like cecilia he gradually became friends with crow and continued as a regular even after cecilia 's departure from the cast . the cartoonist - often appears at his drawing table with a sign saying '' overboard , inc . '' whenever charley comes into his office asking for a raise , he draws a sea monster to eat him . janey - a mermaid that crow has developed a friendship with ( and romantic feelings for ) . however , she and crow both acknowledge the difficulties posed by their differences , such as janey 's preference for worms as pizza topping . the sea monster - a giant godzilla-like creature that shows up now and then to terrorize crow 's ship . not to be confused with the tentacle that is usually drawn in as a practical joke by the cartoonist . in the march 22 , 2008 strip , it is revealed that his name is '' gork '' and that he is in love with janey the mermaid . scratch the green ship 's cat . scratch wants very much to eat the mice . he originally lived on the green ship , but his owner became violently allergic to him and asked captain crow to take him in . the mice - normal-sized but talking mice that live on the ship . a female mouse , ellie , has unrequited romantic feelings for captain crow , much to the annoyance of her boyfriend , jonas . at first , none of the human crew could understand the mice , hearing only squeaks or very tiny voices ; generally leaving the translations to raymond . over time , the humans began to understand the mice without any difficulty , leaving louie the animal that ca n't speak aloud . recently , the mice have taken on more and more human like quality , including a recent strip showing a large quantity of mouse holes for sale as a result of foreclosure , as well as the mice playing human sports , like hockey ( albeit , with miniature equipment , played on the ship 's kiddie pool , filled with frozen water . ) the mice have also taken to driving tiny cars around the ship ; which has resulted in them incurring traffic violations , largely due to them ramming into one of the human crew ( generally crow , who in one strip , revealed his foot was in a cast as a result of such a crash ) . the traffic violations have in turn resulted in crow acting as jailer for some of the mice , as they pay their '' debt to society '' . the mice fly miniature fighter aircraft which they use to fly to the green ship and attack scratch . the rabbits - large , anthropomorphic talking rabbits who frequently sneak onto the ship at night to steal from charley 's vegetable garden . seahawk - originally depicted as crow 's second in command , seahawk has not been seen in the strip in recent years . boof - a wimpy pirate , often a target of charley and seahawk . not seen in recent years . marlene - a woman who once served as a love interest for charley . not seen in recent years . the crow 's nest pirates - a pair of unnamed pirates who occupied the crow 's nest of the '' revenge '' . not seen in recent years . references . external links . overboard at gocomics.com