Makossa

origins . later in the 1960s , modern makossa developed and became the most popular genre in cameroon . makossa is a type of funky dance music , best known outside africa for manu dibango , whose 1972 single '' soul makossa '' was an international hit . outside of africa , dibango and makossa were only briefly popular , but the genre has produced several pan-african superstars through the 70s , 80s and 90s . following dibango , a wave of musicians electrified makossa in an attempt at making it more accessible outside of cameroon . another pop singer in 1970s cameroon was andré-marie tala , a blind singer who had a pair of hits with '' sikati '' and '' potaksima '' . by the 1970s , bikutsi performers like maurice elanga , les veterans and mbarga soukous added brass instruments and found controversy over pornographic lyrics . mama ohandja also brought bikutsi to new audiences , especially in europe . the following decade , however , saw les tetes brulées surpass previous artists in international popularity , though their reaction at home was mixed . many listeners did not like their mellow , almost easy listening-styled bikutsi . cameroonian audiences preferred more roots-based performers like jimmy mvondo mvelé and uta bella , both from yaoundé . 1980s . by the 1980s , makossa had moved to paris and formed a new pop-makossa that fused the fast tempo zouk style popularized by kassav from the french caribbean . prominent musicians from this period included moni bilé , douleur , bébé manga , ben decca , petit-pays , and esa . the 80s also saw rapid development of cameroon 's media which saw a flourishing of both makossa and bikutsi . in 1980 , l'equipe nationale de makossa was formed , joining the biggest makossa stars of the period together , including grace decca , ndedi eyango , ben decca , guy lobe and dina bell . makossa in the 80s saw a wave of mainstream success across africa and , to a lesser degree , abroad , as latin influences , french antilles zouk , and pop music changed its form . while makossa enjoyed international renown , bikutsi was often denigrated as the music of savages and it did not appeal across ethnic lines and into urban areas . musicians continued to add innovations , however , and improved recording techniques ; nkondo si tony , for example , added keyboards and synthesizers , while elanga maurice added brass instruments . les veterans emerged as the most famous bikutsi group in the 80s , while other prominent performers included titans de sangmelima , seba georges , ange ebogo emerent , otheo and mekongo president , who added complex harmonies and jazz influences . in 1984 , a new wave of bikutsi artists emerged , including sala bekono formerly of los camaroes , atebass , a bassist , and zanzibar , a guitarist who would eventually help form les têtes brulées with jean-marie ahanda . 1985 saw the formation of cameroon radio television , a television network that did much to help popularize cameroonian popular music across the country . jean-marie ahanda became the most influential bikutsi performer of the late 80s , and he revolutionized the genre in 1987 after forming les têtes brulées , whose success changed the cameroonian music industry . the band played an extremely popular form of bikutsi that allowed for greater depth and diversity . guitarist zanzibar added foam rubber to the bridge of his guitar , which made the instrument sound more like a balafon than before , and was more aggressive and innovative than previous musicians . les têtes brulées emerged as a reaction against pop-makossa , which was seen as abandoning its roots in favor of mainstream success . the band 's image was part of its success , and they became known for their shaved heads and multi-colored body painting , done to represent traditional beti scarification , as well as torn t-shirts that implied a common folkness in contrast to the well-styled pop-makossa performers of the period . they also wore backpacks on stage , a reference to beti women 's traditional method of carrying babies while they danced bikutsi . it took only a few weeks for les têtes brulées to knock makossa off the cameroonian charts , and the band even toured france . while in france , les têtes brulées recorded their first lp , hot heads , which was also the first bikutsi music recorded for the cd . hot heads expanded the lyrical format of the genre to include socio-political issues . tours of japan , africa , europe and the united states followed , as well as claire denis ' film man no run , which used footage from their european tour . 1990s . in the 1990s , both makossa and bikutsi declined in popularity as a new wave of genres entered mainstream audiences . these included congolese-influenced new rumba and makossa-soukous , as well as more native forms like bantowbol , northern cameroonian nganja ( which had gained some popularity in the united kingdom in the mid-80s ) and an urban street music called bend-skin . les têtes brulées remained the country 's most well known musical export , especially after accompanying the cameroonian soccer team to the world cup in 1990 in italy and 1994 in the united states . a new wave of bikutsi artists arose in the early 1990s , including les martiens ( formed by les têtes brulées bassist atebass ) and the sexually themed roots singer katino ateba ( '' ascenseur : le secret de l'homme '' ) and douala singer sissi dipoko ( '' bikut-si hit '' ) as well as a resurgence of old performers like sala bekono . bikutsi 's international renown continued to grow , and the song '' proof '' from paul simon 's rhythm of the saints , released to mainstream promotion and success in 1990 , gained yet more renown from international audiences . vincent nguini also contributed guitar arrangements and performance to simon 's rhythm of the saints , which became an influential world music album , introducing many north american listeners to the wide range of instrumentation and genres . in 1993 , the pedalé movement was born as a reaction to the cameroonian economic slump . youthful artists like gibraltar drakuss , zele le bombardier , eboue chaleur , pasto , roger bekono , mbarga soukous and saint-desiré atango was a return to the aggressive , earthy sound of bikutsi roots . meanwhile henri dikongué , whose music incorporated , amongst others , bikutsi and makossa , began to release albums which met international success . he went on to tour europe and north america . the most recent form of cameroonian popular music is a fusion of congolese soukous and makossa , a scene which has produced petit pays , marcel bwanga , kotto bass , papillon and jean pierre essome . other popular genres include tchamassi , mangambeu and makassi . notes . references . west , ben ( 2004 ) . cameroon : the bradt travel guide . guilford , connecticut : the globe pequot press inc . noah , jean-maurice ( 2010 ) . le makossa : une musique africaine moderne . paris , france : l'harmattan