Escheat

etymology . the term '' escheat '' derives ultimately from the latin ex-cadere , to '' fall-out '' , via mediaeval french escheoir . collins dictionary of the english language , london , 1986 , p.520 the sense is of a feudal estate in land falling-out of the possession by a tenant into the possession of the lord . origins in feudalism . in feudal england , escheat referred to the situation where the tenant of a fee ( or '' fief '' ) died without an heir or committed a felony . in the case of such demise of a tenant-in-chief , the fee reverted to the king 's demesne permanently , when it became once again a mere tenantless plot of land , but could be re-created as a fee by enfeoffment to another of the king 's followers . where the deceased had been subinfeudated by a tenant-in-chief , the fee reverted temporarily to the crown for year and a day rule by right of seisin after which it escheated to the over-lord who had granted it to the deceased by enfeoffment . from the time of henry iii , the monarchy took particular interest in escheat as a source of revenue . background . at the norman conquest of england , all the land of england was claimed as the personal possession of william the conqueror under allodial title . the monarch thus became the sole '' owner '' of all the land in the kingdom , a position which persists to the present day . he then granted it out to his favoured followers , who thereby became tenant-in-chief , under various contracts of feudal land tenure . such tenures , even the highest one of '' feudal barony '' , never conferred ownership of land but merely ownership of rights over it , that is to say ownership of an estate in land . such persons are therefore correctly termed '' land-holders '' or '' tenants '' ( from latin teneo to hold ) , not owners . if held freely , that is to say by freehold , such holdings were heritable by the holder 's legal heir . on the payment of a premium termed feudal relief to the treasury , such heir was entitled to demand enfeoffment by the king with the fee concerned . where no legal heir existed , the logic of the situation was that the fief had ceased to exist as a legal entity , since being tenantless no one was living who had been enfeoffed with the land , and the land was thus technically owned by either the crown or the immediate overlord ( where the fee had been subinfeudated by the tenant-in-chief to a mesne lord , and perhaps the process of subinfeudation had been continued by a lower series of mesne-lords ) as ultimus heres . logically therefore it was in the occupation of the crown alone , that is to say in the royal demesne . this was the basic operation of an escheat ( excadere ) , a failure of heirs . escheat could also take place if a tenant was outlawed or convicted of a felony , when the king could exercise the ancient right of wasting the criminal 's land for a year and a day , after which the land would revert to the overlord . ( however , one guilty of treason ( rather than mere felony ) forfeited all lands to the king . john and his heirs frequently insisted on seizing as terrae normannorum ( i.e . '' lands of the normans '' ) the english lands of those lords with holdings in normandy who preferred to be normans rather than englishmen , when the victories of philip ii of france forced them to make a proclamation of allegiance to france . ) since disavowal of a feudal bond was a felony , lords could escheat land from those who refused to perform their feudal services . on the other hand , there were also tenants who were merely sluggish in performing their duties , while not being outright rebellious against the lord . remedies in the courts against this sort of thing , even in bracton 's day , were available , but were considered laborious and were frequently ineffectual in compelling the desired performance . the commonest mechanism was distraint , also known as distress ( districtio ) , whereby the lord would seize chattels or goods belonging to the tenant , to hold until performance was achieved . this practice had been addressed in the 1267 statute of marlborough . even so , it remained the most common extrajudicial method applied by overlords at the time of quia emptores . pollock and maitland , history of english law , vol 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 355–366 , cambridge university press , 1968 thus , under english common law , there were two main ways an escheat could happen : a person 's lands escheated to the immediate overlord if he was convicted of a felony ( but not treason , in that event the land was forfeited to the crown ) . if the person was executed for felony , his heirs were attainder , i.e . were ineligible to inherit . in most common-law jurisdictions , this type of escheat has been abolished outright , for example in the united states under article 3 § 3 of the united states constitution , which states that attainders for treason do not give rise to posthumous forfeiture , or '' corruption of blood '' . if a person had no heir to receive his lands under his will , or under the laws of intestacy , then any land he owned at death would escheat . this rule has been replaced in most common-law jurisdictions by bona vacantia or a similar concept . procedure . from the 12th century onward , the crown appointed escheators to manage escheats and report to the exchequer , with one escheator per county established by the middle of the 14th century . upon the death of a tenant-in-chief , the escheator would be instructed by a writ of diem clausit extremum ( '' he has closed his last day '' , i.e . he is dead ) issued by the king 's chancery , to empanel a jury to hold an '' escheat roll '' to ascertain who the legal heir was , if any , and what was the extent of the land held . thus it would be revealed whether the king had any rights to the land . it was also important for the king to know who the heir was , and to assess his personal qualities , since he would thenceforth form a constituent part of the royal army , if he held under military tenure . if there was any doubt , the escheator would seize the land and refer the case to the king 's court where it would be settled , ensuring that not one day 's revenue would be lost . this would be a source of concern with land-holders when there were delays from the court . current operation . most common-law jurisdictions have abolished the concept of feudal land tenure of property , and so the concept of escheat has lost something of its meaning . in england and wales , the possibility of escheat of a deceased person 's property to the feudal overlord was abolished by the administration of estates act 1925 ; however , the concept of bona vacantia means that the crown ( or duchy of cornwall or duchy of lancaster ) can still receive such property if no one else can be found who is eligible to inherit it . the term is often now applied to the transfer of the title to a person 's property to the state when the person dies intestate without any other person capable of taking the property as heir . for example , a common-law jurisdiction 's intestacy statute might provide that when someone dies without a will , and is not survived by a spouse , descendants , parents , grandparents , descendants of parents , children or grandchildren of grandparents , or great-grandchildren of grandparents , then the person 's estate will escheat to the state . in some jurisdictions , escheat can also occur when an entity , typically a bank , credit union or other financial institution , holds money or property which appears to be unclaimed , for instance due to a lack of activity on the account by way of deposits , withdrawals or any other transactions for a lengthy time in a cash account . in many jurisdictions , if the owner can not be located , such property can be revocably escheated to the state . in commerce , it is the process of reassigning legal title in unclaimed or abandoned payroll checks , insurance payouts , or stocks and shares whose owners can not be traced , to a state authority ( in the united states ) . a company is required to file unclaimed property reports with its state annually and , in some jurisdictions , to make a good-faith effort to find the owners of their dormant accounts . the escheating criteria are set by individual state regulations . england and wales . . bankruptcies and liquidations . escheat can still occur in england and wales , if a person is made bankrupt or a corporation is liquidated . usually this means that all the property held by that person is 'vested in ' ( transferred to ) the official receiver or trustee in bankruptcy . however , it is open to the receiver or trustee to refuse to accept that property by disclaimer it . it is relatively common for a trustee in bankruptcy to disclaim freehold property which may give rise to a liability , for example the common parts of a block of flats owned by the bankrupt would ordinarily pass to the trustee to be realised in order to pay his debts , but the property may give the landlord an obligation to spend money for the benefit of lessees of the flats . the bankruptcy of the original owner means that the freehold is no longer the bankrupt 's legal property , and the disclaimer destroys the freehold estate , so that the land ceases to be owned by anyone and effectively escheats to become land held by the crown in demesne . this situation affects a few hundred properties each year . although such escheated property is owned by the crown , it is not part of the crown estate , unless the crown ( through the crown estate commissioners ) 'completes ' the escheat , by taking steps to exert rights as owner . however , usually , in the example given above , the tenants of the flats , or their mortgagees would exercise their rights given by the insolvency act 1986 to have the freehold property transferred to them . this is the main difference between escheat and bona vacantia , as in the latter , a grant takes place automatically , with no need to 'complete ' the transaction . registration of crown land . one consequence of the land registration act 1925 was that only estates in land ( freehold or leasehold ) could be registered . land held directly by the crown , known as property in the '' royal demesne '' , is not held under any vestige feudal tenure ( the crown has no historical overlord other than , for brief periods , the papacy ) and there is therefore no estate to register . this had the consequence that freeholds which escheated to the crown ceased to be registrable . this created a slow drain of property out of registration , amounting to some hundreds of freehold titles in each year . the problem was noted by the law commission in their report '' land registration for the twenty-first century '' . the land registration act 2002 was passed in response to that report . it provides that land held in demesne by the crown may be registered . united states . . transfer agents and escheatment . escheatment is the process of returning lost or unclaimed property to the government of a state , for safekeeping until the owner ( s ) is identified . geographic jurisdiction of the state is determined by the last known address of the original owner . each of the united states has laws regulating escheatment , with holding periods typically ranging around five years . the legal principle behind escheatment is that all property has a legally recognized owner ; therefore , if the original owner can not be found within a specified time , government is presumed to be the owner . escheats are performed on a revocable basis . thus , if property has escheated to a state but the original owner subsequently is found , escheatment is revoked and ownership of the property reverts to that original owner . lost shareholders . according to sec rule 17 cfr 240.17f-1 : transfer agents are obligated by the sec to report to commission ( specifically to its designee ; the sec 's securities information system ) anytime a certificate is known to be lost or missing for at least 2 days . transfer agents must search for the holder 's ssn or ein utilizing an information database system , or if not available , exercise their best effort to match the holder 's name and address through these systems . all transfer agents must report all lost or missing certificates/shareholders on their own annual filings .