Athaulf

life . he was unanimously elected to the throne to succeed his brother-in-law alaric , who had been struck down by a fever suddenly in calabria . king athaulf 's first act was to halt alaric 's southward expansion of the goths in italy . meanwhile , gaul had been separated from the western roman empire by the usurper constantine iii . so in 411 constantius , the magister militum ( master of military ) of the western emperor , flavius augustus honorius , with gothic auxiliaries under ulfilas , crushed the gallic rebellion with a siege of arles . there constantine and his son were offered an honorable capitulation & mdash ; but were beheaded in september on their way to pay homage to honorius at ravenna . in the spring of 412 constantius pressed athaulf . taking the advice of priscus attalus—the former emperor whom alaric had set up at rome in opposition to honorius at ravenna , and who had remained with the visigoths after he 'd been deposed—athaulf led his followers out of italy . moving north into a momentarily pacified gaul , the visigoths lived off the countryside in the usual way . athaulf may have received some additional encouragement in the form of payments in gold from the emperor honorius—since athaulf carried with him as a respected hostage the emperor 's half-sister galla placidia , who had long been his captive . once in gaul , athaulf opened negotiations with a new usurper , the gallic jovinus . but while on his way to meet jovinus , athaulf came across sarus and some of his men . athaulf attacked , captured , and later executed sarus , continuing the feud between their families that had begun with sarus and alaric . jovinus then named his brother sebastianus ( sebastian ) as augustus ( co-emperor ) . this offended athaulf , who had n't been consulted . so he allied his visigoths with honorius . jovinus ' troops were defeated in battle , sebastianus was captured , and jovinus fled for his life . athaulf then turned sebastianus over for execution to honorius ' gallic praetorian prefect ( provincial governor ) , claudius postumus dardanus . after this , athaulf besieged and captured jovinus at valentia ( valence ) in 413 , sending him to narbo ( narbonne ) , where he was executed by dardanus . after the heads of sebastianus and jovinus arrived at honorius ' court in ravenna in late august , to be forwarded for display among other usurpers on the walls of carthage , relations between athaulf and honorius improved sufficiently for athaulf to cement them by marrying galla placidia at narbo in january 414 , but jordanes says he married her in italy , at forlì ( forum livii ) . jordanes , historia gothorum , xxxi . the nuptials were celebrated with high roman festivities and magnificent gifts from the gothic booty . priscus attalus gave the wedding speech , a classical epithalamium . under athaulf 's rule , the visigoths could n't be said to be masters of a settled kingdom until athaulf took possession of narbonne and toulouse in 413 . although athaulf remained an arianism , his relationship with roman culture was summed up , from a catholic roman perspective , by the words that the contemporary christian apologist orosius put into his mouth , athaulf 's declaration : : at first i wanted to erase the roman name and convert all roman territory into a gothic empire : i longed for romania to become gothia , and athaulf to be what caesar augustus had been . but long experience has taught me that the ungoverned wildness of the goths will never submit to laws , and that without law a state is not a state . therefore i have more prudently chosen the different glory of reviving the roman name with gothic vigour , and i hope to be acknowledged by posterity as the initiator of a roman restoration , since it is impossible for me to alter the character of this empire . orosius , historiae adversum paganos ( vii.43.4-6 ) , translated in stephen williams , diocletian and the roman recovery , routledge , 1985 , 2000 , p . 218 ) honorius 's general constantius ( who would later become emperor constantius iii ) , poisoned official relations with athaulf and gained permission to blockade the mediterranean ports of gaul . in reply , athaulf acclaimed priscus attalus as augustus in bordeaux in 414 . but constantius ' naval blockade was successful and , in 415 , athaulf withdrew with his people into northern hispania . attalus fled , fell into the hands of constantius , and was banished to the island of lipari . galla placidia traveled with athaulf . their son , theodosius , died in infancy and was buried in hispania in a silver-plated coffin , thus eliminating an opportunity for a romano-visigothic line . death and aftermath . in hispania , athaulf imprudently accepted into his service one of the late sarus ' followers , unaware that the man harbored a secret desire to avenge the death of his beloved patron . and so , in the palace at barcelona , the man brought athaulf 's reign to a sudden end by killing him while he bathed . sigeric , the brother of sarus , immediately became king & mdash ; for a mere seven days , when he was also murdered and succeeded by wallia . under the latter 's reign , galla placidia was returned to ravenna where , in 417 , at the urging of honorius , she remarried , her new husband being the implacable enemy of the goths , constantius . the main sources for the career of athaulf are paulus orosius , the chronicles of the gallaecian bishop hydatius , and those of augustine 's disciple , prosper of aquitaine . declaration . the authenticity of athaulf 's declaration at narbonne , as orosius reported it in a rhetorical history that was explicitly written '' against pagans '' ( it was completed in 417/18 ) has been doubted . antonio marchetta antonio marchetta , orosio e athaulfo nell'ideologia dei rapporti romano-barbarici ( rome : istituto isorico per il medio evo ) 1987 . the first chapter deals with the doubts raised by previous historians as to the authenticity of the discourse . concludes that the words are indeed athaulf 's and distinguishes them from their interpretation by orosius , who was preparing his readers for a conclusion that christian times were felicitous and who attributed athaulf 's apparent change of heart to the power of his love for galla placidia , the instrument of divine intervention in god 's plan for an eternal roman empire . marchetta finds the marriage instead an act of hard-headed politics . references . external links . de imperatoribus romanis : hugh elton , '' western roman emperors of the first quarter of the fifth century '' septimane wisigothique : '' d'où venaient les wisigoths ? '' ( in french ) edward gibbon , history of the decline and fall of the roman empire , chapter 31