Ship class

naval ship class naming conventions . overview . the name of a naval ship class is most commonly the name of the lead ship , the first ship commissioned or built of its design . however , other systems can be used without confusion or conflict . a descriptive name may be used ; for example it was decided to group destroyers made to the same design as hms tomahawk , all named after weapons , as the rather than tomahawk class . europe in general . in european navies a class is named after the first ship commissioned regardless of when she was ordered or laid down . in some cases this has resulted in different class names being used in european and u.s . references ; for example , european sources record the s of the united states navy as the '' maryland class '' , as was commissioned before . germany . the west german navy ( bundesmarine ) used a three-digit type number for every class in service or in advanced project state . modified versions were identified by a single letter suffix . after the reunification of germany the german navy ( deutsche marine ) kept the system . informally , classes are also traditionally named after their lead ships . indonesia . the indonesian navy has a traditional naming for its ships . moreover , the ship 's type and missions can be identified by the first number on the ship 's three-digit hull number , which is placed on the front bows and the back of the stern . the naming convention is such as : hull number beginning with 1 ( reserved for aircraft carriers ) : great statesmen ( presidents , vice presidents , etc . ) hull number beginning with 2 ( cruisers and destroyers ) : indonesia 's main islands ( for cruisers ) and national heroes ( for destroyers ) hull number beginning with 3 ( frigates , ocean escorts , corvettes ) : national heroes hull number beginning with 4 ( submarines , submarine tenders ) : mythical weapons ( for submarines ) , national heroes ( for submarine tenders ) hull number beginning with 5 ( amphibious ships , lsts , lpds , lcus , command ships ) : main and strategic bays ( for lsts ) , big cities ( for lpds ) , small cities ( for lcus ) , national heroes ( for command ships ) hull number beginning with 6 ( fast attack ships ) : mythical weapons ( previous names for missile boats ) , traditional weapons ( current names for fast missile boats ) , wild animals ( for fast torpedo boats ) hull number beginning with 7 ( minesweepers , minehunters , mine countermeasures ships ) : every island begin with letter '' r '' hull number beginning with 8 ( patrol boats ) : native fishes and sea creatures , native snakes and wild reptiles , wild insects , geographical places ( such as towns , lakes or rivers begin with '' si- '' , like sikuda , sigurot , sibarau ) hull number beginning with 9 ( supporting ships , oilers , tugs , troops transports , oceanographic research ships , sailing ships , etc . ) : volcanoes , cities , mythical figures , geographical capes and straits . russia/soviet union . russian ( and soviet ) ship classes are formally named by the numbered project that designed them . that project sometimes , but not always , had a metaphorical name , and almost always had a nato reporting name . in addition , the ships of the class would be numbered , and that number prefixed by a letter indicating the role of that type of vessel . for example , project 641 had no other name , though nato referred to its members as s . the ship classification in russia ( and formerly soviet union ) does not completely correspond common designation , particularly for destroyer , frigate and corvette type ships . russia has own classification for those ships . in russia , there is a class of squadron torpedo boat that traditionally is adapted as destroyers ( formerly torpedo boats destroyers ) . the russian corresponding word for destroyer is used in air force for fighter aircraft . also destroyers could be classified russian big anti-submarine ships or big asw ships ( e.g . udaloy-class destroyer ) . at the same time big anti-submarine ships could also be classified as cruisers ( e.g . kara-class cruiser ) . the russian big anti-submarine ships class also has its sub-class of guard ( or patrol ) ships . the russian guard ( or patrol ) ships traditionally are reclassified as frigate ( e.g . gepard-class frigate ) . another substantial class in russia ( and formerly soviet union ) is small anti-submarine ships or small asw ships and are adapted as corvettes ( e.g . grisha-class corvette ) . as corvettes were adapted russian small missile ships ; e.g . buyan-class corvette ) or missile boats ; e.g . tarantul-class corvette ) . united kingdom . the british royal navy has used several methods of naming classes . in addition to the accepted european convention , some classes have been named after a common theme in the included ships ' names , e.g . , s , and some classes were implemented as an organizational tool , making traditional methods of naming inefficient . for instance , the is also known as the a class . most destroyer classes were known by the initial letter used in naming the vessels , e.g . , s . classification by letter also helped to conflate similar smaller classes of ships as in the case of the a-class destroyer ( 1913 ) whose names spread across the alphabet . since the end of the world war ii , royal navy ship classes have also been known by their type number ( e.g . type 45 destroyer . ) . united states . in the united states navy , unlike most other navies , the first ship in a class to be authorized by congress is the designated class leader and gives the name to the class , regardless of the order in which the ships of that class are laid down , launched or commissioned . due to numbering conventions the lead ship almost always has the lowest hull number of her class . ( during world war ii the award of construction contracts was not always congruent with completion , so many ships had higher hull numbers than later-class ships . ) lenton , h . t . american submarines and american fleet and escort destroyers ( doubleday , 1973 ) . before the 1920s naval vessels were classified according to shared characteristics , as evidenced by the navy 's own '' standard nomenclature for naval vessels : general order no . 541 , 17 july 1920 '' . nonetheless , it has not prevented naval historians and scholars to retro-apply the current convention to historical naval vessels sharing similarities , those of the american civil war for example , where the union navy in particular had built several vessels in series , which can be typified as '' classes '' as presently understood . popular retconned examples included the monitor and the , among many others , for the union side , whereas historians have coined vessels as being css columbia or css richmond , for those ironclads in service with the confederate states navy . generally accepted by military historians and widely used in the more recent books , webpages and papers on the subject matter ( most notably the releases of osprey publishing ) , these latter-day classifications are sometimes , but still unjustified , considered '' semi-official '' . contemporary records themselves however , show that the modern nomenclature was not in use at the time and never has been , certainly not in a formal sense as was unequivocally exemplified by the complete ships listing in '' official records of the war of the rebellion '' ( series 2 , volume 1 , part 1 ) , where vessels were classified according to the oldfashioned descriptive conventions . the unofficial retro-applying of ship classes can in some cases lead to confusion with researches . for example , while american reference works consistently adhere to the city-class and columbia-class monikers , works of british origins ( again , those of osprey in particular ) refer to the same classes as uss cairo and tennessee-class respectively , in compliance with the modern royal navy naming conventions . yet , by the time the united states entered world war ii , the naming convention was firmly in place , implying the practice had been formalized some time after july 1920 , though it remains unclear as to exactly how and when the practice originated . merchant vessel class . merchant ships are almost always classed by a classification society . these vessels are said to be in class when their hull , structures , machinery , and equipment conform to international maritime organization and marpol standards . vessels out of class may be uninsurable and/or not permitted to sail by other agencies . a vessel 's class may include endorsements for the type of cargo such as '' oil carrier '' , '' bulk carrier '' , '' mixed carrier '' etc . it may also include class notations denoting special abilities of the vessel . examples of this include an ice class , fire fighting capability , oil recovery capability , automated machinery space capability , or other special ability . references . external links . naval naming conventions