Fravia

fravia as francesco vianello . in the 1980s , he was a member of the esteban canal chess club in venice , before moving to ces in brussels . tommaso dorigo ( 2009 ) '' farewell , chicco ! '' on scientific blogging graduated in history at the university of venice in 1994 , vianello had a master 's degree in history and philosophy in 1999 . & nbsp ; he was interested in studying the arts and humanities and was aiming to build a collective knowledge on the particular subject of learning and web-searching as an art . fravia ( 2006 ) '' websearching , the sublime art '' he spoke six languages ( including latin ) . fravia participated as a speaker in the 22nd chaos communication congress . his lecture was on the subject of hacking . . fravia as fravia . vianello was focusing on privacy and created the myth of fjalar ravia fravia ( 2005 ) '' fjalar ravia '' , fictional biography on searchlores.org ( aka fravia+ , msre , spini , red avenger , ~s~ sustrugiel , pellet , ravia f . ) as protection from hostile seekers . at least two distinct phases of his internet public work can be identified . the first , from 1995 ( starting date of his internet presence ) to 1999 was related to software reversing , software protection , decompiling , disassembling , and deep software code deconstruction . at those times the wdasm disassembler by eric grass , which also included a debugger , was a popular download . the second , starting in 2000 , where the first stage left off , was focused on an ( apparently ) entirely different field : internet knowledge search . in february 2001 , vianello made a conference at the école polytechnique in paris about '' the art of information searching on today 's internet '' . fravia ( 2001 ) six parts workshop on '' the art of information searching on today 's internet '' ( through internet archive ) he also presented his work '' wizard searching : reversing the commercial web for fun and knowledge '' at recon 2005 . . first period : reverse engineering ( '' reality cracking '' ) . in the first period vianello focused on reverse-engineering software protection , content copyright , and software patents . the steps for cracking software protection were in many cases published on his website , in the form of essays and old red cracker 's lessons . +orc cracking lessons vianello asked the community to remove from the web every copy of his old site ( www.fravia.org - now a spam advertisement website ) , corresponding to this period , fravia ( 1999 ) because '' the idea was to convert young crackers . the experiment worked only in part , hence the decision a couple of years ago to freeze that site '' . fravia , '' searching problems , web problems : ethical problems '' nevertheless , some mirrors still exist . the site has been described as containing '' useful tools and products '' . according to the 2001 acm multimedia workshops of the association for computing machinery , vianello 's website contained information which could assist hackers of a certain classification who were not skilled enough '' to mount a new or novel attack '' . his website also analysed brute force attacks on steganography . this period included papers related to reality-cracking , fravia , et al . ( 2009 ) '' reality cracking , an introduction '' i.e . the capacity of the seeker to decode the hidden facts behind appearance . reverse engineering a legitimately bought program and studying or modifying its code for knowledge was claimed as legal by vianello at least in the european union under some restricted conditions . fravia ( 1998 ) '' is reverse engineering legal ? why we crack '' . second period : web searching ( '' search lores '' ) . the transition between the two phases occurred after realizing the growing importance of internet search engines as tools to access information . according to his vision , access to information should not be restricted , and he was advocating for a true openness of web information contents . he strongly criticized the large amount of advertising on the internet , which he considered as promoting unnecessary products to a population of naive consumers . richard stallman , in his web article '' ubuntu spyware : what to do ? '' , mentions that it was vianello who alerted him to the fact that performing a file search on a computer running microsoft windows would cause it to send a network packet to an internet server , which was then detected by the firewall in vianello 's computer . in the second stage of his work , vianello explained how the content is currently structured on the world wide web and the difficulties of finding relevant information through search engines because of the growing number of ads , fravia , '' searching problems , web problems '' fravia ( 2001 ) '' how to search the web volume , diameter and structure '' that search engines promote today . in 2005 , vianello was the keynote speaker at the t2 infosec conference . the subject of his speech was : '' the web - bottomless cornucopia and immense garbage dump '' . . +hcu . vianello was a member of the so-called high cracking university ( +hcu ) , founded by old red cracker to advance research into reverse engineering ( rce ) . the addition of the '' + '' sign in front of the nickname of a reverser signified membership in the +hcu . +hcu published a new reverse engineering problem annually and a small number of respondents with the best replies qualified for an undergraduate position at the '' university '' . vianello 's website was known as '' +fravia 's pages of reverse engineering '' and he used it to challenge programmers as well as the wider society to '' reverse engineer '' the '' brainwashing of a corrupt and rampant materialism '' . in its heyday , his website received millions of visitors per year and its influence was described as '' widespread '' . nowadays most of the graduates of +hcu have migrated to linux and few have remained as windows reversers . the information at the university has been rediscovered by a new generation of researchers and practitioners of rce who have started new research projects in the field . . legacy . vianello has been described as an inspiration for many hackers and reversers , a friend of the founder of the ccc wau holland , and a motivation for jon lech johansen to understand the inner workings of computer programs . chaos computer club events blog . johansen commented in a blog post that fravia 's site was a goldmine during his education as a reverse engineer . jon lech johansen ( 2006 ) '' reverse engineering '' , on his blog ( retrieved on 2009-05-05 ) in his later years , he moved from software reversing to free software and searching the web further . his website has been described as the meeting point of the people who wanted to search the web deeper still . in september 2008 , vianello stopped updating his site and holding conferences , after being diagnosed with and receiving treatment for squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil , which metastasized . fravia ( 2008 ) illness ( through internet archive ) his site was frozen for several months but was updated again on 9 march 2009 while he was slowly recovering and focusing on gnu/linux . fravia ( 2009 ) illness , update ( through internet archive ) he died suddenly on sunday , 3 may 2009 at the age of 56 . . published works . francesco vianello , gli unruochingi e la famiglia di beggo conte di parigi . ( ricerche sull'alta aristocrazia carolingia ) // bollettino dell'istituto storico italiano per il medioevo 91 ( 1984 ) . francesco vianello , università di padova , i mercanti di chiavenna in età moderna visti dalla terraferma veneta . francesco vianello , & nbsp ; fravia ( ed . ) annotation and exegesis of origo gentis langobardorum . . notes and references . external links . an archive of fravia 's searchlores ( no longer updated ) fravia 's website ( european mirror ) fravia 's real identity ( european mirror ) fravia 's fake auto-biography ( european mirror ) fravia 's farewell ( april 2009 ) ( european mirror ) fravia at ccc congress 2005 fravia at ccc congress 2002 last known mirror of the original '' reversing site '' video of a fravia conference presentation at recon 2005 in montreal video of a fravia conference presentation at recon 2006 in montreal i have seen the ice age , by malay +greythorne 's privacy nexus ( fravia 's partner +gthorne ) iczelion 's win32 assembly homepage