Samuel Hahnemann

early life . christian friedrich samuel hahnemann was born in meissen , saxony , near dresden . his father christian gottfried hahnemann brief history of life of samuel hahnemann , the father of homoeopathy . homoeoscan.com . 10 april 2014 was a painter and designer of porcelain , for which the town of meissen is famous . as a young man , hahnemann became proficient in a number of languages , including english , french , italian , greek and latin . he eventually made a living as a translator and teacher of languages , gaining further proficiency in '' arabic , syriac , chaldaic and hebrew '' . hahnemann studied medicine for two years at leipzig . citing leipzig 's lack of clinical facilities , he moved to vienna , where he studied for ten months . after one term of further study , he graduated md at the university of erlangen on 10 august 1779 , qualifying with honors . his poverty may have forced him to choose erlangen , as the school 's fees were lower . haehl , vol . 1 , p . 24 . hahnemann 's thesis was titled conspectus adfectuum spasmodicorum aetiologicus et therapeuticus . a dissertation on the causes and treatment of spasmodic diseases cook , p . 36 . . medical practice . in 1781 , hahnemann took a village doctor 's position in the copper-mining area of mansfeld , saxony . haehl , vol . 1 , p . 26 . he soon married johanna henriette kuchler and would eventually have eleven children . after abandoning medical practice , and while working as a translator of scientific and medical textbooks , bradford , pp . 515–16 . hahnemann travelled around saxony for many years , staying in many different towns and villages for varying lengths of time , never living far from the river elbe and settling at different times in dresden , torgau , leipzig and köthen ( anhalt ) cook , pp . 83–4 , before finally moving to paris in june 1835 . cook , p . 168 . . creation of homeopathy . hahnemann was dissatisfied with the state of medicine in his time , and particularly objected to practices such as bloodletting . he claimed that the medicine he had been taught to practice sometimes did the patient more harm than good : my sense of duty would not easily allow me to treat the unknown pathological state of my suffering brethren with these unknown medicines . the thought of becoming in this way a murderer or malefactor towards the life of my fellow human beings was most terrible to me , so terrible and disturbing that i wholly gave up my practice in the first years of my married life and occupied myself solely with chemistry and writing . after giving up his practice around 1784 , hahnemann made his living chiefly as a writer and translator , while resolving also to investigate the causes of medicine 's alleged errors . while translating william cullen 's a treatise on the materia medica , hahnemann encountered the claim that cinchona , the bark of a peruvian tree , was effective in treating malaria because of its astringency . hahnemann believed that other astringent substances are not effective against malaria and began to research cinchona 's effect on the human body by self-application . noting that the drug induced malaria-like symptoms in himself , haehl , vol . 1 , p.38 ; dudgeon , p.48 he concluded that it would do so in any healthy individual . this led him to postulate a healing principle : '' that which can produce a set of symptoms in a healthy individual , can treat a sick individual who is manifesting a similar set of symptoms . '' this principle , like cures like , became the basis for an approach to medicine which he gave the name homeopathy . he first used the term homeopathy in his essay indications of the homeopathic employment of medicines in ordinary practice , published in hufeland 's journal in 1807 . gumpert , martin ( 1945 ) hahnemann : the adventurous career of a medical rebel , new york : fischer , p . 130 . . development of homeopathy . following up the work of the viennese physician anton von störck , hahnemann tested substances for the effects they produced on a healthy individual , presupposing ( as von störck had claimed ) that they may heal the same ills that they caused . his researches led him to agree with von störck that the toxic effects of ingested substances are often broadly parallel to certain disease states , dudgeon , pp.xxi–xxii ; cook , p.95 and his exploration of historical cases of poisoning in the medical literature further implied a more generalised medicinal '' law of similars '' . dudgeon , p.49 & p.176 ; haehl , vol . 1 , p.40 he later devised methods of diluting the drugs he was testing in order to mitigate their toxic effects . he claimed that these dilutions , when prepared according to his technique of '' potentization '' using dilution and succussion ( vigorous shaking ) , were still effective in alleviating the same symptoms in the sick . his more systematic experiments with dose reduction really commenced around 1800–01 when , on the basis of his '' law of similars , '' he had begun using ipecacuanha for the treatment of coughs and belladonna for scarlet fever . cook , pp.96–7 ; dudgeon , pp.338–340 & pp.394–408 he first published an article about the homeopathic approach in a german-language medical journal in 1796 . following a series of further essays , he published in 1810 '' organon of the rational art of healing '' , followed over the years by four further editions entitled the organon of the healing art , the first systematic treatise and containing all his detailed instructions on the subject . a 6th organon edition , unpublished during his lifetime , and dating from february 1842 , was only published many years after his death . it consisted of a 5th organon containing extensive handwritten annotations . sixth organon book review . minimum.com . retrieved on 16 may 2012 . the organon is widely regarded as a remodelled form of an essay he published in 1806 called '' the medicine of experience '' , which had been published in hufeland 's journal . of the organon , robert ellis dudgeon states it '' was an amplification and extension of his '' medicine of experience '' , worked up with greater care , and put into a more methodical and aphorism form , after the model of the hippocratic writings . '' dudgeon , r . e . ( 1853 ) lectures on the theory and practice of homeopathy , london : henry turner , p . xxxi . . coffee theory of disease . around the start of the nineteenth century hahnemann developed a theory , propounded in his 1803 essay on the effects of coffee from original observations , that many diseases are caused by coffee . hahnemann s ( 1803 ) : on the effects of coffee from original observations , in hahnemann s . , dudgeon r . e . ( ed ) ( 1852 ) : the lesser writings of samuel hahnemann . new york : william radde , p . 391 . hahnemann later abandoned the coffee theory in favour of the theory that disease is caused by psora , but it has been noted that the list of conditions hahnemann attributed to coffee was similar to his list of conditions caused by psora . morrell , p . ( 1996 ) : on hahnemann 's coffee theory , www.homeoint.org . later life . in early 1811 bradford , p . 76 . hahnemann moved his family back to leipzig with the intention of teaching his new medical system at the university of leipzig . as required by the university statutes , to become a faculty member he was required to submit and defend a thesis on a medical topic of his choice . on 26 june 1812 , hahnemann presented a latin thesis , entitled '' a medical historical dissertation on the helleborism of the ancients . '' bradford , p . 93 . his thesis very thoroughly examined the historical literature and sought to differentiate between the ancient use of helleborus niger , or black hellebore , and the medicinal uses of the '' white hellebore '' , botanically veratrum album , both of which are poisonous plants . haehl , vol . 2 , p . 96 . hahnemann continued practicing and researching homeopathy , as well as writing and lecturing for the rest of his life . he died in 1843 in paris , at 88 years of age , and is entombed in a mausoleum at paris 's père lachaise cemetery . descendants . there are a few living descendants of hahnemann 's older sister charlotte ( 1752–1812 ) , but the living descendants of hahnemann himself derive from one of his daughters . hahnemann 's daughter , amelie ( 1789–1881 ) , had a son : leopold suss-hahnemann . leopold emigrated to england , and he practised homeopathy in london . he retired to the isle of wight and died there at the outbreak of world war i in 1914 . dr leopold suss-hahnemann 's youngest daughter , amalia , had two children , winifred ( born in 1898 ) and herbert . william herbert tankard-hahnemann ( 1922–2009 ) was winifred 's son . he served as a major in the british army during world war ii , and then had a career in the city of london . he was at one point appointed as a freeman of the city of london . mr william herbert tankard-hahnemann , the great-great-great-grandson of samuel hahnemann died on 12 january 2009 ( his 87th birthday ) after 22 years of active patronage of the british institute of homeopathy . the william tankard-hahnemann line continues with his son , charles . writings . hahnemann wrote a number of books , essays , and letters on the homeopathic method , chemistry , and general medicine : heilkunde der erfahrung . norderstedt 2010 , reprinted in fragmenta de viribus , a collection of 27 drug '' provings '' published in latin in 1805 . ' & 39 ; fragmenta de viribus ' & 39 ; and ' & 39 ; materia medica pura ' & 39 ; full-text in french . homeoint.org . retrieved on 16 may 2012 . the organon of the healing art ( 1810 ) , a detailed delineation of what he saw as the rationale underpinning homeopathic medicine , and guidelines for practice . hahnemann published the 5th edition in 1833 ; a revised draft of this ( 1842 ) was discovered after hahnemann 's death and finally published as the 6th edition in 1921 . online etext of hahnemann 's organon der heilkunst . organon of homeopathy , 6th version english version , full text online ; german original ( other format ) ; english translation . homeopathyhome.com . retrieved on 16 may 2012 . materia medica pura , a compilation of '' homoeopathic proving '' reports , published in six volumes between vol . i in 1811 and vol . vi in 1827 . revised editions of volumes i and ii were published in 1830 and 1833 , respectively . chronic diseases ( 1828 ) , an explanation of the root and cure of chronic disease according to the theory of miasms , together with a compilation of '' homoeopathic proving '' reports , published in five volumes during the 1830s . the friend of health , in which hahnemann '' recommended the use of fresh air , bed rest , proper diet , sunshine , public hygiene and numerous other beneficial measures at a time when many other physicians considered them of no value . '' appeal to thinking philanthropist respecting the mode of propagation of the asiatic choler , in which hahnemann describes cholera physicians and nurses as the '' certain and frequent propagators '' of cholera and that whilst deriding nurses ' '' fumigations with chlorine '' , promoted the use of '' drops of camphorated spirit '' as a cure for the disease . hahnemann also campaigned for the humane treatment of the insane in 1792 . john henry clarke wrote that '' in 1787 , hahnemann discovered the best test for arsenic and other poisons in wine , having pointed out the unreliable nature of the 'wurtemberg test , ' which had been in use up to that date . '' haehl , vol . 1 , p . 34 . samuel hahnemanns apothekerlexikon . vol.2 . crusius , leipzig 1798–1799 digital edition by the university and state library düsseldorf reine arzneimittellehre . arnold , dresden ( several editions ) 1822–1827 digital edition by the university and state library düsseldorf systematische darstellung der reinen arzneiwirkungen aller bisher geprüften mittel . vieweg , braunschweig 1831 – digital edition by the university and state library düsseldorf