Flying wing

history . early research . tailless aircraft have been experimented with since the earliest attempts to fly . britain 's j . w . dunne was an early pioneer , his swept-wing biplane and monoplane designs displayed inherent stability as early as 1910 . his work directly influenced several other designers , including g . t . r . hill , who developed a series of experimental tailless aircraft designs , collectively known as the westland-hill pterodactyl , during the 1920s and early 1930s . despite attempts to pursuit orders from the aviation ministry , the pterodactyl programme was ultimately cancelled during the mid 1930s before any order for the mk . vi was issued . germany 's hugo junkers patented his own wing-only air transport concept in 1910 , seeing it as a natural solution to the problem of building an airliner large enough to carry a reasonable passenger load and enough fuel to cross the atlantic in regular service . he believed that the flying wing 's potentially large internal volume and low drag made it an obvious design for this role . his deep-chord monoplane wing was incorporated in the otherwise conventional junkers j 1 in december 1915 . in 1919 he started work on his '' giant '' jg1 design , intended to seat passengers within a thick wing , but two years later the allied aeronautical commission of control ordered the incomplete jg1 destroyed for exceeding postwar size limits on german aircraft . junkers conceived futuristic flying wings for up to 1,000 passengers ; the nearest this came to realization was in the 1931 junkers g.38 34-seater grossflugzeug airliner , which featured a large thick-chord wing providing space for fuel , engines , and two passenger cabins . however , it still required a short fuselage to house the crew and additional passengers . the soviet boris ivanovich cheranovsky began testing tailless flying wing gliders in 1924 . after the 1920s , soviet designers such as cheranovsky worked independently and in secret under stalin . with significant breakthrough in materials and construction methods , aircraft such as the bich-3 , '' history of aircraft construction in the ussr '' by v.b . shavrov , vol . 1 p . 431 ( with images ) bich-14 , bich-7a became possible . men like chizhevskij and antonov also came into the spotlight of the communist party by designing aircraft like the tailless bok-5 bok-5 , v.a.chizhevskij ( chizhevskij ) and oka-33 '' history of aircraft construction in the ussr '' by v.b . shavrov , vol.1 pp . 547–548 . ( the first ever built by antonov ) which were designated as '' motorized gliders '' due to their similarity to popular gliders of the time . the bich-11 , developed by cheranovsky in 1932 , '' rocket fighter '' by william green , p . 39-41 . competed with the horten brothers h1 and adolf galland at the ninth glider competitions in 1933 , but was not demonstrated in the 1936 summer olympics in berlin . in germany , alexander lippisch worked first on tailless types before progressively moving to flying wings , while the horten brothers developed a series of flying wing gliders through the 1930s . the h1 glider was flown with partial success in 1933 , and the subsequent h2 flown successfully in both glider and powered variants . in the united states , from the 1930s jack northrop and cheston l . eshelman independently worked on their own designs . the northrop n-1m , a scale prototype for a long-range bomber , first flew in 1940 . the eshelman fw-5 , which was commonly referred to as the wing , was an experimental cabin monoplane . other 1930s examples of true flying wings include frenchman charles fauvel 's av3 glider of 1933 and the american freel flying wing glider flown in 1937 . featuring a self-stabilizing airfoil on a straight wing . second world war . during the second world war , the general understanding of aerodynamic issues became sufficiently understood for work on a range of production-representative prototypes to commence . in nazi germany , the horten brothers were keen proponents of the flying wing configuration , developing their own designs around it . one such aircraft they produced was the horten h.iv glider , which was produced in low numbers between 1941 and 1943 . dowling , stephen . '' the flying wing decades ahead of its time . '' bbc news , 2 february 2016 . several other late-war german military designs were based on the flying wing concept , or variations of it , as a proposed solution to extend the range of otherwise very short-range of aircraft powered by early jet engines . the most famous example of these designs would be the horten ho 229 fighter-bomber , which first flew in 1944 . it combined a flying wing , or nurflügel , design with a pair of junkers jumo 004 jet engines in its second , or '' v2 '' ( v for versuch ) prototype airframe ; as such , it was the world 's first pure flying wing to be powered by twin jet engines , being first reportedly flown in march 1944 . v2 was piloted by erwin ziller , who was killed when a flameout in one of its engines led to a crash . plans were made to produce the type as the gotha go 229 during the closing stages of the conflict . despite intentions to develop the go 229 and an improved go p.60 for several roles , including as a night fighter , no gotha-built go 229s or p.60s were ever completed . the unflown , nearly completed surviving '' v3 , '' or third prototype was captured by american forces and send back for study ; it has ended up in storage at the smithsonian institution . the allies also made several relevant advances in the field . during december 1942 , northrop flew the n-9m , a one-third scale development aircraft for a proposed long-range bomber ; several were produced , all but one were scrapped following the bomber programme 's termination . in britain , the baynes bat glider was flown during wartime ; it was a one-third scale experimental aircraft intended to test out the configuration for potential winged tank . the british armstrong whitworth a.w.52g of 1944 was a glider test bed for tailless research , the company holding ambitions to develop a large flying wing airliner capable of serving transatlantic routes . the a.w.52g was later followed up by the armstrong whitworth a.w.52 , an all-metal jet-powered model capable of high speeds for the era ; great attention was paid to laminar flow . first flown on 13 november 1947 , the a.w.52 yielded disappointing results ; the first prototype crashed without loss of life on 30 may 1949 , the occasion being the first emergency use of an ejection seat by a british pilot . the second a.w.52 remained flying with the royal aircraft establishment until 1954 . . postwar . projects continued to examine the flying wing during the postwar era . the work on the northrop n-1m led to the yb-35 long-range bomber , with pre-production machines flying in 1946 . this was superseded the next year by conversion of the type to jet power as the yb-49 of 1947 . the design did not offer a great advantage in range , presented a number of technical problems and did not enter production . in the soviet union , the bich-26 , became one of the first attempts to produce a supersonic jet flying wing aircraft in 1948 ; '' history of aircraft construction in the ussr '' by v.b . shavrov , vol . 2 . p . 114 . aviation author bill gunston referred to the bich-26 as being ahead of its time . gunston , bill . '' the osprey encyclopaedia of russian aircraft 1875–1995 '' . london , osprey . 1995 . however , the airplane was not accepted by the soviet military and the design died with cheranovsky . several other nations also opted to undertake flying wing projects . turkey was one such country , the turk hava kurumu ucak fabrikasi producing the thk-13 tailless glider during 1948 . kılıç , m . 2009 . uçan kanat , thk basımevi , ankara , p . 5 . '' turkish aeronautical association ( thk ) '' , turkish aircraft production ( english-language page ) . ( retrieved 15 may 2014 ) multiple british manufacturers also explored the concept at this time . early proposals for the avro vulcan , a nuclear-armed strategic bomber designed by roy chadwick , also explored several flying wing arrangements ; alliott verdon roe official web site - avro vulcan sketch one such configuration examined for the vulcan paired the flying wing with a rudimentary forward fuselage and a vertical stabilizer at each wingtip ; the delta wing that was actually adopted was arrived at by reducing the wingspan while maintaining the wing area by filling in the space between the wingtips . gunston , w.t . '' the vulcan story . '' flight , 31 january 1958 , p . 143 . following the arrival of supersonic aircraft during the 1950s , military interest in the flying wing was quickly curtailed , as the concept of adopting a thick wing that accommodated the crew and equipment directly conflicted with the optimal thin wing for supersonic flight . interest in flying wings was renewed in the 1980s due to their potentially low radar reflection cross-sections . stealth technology relies on shapes that reflect radar waves only in certain directions , thus making the aircraft hard to detect unless the radar receiver is at a specific position relative to the aircraft—a position that changes continuously as the aircraft moves . '' stealth aircraft . '' u.s . centennial of flight commission , 2003 . retrieved : 5 november 2012 . this approach eventually led to the northrop grumman b-2 spirit , a flying wing stealth bomber . in this case , the aerodynamic advantages of the flying wing are not the primary reasons for the design 's adoption . however , modern computer-controlled fly-by-wire systems allow for many of the aerodynamic drawbacks of the flying wing to be minimized , making for an efficient and effectively stable long-range bomber . due to the practical need for a deep wing , the flying wing concept is most practical for subsonic aircraft . there has been continual interest in using it in the large transport role where the wing is deep enough to hold cargo or passengers . a number of companies , including boeing , mcdonnell douglas , and armstrong whitworth , have performed considerable design work on flying wing airliners to date , no such airliners have yet entered production as of 2020 . since the end of the cold war , numerous unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) featuring the flying wing have been produced . nations have typically used such platforms for aerial reconnaissance ; such uavs include the lockheed martin rq-170 sentinel , the northrop grumman tern , and the nanning huishi uav . civilian companies have also experimented with uavs , such as the facebook aquila , as atmospheric satellites . various prototype unmanned combat aerial vehicles ( ucavs ) have been produced , including the dassault neuron , the sukhoi s-70 okhotnik-b , and the bae systems taranis . . design . overview . a clean flying wing is sometimes presented as theoretically the most aerodynamics efficient ( lowest drag ) design configuration for a fixed wing aircraft . it also would offer high structural efficiency for a given wing depth , leading to light weight and high fuel efficiency . because it lacks conventional stabilizing surfaces and the associated control surfaces , in its purest form the flying wing suffers from the inherent disadvantages of being unstable and difficult to control . these compromises are difficult to reconcile , and efforts to do so can reduce or even negate the expected advantages of the flying wing design , such as reductions in weight and drag . moreover , solutions may produce a final design that is still too unsafe for certain uses , such as commercial aviation . further difficulties arise from the problem of fitting the pilot , engines , flight equipment , and payload all within the depth of the wing section . other known problems with the flying wing design relate to pitch and yaw . pitch issues are discussed in the article on tailless aircraft . the problems of yaw are discussed below . engineering design . a wing that is made deep enough to contain the pilot , engines , fuel , undercarriage and other necessary equipment will have an increased frontal area , when compared with a conventional wing and long-thin fuselage . this can actually result in higher drag and thus lower efficiency than a conventional design . typically the solution adopted in this case is to keep the wing reasonably thin , and the aircraft is then fitted with an assortment of blisters , pods , nacelles , fins , and so forth to accommodate all the needs of a practical aircraft . the problem becomes more acute at supersonic speeds , where the drag of a thick wing rises sharply and it is essential for the wing to be made thin . no supersonic flying wing has ever been built . directional stability . for any aircraft to fly without constant correction it must have directional stability in yaw . flying wings lack anywhere to attach an efficient vertical stabilizer or fin . any fin must attach directly on to the rear part of the wing , giving a small moment arm from the aerodynamic center , which in turn means that the fin is inefficient and to be effective the fin area must be large . such a large fin has weight and drag penalties , and can negate the advantages of the flying wing . the problem can be minimized by increasing the wing sweepback and placing twin fins outboard near the tips , as for example in a low-aspect-ratio delta wing , but many flying wings have gentler sweepback and consequently have , at best , marginal stability . another solution is to angle or crank the wing tip sections downward with significant anhedral , increasing the area at the rear of the aircraft when viewed from the side . the frontal area of a swept wing as seen in the direction of the airflow depends on the yaw angle relative to the airflow . yaw increases the drag of the leading wing and reduces that of the trailing one . with enough sweep-back , differential drag is sufficient to naturally re-align the aircraft . this is the stabilization scheme used in the early northrop flying wings , in combination with vertical engine nacelles ( yb-35 ) or diminutive stabilizers ( yb-49 ) . a complementary approach uses differential twist or wash out , together with a swept-back wing planform and a suitable airfoil section . prandtl , pankonin and others discovered that washout was fundamental to the yaw stability in a turn of the horten brothers flying wings of the 1930s and 1940s . due to the necessity for elevons to be located near the wingtips , the one on the upward-moving wing causes drag that impedes turning as it deflects the high-pressure airflow under the wing . the hortens described a '' bell shaped lift distribution '' across the span of the wing , with more lift in the center section and less at the tips due to their reduced angle of incidence , or washing out . the restoration of outer lift by the elevon creates a slight thrust for the rear ( outer ) section of the wing during the turn . when displaced , this vector essentially pulls the trailing wing forward to compensate for the '' adverse yaw '' caused by the elevon . it did not work well in practice . guiler , r.w . ; control of a swept wing tailless aircraft through wing morphing , icas 2008 : 26th congress of international council of the aeronautical sciences , paper icas 2008-2.7.1 , pages 1–2 . . yaw control . in some flying wing designs , any stabilizing fins and associated control rudders would be too far forward to have much effect , thus alternative means for yaw control are sometimes provided . one solution to the control problem is differential drag : the drag near one wing tip is artificially increased , causing the aircraft to yaw in the direction of that wing . typical methods include : deceleron . the top surface moves up while the lower surface moves down . splitting the aileron on one side induces yaw by creating a differential air brake effect . spoilers . a spoiler surface in the upper wing skin is raised , to disrupt the airflow and increase drag . this effect is generally accompanied by a loss of lift , which must be compensated for either by the pilot or by complex design features . spoilerons . an upper surface spoiler that also acts to reduce lift ( equivalent to deflecting an aileron upwards ) , so causing the aircraft to bank in the direction of the turn—the angle of roll causes the wing lift to act in the direction of turn , reducing the amount of drag required to turn the aircraft 's longitudinal axis . a consequence of the differential drag method is that if the aircraft maneuvers frequently then it will frequently create drag . so flying wings are at their best when cruising in still air : in turbulent air or when changing course , the aircraft may be less efficient than a conventional design . bi-directional flying wing . the supersonic bi-directional flying wing design comprises a long-span low speed wing and a short-span high speed wing joined in the form of an unequal cross . the proposed craft would take off and land with the low-speed wing across the airflow , then rotate a quarter-turn so that the high-speed wing faces the airflow for supersonic travel . zha , im & espinal , toward zero sonic-boom and high efficiency supersonic flight : a novel concept of supersonic bi-directional flying wing nasa has funded a study of the proposal . the design is claimed to feature low wave drag , high subsonic efficiency and little or no sonic boom . the proposed low-speed wing would have a thick , rounded airfoil able to contain the payload and a long span for high efficiency , while the high-speed wing would have a thin , sharp-edged airfoil and a shorter span for low drag at supersonic speed . related designs . some related aircraft that are not strictly flying wings have been described as such . some types , such as the northrop x-216h , still have a tail stabilizer mounted on tail booms , although they lack a fuselage . many hang gliders and microlight aircraft are tailless . although sometimes referred to as flying wings , these types carry the pilot ( and engine where fitted ) below the wing structure rather than inside it , and so are not true flying wings . an aircraft of sharply swept delta planform and deep center section represents a borderline case between flying wing , blended wing body , and/or lifting body configurations . see also . list of flying wings delta wing lifting body oblique wing vincent burnelli zanonia macrocarpa . references . citations . . bibliography . . . . . . . external links . history of the flying wing at century of flight . the nurflügel page flight to the future by joe mizrahi , wings , april 1999 , vol . 29 , no . 2 glen edwards and the flying wing flying wings are coming , march 1942