1901 in literature

events . january 31 – anton chekhov 's three sisters ( три сeстры , tri sestry ) opens at the moscow art theatre , directed by constantin stanislavski and vladimir nemirovich-danchenko with stanislavski as vershinin , olga knipper as masha , margarita savetskaya as olga , maria andreyeva as irina , and maria lilina ( stanislavsky 's wife ) as natasha . february 22 – leo tolstoy is excommunicated from the russian orthodox church . decree of excommunication of leo tolstoy . may 6 – swedish dramatist august strindberg , 52 , marries his third wife , the swedish-norwegian actress harriet bosse , 23 , after an engagement in march during rehearsals for his play easter ( påsk ) . may 25 – chekhov marries olga knipper in a quiet ceremony . '' i have a horror of weddings , the congratulations and the champagne , standing around , glass in hand with an endless grin on your face . '' letter to olga knipper , april 19 , 1901 . may 28 – cherry v . des moines leader is decided in the iowa supreme court , upholding the right to publish critical reviews . june 28 – g . k . chesterton marries frances blogg at st mary abbots , kensington . july – the first modern performances of everyman , the 15th-century morality play , are given by william poel 's elizabethan stage society outdoors at the charterhouse in london . stephen g . kuehler ( 2008 ) . concealing god : the '' everyman '' revival , 1901–1903 . tufts university ph.d . thesis , p . 108 . july 24 – o . henry is released from prison in columbus , ohio after serving three years for embezzlement . october thomas mann 's first novel , buddenbrooks , is published in berlin . the irish literary theatre project gives its final performance . october 23 – mark twain receives an honorary doctorate of literature from yale university . in the same month he moves to riverdale , new york . december 2 – the romanian literary review sămănătorul is founded . december 10 – the first nobel prize in literature is awarded , to french poet sully prudhomme . nobel prize official website : from the first nobel prize award ceremony , 1901 . accessed march 11 , 2013 . unknown date – world 's classics series of publications is founded by grant richards in england . new books . fiction . ignacio manuel altamirano – el zarco leonid andreyev – « повести » ( stories ) rené boylesve – la becquée samuel butler – erewhon revisited hall caine – the eternal city winston churchill – the crisis colette – claudine à paris joseph conrad and ford madox ford – the inheritors victoria cross – anna lombard patrick s . dinneen – cormac ó conaill ( first novel in irish published complete in book form ) george douglas – the house with the green shutters miles franklin – my brilliant career géza gárdonyi – a láthatatlan ember ( the invisible man ) henry james – the sacred fount johannes v . jensen – the fall of the king rudyard kipling – kim jean lorrain monsieur de phocas le vice errant george barr mccutcheon – graustark : the story of a love behind a throne thomas mann – buddenbrooks george moore – sister theresa frank norris – the octopus charles-louis philippe – bubu de montparnasse luigi pirandello – l'esclusa ( the excluded woman ) liane de pougy – idylle saphique josé maria de eça de queiroz – a cidade e as serras m . p . shiel lord of the sea the purple cloud bram stoker and valdimar ásmundsson – makt myrkranna ( powers of darkness , icelandic language adaptation of stoker 's dracula ) rabindranath tagore – nastanirh ( নষ্টনীড় , the broken nest ) william alexander taylor – intermere jules verne the sea serpent ( les histoires de jean-marie cabidoulin ) the village in the treetops ( le village aérien ) h . g . wells – the first men in the moon émile zola – travail . children and young people . john kendrick bangs – mr . munchausen l . frank baum american fairy tales the master key dot and tot of merryland evelyn everett-green – true stories of girl heroines . drama . gabriele d'annunzio – francesca da rimini j . m . barrie – quality street roberto bracco – lost in the dark ( sperduti nel buio ) hall caine – the eternal city anton chekhov – three sisters clyde fitch – the climbers haralamb lecca – quinta . suprema forță wilhelm meyer-förster – old heidelberg ( alt heidelberg ) louis n . parker – the cardinal august strindberg – a dream play ( ett drömspel , published ) stanisław wyspiański warszawianka ( varsovian anthem , stage première ) the wedding ( wesele ) . poetry . henry ames blood – selected poems of henry ames blood maxim gorky – the song of the stormy petrel ( песня о буревестнике ) thomas hardy – poems of the past and the present akiko yosano ( 与謝野 晶子 ) – midaregami ( みだれ髪 , tangled hair ) . non-fiction . annie besant , charles webster leadbeater – thought-forms : a record of clairvoyant investigation sigmund freud – the psychopathology of everyday life ( zur psychopathologie des alltagslebens ) seebohm rowntree – poverty , a study of town life edith helen sichel – women and men of the french renaissance rudolf steiner – die mystik im aufgange des neuzeitlichen geisteslebens , und ihr verhältnis zur modernen weltan-schauung ( mysticism at the dawn of modern spiritual life , and its relationship with modern world-views ) a . e . waite – the life of louis claude de saint-martin booker t . washington – up from slavery h . g . wells – anticipations of the reaction of mechanical and scientific progress upon human life and thought . births . january 31 – marie luise kaschnitz ( marie luise von holzing-berslett ) , german story writer , novelist and poet ( died 1974 ) february 13 – lewis grassic gibbon ( james leslie mitchell ) , scottish novelist ( died 1974 ) february 23 – ivar lo-johansson , swedish novelist and journalist ( died 1990 ) march 4 ( or 1903 ) – jean-joseph rabearivelo ( joseph-casimir rabearivelo ) , malagasy francophone poet ( suicide 1937 ) april 10 – anna kavan ( helen emily woods , helen ferguson ) , french-born english novelist and short story writer ( died 1968 ) may 1 – antal szerb , hungarian writer ( died 1945 ) may 15 – xavier herbert , australian novelist ( died 1984 ) june 1 – john van druten , english-born american dramatist ( died 1957 ) june 23 – ahmet hamdi tanpınar , turkish novelist and essayist ( died 1962 ) july 9 – barbara cartland , english romantic novelist , historian and playwright ( died 2000 ) july 20 – dilys powell , english film critic ( died 1995 ) july 25 – ruth krauss , american children 's author and poet ( died 1993 ) august 10 – sergio frusoni , cape verde poet and promoter of cape verdean creole language ( died 1975 ) august 17 – heðin brú , faroese fiction writer and translator ( died 1987 ) august 20 – salvatore quasimodo , italian author ( died 1968 ) november 3 – andré malraux , french author ( died 1976 ) november 4 – ernest elmore ( john bude ) , english crime writer and theatre director ( died 1957 ) december 9 – ödön von horváth , austro-hungarian dramatist and novelist ( died 1938 ) december 16 – margaret mead , american anthropologist and author ( died 1978 ) . deaths . january 14 – víctor balaguer , catalan spanish dramatist and poet ( born 1824 ) february 2 – john cordy jeaffreson , english novelist and non-fiction writer ( born 1831 ) february 15 – maurice thompson , american novelist ( born 1844 ) march 19 – philippe gille , french dramatist ( born 1831 ) march 24 – charlotte mary yonge , english novelist ( born 1823 ) april 6 – george murray smith , english publisher ( born 1824 ) april 12 – louis auguste sabatier , french theologian ( born 1839 ) june 5 – dagny juel , norwegian writer and artists ' model ( shot , born 1867 ) june 9 – walter besant , english novelist and historian ( born 1836 ) june 10 – robert williams buchanan , scottish poet , novelist and dramatist ( born 1841 ) july 7 – johanna spyri , swiss children 's writer ( born 1827 ) july 18 – jan ten brink , dutch novelist ( born 1834 ) july 20 – william cosmo monkhouse , english poet and critic ( born 1840 ) july 27 – brooke foss westcott , english theologian ( born 1825 ) august 9 – vishnudas bhave , indian dramatist ( unknown birth year ) october 31 – julien leclercq , french symbolist poet and art critic ( born 1865 ) november 6 – kate greenaway , english children 's illustrator and writer ( born 1846 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : sully prudhomme . references .