Macintosh II

overview . two common criticisms of the macintosh from its introduction in 1984 were the closed architecture and lack of color ; rumors of a color macintosh began almost immediately . the macintosh ii project was begun by dhuey and berkeley during 1985 without the knowledge of apple co-founder and macintosh division head steve jobs , who opposed features like expansion slots and color , on the basis that the former complicated the user experience and the latter did not conform to wysiwyg , since color printers were not common . he instead wanted higher-resolution monochrome displays for the macintosh . initially referred to as '' little big mac '' , the macintosh ii was codenamed '' milwaukee '' after dhuey 's hometown , and later went through a series of new names , including '' reno '' , '' becks '' , '' cabernet '' , '' uzi '' and '' paris '' ( after jean-louis gassée , apple 's then products manager , who protected the semi-clandestine project from cancellation ) . levy , steven . insanely great : the life and times of macintosh , the computer that changed everything . new york : viking , 1994 ; p . 229-231 after jobs was fired from apple in september 1985 , the project could proceed openly . the macintosh ii was introduced at the appleworld 1987 conference in los angeles , with low-volume initial shipments starting two months later . retailing for us 5,498 , the macintosh ii was the first '' modular '' macintosh model , so called because it came in a horizontal desktop case like many ibm pc compatibles of the time . all previous macintosh computers used an compact macintosh . the macintosh ii had drive bays for an internal hard disk ( originally 40 mb or 80 mb ) and an optional second floppy disk drive . it , along with the macintosh se , was the first macintosh computer to use the apple desktop bus ( adb ) introduced with the apple iigs for keyboard and mouse interface . the primary improvement in the macintosh ii was color quickdraw in rom , a color version of the graphics language which was the heart of the machine . among the many innovations in color quickdraw were an ability to handle any display size , up to 8-bit color depth , and multiple monitors . because color quickdraw was included in the macintosh ii 's rom and relied on new 68020 instructions , earlier macintoshes could not be upgraded to display color . in september 1988 , shortly before the introduction of the macintosh iix , apple increased the list price of the macintosh ii by about 20 % . . hardware . thumb cpu : the macintosh ii is built around the motorola 68020 processor operating at 16 mhz , teamed with a motorola 68881 floating point unit . the machine shipped with a socket for an mmu , but the '' apple hmmu chip '' ( vlsi vi475 chip ) was installed that did not implement virtual memory ( instead , it translated 24-bit addresses to 32-bit addresses for the mac os , which would not be 32-bit clean until system 7 ) . memory : the standard memory was 1 megabyte , expandable to 8 mb . apple announces 68030 macintosh iix with high density compatible drive by john cook and carol cochrane , business wire 09/19/88 ( retrieved september 20 , 2009 ) the mac ii had eight 30-pin simms , and memory was installed in groups of four ( called '' bank a '' and '' bank b '' ) . the original macintosh ii did not have a pmmu by default . it relied on the memory controller hardware to map the installed memory into a contiguous address space . this hardware had the restriction that the address space dedicated to bank a must be larger than those of bank b . though this memory controller was designed to support up to 16mb 30-pin simms for up to 128mb of ram , the original macintosh ii roms had problems limiting the amount of ram that can be installed to 8mb . the macintosh iix roms that also shipped with the fdhd upgrade fixed this problem , though still do not have a 32-bit memory manager and can not boot into 32-bit addressing mode under mac os ( without the assistance of mode32 ) . series : the 24-bit rom blues by adam c . engst , tidbits , april 22 , 1991 ( retrieved september 21 , 2009 ) mode32 contained a workaround that allowed larger simms to be put in bank b with the pmmu installed . in this case , the roms at boot think that the computer has 8mb or less of ram . mode32 then reprograms the memory controller to dedicate more address space to bank a , allowing access to the additional memory in bank b . since this makes the physical address space discontiguous , the pmmu is then used to remap the address space into a contiguous block . graphics : the macintosh ii includes a graphics card that supports a true-color 16.7 million color palette and was available in two configurations : 4-bit and 8-bit . the 4-bit model supports 16 colors on a 640×480 display and 256 colors ( 8-bit video ) on a 512×384 display , which means that vram was 256 kb . the 8-bit model supports 256-color video on a 640×480 display , which means that vram was 512 kb in size . with an optional ram upgrade ( requiring 120ns dip chips ) , the 4-bit version supports 640×480 in 8-bit color . the video card does not include hardware acceleration of drawing operations . display : apple offered a choice of two displays , a 12 '' black and white unit , and a more expensive 13 '' high-resolution color display based on sony 's trinitron technology . more than one display could be attached to the computer , and objects could be easily dragged from one screen to the next . third-party displays quickly became available . the los angeles times reviewer called the color '' spectacular . '' the operating system user interface remained black and white even on color monitors with the exception of the apple logo , which appeared in rainbow color . storage : a 5.25-inch 40 mb internal scsi hard disk was optional , as was a second internal 800 kilobyte 3.5-inch floppy disk drive . expansion : six nubus slots were available for expansion ( at least one of which had to be used for a graphics card , as the mac ii had no onboard graphics chipset and the os did n't support headless booting ) . it is possible to connect as many as six displays to a macintosh ii by filling all of the nubus slots with graphics cards . another option for expansion included the mac286 , which included an intel 80286 chip and could be used for ms-dos compatibility . the original roms in the macintosh ii contained a bug that prevented the system from recognizing more than one megabyte of memory address space on a nubus card . every macintosh ii manufactured until approximately november 1987 had this defect . this happened because slot manager was not 32-bit clean . infoworld magazine , october 26 , 1987 , p.47 apple offered a well-publicized recall of the faulty roms and released a program to test whether a particular macintosh ii had the defect . as a result , it is rare to find a macintosh ii with the original roms . accessories : the macintosh ii and macintosh se were the first apple computers since the apple i to be sold without a keyboard . instead the customer was offered the choice of the new adb apple keyboard or the apple extended keyboard as a separate purchase . dealers could bundle a third-party keyboard or attempt to upsell a customer to the more expensive ( and higher-profit ) extended keyboard . audio : the macintosh ii was the first macintosh to have the chimes of death accompany the sad mac logo whenever a serious hardware error occurred . the new extensions featured for the macintosh ii at the time were a/rose and sound manager . models . the macintosh ii was offered in three configurations . all systems included a mouse and a single 800 kb 3.5-inch floppy disk drive ; a 68551 pmmu was available as an option . macintosh ii cpu : 1 mb ram . macintosh ii 1/40 cpu : 1 mb ram , internal 40-megabyte scsi hdd . macintosh ii 4/40 cpu : 4 mb ram , internal 40-megabyte scsi hdd . references . external links . mac ii profile on low end mac macintosh ii technical specifications at apple.com