Hyacinthoides non-scripta

taxonomy . hyacinthoides non-scripta was alpha taxonomy by carl linnaeus in his seminal 1753 work , as a species in the genus hyacinthus . the specific epithet means '' unlettered '' or '' unmarked '' and was intended to distinguish this plant from the classical hyacinth of greek mythology . this mythical flower , which was almost certainly not the modern hyacinth , sprang up from the blood of the dying prince hyacinthus . his lover , the god apollo , shed tears that marked the new flower 's petals with the letters '' aiai '' ( '' alas '' ) as a sign of his grief . in 1803 , johann centurius von hoffmannsegg and johann heinrich friedrich link transferred the species to the genus scilla , and in 1849 christian august friedrich garcke transferred it to the genus endymion ( now a synonym of hyacinthoides ) ; it is still widely known as '' scilla non-scripta '' or '' endymion non-scriptus '' . in 1934 , pierre chouard transferred the species to its current placement in the genus hyacinthoides . scilla was the original greek name for the sea squill , drimia maritima ; endymion is a character from greek mythology ; hyacinthoides means '' like a hyacinth '' . the type species of hyacinthoides is h . & nbsp ; hispanica , while that of endymion is '' scilla nutans '' , described by james edward smith in english botany in 1797 , but now treated as a synonym of h . & nbsp ; non-scripta . smith had argued that ( '' nodding '' ) is a more fitting epithet than , which makes no sense once separated from hyacinthus , but the international code of nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants requires the oldest name to be used , regardless of meaning . common names for hyacinthoides non-scripta include bluebell , common bluebell , english bluebell , british bluebell , wild hyacinth , wood bell , fairy flower and bell bottle . in scotland , the term '' bluebell '' is used for the harebell , campanula rotundifolia . . related species . hyacinthoides non-scripta forms a clade with three other species – h . & nbsp ; hispanica , h . & nbsp ; paivae and h . & nbsp ; cedretorum – centred on the iberian peninsula . h . & nbsp ; paivae is restricted to a small area of north-western iberia ( galicia and neighbouring parts of portugal ) , while h . & nbsp ; cedretorum is found in mountainous areas of western north africa ( morocco and algeria ) . within iberia , h . & nbsp ; non-scripta and h . & nbsp ; hispanica are geographically separated by the duero river . the genus also contains seven further species , mostly distributed further east in the mediterranean basin . . description . hyacinthoides non-scripta is a perennial plant that grows from a bulb . it produces 3–6 linear leaves , all growing from the base of the plant , and each wide . an inflorescence of 5–12 ( exceptionally 3–32 ) flowers is borne on a stem up to tall , which droops towards the tip ; the flowers are arranged in a 1-sided nodding raceme . each flower is long , with two bracts at the base , and the six tepals are strongly recurved at their tips . the tepals are violet–blue . the three stamens in the outer whorl are fused to the perianth for more than 75 % of their length , and bear cream-coloured pollen . the flowers are strongly and sweetly scented . the seeds are black , and germinate on the soil surface . the bulbs produce contractile roots ; when these roots contract , they draw the bulbs down into deeper layers of the soil where there is greater moisture , reaching depths of . this may explain the absence of h . & nbsp ; non-scripta from some thin soils over chalk in south east england , since the bulbs are unable to penetrate into sufficiently deep soils . h . & nbsp ; non-scripta differs from h . & nbsp ; hispanica , which occurs as an introduced species in the british isles , in a number of ways . h . & nbsp ; hispanica has paler flowers which are borne in radially symmetrical racemes ; their tepals are less recurved , and are only faintly scented . the outer stamens are fused with the tepals for less than 75 % of their length , and the anthers are the same colour as the tepals . these two species are thought to have diverged 8000 years ago . the two species hybridise readily to produce fertile offspring known as hyacinthoides × massartiana ; the hybrids are intermediate between the parental species , forming a spectrum of variation which connects the two . . distribution and ecology . hyacinthoides non-scripta is native to the western parts of atlantic europe , from north-western spain and north-western portugal , to the netherlands and the british isles . it is found in belgium , great britain , france , ireland , portugal , the netherlands and spain , and also occurs as a naturalized species in germany , italy and romania . it has also been introduced ( and can be highly invasive ) into various parts of north america , in both the pacific northwest ( british columbia , washington and oregon ) , the great lakes region ( ontario , new york , ohio and pennsylvania ) and other parts of the united states ( the virginias , kentucky and indiana ) . despite the wide distribution of h . & nbsp ; non-scripta , it reaches its greatest densities in the british isles , where '' bluebell woods '' ( woodland with the understory dominated by h . & nbsp ; non-scripta in spring ) are a familiar sight . h . & nbsp ; non-scripta is found throughout the british isles , with the exception of the northern outer hebrides ( lewis and harris ) , orkney and shetland , and it is estimated that 25 % –50 % of all common bluebells may be found in the british isles . bluebells are a species of deciduous woodland over much of their range , flowering and leafing early before the canopy closes in late spring . they may also be found growing under bracken or japanese knotweed , perennial plants which also form stands with a dense summer canopy . they are most successful on slightly acid soils ; the same niche in alkaline conditions may be occupied by other species such as mercurialis perennis . as a species adapted to woodlands , the young shoots are able to penetrate through a thick layer of leaf litter , and bluebells are often used as an indicator species to identify ancient woodland . bluebells are also frequently found in hedgerows , and in the west of their range they can be found growing in open habitats , including coastal meadows . bluebell flowers are rich in pollen and nectar , and are chiefly pollinated by bumblebees , although they are also visited by various other insects . they are a host species for the parasitic fungus uromyces muscari , which causes bluebell rust . the ability of h . & nbsp ; non-scripta to take up phosphorus from the soil is greatly enhanced by the presence of arbuscular mycorrhizae in its roots . . protection . hyacinthoides non-scripta is not protected under international law , such as cites or the eu habitats directive . in the united kingdom , h . & nbsp ; non-scripta is a protected species under the wildlife and countryside act 1981 . landowners are prohibited from removing common bluebells on their land for sale and it is a criminal offence to remove the bulbs of wild common bluebells . this legislation was strengthened in 1998 under schedule 8 of the act making any trade in wild common bluebell bulbs or seeds an offence , punishable by fines of up to £5,000 per bulb . the species is not protected in the republic of ireland . in france , h . & nbsp ; non-scripta is largely confined to the northern half of the country . it is not legally protected at the national level , but it is protected in many of the towards the edge of its range ( corrèze , loiret , gironde , lot-et-garonne , dordogne , cher , eure-et-loir , indre-et-loire and loir-et-cher ) . in wallonia , h . & nbsp ; non-scripta is protected under of the . . uses . bluebells are widely planted as garden plants , either among trees or in herbaceous borders . they flower at the same time as hyacinths , narcissus and some tulips . their ability to reproduce vegetatively , using bulb offsets and seed , means that they can spread rapidly , and may need to be controlled as weeds . in common with other members of their genus , bluebells- particularly their bulbs- are normally considered to be toxic . bluebells synthesise a wide range of chemicals with potential medicinal properties : they contain at least 15 biologically active compounds that may provide them with protection against insects and animals . certain extracts – water-soluble alkaloids – are similar to compounds tested for use in combating hiv and cancer . the bulbs of bluebells are used in folk medicine as a remedy for leucorrhoea , and as a diuretic or styptic , while the sap can be used as an adhesive . the bluebell may be regarded as the united kingdom 's '' favourite flower '' . when the wild plant charity plantlife organised a survey in 2004 to find a favourite flower for each county in the united kingdom , it decided to ban voters from choosing the bluebell because it had been by far the top choice in an earlier poll for the nation 's favourite flower . a stylised bluebell is used as the logo for the botanical society of britain and ireland . . notes . references . external links . plantlife description : bluebell kew plant profile : hyacinthoides non-scripta ( bluebell )