Pnictogen

characteristics . chemical . like other groups , the members of this family show similar patterns in electron configuration , especially in the outermost shells , resulting in trends in chemical behavior . this group has the defining characteristic that all the component elements have 5 electrons in their outermost shell , that is 2 electrons in the s & nbsp ; subshell and 3 unpaired electrons in the p & nbsp ; subshell . they are therefore 3 & nbsp ; electrons short of filling their outermost electron shell in their non-ionized state . the russell–saunders term symbol of the ground state in all elements in the group is 4 s . the most important elements of this group are nitrogen ( n ) , which in its diatomic form is the principal component of air , and phosphorus ( p ) , which , like nitrogen , is essential to all known forms of life . compounds . binary compounds of the group can be referred to collectively as pnictides . pnictide compounds tend to be exotic . various properties that some pnictides have include being diamagnetic and paramagnetic at room temperature , being transparent , and generating electricity when heated . other pnictides include the ternary rare-earth main-group variety of pnictides . these are in the form of re a m b pn c , where m is a carbon group or boron group element and pn is any pnictogen except nitrogen . these compounds are between ionic and covalent compounds and thus have unusual bonding properties . '' pnicogen – molecule of the month '' . university of bristol these elements are also noted for their stability in compounds due to their tendency for forming double and triple covalent bonds . this is the property of these elements which leads to their potential toxicity , most evident in phosphorus , arsenic and antimony . when these substances react with various chemicals of the body , they create strong free radicals not easily processed by the liver , where they accumulate . paradoxically , it is this strong bonding which causes nitrogen and bismuth 's reduced toxicity ( when in molecules ) , as these form strong bonds with other atoms which are difficult to split , creating very unreactive molecules . for example , n 2 , the diatomic form of nitrogen , is used as an inert gas in situations where using argon or another noble gas would be too expensive . formation of multiple bonds is facilitated by their five valence electrons whereas the octet rule permits a pnictogen for accepting three electrons on covalent bonding . because 5 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 3 , it leaves unused two electrons in a lone pair unless there is a positive charge around ( like in ) . when a pnictogen forms only three single bonds , effects of the lone pair typically result in trigonal pyramidal molecular geometry . oxidation states . the light pnictogens ( nitrogen , phosphorus , and arsenic ) tend to form −3 charges when reduced , completing their octet . when oxidized or ionized , pnictogens typically take an oxidation state of +3 ( by losing all three p-shell electrons in the valence shell ) or +5 ( by losing all three p-shell and both s-shell electrons in the valence shell ) . however heavier pnictogens are more likely to form the +3 oxidation state than lighter ones due to the s-shell electrons becoming more stabilized . boudreaux , kevin a . '' group 5a — the pnictogens '' . department of chemistry , angelo state university , texas . −3 oxidation state . pnictogens can react with hydrogen to form pnictogen hydrides such as ammonia . going down the group , to phosphane ( phosphine ) , arsane ( arsine ) , stibane ( stibine ) , and finally bismuthane ( bismuthine ) , each pnictogen hydride becomes progressively less stable/more unstable , more toxic , and has a smaller hydrogen-hydrogen angle ( from 107.8° in ammonia to 90.48° in bismuthane ) . ( also , technically , only ammonia and phosphane have the pnictogen in the −3 oxidation state because , for the rest , the pnictogen is less electronegative than hydrogen . ) crystal solids featuring pnictogens fully reduced include yttrium nitride , calcium phosphide , sodium arsenide , indium antimonide , and even double salts like aluminum gallium indium phosphide . these include iii-v semiconductors , including gallium arsenide , the second-most widely-used semiconductor after silicon . +3 oxidation state . nitrogen forms a limited number of stable iii compounds . nitrogen ( iii ) oxide can only be isolated at low temperatures , and nitrous acid is unstable . nitrogen trifluoride is the only stable nitrogen trihalide , with nitrogen trichloride , nitrogen tribromide and nitrogen triiodide being explosive—nitrogen triiodide being so shock-sensitive that the touch of a feather detonates it . phosphorus forms a +iii oxide which is stable at room temperature , phosphorous acid , and several trihalides , although the triiodide is unstable . arsenic forms +iii compounds with oxygen as arsenites , arsenous acid , and arsenic ( iii ) oxide , and it forms all four trihalides . antimony forms antimony trioxide and antimonite but not oxyacids . its trihalides , antimony trifluoride , antimony trichloride , antimony tribromide , and antimony triiodide , like all pnictogen trihalides , each have trigonal pyramidal molecular geometry . the +3 oxidation state is bismuth 's most common oxidation state because its ability to form the +5 oxidation state is hindered by relativistic quantum chemistry , effects that are even more pronounced concerning moscovium . bismuth ( iii ) forms an oxide , an oxychloride , an oxynitrate , and a sulfide . moscovium ( iii ) is predicted to behave similarly to bismuth ( iii ) . moscovium is predicted to form all four trihalides , of which all but the trifluoride are predicted to be soluble in water . it is also predicted to form an oxychloride and oxybromide in the +iii oxidation state . +5 oxidation state . for nitrogen , the +5 state is typically serves as only a formal explanation of molecules like dinitrogen pentoxide , as the high electronegativity of nitrogen causes the electrons to be shared almost evenly . pnictogen compounds with coordination number & nbsp ; 5 are hypervalent . nitrogen ( v ) fluoride is only theoretical and has not been synthesized . the '' true '' +5 state is more common for the essentially non-relativistic typical pnictogens phosphorus , arsenic , and antimony , as shown in their oxides , phosphorus ( v ) oxide , arsenic ( v ) oxide , and antimony ( v ) oxide , and their fluorides , phosphorus ( v ) fluoride , arsenic ( v ) fluoride , antimony ( v ) fluoride . at least two also form related fluoride-anions , hexafluorophosphate and hexafluoroantimonate , that function as non-coordinating anions . phosphorus even forms mixed oxide-halides , known as oxyhalides , like phosphorus oxychloride , and mixed pentahalides , like phosphorus trifluorodichloride . pentamethylpnictogen ( v ) compounds exist for arsenic , antimony , and bismuth . however , for bismuth , the +5 oxidation state becomes rare due to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s orbitals known as the inert pair effect , so that the 6s electrons are reluctant to bond chemically . this causes bismuth ( v ) oxide to be unstable and bismuth ( v ) fluoride to be more reactive than the other pnictogen pentafluorides , making it an extremely powerful fluorinating agent . this effect is even more pronounced for moscovium , prohibiting it from attaining a +5 oxidation state . other oxidation states . nitrogen forms nitrogen oxide in which the nitrogen can take on a variety of oxidation states , including +ii , +iv , and even some mixed-valence compounds and very unstable +vi oxidation state . in hydrazine , diphosphane , and organic derivatives of the two , the nitrogen/phosphorus atoms have the −2 oxidation state . likewise , diimide , which has two nitrogen atoms double-bonded to each other , and diazene have nitrogen in the oxidation state of −1 . similarly , realgar has arsenic-arsenic bonds , so the arsenic 's oxidation state is +ii . a corresponding compound for antimony is sb 2 ( c 6 h 5 ) 4 , where the antimony 's oxidation state is +ii . phosphorus has the +1 oxidation state in hypophosphorous acid and the +4 oxidation state in hypophosphoric acid . antimony tetroxide is a mixed-valence compound , where half of the antimony atoms are in the +3 oxidation state , and the other half are in the +5 oxidation state . it is expected that moscovium will have an inert pair effect for both the 7s and the 7p 1/2 electrons , as the binding energy of the lone 7p 3/2 electron is noticeably lower than that of the 7p 1/2 electrons . this is predicted to cause +i to be a common oxidation state for moscovium , although it also occurs to a lesser extent for bismuth and nitrogen . . physical . the pnictogens consist of two non-metals ( one gas , one solid ) , two metalloids , one metal , and one element with unknown chemical properties . all the elements in the group are solids at room temperature , except for nitrogen which is gaseous at room temperature . nitrogen and bismuth , despite both being pnictogens , are very different in their physical properties . for instance , at stp nitrogen is a transparent non-metallic gas , while bismuth is a silvery-white metal . the density of the pnictogens increase towards the heavier pnictogens . nitrogen 's density is 0.001251 g/cm 3 at stp . phosphorus 's density is 1.82 g/cm 3 at stp , arsenic 's is 5.72 g/cm 3 , antimony 's is 6.68 g/cm 3 , and bismuth 's is 9.79 g/cm 3 . nitrogen 's melting point is −210 & nbsp ; °c and its boiling point is −196 & nbsp ; °c . phosphorus has a melting point of 44 & nbsp ; °c and a boiling point of 280 & nbsp ; °c . arsenic is one of only two elements to sublimate at standard pressure ; it does this at 603 & nbsp ; °c . antimony 's melting point is 631 & nbsp ; °c and its boiling point is 1587 & nbsp ; °c . bismuth 's melting point is 271 & nbsp ; °c and its boiling point is 1564 & nbsp ; °c . nitrogen 's crystal structure is hexagonal . phosphorus 's crystal structure is cubic . arsenic , antimony , and bismuth all have rhombohedral crystal structures . . history . the nitrogen compound sal ammoniac ( ammonium chloride ) has been known since the time of the ancient egyptians . in the 1760s two scientists , henry cavendish and joseph priestley , isolated nitrogen from air , but neither realized the presence of an undiscovered element . it was not until several years later , in 1772 , that daniel rutherford realized that the gas was indeed nitrogen . the alchemy hennig brandt first discovered phosphorus in hamburg in 1669 . brandt produced the element by heating evaporated urine and condensing the resulting phosphorus vapor in water . brandt initially thought that he had discovered the philosopher 's stone , but eventually realized that this was not the case . arsenic compounds have been known for at least 5000 years , and the ancient greek theophrastus recognized the arsenic minerals called realgar and orpiment . elemental arsenic was discovered in the 13th century by albertus magnus . antimony was well known to the ancients . a 5000-year-old vase made of nearly pure antimony exists in the louvre . antimony compounds were used in dyes in the babylonian times . the antimony mineral stibnite may have been a component of greek fire . bismuth was first discovered by an alchemist in 1400 . within 80 years of bismuth 's discovery , it had applications in printing and decorated caskets . the incas were also using bismuth in knives by 1500 . bismuth was originally thought to be the same as lead , but in 1753 , claude françois geoffroy proved that bismuth was different from lead . moscovium was successfully produced in 2003 by bombarding americium-243 atoms with calcium-48 atoms . . names and etymology . the term '' pnictogen '' ( or '' pnigogen '' ) is derived from the ancient greek word meaning '' to choke '' , referring to the choking or stifling property of nitrogen gas . it can also be used as a mnemonic for the two most common members , p and n . the term '' pnictogen '' was suggested by the dutch chemist anton eduard van arkel in the early 1950s . it is also spelled '' pnicogen '' or '' pnigogen '' . the term '' pnicogen '' is rarer than the term '' pnictogen '' , and the ratio of academic research papers using '' pnictogen '' to those using '' pnicogen '' is 2.5 to 1 . it comes from the greek root ( choke , strangle ) , and thus the word '' pnictogen '' is also a reference to the dutch and german names for nitrogen and , respectively , '' suffocating substance '' : i.e . , substance in air , unsupportive of breathing ) . hence , '' pnictogen '' could be translated as '' suffocation maker '' . the word '' pnictide '' also comes from the same root . the name pentels ( from greek , , five ) also at one time stood for this group . . occurrence . nitrogen makes up 25 parts per million of the earth 's crust , 5 parts per million of soil on average , 100 to 500 parts per trillion of seawater , and 78 % of dry air . the majority of nitrogen on earth is in the form of nitrogen gas , but some nitrate minerals do exist . nitrogen makes up 2.5 % of a typical human by weight . phosphorus makes up 0.1 % of the earth 's crust , making it the 11th most abundant element there . phosphorus makes up 0.65 parts per million of soil , and 15 to 60 parts per billion of seawater . there are 200 mt of accessible phosphates on earth . phosphorus makes up 1.1 % of a typical human by weight . phosphorus occurs in minerals of the apatite family which are the main components of the phosphate rocks . arsenic makes up 1.5 parts per million of the earth 's crust , making it the 53rd most abundant element there . the soils contain 1 to 10 parts per million of arsenic , and seawater contains 1.6 parts per billion of arsenic . arsenic makes up 100 parts per billion of a typical human by weight . some arsenic exists in elemental form , but most arsenic is found in the arsenic minerals orpiment , realgar , arsenopyrite , and enargite . antimony makes up 0.2 parts per million of the earth 's crust , making it the 63rd most abundant element there . the soils contain 1 part per million of antimony on average , and seawater contains 300 parts per trillion of antimony on average . a typical human contains 28 parts per billion of antimony by weight . some elemental antimony occurs in silver deposits . bismuth makes up 48 parts per billion of the earth 's crust , making it the 70th most abundant element there . the soils contain approximately 0.25 parts per million of bismuth , and seawater contains 400 parts per trillion of bismuth . bismuth most commonly occurs as the mineral bismuthinite , but bismuth also occurs in elemental form or in sulfide ores . moscovium is produced several atoms at a time in particle accelerators . . production . nitrogen . nitrogen can be produced by fractional distillation of air . . phosphorus . the principal method for producing phosphorus is to reduce phosphates with carbon in an electric arc furnace . . arsenic . most arsenic is prepared by heating the mineral arsenopyrite in the presence of air . this forms arsenic trioxide , from which arsenic can be extracted via carbon reduction . however , it is also possible to make metallic arsenic by heating arsenopyrite at 650 to 700 & nbsp ; °c without oxygen . '' arsenic ( as ) chemical element '' . encyclopædia britannica . . antimony . with sulfide ores , the method by which antimony is produced depends on the amount of antimony in the raw ore . if the ore contains 25 % to 45 % antimony by weight , then crude antimony is produced by smelting the ore in a blast furnace . if the ore contains 45 % to 60 % antimony by weight , antimony is obtained by heating the ore , also known as liquidation . ores with more than 60 % antimony by weight are chemically displaced with iron shavings from the molten ore , resulting in impure metal . if an oxide ore of antimony contains less than 30 % antimony by weight , the ore is reduced in a blast furnace . if the ore contains closer to 50 % antimony by weight , the ore is instead reduced in a reverberatory furnace . antimony ores with mixed sulfides and oxides are smelted in a blast furnace . butterman , c . ; carlin , jr . , j.f . ( 2003 ) . mineral commodity profiles : antimony . united states geological survey . . bismuth . bismuth minerals do occur , in particular in the form of sulfides and oxides , but it is more economic to produce bismuth as a by-product of the smelting of lead ores or , as in china , of tungsten and zinc ores . . moscovium . moscovium is produced a few atoms at a time in particle accelerators by firing a beam of calcium-48 ions at americium until the nuclei fuse . . applications . liquid nitrogen is a commonly used cryogenic liquid . nitrogen in the form of ammonia is a nutrient critical to most plants ' survival . haber process accounts for about 1–2 % of the world 's energy consumption and the majority of reduced nitrogen in food . phosphorus is used in matches and incendiary bombs . phosphate fertilizer helps feed much of the world . arsenic was historically used as a paris green pigment , but is not used this way anymore due to its extreme toxicity . arsenic in the form of organoarsenic chemistry is sometimes used in chicken feed . antimony is alloyed with lead to produce some bullets . antimony currency was briefly used in the 1930s in parts of china , but this use was discontinued as antimony is both soft and toxic . bismuth subsalicylate is the active ingredient in pepto-bismol . . biological role . nitrogen is a component of molecules critical to life on earth , such as dna and amino acids . nitrates occur in some plants , due to bacteria present in the nodes of the plant . this is seen in leguminous plants such as peas or spinach and lettuce . a typical 70 kg human contains 1.8 kg of nitrogen . phosphorus in the form of phosphates occur in compounds important to life , such as dna and atp . humans consume approximately 1 g of phosphorus per day . phosphorus is found in foods such as fish , liver , turkey , chicken , and eggs . phosphate deficiency is a problem known as hypophosphatemia . a typical 70 kg human contains 480 g of phosphorus . arsenic promotes growth in chickens and rats , and may be micronutrient . arsenic has been shown to be helpful in metabolizing the amino acid arginine . there are 7 mg of arsenic in a typical 70 kg human . antimony is not known to have a biological role . plants take up only trace amounts of antimony . there are approximately 2 mg of antimony in a typical 70 kg human . bismuth is not known to have a biological role . humans ingest on average less than 20 μg of bismuth per day . there is less than 500 μg of bismuth in a typical 70 kg human . . toxicity . nitrogen gas is completely nontoxic , but breathing in pure nitrogen gas is deadly , because it causes nitrogen asphyxiation . the build-up of nitrogen bubbles in the blood , such as those that may occur during scuba diving , can cause a condition known as the '' bends '' ( decompression sickness ) . many nitrogen compounds such as hydrogen cyanide and nitrogen-based explosives are also highly dangerous . white phosphorus , an allotrope of phosphorus , is toxic , with 1 mg per kg bodyweight being a lethal dose . white phosphorus usually kills humans within a week of ingestion by attacking the liver . breathing in phosphorus in its gaseous form can cause an industrial disease called '' phossy jaw '' , which eats away the jawbone . white phosphorus is also highly flammable . some organophosphorus compounds can fatally block certain enzymes in the human body . elemental arsenic is toxic , as are many of its inorganic compounds ; however some of its organic compounds can promote growth in chickens . the lethal dose of arsenic for a typical adult is 200 mg and can cause diarrhea , vomiting , colic , dehydration , and coma . death from arsenic poisoning typically occurs within a day . antimony is mildly toxic . additionally , wine steeped in antimony containers can emetic . when taken in large doses , antimony causes vomiting in a victim , who then appears to recover before dying several days later . antimony attaches itself to certain enzymes and is difficult to dislodge . stibine , or sbh 3 , is far more toxic than pure antimony . bismuth itself is largely nontoxic , although consuming too much of it can damage the liver . only one person has ever been reported to have died from bismuth poisoning . however , consumption of soluble bismuth salts can turn a person 's gums black . moscovium is too unstable to conduct any toxicity chemistry . see also . oxypnictide , including superconductors discovered in 2008 . ferropnictide , including oxypnictide superconductors . references .