Donald Keyhoe

early life and career . keyhoe was born and raised in ottumwa , iowa . upon receiving his b.s . degree from the united states naval academy in 1919 , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the united states marine corps . in 1922 , his arm was injured during an airplane crash in guam . during his long convalescence , keyhoe began writing as a hobby . he eventually returned to active duty , but the injury gave keyhoe persistent trouble , and , as a result , he retired from the marines in 1923 . he then worked for the national geodetic survey and u.s . department of commerce . in 1927 , keyhoe managed a very popular coast-to-coast tour by charles lindbergh . this led to keyhoe 's first book , 1928 's flying with lindbergh . the book was a quick success , and led to a freelance writing career , with many of keyhoe 's articles and fictional stories ( mostly related to aviation ) appearing in a variety of leading publications . keyhoe returned to active duty during world war ii in a naval aviation training division before retiring again at the rank of major . writing for the pulps and glossies . by the time his ufo books appeared , keyhoe was already a well-established author , with numerous appearances in the pulp magazines of the 1920s and 1930s . four of his short stories were printed in weird tales , one of the most prestigious of the pulps : '' the grim passenger '' ( 1925 ) , '' the mystery under the sea '' ( 1926 ) , '' through the vortex '' ( 1926 ) and '' the master of doom '' ( 1927 ) . he also produced the lead novel for all three issues of a short-lived magazine called dr . yen sin : '' the mystery of the dragon 's shadow '' ( may/june 1936 ) , '' the mystery of the golden skull '' ( july/august 1936 ) and '' the mystery of the singing mummies '' ( september/october 1936 ) . the doctor was opposed by a hero who could not sleep . keyhoe wrote a number of air adventure stories for flying aces , and other magazines , and created two larger-than-life superheroes in this genre . the first of these was captain philip strange , referred to as '' the brain devil '' and '' the phantom ace of g-2 . '' captain strange was an american intelligence officer during world war i who was gifted with esp and other mental powers . his existence has been perpetuated beyond keyhoe 's stories as a minor member of the wold newton family . keyhoe 's other '' superpowered '' flying ace was richard knight , a world war i veteran who was blinded in combat but gained a supernatural ability to see in the dark . knight featured in a number of adventure stories set in the 1930s ( when the stories were written ) . other series he wrote included the '' eric trent '' series in flying aces and the vanished legion in dare-devil aces , and two long-running series : '' the devil dog squadron '' in sky birds and '' the jailbird flight '' in battle aces . many of keyhoe 's stories for the pulps were science fiction or weird fantasy , or contained a significant measure of these elements & nbsp ; — a fact that was not lost on later critics of his ufo books . p . 188 he was also a freelancer for saturday evening post , the nation , and reader 's digest . flying saucers are real . following kenneth arnold 's report of odd , fast-moving aerial objects in the summer of 1947 , interest in '' flying disks '' and '' flying saucers '' was widespread , and keyhoe followed the subject with some interest , though he was initially skeptical of any extraordinary answer to the ufo question . for some time , true ( a popular american men 's magazine ) had been inquiring of officials as to the flying saucer question , with little to show for their efforts . in about may 1949 , after the u.s . air force had released contradictory information about the saucers , editor ken purdy turned to keyhoe , who had written for the magazine , but who also , importantly , had many friends and contacts in the military and the pentagon . after some investigation , keyhoe became convinced that the flying saucers were real . as their forms , flight maneuvers , speeds and light technology was apparently far ahead of any nation 's developments , keyhoe became convinced that they must be the products of unearthly intelligences , and that the u.s . government was trying to suppress the whole truth about the subject . this conclusion was based especially on the response keyhoe found when he quizzed various officials about flying saucers . he was told there was nothing to the subject , yet was simultaneously denied access to saucer-related documents . keyhoe 's article '' flying saucers are real '' appeared in the january 1950 issue of true ( published december 26 , 1949 ) and caused a sensation . though such figures are always difficult to verify , captain edward j . ruppelt , the first head of project blue book , reported that '' it is rumored among magazine publishers that don keyhoe 's article in true was one of the most widely read and widely discussed magazine articles in history . '' capitalizing on the interest , keyhoe expanded the article into a book , the flying saucers are real ( 1950 ) ; it sold over half a million copies in paperback . he argued that the air force knew that flying saucers were outer space , but downplayed the reports to avoid public panic . in keyhoe 's view , the aliens & nbsp ; — wherever their origins or intentions & nbsp ; — did not seem hostile , and had likely been surveilling the earth for two hundred years or more , though keyhoe wrote that their '' observation suddenly increased in 1947 , following the series of a-bomb explosions in 1945 . '' dr . michael d . swords characterized the book as '' a rather sensational but accurate account of the matter . '' ( swords , p . & nbsp ; 100 ) boucher and mccomas praised it as '' cogent , intelligent and persuasive . '' '' recommended reading , '' f & sf , fall 1950 , p.83 keyhoe wrote several more books about ufos . flying saucers from outer space ( holt , 1953 ) is perhaps the most impressive , being largely based on interviews and official reports vetted by the air force . the book included a blurb by albert m . chop , the air force 's press secretary in the pentagon , who characterized keyhoe as a '' responsible , accurate reporter '' and further expressed approval for keyhoe 's arguments in favor of the extraterrestrial hypothesis . carl jung argued that keyhoe 's first two books were '' based on official material and studiously avoid the wild speculations , naivete or prejudice of other ufo publications . '' . the nicap era . in 1956 , keyhoe cofounded the national investigations committee on aerial phenomena ( nicap ) . he was one of several prominent professional , military or scientific figures on the board of directors , which lent the group a degree of legitimacy many of the other contemporary '' flying saucer clubs '' sorely lacked . nicap published a newsletter , the ufo investigator , which was mailed to its members . although the newsletter was intended to be published on a regular monthly basis , due to financial problems it was often delivered on a more erratic basis . for example , in 1958 four issues were published , but only two issues were published in 1959 . ( peebles , p . 162 ) nicap founder thomas townsend brown was ousted as director in early 1957 after facing repeated charges of financial ineptitude . keyhoe replaced him ; he was only slightly better at managing nicap 's finances , and the organization often faced financial shortfalls and crises throughout keyhoe 's twelve years as director . even so , it would remain the largest and most influential civilian ufo research group in the united states from the late 1950s to the late 1960s . ( peebles , p . 141 ) with keyhoe in the lead , nicap pressed hard for congressional hearings and investigation into ufos . they scored some attention from the mass media , and the general public ( nicap 's membership peaked at about 15,000 during the early and mid-1960s ) but only very limited interest from government officials . however , there was increasing criticism of the air force 's project blue book . following a widely publicized wave of ufo reports in 1966 , nicap was among the chorus which called for an independent scientific investigation of ufos . the condon committee was formed at the university of colorado with this goal in mind , though it quickly became mired in infighting and later , in controversy . keyhoe publicized the so-called '' trick memo '' , an embarrassing memorandum written by the condon committee coordinator which seemed to suggest that the ostensibly objective and neutral committee had determined to pursue a debunker operation well before even beginning their studies . television appearances . on january 22 , 1958 , keyhoe appeared on a cbs live television show the armstrong circle theatre to speak on the topic of ufos . keyhoe charged that a u.s . congressional committee was evaluating evidence that '' will absolutely prove that the ufos are machines under intelligent control '' . however cbs stopped the audio portion of the live broadcast . herbert a . carlborg , cbs director of editing stated '' this program had been carefully cleared for security reasons '' . heraldtribune.com – de void – the mainstream media 's lonely ufo web log . – heraldtribune.com on march 8 , 1958 , keyhoe appeared on the mike wallace interview on abc and spoke about flying saucers , contactees and the details of the armstrong circle theatre censorship , which he blamed on the air force rather than cbs . the mike wallace interview with major donald e . keyhoe , 3/8/1958 in 1967 , keyhoe appeared as himself on the may 23 episode of to tell the truth , receiving three of four possible votes . . later life . nicap 's membership plummeted in the late 1960s , and keyhoe was blamed by critics within nicap for the organization 's decline . some nicap members accused him of incompetent handling of nicap 's finances and personnel , and of being too authoritarian in his leadership style . by july 1969 nicap was facing bankruptcy , and keyhoe was forced to lay off five of nicap 's nine staff members . ( peebles , p . 231 ) additionally , the ufo investigator , the organization 's newsletter , which was edited and published by keyhoe , gradually moved from being delivered on a reliable monthly basis in the mid-sixties to an increasingly erratic and unreliable delivery schedule , which angered many nicap subscribers . in 1969 keyhoe turned his focus away from the military and focused on the cia as the source of the ufo cover up . however , nicap 's board of governors , headed by colonel joseph bryan iii , investigated nicap 's finances and found that social security taxes had been withheld from employee 's paychecks , but not reported to the government , and that some nicap members had not paid their annual dues for years , but were still receiving copies of the ufo investigator and enjoying full nicap membership rights . ( peebles , pp . 231-232 ) in december 1969 , in what was described as a '' stormy meeting '' , the board forced keyhoe to retire as nicap chief . ( peebles , p . 232 ) colonel bryan became the new director of nicap . under bryan 's leadership , nicap disbanded its local and state affiliate groups , and by 1973 it had been completely closed . p . 17 in 1973 , keyhoe wrote his final book about ufos , aliens from space . it promoted '' operation lure '' , a plan to entice extraterrestrials to land on earth , and described the problems keyhoe had getting information from government agents . beyond this book , keyhoe had little contact with ufology as he settled into retirement . however , he did speak at several ufo conferences after his ouster from nicap . in 1981 he joined mufon 's board of directors , but his membership was essentially in name only because of his declining health , and he had little to do with the organization . donald keyhoe died in 1988 at the age of 91 , and was buried in green hill cemetery in luray , virginia . several of keyhoe 's books are now in the public domain and are available online . books . flying with lindbergh , 2003 ( reprint ) , kessinger publishing , the flying saucers are real ( 1950 ) , 2006 ( reprint ) , cosimo classics , flying saucers from outer space ( 1953 ) , henry holt and company , ny the flying saucer conspiracy , 1955 , henry holt and company , ny flying saucers : top secret , 1960 , g.p . putnam & sons , asin b000eb427c aliens from space : the real story of unidentified flying objects , 1973 , signet press , asin b000hyommg the vanished legion , 2011 ( reprint ) , age of aces , captain philip strange : strange war , 2011 ( reprint ) , age of aces , the complete adventures of richard knight volume 1 , 2011 ( reprint ) , altus press , the complete adventures of richard knight volume 2 , 2017 ( reprint ) , altus press , captain philip strange : strange enemies , 2012 ( reprint ) , age of aces , captain philip strange : strange operators , 2014 ( reprint ) , age of aces , the complete adventures of eric trent , volume 1 , 2016 ( reprint ) , altus press , captain philip strange : strange spectres , 2016 ( reprint ) , age of aces , the jailbird flight : dead man ’ s drome , 2015 ( reprint ) , age of aces , . see also . condon report . references . further reading . jerome clark , the ufo book : encyclopedia of the extraterrestrial ; visible ink press , 1998 edward j . ruppelt , the report on unidentified flying objects ann druffel , firestorm & nbsp ; — dr . james e . mcdonald 's fight for ufo science , wild flower press , columbus , 1997 , ( passim , especially pp . & nbsp ; 450–474 ) michael d . swords , '' ufos , the military , and the early cold war '' ( pp . & nbsp ; 82–122 in ufos and abductions : challenging the borders of knowledge , david m . jacobs , editor ; university press of kansas , 2000 ; isbn ) h . w . wilson , current biography , 1956 , february 1989 curtis peebles , watch the skies : a chronicle of the flying saucer myth ; new york : berkley books , 1995 . external links . donald e . keyhoe archives the flying saucers are real by donald keyhoe ( free ebook . ) donald e . keyhoe interviewed by mike wallace on the mike wallace interview march 8 , 1958 donald edward keyhoe at find a grave