Kerrison Predictor

history . by the late 1930s , both vickers and sperry had developed predictors for use against high-altitude bombers . however , low-flying aircraft presented a very different problem , with very short engagement times and high angular rates of motion , but at the same time less need for ballistic accuracy . machine guns had been the preferred weapon against these targets , aimed by eye and swung by hand , but these no longer had the performance needed to deal with the larger and faster aircraft of the 1930s . the british army 's new bofors 40 mm guns were intended as their standard low-altitude anti-aircraft weapons . however , existing gunnery control systems were inadequate for the purpose ; the range was too far to '' guess '' the lead , but at the same time close enough that the angle could change faster than the gunners could turn the traversal handles . trying to operate a calculating gunsight at the same time was an added burden on the gunner . making matters worse was that these ranges were exactly where the luftwaffes dive bombers , which were quickly proving to be a decisive weapon in the blitzkrieg , were attacking from . the kerrison predictor was a relatively simple device compared to high-altitude predictors and was designed to meet these particular requirements . it was designed by major a.v . kerrison at the admiralty research laboratory , teddington , in the late 1930s . after the war , kerrison went on to become director of aeronautical and engineering research at the british admiralty . the predictor solved the problem by doing all of the calculations mechanically through a complex system of gears . inputs to its calculations included wind speed , ballistics of the gun and the rounds it fired , angle to the target in azimuth and altitude , and a user-input estimated target speed . some of these inputs were fed in by dials , which turned gearing inside the predictor to calculate the range ( from the change in angle and estimated speed ) and direction of motion . the '' output '' of the device drove hydraulic servo-motors attached to the traversal and elevation gears of the otherwise unmodified bofors gun , allowing it to follow the predictor 's indications automatically without manual intervention . the gunners simply kept the gun loaded , while the three aimers simply had to point the predictor , mounted on a large tripod , at the target . the kerrison predictor did not calculate fuse settings , as the shells fired by the 40 & nbsp ; mm bofors gun , with which it was designed to work , were contact-fused . the predictor proved to be able to hit practically anything that flew in a straight line , and it was particularly effective against dive bombers . however , it was also very complex , including over 1,000 precision parts and weighing over , even though much of it was made of aluminium to reduce weight . with the demands of the raf for almost all light metals and machinists , the predictor was far too difficult for the army to produce in any quantity . while the predictor proved to be an excellent addition to the bofors , it was not without its faults . the main problem was that the system required a fairly large electrical generator in order to drive the gun , increasing the logistics load in supplying the generators with fuel . setting the system up was also a fairly complex task , and not something that could be done '' on the fly '' . in the end they were used almost entirely for static emplacements , field units continuing to rely on their original iron sights or the simple stiffkey-stick sights that were introduced in late 1943 . the no.7 anti-aircraft composite predictor , also designed by kerrison was similar in some ways . it was originally developed for the 6-pounder naval gun , for close-in defence and also against targets at intermediate altitudes of . it was later adapted for use with the 40 & nbsp ; mm bofors . us service . although it was more accurate than the kerrison predictor , sperry was unable to keep up with production of its more expensive and complex m-7 director . in september 1940 , george marshall asked the british for the loan of four bofors 40 & nbsp ; mm guns with kerrison predictors for testing . during testing the kerrison predictor provided accurate fire control to a range in excess of , and the bofors gun was reliable . in the fall of 1940 , the ordnance department standardized the kerrison predictor for use with their 37 & nbsp ; mm gun . by february 1941 , the u.s . navy had adopted the bofors for use on their ships . to ease production problems , the army reluctantly standardized on the 40 & nbsp ; mm in february 1941 ; the u.s . was building the bofors for the british under the lend-lease program . the predictor 's plans were passed to sperry corporation , who were just commencing production of their own complex high-altitude system , the m7 computing sight , and had no excess capacity to produce the new design as well . instead , they completed changes needed to adapt the predictor to u.s . production and sent the plans back to the army for production elsewhere . in december 1940 the singer corporation was contracted to produce 1,500 predictors per month to equip the army 's existing 37 & nbsp ; mm guns while production of the 40 & nbsp ; mm bofors was ramped up . singer implemented massive changes in the company , including building new factories and the switching of a foundry from steel to aluminium . production did not begin until january 1943 , but the entire order was filled for the m5 antiaircraft director by the middle of 1944 . for a brief time , some of the u.s . army 's bofors guns were equipped with the sperry m7 , but these were replaced in the field as soon as m5s became available . ( excerpt from ) with aircraft speeds increasing dramatically during the war , even the speed of the kerrison predictor proved lacking by the end . nevertheless , the predictor demonstrated that effective gunnery required some sort of reasonably powerful computing support , and in 1944 bell labs started delivery of a new system based around an electronic analog computer . the timing proved excellent ; late that summer , the germans started attacking london with the v-1 flying bomb , which flew at high speeds at low altitudes . after a month of limited success against them , every available anti-aircraft gun was moved to the strip of land on the approach to london , and the new sights proved to be more than capable against them . daytime attacks were soon abandoned . long after the war , u.s . m5s started appearing in surplus shops in the late 1950s . john whitney purchased one ( and later a sperry m7 ) and connected the electrical outputs to servos controlling the positioning of small lit targets and light bulbs . he then modified the '' mathematics '' of the system to move the targets in various mathematically controlled ways , a technique he referred to as incremental drift . as the power of the systems grew , they eventually evolved into motion control photography , a widely used technique in special effects filming . see also . director ( military ) fire-control system gun data computer rangekeeper . references . notes . . sources . . external links . memories of frank yates , chapter 4