American Psychiatric Association

history . at a meeting in 1844 in philadelphia , thirteen superintendents and organizers of insane asylums and hospitals formed the association of medical superintendents of american institutions for the insane ( amsaii ) . the group included thomas kirkbride , creator of the asylum model which was used throughout the united states . the group was chartered to focus '' primarily on the administration of hospitals and how that affected the care of patients '' , as opposed to conducting research or promoting the profession . in 1893 , the organization changed its name to the american medico-psychological association . barton , p . 89 in 1921 , the association changed that name to the present american psychiatric association . barton , p . 168 the association was incorporated in 1927 . the cover of the publication semi-centennial proceedings of the american medical psychological association , which the association distributed in 1894 at its 50th annual meeting in philadelphia , contained the first depiction of the association 's official seal . the seal has undergone several changes since that time . the present seal is a round medallion with a purported likeness of benjamin rush 's profile and 13 stars over his head to represent the 13 founders of the organization . the outer ring contains the words '' american psychiatric association 1844 . '' rush 's name and an m.d . are below the picture . an association history of the seal states : the choice of rush ( 1746–1813 ) for the seal reflects his place in history . rush 's practice of psychiatry was based on bleeding , purging , and the use of the tranquilizer chair and gyrator . by 1844 these practices were considered erroneous and abandoned . rush , however , was the first american to study mental disorder in a systematic manner , and he is considered the father of american psychiatry . in 2015 , the association adopted a new logo that depicts the serpent-entwined rod of asclepius superimposed over the image of two cerebral hemisphere . the logo appears next to the words '' american psychiatric association '' , with the word '' psychiatric '' in bold type ; the tagline '' medical leadership for mind , brain and body '' appears below the logo . the association will continue to use the seal bearing rush 's profile for ceremonial purposes and for some internal documents . . organization and membership . apa is led by the president of the american psychiatric association and a board of trustees with an executive committee . apa reports that its membership is primarily medical specialists who are qualified , or in the process of becoming qualified , as psychiatrists . the basic eligibility requirement is completion of a residency program in psychiatry accredited by the residency review committee for psychiatry of the accreditation council for graduate medical education ( acgme ) , the royal college of physicians and surgeons of canada ( rcps ( c ) ) , or the american osteopathic association ( aoa ) . applicants for membership must also hold a valid medical license ( with the exception of medical students and residents ) and provide one reference who is an apa member . apa holds an annual conference attended by a u.s . and international audience . apa is made up of some 76 district associations throughout the country . . publications and campaigns . apa position statements , apa policy finder clinical practice guidelines , and descriptions of its core diagnostic manual ( the dsm ) are published . apa publishes several journals focused on different areas of psychiatry , for example , academic , clinical practice , or news . top five choosing wisely recommendations . in coordination with the american board of internal medicine , the apa proposes five recommendations for physicians and patients . the list was compiled by members of the council on research and quality care . the apa places a primary focus on antipsychotic medications due to a rapid increase in sales , from 9.6 billion in 2004 to 18.5 billion in 2011 . do n't prescribe antipsychotic medications to patients for any indication without appropriate initial evaluation and appropriate ongoing monitoring . do n't routinely prescribe 2 or more antipsychotic medications concurrently . do n't prescribe antipsychotic medications as a first-line intervention to treat behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia . do n't routinely prescribe antipsychotic medications as a first-line intervention for insomnia in adults . do n't routinely prescribe antipsychotic medications as a first-line intervention for children or adolescents for any diagnosis other than psychotic disorders . . notable figures . donald cameron , was president of the american psychiatric association from 1952–53 . he conducted coercive experiments widely denounced as unethical , including involuntary electroshock therapy , drug administration , and prolonged confinement and sensory deprivation funded as part of the central intelligence agency project mkultra . jeffrey lieberman was the principal investigator for the clinical antipsychotic trials of intervention effectiveness , sponsored by the national institute of mental health study . he was president of the american psychiatric association in 2013–2014 . adolf meyer , former psychiatrist-in-chief at the johns hopkins hospital , was the president of the american psychiatric association from 1927–1928 and was one of the most influential figures in psychiatry in the first half of the twentieth century . robert spitzer was the chair of the task force of the third edition of the dsm . herb pardes past president and noted figure in american psychiatry . drug company ties . in his book anatomy of an epidemic ( 2010 ) , robert whitaker described the partnership that has developed between the apa and pharmaceutical companies since the 1980s . apa has come to depend on pharmaceutical money . the drug companies endowed continuing education and psychiatric '' grand rounds '' at hospitals . they funded a political action committee ( pac ) in 1982 to lobby congress . the industry helped to pay for the apa 's media training workshops . it was able to turn psychiatrists at top schools into speakers , and although the doctors felt they were independents , they rehearsed their speeches and likely would not be invited back if they discussed drug side effects . '' thought leaders '' became the experts quoted in the media . as marcia angell wrote in the new england journal of medicine ( 2000 ) , '' thought leaders '' could agree to be listed as an author of ghostwriter articles , and she cites thomas bodenheimer and david rothman who describe the extent of the drug industry 's involvement with doctors . the new york times published a summary about antipsychotic medications in october 2010 . in 2008 , for the first time , senator charles grassley asked the apa to disclose how much of its annual budget came from drug industry funds . the apa said that industry contributed 28 % of its budget ( 14 million at that time ) , mainly through paid advertising in apa journals and funds for continuing medical education . . controversies . in the 1964 election , fact magazine polled american psychiatric association members on whether barry goldwater was fit to be president and published '' the unconscious of a conservative : a special issue on the mind of barry goldwater '' . this led to a ban on the diagnosis of a public figure by psychiatrists who have not performed an examination or been authorized to release information by the patient . this became the goldwater rule . supported by various funding sources , the apa and its members have played major roles in examining points of contention in the field and addressing uncertainties about psychiatric illness and its treatment , as well as the relationship of individual mental health concerns to those of the community . controversies have related to anti-psychiatry and disability rights campaigners , who regularly protest at american psychiatric association offices or meetings . in 1971 , members of the gay liberation front organization sabotaged an apa conference in san francisco . in 2003 activists from mindfreedom international staged a 21-day hunger strike , protesting at a perceived unjustified biomedical focus and challenging apa to provide evidence of the widespread claim that mental disorders are due to chemical imbalances in the brain . apa published a position statement in response and the two organizations exchanged views on the evidence . the apa 's dsm came under criticism from autism specialists tony attwood and simon baron-cohen for proposing the elimination of asperger 's syndrome as a disorder and replacing it with an autism spectrum severity scale . roy richard grinker wrote a controversial editorial for the new york times expressing support for the proposal . the apa president in 2005 , steven sharfstein , praised the pharmaceutical industry but argued that american psychiatry had '' allowed the biopsychosocial model to become the bio-bio-bio model '' and accepted '' kickbacks and bribes '' from pharmaceutical companies leading to the over-use of medication and neglect of other approaches . in 2008 apa was the focus of congressional investigations on how pharmaceutical industry money shapes the practices of nonprofit organizations that purport to be independent . the drug industry accounted in 2006 for about 30 percent of the association 's 62.5 million in financing , half through drug advertisements in its journals and meeting exhibits , and the other half sponsoring fellowships , conferences and industry symposiums at its annual meeting . the apa came under increasing scrutiny and questions about conflicts of interest . the apa president in 2009–10 , alan schatzberg , was identified as the principal investigator on a federal study into the drug mifepristone for use as an antidepressant being developed by corcept therapeutics , a company schatzberg had created and in which he had several million dollars ' equity . . see also . presidents of the american psychiatric association american board of psychiatry and neurology american group psychotherapy association american journal of psychiatry american psychoanalytic association royal college of psychiatrists . notes . references . . external links . jama ( the journal of the american medical association ) psychiatry paul lowinger papers , kislak center for special collections , rare books and manuscripts , university of pennsylvania . paul lowinger was a psychiatrist and founder of the institute of social medicine and community health , and his papers are largely concerned with his work as a psychiatrist and activist , with significant portions devoted to his work with the american psychiatric association .