Suxamethonium chloride

medical uses . succinylcholine chloride injection indicated , in addition to general anesthesia , to facilitate tracheal intubation and to provide skeletal muscle relaxation during surgery or mechanical ventilation . its medical uses are limited to short-term muscle relaxation in anesthesia and intensive care , usually for facilitation of endotracheal intubation . it is popular in emergency medicine due to its rapid onset and brief duration of action . the former is a major point of consideration in the context of trauma care , where endotracheal intubation may need to be completed very quickly . the latter means that , should attempts at endotracheal intubation fail and the person can not be ventilator , there is a prospect for neuromuscular recovery and the onset of spontaneous breathing before hypoxemia occurs . it may be better than rocuronium in people without contraindications due to its faster onset of action and shorter duration of action . it is indicated , in addition to general anesthesia , to facilitate tracheal intubation and to provide skeletal muscle relaxation during surgery or mechanical ventilation . suxamethonium is also commonly used as the sole muscle relaxant during electroconvulsive therapy , favoured for its short duration of action . suxamethonium is quickly degraded by plasma butyrylcholinesterase and the duration of effect is usually in the range of a few minutes . when plasma levels of butyrylcholinesterase are greatly diminished or an atypical form is present ( an otherwise harmless inherited disorder ) , paralysis may last much longer , as is the case in liver failure or in neonates . it is recommended that the vials be stored at a temperature between 2°-8 & nbsp ; °c . the multi-dose vials are stable for up to 14 days at room temperature without significant loss of potency . unless otherwise indicated in the prescribing information , room temperature for storage of medications is 15°-25 & nbsp ; °c ( 59°-77 & nbsp ; °f ) . . side effects . side effects include malignant hyperthermia , muscle pains , acute rhabdomyolysis with hyperkalemia , transient ocular hypertension , constipation and changes in cardiac rhythm , including bradycardia , and cardiac arrest . in people with neuromuscular disease or burns , an injection of suxamethonium can lead to a large release of potassium from skeletal muscles , potentially resulting in cardiac arrest . conditions having susceptibility to suxamethonium-induced high blood potassium are burns , closed head injury , acidosis , guillain–barré syndrome , cerebral stroke , drowning , severe intra-abdominal sepsis , massive trauma , myopathy , and tetanus . suxamethonium does not produce unconsciousness or anesthesia , and its effects may cause considerable psychological distress while simultaneously making it impossible for a patient to communicate . therefore , administration of the drug to a conscious patient is contraindicated . hyperkalemia . the side effect of high blood potassium may occur because the acetylcholine receptor is propped open , allowing continued flow of potassium ions into the extracellular fluid . a typical increase of potassium ion serum concentration on administration of suxamethonium is 0.5 & nbsp ; mmol per liter . the increase is transient in otherwise healthy patients . the normal range of potassium is 3.5 to 5 meq per liter . high blood potassium does not generally result in adverse effects below a concentration of 6.5 to 7 meq per liter . therefore , the increase in serum potassium level is usually not catastrophic in otherwise healthy patients . severely high blood levels of potassium will cause changes in cardiac electrophysiology , which , if severe , can result in asystole . malignant hyperthermia . malignant hyperthermia ( mh ) from suxamethonium administration can result in a drastic and uncontrolled increase in skeletal muscle oxidative metabolism . this overwhelms the body 's capacity to supply oxygen , remove carbon dioxide , and regulate body temperature , eventually leading to circulatory collapse and death if not treated quickly . susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia is often inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder , for which there are at least six gene of interest , the most prominent being the ryanodine receptor gene ( ryr1 ) . mh susceptibility is phenotype and genetically related to central core disease ( ccd ) , an autosomal dominant disorder characterized both by mh symptoms and by myopathy . mh is usually unmasked by anesthesia , or when a family member develops the symptoms . there is no simple , straightforward test to diagnose the condition . when mh develops during a procedure , treatment with dantrolene sodium is usually initiated ; dantrolene and the avoidance of suxamethonium administration in susceptible people have markedly reduced the mortality from this condition . apnea . the normal short duration of action of suxamethonium is due to the rapid metabolism of the drug by non-specific plasma cholinesterases . however plasma cholinesterase activity is reduced in some people due to either genetic variation or acquired conditions , which results in a prolonged duration of neuromuscular block . genetically , ninety six percent of the population have a normal ( eu : eu ) genotype and block duration ; however , some people have atypical genes ( ea , es , ef ) which can be found in varying combinations with the eu gene , or other atypical genes ( see pseudocholinesterase deficiency ) . such genes will result in a longer duration of action of the drug , ranging from 20 minutes up to several hours . acquired factors that affect plasma cholinesterase activity include pregnancy , liver disease , kidney failure , heart failure , thyrotoxicosis , and cancer , as well as a number of other drugs . if unrecognized by a clinician it could lead to awareness if anesthesia is discontinued whilst still paralyzed or hypoxemia ( and potentially fatal consequences ) if artificial ventilation is not maintained . normal treatment is to maintain sedation and ventilate the patient on an intensive care unit until muscle function has returned . blood testing for cholinesterase function can be performed . mivacurium , a non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug , is also metabolized via the same route with a similar clinical effect in patients deficient in plasma cholinesterase activity . deliberate induction of conscious apnea using this drug led to its use as a form of aversion therapy in the 1960s and 1970s in some prison and institutional settings . this use was discontinued after negative publicity concerning the terrifying effects on subjects of this treatment and ethical questions about the punitive use of painful aversion . mechanism of action . there are two phases to the blocking effect of suxamethonium . phase 1 block . phase 1 blocking has the principal paralytic effect . binding of suxamethonium to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor results in opening of the receptor 's monovalent cation channel ; a disorganized depolarization of the motor end-plate occurs and calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum . in normal skeletal muscle , acetylcholine dissociates from the receptor following depolarization and is rapidly hydrolyzed by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase . the muscle cell is then ready for the next signal . suxamethonium has a longer duration of effect than acetylcholine , and is not hydrolyzed by acetylcholinesterase . by maintaining the membrane potential above threshold , it does not allow the muscle cell to repolarize . when acetylcholine binds to an already depolarized receptor , it can not cause further depolarization . calcium is removed from the muscle cell cytoplasm independent of repolarization ( depolarization signaling and muscle contraction are independent processes ) . as the calcium is taken up by the sarcoplasmic reticulum , the muscle relaxes . this explains muscle flaccidity rather than tetany following fasciculations . the results are membrane depolarization and transient fasciculations , followed by paralysis . phase 2 block . while this phase is not abnormal and is a part of its mechanism of action , it is undesirable during surgery , due to the inability to depolarize the cell again . often , patients must be on a ventilator for hours if phase 2 block occurs . it is caused by the blood concentration of suxamethonium exceeding the therapeutic window . desensitization occurs at the nerve terminal , and the myocyte becomes less sensitive to acetylcholine ; the membrane repolarizes and can not be depolarized again . chemistry . suxamethonium is an odorless , white crystalline substance . aqueous solutions have a ph of about 4 . the dihydrate melts at 160 & nbsp ; °c , whereas the anhydrous melts at 190 & nbsp ; °c . it is highly soluble in water ( 1 & nbsp ; gram in about 1 ml ) , soluble in ethanol ( 1 & nbsp ; gram in about 350 ml ) , slightly soluble in chloroform , and practically insoluble in ether . suxamethonium is a hygroscopic compound . the compound consists of two acetylcholine molecules that are linked by their acetyl groups . it can also be viewed as a central moiety of succinic acid with two choline moieties , one on each end . history . suxamethonium was first discovered in 1906 by reid hunt and rené de m . taveau . when studying the drug , animals were given curare and thus they missed the neuromuscular blocking properties of suxamethonium . instead in 1949 an italian group led by daniel bovet was first to describe succinylcholine induced paralysis . the clinical introduction of suxamethonium was described in 1951 by several groups . papers published by stephen thesleff and otto von dardel in sweden are important but also to be mentioned is work by bruck , mayrhofer and hassfurther in austria , scurr and bourne in uk , and foldes in america . . brand names . it is available in german-speaking countries under the trade name lysthenon among others . compendium.ch : lysthenon 2 % inj lös 100 mg/5ml . other animals . it is sometimes used in combination with analgesics and sedatives for euthanasia and immobilization of horses .