Fritz Perls

life . fritz perls was born in berlin , germany , in 1893 . perls grew up on the bohemian scene in berlin , participated in expressionism and dadaism , and experienced the turning of the artistic avant-garde toward the revolutionary left . deployment to the front line , the trauma of war , anti-semitism , intimidation , escape , and the holocaust are further key sources of biographical influence . he was expected to practice law , following his distinguished uncle herman staub , but instead he studied medicine . perls joined the german army during world war i , and spent time in the trenches . after the war in 1918 he returned to his medical studies graduating two years later , specializing in neuropsychiatry as a medical doctor , and then became an assistant to kurt goldstein , who worked with brain injured soldiers . perls gravitated toward psychoanalysis . in 1927 fritz perls became a member of wilhelm reich 's technical seminars in vienna . reich 's concept of character analysis influenced perls to a large extent . and in 1930 reich became perls ' supervising senior analyst in berlin . in 1930 fritz perls married laura perls ( born , lore posner ) , and they had two children together , renate and stephen . in 1933 , soon after the hitler regime came to power , being of jewish descent , and because of their anti-fascist political activities in the time before , fritz perls , laura , and their eldest child renate fled to the netherlands , and one year later they emigrated to south africa , where fritz perls started a psychoanalytic training institute . in 1936 he had a brief and unsatisfactory meeting with freud . in 1942 fritz perls joined the south african army , and he served as an army psychiatrist with the rank of captain until 1946 . while in south africa , perls was influenced by the '' holism '' of jan smuts . during this period fritz perls co-wrote his first book , ego , hunger , and aggression ( published in 1942 and re-published in 1947 ) . laura perls wrote two chapters of the book , although when it was re-published in the united states she was not given any recognition for her work . fritz and laura perls left south africa in 1946 and ended up in new york city , where fritz perls worked briefly with karen horney , and wilhelm reich . after living through a peripatetic episode , during which he lived in montreal and served as a cruise ship psychiatrist , perls finally settled in manhattan . perls wrote his second book with the assistance of new york intellectual and author , paul goodman , who drafted the theoretical second part of the book based upon perls ' hand-written notes . perls and goodman were influenced by the work of kurt lewin and otto rank . along with the experiential first part , written with ralph hefferline , the book was entitled gestalt therapy and published in 1951 . thereafter , fritz and laura perls started the first gestalt institute in their manhattan apartment . fritz perls began traveling throughout the united states in order to conduct gestalt workshops and training . in 1960 fritz perls left laura perls behind in manhattan and moved to los angeles , where he practiced in conjunction with jim simkin . he started to offer workshops at esalen institute in big sur , california , in 1963 . perls became interested in zen during this period , and incorporated the idea of mini-satori ( a brief awakening ) into his practice . he also traveled to japan , where he stayed in a zen monastery . eventually , he settled at esalen , and even built a house on the grounds . one of his students at esalen was dick price , who developed gestalt practice , based in large part upon what he learned from perls . at esalen , perls collaborated with ida rolf , founder of rolfing , to address the relationship between the mind and the body . perls has been widely cited outside the realm of psychotherapy for a quotation often described as the '' gestalt prayer '' : in 1969 perls left esalen and started a gestalt community at lake cowichan on vancouver island , canada . fritz perls died of heart failure in chicago , on march 14 , 1970 , after heart surgery at the louis a . weiss memorial hospital . . reception . perls ' approach to therapy was included in criticism by jeffrey masson , a psychoanalyst who feuded with journalists and with the psychoanalytic community generally over his controversial theories disputing the effectiveness of psychotherapy . masson said that perls was sexist , as well as physically and emotionally abusive towards women in his private life . masson quoted perls from his autobiography , in and out the garbage pail , where perls wrote : once i was called to a group to calm down a girl who attacked everyone in the group physically . the group members tried to hold her and to calm her down . in vain . again and again she got up and fought . when i came in she charged with her head down into my belly and nearly knocked me over : then i let her have it until i had her on the floor . up she came again . and then a third time . i got her down again and said , gasping : '' i 've beaten up more than one bitch in my life . '' then she got up , threw her arms around me : '' fritz , i love you . '' apparently she finally got what , all her life , she was asking for . and there are thousands of women like her in the states . provoking and tantalizing , bitching , irritating their husbands and never getting their spanking . you do n't have to be a parisian prostitute to need that so as to respect your man . a polish saying is : '' my husband lost interest in me , he never beats me any more . '' therapist barry stevens , who met fritz perls for the first time in 1967 , described a different impression of him . she wrote : '' . & nbsp ; i know that fritz does n't like his arrogance , and along with it , he has such a beautiful humility . '' and later she said : '' fritz is almost always a very warm and gentle old gentleman now . '' stevens also described another incident from a group therapy session : '' . & nbsp ; fritz perls asked us all a question and waited for answers . & nbsp ; . i said nothing . he said 'barry ? ' ' i 'm blank , '' i said . he nodded and went on to someone or something else . how nice to have my blankness easily accepted . '' erving polster , psychologist and gestalt therapist , founding faculty member of the gestalt institute of cleveland in 1953 , said about fritz perls : “ from fritz i got the realization that a person could have incredible range in characteristics . i could experience fritz as the most cutting and as the most tender of all people . ” wysong , joe / rosenfeld , edward ( eds . ) : “ an oral history of gestalt therapy ” , highland , new york , 1982 , p . 49 . . selected publications . perls , f . , ego , hunger and aggression ( 1942 , 1947 ) perls , f . , hefferline , r . , & goodman , p . , gestalt therapy : excitement and growth in the human personality ( 1951 ) perls , f . , gestalt therapy verbatim ( 1969 ) . perls , f . , in and out the garbage pail ( 1969 ) perls , f . , the gestalt approach and eye witness to therapy ( 1973 ) . references . further reading . . external links . a life chronology , by frederick perls frederick perls : a son 's reflections , by stephen perls growing up rugged : fritz perls and gestalt therapy by national book award winner ernest becker . delivered as a talk shortly after perls 's death in 1970 . psychiatry in a new key from the unpublished manuscripts of fritz perls finding self through gestalt therapy , a transcript of a talk given at the cooper union by frederick perls in 1957 planned psychotherapy by frederick perls . a talk given in the late 1940s at the william alanson white institute in new york city , '' planned psychotherapy '' predates the articulation of gestalt therapy by a few years . perls discusses in detail his developing use of focusing on the '' here and now . '' fritz perls : gestalt therapy a nearly forgotten interview with fritz perls ( the co-founder of gestalt therapy ) by adelaide bry