The Children of Men

plot . the narration for the novel alternates between the third person and the first person , the latter in the form of a diary kept by dr . theodore '' theo '' faron , an oxford don . the novel opens with the first entry in theo 's diary . it is the year 2021 , but the novel 's events have their origin in 1995 , which is referred to as '' year omega '' . in 1994 , the sperm count of human males plummeted to zero , a feminist civil war broke out , and mankind now faces imminent extinction . the last people to be born are now called '' omegas '' . '' a race apart '' , they enjoy various prerogatives . theo writes that the last human being to be born on earth has been killed in a pub brawl . in 2006 , xan lyppiatt , theo 's rich and charismatic cousin , appointed himself warden of england in the last general election . as people have lost all interest in politics , lyppiatt abolishes democracy . he is called a despot and tyrant by his opponents , but officially the new society is referred to as egalitarian . theo is approached by a woman called julian , a member of a group of dissidents calling themselves the five fishes . he meets with them at an isolated church . rolf , their leader and julian 's husband , is hostile , but the others—miriam ( a former midwife ) , gascoigne ( a man from a military family ) , luke ( a former priest ) , and julian—are more personable . the group wants theo to approach xan on their behalf and ask for various reforms , including a return to a more democratic system . during their discussions , as theo prepares to meet with xan , the reader learns how the uk is in 2021 : the omegas are described as spoiled , over-entitled and egotistical because of their youth and luxurious lifestyle . they are violent , remote , and unstable . they regard non-omegas ( elders ) with undisguised contempt , yet they are spared punishment due to their age . according to rumour , outside of the uk , some countries sacrifice omegas in fertility rituals . due to the global infertility of mankind , newborn animals ( such as kittens and puppies ) are doted upon and treated as infants , pushed in prams , and dressed in children 's clothing . the latest trend in london is to have elaborate christening ceremonies for newborn pets . the country is governed by decree of the council of england , which consists of five people . parliament has been reduced to an advisory role . the aims of the council are : ( 1 ) protection and security , ( 2 ) comfort , and ( 3 ) pleasure , corresponding to the warden 's promises of : ( 1 ) freedom from fear , ( 2 ) freedom from want , and ( 3 ) freedom from boredom . the grenadiers , formerly an elite regiment in the british armed forces , are the warden 's private army . the state secret police ( ssp ) ensures the council 's decrees are executed . the courts still exist , but juries have been abolished . under the '' new arrangements '' , defendants are tried by a judge and two magistrates . all convicted criminals are dumped at a penal colony on the isle of man . there is no remission , escape is almost impossible , visitors are forbidden , and prisoners may not write or receive letters . every citizen is required to learn skills , such as animal husbandry , which they might need to help them survive if they happen to be among the last human beings in the uk . foreign workers are lured into the country and then exploited . young people , preferably omegas , from poorer countries come to england to work there . these '' foreign omegas '' or , generally , '' sojourners '' , are imported to do undesirable work . at 60 , which is the age limit , they are sent back ( '' forcibly repatriated '' ) . british omegas are not allowed to emigrate so as to prevent further loss of labour . elderly/infirm citizens have become a burden ; nursing homes are for the privileged few . the rest are expected and sometimes forced suicide by taking part in a '' quietus '' ( council-sanctioned mass drowning ) at age 60 . the state has opened '' pornography centres '' as well as installing special transmitters that emit a special kind of radiation designed to increase libido . twice a year , healthy women under 45 must submit to a gynecology examination ; and most men must have their sperm tested , to keep hope alive . theo 's meeting , which turns out to be a meeting with the full council of england , does not go well . some of the members resent him because he resigned as xan 's advisor rather than share the responsibility of governing the uk . xan guesses that theo 's suggestions came from others and makes clear to theo that he will take action against dissidents . the five fishes distribute a leaflet detailing their demands . the ssp visit theo . he sees julian in the market shortly afterwards . he tells her of the ssp visit , then tells her that if ever she needs him she only has to send for him . that night , however , theo decides to leave england for the summer and visit the continent before nature overruns it . soon after theo 's return , miriam tells him that gascoigne was arrested as he was trying to rig a quietus landing stage to explode . the other fishes are about to go on the run , and julian wants him . miriam reveals why julian did not come herself : julian is pregnant . theo believes julian is deceiving herself , but when the two meet , julian invites theo to listen to her baby 's heartbeat . during the group 's flight , luke is killed while trying to protect julian during a confrontation with a wild gang of omegas . julian confesses that the father of her child is not rolf , but rather the deceased luke . rolf , who believes he should rule the u.k . in xan 's place , is angered at the discovery ; he abandons the group to notify the warden . the group heads to a shack theo knows of . miriam delivers julian 's baby : a boy , not a girl as julian had thought . miriam goes to find more supplies ; after she is gone too long , theo investigates . he finds miriam dead , garrotted in a nearby house . theo returns to julian , but soon afterward julian hears a noise outside : xan . theo and xan confront each other and both fire one shot . the sudden wailing of the baby startles xan , causing him to miss , as rolf had thought the baby would not be born for another month . theo shoots and kills xan . he removes from xan 's finger the coronation ring , which xan had taken to wearing as a symbol of authority , and seems poised to become the new leader of the uk ( at least temporarily ) . the other members of the council are introduced to the baby , whom theo baptises . adaptation . in 2006 , a film adaptation was directed by alfonso cuarón , starring julianne moore and clive owen . the film was well received , and , according to cuarón , p.d . james was said to have been pleased with it despite the alterations . . critical reception . on 5 november 2019 bbc news included the children of men on its list of the 100 most influential novels . . see also . greybeard ( 1964 ) by brian aldiss , a science fiction novel set in an earth with an ageing and sterile population pregnancy in science fiction the handmaid 's tale ( 1985 ) , a dystopian novel by canadian author margaret atwood the white plague ( 1982 ) by frank herbert , a science fiction novel in which a dedicated bio-terrorism weapon kills all women on earth , subjecting the entire human race to certain extinction . references .