Mistle thrush

taxonomy . the mistle thrush was first described by carl linnaeus in his 1758 10th edition of systema naturae under its current scientific name . linnaeus ( 1758 ) p . 168 . turdus is the latin for '' thrush '' , and viscivorus , '' mistletoe eater '' , comes from viscum '' mistletoe '' and vorare , '' to devour '' . brookes ( 2006 ) p . 952 . jobling ( 2010 ) p . 393 . jobling ( 2010 ) p . 404 . the bird 's liking for mistletoe berries is also indicated by its english name , '' mistle '' being an old name for the plant . there are more than 60 species of medium to large thrushes in the genus turdus , characterised by rounded heads , longish pointed wings , and usually melodious songs . clement et al . ( 2000 ) pp . 36–38 . a mitochondrial dna study identified the mistle thrush 's closest relatives as the similarly plumaged song and chinese thrushes ; these three species are early offshoots from the eurasian lineage of turdus thrushes after they spread north from africa . they are less closely related to other european thrush species such as the blackbird ( t . merula ) which are descended from ancestors that had colonised the caribbean islands from africa and subsequently reached europe from there . at least eight subspecies have been proposed , but the differences between them are mainly clinal , with birds being paler and less densely spotted in the east of the range . the accepted subspecies as of 2000 are : clement et al . ( 2000 ) pp . 397–491 . turdus viscivorus viscivorus , named by linnaeus , 1758 , the nominate subspecies . t . v . bonapartei , cabanis , 1860 . t . v . deichleri , erlanger , 1897 . an isolated population in crimea has sometimes been separated as t . v . tauricus , but this is not considered to be a valid form . mistle thrush fossils have been found in pleistocene deposits from poland and sicily . . description . the mistle thrush is the largest thrush native to europe . the nominate subspecies measures in length , with a wingspan . it weighs , with an average of around . it has a stocky upright posture when on the ground . it has pale grey-brown upperparts , the chin and throat are greyish-white , and the yellowish-buff breast and off-white belly are marked with round black spots . the spotting becomes denser on the lower chest , giving the appearance of a breast-band . the long tail has white tips on the outer feathers , and the underwing coverts are white . the eyes are dark brown and the bill is blackish with a yellowish base to the lower mandible . the legs and feet are yellowish-brown . there are no plumage differences between the sexes . juveniles are similar to adults , but they have paler upperparts with creamy centres to many of the feathers and smaller spots on the yellowish underparts . by their first winter they are very similar to adults , but the underparts are usually more buff-toned . the eastern subspecies t . v . bonapartei is in length , and therefore slightly larger than the nominate form . it is paler grey above and whiter below , with fewer black spots . birds of intermediate appearance are seen west of the ob river where the range overlaps with viscivorus . the southern race t . v . deichleri resembles bonapartei in appearance , but is closer in size to the nominate viscivorus , although it has a more slender bill . adults have a full moult after breeding , beginning between late may and the end of june , and completed by early october . juvenile birds have a partial moult , replacing their head , body , and covert feathers ; this is completed by october , although the start of the moult depends on when the chicks hatched . the mistle thrush is much larger , paler and longer-tailed than the sympatric song thrush . in the western himalayas it could be confused with both the plain-backed and the long-tailed thrushes . these are similar to the mistle thrush , but the plain–backed thrush lacks obvious wing bars , is more rufous above than its relative , and is barred rather than spotted below . the long-tailed thrush has olive-toned upperparts , bars on its breast and two wing bars . juvenile mistle thrushes are superficially similar to white 's thrush , but that species has golden-yellow plumage , scalloped underparts and a distinctive underwing pattern . . voice . the male mistle thrush has a loud melodious song with fluted whistles , sounding like chewee-trewuu & nbsp ; . trureetruuruu or similar , repeated three to six times , and used to advertise his territory , attract a mate and maintain the pair bond . clement et al . ( 2000 ) p . 41 . the tone resembles that of the song thrush or blackbird , but compared to its relatives the mistle thrush 's repertoire is less varied and the delivery is slower . the song is , however , much louder , often audible up to 2 & nbsp ; km ( 2,000 & nbsp ; yd ) away . the song is given from a treetop or other elevated position mainly from november to early june . the male is most vocal in the early morning , and its tendency to sing after , and sometimes during , wet and windy weather led to the old name '' stormcock '' . the song may be heard in any month , although it is uncommon from july to august while the thrush is moulting . the main call , given by both sexes , is a dry chattering krrrr , louder when it is alarmed or excited . it is often likened to the sound of a football rattle , a form of musical ratchet . there is also a squeaky tuk contact call . . distribution and habitat . the mistle thrush breeds in much of europe and temperate asia , although it is absent from the treeless far north , and its range becomes discontinuous in southeast europe , turkey and the middle east . in these warmer southern areas , it tends to be found in the milder uplands and coastal regions . nominate t . v . viscivorus breeds in europe and in asia east to the ob , beyond which it is replaced by t . v . bonapartei . the southern form t . v . deichleri is resident in north africa , corsica and sardinia . the mistle thrush is a partial migrant : birds from the north and east of the range wintering in the milder areas of europe and north africa . scandinavian and russian birds start moving south from mid-september onwards , most birds wintering in europe , western turkey and the middle east . between mid-october and november , large numbers cross the strait of gibraltar and others pass through cyprus , but there is hardly any migration across the north sea . breeding birds in the british isles and north-west europe are resident or move only short distances . in the himalayas , the breeding population moves to nearby lower-altitude sites in winter . return migration starts mainly from late march , although it can be a month earlier in the middle east , and northern breeders may not arrive back on their territories until late april or early may . migration may be by day or night , and typically involves individuals or small groups . vagrant birds have occurred in the azores , china , crete , faroe islands , iceland , japan , oman , saudi arabia , sikkim and the united arab emirates . in the winter 2017/2018 the first record of a mistle thrush for north america was at miramichi in new brunswick . the mistle thrush is found in a wide range of habitats containing trees , including forests , plantations , hedges and town parks . in the south and east of its range , it inhabits upland coniferous woodland and the range extends above the main tree line where dwarf juniper is present . breeding occurs at up to in the mountains of north africa , and occasionally much higher , to . in the highlands of europe , its preferred altitude is from . snow & perrins ( 1998 ) pp . 1230–1234 . more open habitats , such as agricultural land , moors and grassy hills , are extensively used in winter or on migration . there is evidence that this species has changed its natural habitat in at least parts of its range . in germany and elsewhere in central europe , it was found only in coniferous forest until the mid-1920s when its range rapidly expanded , first into farmland , and then to suburbs and urban parks . the reasons for this expansion are unclear . fuller ( 2003 ) p . 28 . in areas of intensive farming , such as eastern england , arable land has in turn largely been abandoned in favour of built-up areas with their greater variety of green habitats . perhaps the most notable find of the 118th christmas bird count in canada was a single vagrant mistle thrush found in miramichi , new brunswick . this was the first record for this species in north america . the discovery attracted many birders from canada and the united states ; sightings continued from early december 2017 through late march 2018 . . behaviour . mistle thrushes are found as individuals or pairs for much of the year , although families forage together in late summer , and groups may merge to form large flocks when food sources are plentiful . it is not uncommon for up to 50 thrushes to feed together at that time of year . they roost at night in trees or bushes , again typically as individuals or pairs , except in late summer or autumn when families may roost together . the mistle thrush is quite terrestrial , hopping with its head held up and body erect ; when excited , it will flick its wings and tail . the flight consists of undulating bounds interspersed with glides . . breeding . mistle thrushes breed in the year subsequent to their hatching ; they are monogamous and stay as a pair throughout the year in areas where they are not migratory . their territories are much larger than those of blackbirds or song thrushes ; although the nest territory is only about , around is used for feeding . territories are normally reoccupied in subsequent years . territories are larger in woods than in farmland . the male will attack intruders into its breeding area , including birds of prey and corvids , and sometimes cats or humans . courtship feeding of the female by her partner has sometimes been observed . breeding typically commences in mid-march in the south and west of europe ( late february in britain ) , but not till early may in finland . the nest is usually built in a tree in the fork of a branch or against the trunk , although hedges , ledges on buildings and cliff faces may also be used . the nest site may be up to above the ground , although is more typical . the common chaffinch often nests close to a mistle thrush , the vigilance of the chaffinch and the aggressive behaviour of the thrush benefiting both species . the thrush 's nest is a large cup of sticks , dry grass , roots and moss , coated on the inside with a layer of mud and lined with fine grass and leaves . the nest is built by the female , although the male may help . nests built early in the breeding season may be destroyed by bad weather . the clutch is typically three to five eggs ( range two to six ) , which are usually whitish-buff or greenish-blue and are spotted with red , purple or brown . the average size of the egg is , and weighs , of which 6 % is shell . the eggs are incubated for 12–15 & nbsp ; days , mainly by the female . the chicks are altricial and downy , and are fed by both parents . they fledge about 14–16 & nbsp ; days after hatching . there are normally two broods , except in siberia , where there is only one , the male feeding the fledglings from the first brood while the female sits on the second clutch . sometimes the same nest is reused for both broods . the young are dependent on their parents for 15–20 days after fledging . in a study carried out in britain , the survival rate for juveniles in their first year is 57 & nbsp ; per cent , and the adult annual survival rate is 62 & nbsp ; per cent . life expectancy is typically three years , but the maximum age recorded from bird ringing recoveries is 21 & nbsp ; years and 3 & nbsp ; months for a bird shot in switzerland . . feeding . mistle thrushes feed mainly on invertebrates , fruit and berries . animal prey include earthworms , insects and other arthropods , slugs and snails . snails are sometimes smashed on a stone '' anvil '' , a technique also used by the song thrush . the mistle thrush has been known to kill slowworms and the young of the song thrush , blackbird and dunnock . plant food includes the fruits and seeds of bushes and trees , mainly holly , yew , ivy and mistletoe , but also , for example , blackberry , cherry , elder , hawthorn , olive and rose . it may eat the flowers and shoots of grasses and other plants , and will take fallen apples and plums . it forages within its breeding habitat and in open fields , sometimes sharing these feeding areas with redwings or fieldfares . young birds are initially mainly fed on invertebrates , often collected from low foliage or under bushes rather than in the grassland preferred by the adults . adults will roam up to 1 & nbsp ; km ( approximately 1,100 & nbsp ; yards ) from the nest on pasture or ploughed land . after fledging the young may accompany their parents until the onset of winter . individuals or pairs will defend one or more fruit-bearing trees throughout the winter , with preference shown for trees which host mistletoe , the parasitic plant from which the bird derives its name . where mistletoe is not present , holly is the most common tree chosen . snow & snow ( 2010 ) pp . 154–156 . although the thrush normally feeds on the ground and from low bushes , the defence of this resource conserves fruit for later in the season when other food items become scarce . the trees are defended against other thrushes as well as birds such as the bullfinch and great spotted woodpecker . in milder winters with an abundance of fruit , however , this strategy is less used and thrushes can be observed foraging in flocks . conversely , in hard winters , the defender may be overwhelmed by large flocks of fieldfares , redwings or bohemian waxwings . as its name implies , the mistle thrush is important in propagating the mistletoe , an aerial parasite , which needs its seeds to be deposited on the branches of suitable trees . the highly nutritious fruits are favoured by the thrush , which digests the flesh leaving the sticky seeds to be excreted , possibly in a suitable location for germination . rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) p . 28 . . predators and parasites . the mistle thrush is predated upon by a wide variety of birds of prey , including the boreal owl , korpimäki & hakkarainen ( 2012 ) p . 97 . short-eared owl , tawny owl , ural owl , eurasian eagle-owl , golden eagle , watson ( 2010 ) p . 94 . kestrel , common buzzard , red kite , northern goshawk , kenward ( 2010 ) p . 204 . peregrine falcon , ratcliffe ( 2010 ) p . 415 . and sparrowhawk . newton ( 2010 ) p . 108 . the eggs and chicks may be targeted by cats and corvids . parent birds exhibit fearlessness in defence of their nests , occasionally even attacking humans . coward ( 1928 ) pp . 193–196 . the mistle thrush is not normally a host of the common cuckoo , a brood parasite . external parasites of the mistle thrush include the hen flea , the moorhen flea , the castor bean tick and the brightly coloured harvest mite . rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) pp . 84–85 . rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) p . 227 . internally , they can suffer from parasites including cestoda , rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) p . 197 . nematodes , rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) p . 189 . and syngamus merulae ( a species of gapeworm ) . rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) p . 181 . blood parasites can include trypanosoma and plasmodium species . rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) p . 171 . rothschild & clay ( 1953 ) p . 165 . . status . the mistle thrush has an extensive distribution in europe and western asia , and its european breeding population is estimated at 9–22.2 & nbsp ; million birds . when asian breeders are added , this gives a global total of 12.2–44.4 & nbsp ; million . the species was formerly more restricted in range , and rarely bred even in northern england in the 1700s . brown & grice ( 2005 ) p . 499 . it expanded rapidly into lowland and coastal areas of europe during the 18th century and the first half of the 19th century , colonising areas where it was formerly rare or absent , such as ireland ( where it first bred in 1807 ) , scotland and the netherlands . the range also increased in denmark , norway , hungary and austria . although the population now appears to be declining , the decrease is not rapid or large enough to trigger conservation vulnerability criteria . given its high numbers and very large range , this thrush is therefore classified by the international union for conservation of nature as being of least concern . the perceived decline may be due to the loss of invertebrate-rich pastures and mixed farms through conversion to arable agriculture or more intensively managed grassland . adult survival , clutch size and fledging success are all lower in arable landscapes than in areas with extensive pasture . in finland , the loss of ancient forests is thought to have led to a local decline . . in culture . desiderius erasmus 's early sixteenth-century collection of latin proverbs included turdus malum sibi ipse cacat , ( the thrush himself excretes his own trouble ) , which refers to the use of the sticky mistletoe berries favoured by this species as an ingredient in birdlime , used to trap birds . the thrush was seen to be thus spreading the seeds of his own destruction . erasmus ( 1982 ) p . 25 . mistle thrush and alpine chough , by giovanni da udine , an artist who worked in raphael 's studio in the 16th century , was a sketch for his bird with garland and fruit , and this in turn was the basis for a raphael fresco in the apostolic palace . hersey ( 1993 ) p . 225 . alsteens ( 2009 ) pp . 22–23 . the early renaissance poem '' the harmony of birds '' features a thrusshe ( mistle thrush ) singing the phrase '' sanctus , sanctus '' , distinguishing the bird from the song thrush , the mauys or throstle . percy society et al . ( 1842 ) p . 6 . andrew ( 1985 ) p . 77 . the song of the mistle thrush is also described in thomas hardy 's '' darkling thrush '' and edward thomas 's '' the thrush '' . armitage & dee ( 2011 ) pp . 202–203 . the loud call of this common and conspicuous bird also led to many old or local names , including '' screech '' , '' shrite '' and '' gawthrush '' . swainson ( 1886 ) pp . 1–2 . lockwood ( 1984 ) p . 104 . other names , including '' stormcock '' referred to its willingness to sing in wind and rain . '' holm thrush '' , '' hollin cock '' and '' holm cock '' are based on obsolete names for the holly tree , which may be defended by the thrush in winter for its berries . cocker & mabey ( 2005 ) pp . 360–361 . in frances hodgson burnett 's the secret garden , dickon reassures mary lennox that he will keep his knowledge of the garden secret by comparing her to a mistle thrush in defence of its nest , recognising his privilege in sharing her secret : '' if tha ' was a missel thrush an ' showed me where thy nest was , does tha ' think i 'd tell any one ? not me , '' he said . '' tha ' art as safe as a missel thrush . '' stormcock , released in 1971 , is the fifth album by english folk/rock singer-songwriter and guitarist roy harper . the final verse of the jethro tull song '' jack-in-the-green '' from their album songs from the wood mentions the bird in the lines '' oh , the mistlethrush is coming . jack , put out the light . '' the bird also features in the lyrics of the decemberists ' song '' wo n't want for love ( margaret in the taiga ) '' from their 2009 album the hazards of love : '' mistlethrush , mistlethrush , lay me down in the underbrush , my naked feet grow weary with the dusk '' . . references . bibliography . ( catalogue for the exhibition '' raphael to renoir : drawings from the collection of jean bonna '' , held at the metropolitan museum of art , new york , from 21 january to 26 april 2009 , and at the national gallery of scotland , edinburgh , from 5 june to 6 september 2009 ) . external links . ageing and sexing ( pdf ; 4.3 mb ) by javier blasco-zumeta & gerd-michael heinze feathers – ornithos – birdwatching in europe vocalisations – xeno-canto