Tyrtaeus

life . sources . virtually all we know about the life of tyrtaeus is found two entries of the suda , a byzantine encyclopedia redacted in the 10th century ad . traditional accounts of his life were almost entirely deduced from his poetry or were simply fiction , such as the account by pausanias of his supposed transformation from a lame and stupid school teacher in athens to the mastermind of spartan victories against the messenians . pausanias 4.15.6 , cited by . variations on his athenian origin and deformity are found in numerous ancient sources , including diogenes laërtius , who said that the athenians regarded him as deranged , diogenes laërtius 2.43 , cited by . porphyry , who labelled him '' one-eyed '' , porphyry in horace a.p . 402 , cited by . or justin , who believed that he was sent to the spartans by the athenians as a deliberate insult . justin 3.5 , cited by . ( 640–637 bc ) . he wrote a constitution for the lacedaemonians , precepts in elegiac verse , and war songs , in five books . suda iv.610.5 ( adler ) , cited by . author title source } } the second entry states that the spartans took him as their general from among the athenians in response to an oracle . during the 19th and early 20th centuries , the picture of tyrtaeus ' life has been complicated by doubts about the authenticity of many of his verses , dated by various scholars to the 5th or 4th century bc . a theory that '' tyrtaeus '' was in fact a 5th century athenian was even posited by eduard schwartz in 1899 . e . schwartz , '' tyrtaios '' , hermes 34 ( 1899 ) , cited by . see also macan in classical review ( february 1897 ) ; h . weil , études sur l'antiquité grecque ( 1900 ) , and c . giarratani , tirteo e i suoi carmi ( 1905 ) . according to gerber ( 1997 ) , however , '' that skepticism has now largely disappeared '' , and disagreements among scholars now essentially revolves around the version of fragment 4 that should be accepted as genuine ( plutarch 's or diodorus ' version , or a combination of the two ) , and about the dating of fragment 12 , which some critics have assigned to the time of xenophanes ( c . 570 – c . 475 bc ) or shortly before 498 bc . , gerber states that '' most critics have been convinced '' by jaeger 's defence of fr . 12 as tyrtaeus ' work ( five essays . 1966 1932 . pp . 103–42 ) , but that fränkel ( egpp . pp . 337–39 ) assigns it '' to the time of xenophanes '' and g . tarditi ( '' parenesi e arete nel corpus tirtaico '' . 1982 . rfic 110 . pp . 257–276 ) to shortly before pindar 's pythian 10 ( 498 ) . . birth and place of origin . the floruit given in the first entry of suda is perhaps too early since jerome offers a date of 633–632 . modern scholars are less specific and provide instead date ranges for the second messenian war ( and thus for tyrtaeus ' life ) such as '' the latter part of the 7th century '' , v . parker , 'the dates of the messenian wars ' , chiron 21 ( 1991 ) , pages 25–47 , as summarized by . or '' any time between the sixties and the thirties '' of the 7th century . the confusion about his place of origin , which emerged by the 5th century bc , may have had several causes . it has been suggested that the depictions of tyrtaeus as a lame schoolmaster from athens were invented to denigrate sparta , which in the views of athenians could not have had a talented poet of its own . according to pausanias , the athenians sent the lame , mentally defective teacher-poet to sparta as a compromise , wishing to obey the oracle which had demanded an athenian , but unwilling to help the spartans in their war with a more capable individual . yet , tyrtaeus was not listed by herodotus among the two foreigners ever to have been awarded spartan citizenship . herodotus ix . 35 . one ancient source even listed aphidnae as his supposed athenian deme , but there was also a place of that name in laconia . ancient athenian propaganda might indeed have played a role , although even plato , who could hardly have intended any denigration as an admirer of sparta , gave credence to the poet 's athenian origin . plato laws 1.629a–b , cited by . according to scholar n . r . e . fisher , '' the story was surely an invention by athenians , designed in the first instance for a predominantly athenian market . it must have been aimed at making co-operation between sparta and athens more acceptable '' . it has also been noted that tyrtaeus did not compose in the vernacular laconian doric greek of sparta , as could be expected of a native spartan like his near contemporary alcman . however , greek elegists used the ionic greek of homer regardless of their city of origin or their audience . scholars generally agree that tyrtaeus was a native of laconia for several reasons : the use of the first personal plural to include himself among the heraclidae whom zeus had given to sparta in fragment 2 ; the presence of occasional doric words in his vocabulary ; and his tone of authority when addressing spartan warriors , which would have been tolerated only if delivered by a spartan-born poet . sparta . the conquest of messenia in the eighth century , by the grandfathers of tyrtaeus 's generation , provided the foundation for a sophisticated and cultivated lifestyle . foreign poets like the lesbian terpander and cretan thaletas were welcome guests . ivory and gold ornaments , bronze vessels of ornate workmanship , fine pottery and the odes of alcman all testify to refined tastes , continuing even into the sixth century . the continuance of those luxuries was '' dearly purchased '' in blood and toil by tyrtaeus 's generation when the messenians revolted , and the ensuing war and civil strife inspired his entire poetic work . the crisis was mentioned by aristotle for its instructive power : the noble sentiment of line 1 seems to be original yet the vocabulary is entirely homeric and , though lines 5–7 are adapted from homer 's iliad ( 13.130–33 ) , '' . locking spear by spear , shield against shield at the base , so buckler/ leaned on buckler , helmet on helmet , man against man , and the horse-hair crests along the horns of their shining helmets/ touched as they bent their heads , so dense were they formed on each other , . '' iliad 13.130–33 , translated by r.lattimore , the iliad of homer , university of chicago press ( 1951 ) there is an important difference : homer describes the advance of one side in close formation , whereas tyrtaeus describes two sides meeting in the hoplite style of fighting . the description of the battle is rejected however by some scholars as anachronistic : for example , missiles were not characteristic of hoplite warfare . the passage demonstrates one of the more common devices employed by tyrtaeus—the use of parallel phrases for amplification , sometimes degenerating into tedious repetition . here it is used to communicate a sense of the crowded battlefield . editions and translations . there are english verse translations by richard polwhele ( 1792 ) and imitations by the english poet laureate h . j . pye ( 1795 ) , and an italian version by f . cavallotti , with text , introduction and notes ( 1898 ) . the fragment that begins with ( fr . 10 west ) has been translated by the poet thomas campbell . the edition by c . a . klotz ( 1827 ) contains a dissertation on the war-songs of different countries . notes . . references . bibliography . . primary sources . . further reading . . external links . one of the medallion wafer poems by letitia elizabeth landon in the literary gazette , 1823 . tyrtaeus : greek texts tyrtaeus poems