Frederick Reines

early life . frederick reines was born in paterson , new jersey , one of four children of gussie ( cohen ) and israel reines . his parents were jewish emigrants from the same town in russia , but only met in new york city , where they were later married . he had an older sister , paula , who became a doctor , and two older brothers , david and william , who became lawyers . he said that his '' early education was strongly influenced '' by his studious siblings . he was the great-nephew of the rabbi yitzchak yaacov reines , the founder of mizrachi , a religious zionist movement . the family moved to hillburn , new york , where his father ran the general store , and he spent much of his childhood . he was an eagle scout . looking back , reines said : '' my early childhood memories center around this typical american country store and life in a small american town , including independence day july celebrations marked by fireworks and patriotic music played from a pavilion bandstand . '' reines sang in a chorus , and as a soloist . for a time he considered the possibility of a singing career , and was instructed by a vocal coach from the metropolitan opera who provided lessons for free because the family did not have the money for them . the family later moved to north bergen , new jersey , residing on kennedy boulevard and 57th street . because north bergen did not have a high school , he attended union hill high school in union hill , new jersey ( today union city , new jersey ) , from which he graduated in 1935 . from an early age , reines exhibited an interest in science , and liked creating and building things . he later recalled that : the first stirrings of interest in science that i remember occurred during a moment of boredom at religious school , when , looking out of the window at twilight through a hand curled to simulate a telescope , i noticed something peculiar about the light ; it was the phenomenon of diffraction . that began for me a fascination with light . ironically , reines excelled in literary and history courses , but received average or low marks in science and math in his freshman year of high school , though he improved in those areas by his junior and senior years through the encouragement of a teacher who gave him a key to the school laboratory . this cultivated a love of science by his senior year . in response to a question seniors were asked about what they wanted to do for a yearbook quote , he responded : '' to be a physicist extraordinaire . '' reines was accepted into the massachusetts institute of technology , but chose instead to attend stevens institute of technology in hoboken , new jersey , where he earned his bachelor of science ( b.s . ) degree in mechanical engineering in 1939 , and his master of science ( m.s . ) degree in mathematical physics in 1941 , writing a thesis on '' a critical review of optical diffraction theory '' . he married sylvia samuels on august 30 , 1940 . they had two children , robert and alisa . he then entered new york university , where he earned his doctor of philosophy ( ph.d . ) in 1944 . he studied cosmic rays there under serge a . korff , but wrote his thesis under the supervision of richard d . present on '' nuclear fission and the liquid drop model of the nucleus '' . publication of the thesis was delayed until after the end of world war ii ; it appeared in physical review in 1946 . . los alamos laboratory . in 1944 richard feynman recruited reines to work in the theoretical division at the manhattan project 's los alamos laboratory , where he would remain for the next fifteen years . he joined feynman 's t-4 ( diffusion problems ) group , which was part of hans bethe 's t ( theoretical ) division . diffusion was an important aspect of critical mass calculations . in june 1946 , he became a group leader , heading the t-1 ( theory of dragon ) group . an outgrowth of the '' demon core second incident '' experiment , the dragon was a machine that could attain a critical state for short bursts of time , which could be used as a research tool or power source . reines participated in a number of nuclear tests , and writing reports on their results . these included operation crossroads at bikini atoll in 1946 , operation sandstone at eniwetok atoll in 1948 , and operation ranger and operation buster–jangle at the nevada test site . in 1951 he was the director of operation greenhouse series of nuclear tests in the pacific . this saw the first american tests of boosted fission weapons , an important step towards thermonuclear weapons . he studied the effects of nuclear blasts , and co-authored a paper with john von neumann on mach stem formation , an important aspect of an air blast wave . in spite or perhaps because of his role in these nuclear tests , reines was concerned about the dangers of radioactive pollution from atmospheric nuclear tests , and became an advocate of underground nuclear testing . in the wake of the sputnik crisis , he participated in john archibald wheeler 's project 137 , which evolved into jason . he was also a delegate at the atoms for peace conference in geneva in 1958 . . discovery of the neutrino and the inner workings of stars . the neutrino is a subatomic particle first proposed by wolfgang pauli on december 4 , 1930 . the particle was required to resolve the problem of missing energy in observations of beta decay , when a neutron decays into a proton and an electron . the new hypothetical particle was required to preserve the fundamental law of conservation of energy . enrico fermi renamed it the neutrino , italian for '' little neutral one '' , and in 1934 , proposed his fermi 's interaction by which the electrons emitted from the nucleus were created by the decay of a neutron into a proton , an electron , and a neutrino : : → + + the neutrino accounted for the missing energy , but fermi 's theory described a particle with little mass and no electric charge that appeared to be impossible to observe directly . in a 1934 paper , rudolf peierls and hans bethe calculated that neutrinos could easily pass through the earth , and concluded '' there is no practically possible way of observing the neutrino . '' in 1951 , reines and his colleague clyde cowan decided to see if they could detect neutrinos and so prove their existence . at the conclusion of the greenhouse test series , reines had received permission from the head of t division , j . carson mark , for a leave in residence to study fundamental physics . '' so why did we want to detect the free neutrino ? '' he later explained , '' because everybody said , you could n't do it . '' according to fermi 's theory , there was also a corresponding reverse reaction , in which a neutrino combines with a proton to create a neutron and a positron : : + → + the positron would soon be annihilated by an electron and produce two 0.51 mev gamma rays , while the neutron would be captured by a proton and release a 2.2 mev gamma ray . this would produce a distinctive signature that could be detected . they then realised that by adding cadmium salt to their liquid scintillator they would enhance the neutron capture reaction , resulting in a 9 mev burst of gamma rays . for a neutrino source , they proposed using an atomic bomb . permission for this was obtained from the laboratory director , norris bradbury . work began on digging a shaft for the experiment when j . m . b . kellogg convinced them to use a nuclear reactor instead of a bomb . although a less intense source of neutrinos , it had the advantage in allowing for multiple experiments to be carried out over a long period of time . in 1953 , they made their first attempts using one of the large reactors at the hanford nuclear site in what is now known as the cowan–reines neutrino experiment . their detector now included of scintillating fluid and 90 photomultiplier tubes , but the effort was frustrated by background noise from cosmic rays . with encouragement from john a . wheeler , they tried again in 1955 , this time using one of the newer , larger 700 mw reactors at the savannah river site that emitted a high neutrino flux of 1.2 x 10 12 / cm 2 sec . they also had a convenient , well-shielded location from the reactor and underground . on june 14 , 1956 , they were able to send pauli a telegram announcing that the neutrino had been found . when bethe was informed that he had been proven wrong , he said , '' well , you should n't believe everything you read in the papers . '' from then on reines dedicated the major part of his career to the study of the neutrino 's properties and interactions , which work would influence study of the neutrino for future researchers to come . cowan left los alamos in 1957 to teach at george washington university , ending their collaboration . on the basis of his work in first detecting the neutrino , reines became the head of the physics department of case western reserve university from 1959 to 1966 . at case , he led a group that was the first to detect neutrinos created in the atmosphere by cosmic rays . reines had a booming voice , and had been a singer since childhood . during this time , besides performing his duties as a research supervisor and chairman of the physics department , reines sang in the cleveland orchestra chorus under the direction of robert shaw in performances with george szell and the cleveland orchestra . in 1966 , reines took most of his neutrino research team with him when he left for the new university of california , irvine ( uci ) , becoming its first dean of physical sciences . at uci , reines extended the research interests of some of his graduate students into the development of medical radiation detectors , such as for measuring total radiation delivered to the whole human body in radiation therapy . reines had prepared for the possibility of measuring the distant events of a supernova explosion . supernova explosions are rare , but reines thought he might be lucky enough to see one in his lifetime , and be able to catch the neutrinos streaming from it in his specially-designed detectors . during his wait for a supernova to explode , he put signs on some of his large neutrino detectors , calling them '' supernova early warning systems '' . in 1987 , neutrinos emitted from sn 1987a were detected by the irvine–michigan–brookhaven ( imb ) collaboration , which used an 8,000 ton cherenkov detector located in a salt mine near cleveland . normally , the detectors recorded only a few background events each day . the supernova registered 19 events in just ten seconds . this discovery is regarded as inaugurating the field of neutrino astronomy . in 1995 , reines was honored , along with martin l . perl with the nobel prize in physics for his work with cowan in first detecting the neutrino . unfortunately , cowan had died in 1974 , and the nobel prize is not awarded posthumously . reines also received many other awards , including the j . robert oppenheimer memorial prize in 1981 , the national medal of science in 1985 , the bruno rossi prize in 1989 , the michelson–morley award in 1990 , the panofsky prize in 1992 , and the franklin medal in 1992 . he was elected a member of the national academy of sciences in 1980 and a foreign member of the russian academy of sciences in 1994 . he remained dean of physical sciences at uci until 1974 , and became a professor emeritus in 1988 , but he continued teaching until 1991 , and remained on uci 's faculty until his death . . death . reines died after a long illness at the university of california , irvine medical center in orange , california , on august 26 , 1998 . he was survived by his wife and children . his papers are in the uci libraries . reines hall at uci was named in his honor . . publications . reines , f . & c . l . cowan , jr . '' on the detection of the free neutrino '' , los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) ( through predecessor agency los alamos scientific laboratory ) , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( august 6 , 1953 ) . reines , f . , cowan , c . l . jr . , carter , r . e . , wagner , j . j . & m . e . wyman . '' the free antineutrino absorption cross section . part i . measurement of the free antineutrino absorption cross section . part ii . expected cross section from measurements of fission fragment electron spectrum '' , los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) ( through predecessor agency los alamos scientific laboratory ) , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( june 1958 ) . reines , f . , gurr , h . s . , jenkins , t . l . & j . h . munsee . '' neutrino experiments at reactors '' , university of california-irvine , case western reserve university , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the atomic energy commission ) , ( september 9 , 1968 ) . roberts , a . , blood , h . , learned , j . & f . reines . '' status and aims of the dumand neutrino project : the ocean as a neutrino detector '' , fermi national accelerator laboratory ( fnal ) , united states department of energy ( through predecessor agency the energy research and development administration ) , ( july 1976 ) . . notes .