Youth culture

existence . there is a debate about whether or not youth culture exists . some researchers argue that youth 's values and morals are not distinct from those of their parents , which means that youth culture is not a separate culture . just because people see the presence of what seems to be a youth culture today does not mean that this phenomenon extends to all generations of young people . additionally , peer influence varies greatly between contexts and by sex , age , and social status , making a single '' youth culture '' difficult , if not impossible , to define . steinberg , l . ( 2008 ) . adolescence . new york , ny : mcgraw-hill . others argue that there are definite elements of youth society that constitute culture , and that these elements differ from those of their parents ' culture . janssen et al . have used the terror management theory ( tmt ) to argue for the existence of youth culture . janssen , j . , dechesne , m , & van knippenberg , a . ( 1999 ) . the psychological importance of youth culture : a terror management approach . youth & society , 31 ( 2 ) , 152-167 . tmt is a psychological concept that hypothesizes that culture originates from an attempt to cope with the knowledge of mortality . society does this by adopting a worldview and developing self-esteem . researchers test tmt by exposing people to reminders of their mortality . tmt is supported if being reminded of death causes people to cling more strongly to their worldview . janssen et al . tested the following hypothesis : '' if youth culture serves to help adolescents deal with problems of vulnerability and finiteness , then reminders of mortality should lead to increased allegiance to cultural practice and belief of the youth . '' their results supported their hypothesis and the results of previous studies , suggesting that youth culture is , in fact , a culture . schwartz and merten used the language of adolescents to argue for the presence of youth culture as distinct from the rest of society . schwartz , g . & merten . d . ( 1967 ) . the language of adolescence : an anthropological approach to the youth culture . the american journal of sociology , 72 ( 5 ) , 453-468 . schwartz argued that high school students used their vocabulary to create meanings that are distinct to adolescents . specifically , the adolescent status terminology ( the words that adolescents use to describe hierarchical social statuses ) contains qualities and attributes that are not present in adult status judgments . according to schwartz , this reflects a difference in social structures and the way that adults and teens experience social reality . this difference indicates cultural differences between adolescents and adults , which supports the presence of a separate youth culture . . movements . throughout the 20th century , youths had a strong influence on both lifestyle and culture . the flappers and the mods are two great examples of the impact of youth culture on society . the flappers were young women , confident about a prosperous future after world war i , and they became the symbol of effervescence . this liveliness was seen in her new attitude in life in which she openly drank , smoked , and , in some cases , socialized with gangster-type men . the fashionable dress at the time also reflected the flapper 's new lifestyle . hems were raised , waists dropped , and hair was cut into bobs . this not only created a look that was dramatically different from the corseted , structured dresses of previous generations , but it also created a new freedom that allowed the wearer to move in ways one was unable to before . this break from older values was also apparent in a new posture embraced by the flappers . instead of an upright , corseted posture , they preferred '' a 'lop-sided ' stance characterized by 'sunken chests and round shoulders , ' which suggested fatigue rather than beauty . '' the flappers exemplified how youth culture was influential in fashion and lifestyle . mods also are a great example of a youth culture movement inspiring a popular lifestyle . similar to the flappers , they also emerged during a time of war and political and social troubles . they were a group of kids that stemmed from a group called the modernists . the mods were young men and women who came from all classes , and they believed that their fashion choices '' gave them entrée everywhere , '' and their fashion choices empowered them . the women 's fashions were short and reflected an ideal , youthful body unforgiving to women with curves . they also cut their hair short , possibly a '' homage to the flappers of the 1920s . '' the mod style and embrace of modern technology spread from the uk overseas to america , as well as other countries , proving it to be an extremely influential youth culture movement . theories . the presence of youth culture is a relatively recent historical phenomenon . there are several dominant theories about the emergence of youth culture in the 20th century . these include theories about the historical , economic , and psychological influences on the presence of youth culture . one historical theory credits the emergence of youth culture to the beginning of compulsory education . james coleman argues that age segregation is the root of a separate youth culture . coleman , j . ( 1961 ) . the adolescent society . glencoe , il : free press . before compulsory schooling , many children and adolescents interacted primarily with adults . in contrast , modern children associate extensively with others their own age . these interactions allow adolescents to develop shared experiences and meanings , which are the root of youth culture . another theory posits that some types of cultures facilitate the development of youth culture , while others do not . the basis of this distinction is the presence of universalistic or particularistic norms . particularistic norms are guidelines for behavior that vary from one individual to another . in contrast , universalistic norms apply to all members of a society . universalistic norms are more likely to be found in industrialized societies . modernization in the last century or so has encouraged universalistic norms , since interaction in modern societies makes it necessary for everyone to learn the same set of norms . modernization and universalistic norms have encouraged the growth of youth culture . the need for universalistic norms has made it impractical for young people 's socialization to come primarily from immediate family members , which would lead to significant variation in the norms that are communicated . therefore , many societies use age grouping , such as in schools , to educate their children on societies ' norms and prepare them for adulthood . youth culture is a byproduct of this tactic . because children spend so much time together and learn the same things as the rest of their age group , they develop their own culture . psychological theorists have noted the role of youth culture in identity development . youth culture may be a means of achieving identity during a time when one 's role in life is not always clear . erik erikson theorized that the major psychological conflict of adolescence is identity versus role confusion . the goal of this stage of life is to answer the question , '' who am i ? '' this can be difficult in many societies in which adolescents are simultaneously expected to behave like children and take on adult roles . some psychologists have theorized that the formation of youth culture is an attempt to adopt an identity that reconciles these two conflicting expectations . for example , parsons ( 1951 ) posited that adolescence is a time when young people are transitioning from reliance on parents to autonomy . in this transitory state , dependence on the peer group serves as a stand-in for parents . parsons , t . the social system . glencoe , ill : free press , 1951 . burlingame restated this hypothesis in 1970 . he wrote that adolescents replace parents with the peer group , and that this reliance on the peer group diminishes as youth enter adulthood and take on adult roles . burlingame , w.v . the youth culture . in e.d . evans ( ed . ) , adolescents : readings in behavior and development . hinsdale , ill : dryden press , 1970 , pp . 131-149 . fasick relates youth culture as a method of identity development to the simultaneous elongation of childhood and the need for independence that occurs in adolescence . according to fasick , adolescents face contradictory pulls from society . on one hand , compulsory schooling keeps them socially and economically dependent on their parents . on the other hand , young people need to achieve some sort of independence in order to participate in the market economy of modern society . as a means of coping with these contrasting aspects of adolescence , youth create independence through behavior—specifically , through the leisure-oriented activities that are done with peers . fasick , f . ( 1984 ) . parents , peers , youth culture and autonomy in adolescence . adolescence , 19 ( 73 ) , 143-157 . . impact on adolescents . for decades , adults have worried that youth subcultures were the root of moral degradation and changing values in younger generations . researchers have characterized youth culture as embodying values that are '' in conflict with those of the adult world '' . sugarman , barry . involvement in youth culture , academic achievement and conformity in school : an empirical study of london schoolboys . 1967 . the british journal of sociology , 18 . 151-164 . common concerns about youth culture include a perceived lack of interest in education , involvement in risky behaviors like substance use and sexual activity , and engaging extensively in leisure activities . parsons , t . ( 1954 ) . age and sex in the social structure of the united states . in essays in sociological theory , 89-103 . new york : free press . these perceptions have led many adults to believe that adolescents hold different values than older generations and to perceive youth culture as an attack on the morals of current society . these worries have prompted the creation of parenting websites such as theyouthculturereport.com and the center for parent youth understanding ( cpyu.org ) , whose goal is to preserve the values of older generations in young people . despite the attitudes of many adults , there is not a consensus among researchers about whether youth subcultures hold different beliefs than adults do . some researchers have noted the simultaneous rise in age segregation and adolescent adjustment problems such as suicide , delinquency , and premarital pregnancy . bronfenbrenner , u . ( 1974 ) . the origins of alienation . scientific american , 231 , 53-61 . perhaps the increased prevalence of age segregation contributed to the problems of modern youth , and these problems represent a difference in values . however , most evidence suggests that these youth problems are not a reflection of different morals held by younger generations . multiple studies have found that most adolescents hold views that are similar to their parents . fasick , f . ( 1984 ) . parents , peers , youth culture and autonomy in adolescence . , adolescence , 19 ( 73 ) , 143-157 . one study challenged the theory that adolescent cohorts have distanced themselves from their parents by finding that between 1976 and 1982 , a time when rates of adolescent problems increased , adolescents became less peer-oriented . sebald , h . ( 1986 ) . adolescents ' shifting orientation toward parents and peers : a curvilinear trend over recent decades . journal of marriage and family , 48 , 5-13 . a second study 's finding that adolescents ' values were more similar to their parents ' in the 1980s than they were in the 1960s and '70s echoes sebald 's findings . gecas , v . , & seff , m . ( 1990 ) . families and adolescents : a review of the 1980s . journal of marriage and family , 52 , 941-958 . another study did find differences between adolescents ' and parents ' attitudes , but found that the differences were in the degree of belief , not in the attitude itself . weinstock , a . , & lerner , r.m . ( 1972 ) . attitudes of late adolescents and their parents toward contemporary issues . psychological reports , 30 , 239-244 . there may also be pluralistic ignorance on the part of youth regarding how their attitudes compare to peers and parents . a study by lerner et al . asked college students to compare their attitudes on a number of issues to the attitudes of their peers and parents . most students rated their attitudes as falling somewhere between their parents ' more conservative attitudes and their peers ' more liberal attitudes . the authors suggested that the reason for this is that the students perceived their friends as more liberal than they really were . lerner , r.m . , meisels , m . , & knapp , j.r . ( 1975 ) . actual and perceived attitudes of late adolescents and their parents : the phenomenon of the generation gaps . journal of genetic psychology , 126 , 195-207 . if adolescents ' values are similar to their parents ' , this raises the question of why adults insist that adolescents inhabit a separate world with different values . one reason may be that the similarities between adolescent and adult values are relatively invisible compared to the differences between these two groups . the way young people dress , the music they listen to , and their language are often more apparent than the values they hold . this may lead adults to overemphasize the differences between youth and other age groups . adults may also falsely believe that youth 's assertion of independence in exterior aspects of their life represents a manifestation of a different value system . in reality , sports , language , music , clothing and dating tend to be superficial ways of expressing autonomy—they can be adopted without compromising one 's beliefs or values . of course , there are some areas in which adolescents ' assertion of autonomy can cause long-term consequences . these include behaviors involving substance use and sexual activity . the impact of youth culture on deviance and sexual behavior is debatable . drinking alcohol is normative for adolescents in the united states , with more than 70 % of high school students reporting ever having had a drink . apps.nccd.cdc.gov similarly , about 2/3 of teenagers have engaged in sexual intercourse by the time they leave high school . as drinking and having sex may be common in adolescence , many researchers include them as aspects of youth culture . while engaging in these activities can have harmful consequences , the majority of adolescents who engage in these risky behaviors do not suffer long-term consequences . the possibilities of addiction , pregnancy , incarceration , and other negative outcomes are some potentially negative effects of participation in youth culture . research demonstrates that many factors may influence youth to engage in high-risk behaviors , including '' a lack of stable role models , heightened family stresses , lowered levels of family investment , weakened emotional bonds between parents and their children , lowered levels of social capital and social control , and a lack of hope in ones future '' . however , teen culture may also have benefits for the adolescent . peer influence can have a positive effect on adolescents ' well-being . for example , most teens report that their friends pressure them not to use drugs or engage in sexual activity . . impact on society in general . young people can be a powerful force in precipitating change in society . youth-led revolutions in the 20th and 21st centuries attest to this fact . organizations of young people , which were often based on a student identity , were crucial to the civil rights movement . these include organizations such as the southern student organizing committee , students for a democratic society and the student nonviolent coordinating committee , whose role in sit-ins , protests , and other activities of the civil rights movement were crucial to its success . the freedom summer relied heavily on college students ; hundreds of students engaged in registering african americans to vote , teaching in '' freedom schools '' , and organizing the mississippi freedom democratic party . the american protests in the vietnam war were also student-driven . many college campuses were buzzing during the war with protests , sit-ins , and demonstrations . organizations such as the young americans for freedom , the student libertarian movement , and the student peace union were based on youth status and contributed to participation in anti-war activities . some scholars have claimed that the activism of youth during the vietnam war was symbolic of a youth culture whose values were against those of mainstream american culture . harrison , benjamin t . ( 2000 ) 'roots of the anti-vietnam war movement , ' in hixson , walter ( ed ) the vietnam antiwar movement . new york : garland publishing meyer , david s . 2007 . the politics of protest : social movements in america . new york : oxford university press . in the early 2010s , the arab spring illustrated how young people played roles in demonstrations and protests . the activities of the movement were initiated primarily by young people , often college students dissatisfied with opportunities afforded to them . the participation of young people prompted time magazine to include several youth members of the movement in its 2011 list of 100 most influential people . additionally , the movement utilised social media ( which can be considered an aspect of youth culture ) to schedule , coordinate , and publicize events . some scholars have studied the trends that accompany social unrest , and have suggested ties between youth and revolt . most notable is gunnar heinsohn 's theory of the youth bulge . according to this theory , an especially large population of young people , especially males , is associated with social unrest , war , and terrorism . the rationale that heinsohn gives is that these population trends leave many people unable to find prestigious places in society , so they turn their attention to creating change in society . see also . children 's clothing crowds after-eighty generation baby boom generation beat generation generation x millennials ( '' generation y '' ) generation z ( '' internet generation '' ) list of subcultures . references .