Screw-pile lighthouse

history . pile lighthouse tubular skeletal tower lighthouses were built , usually of cast-iron but also of wrought-iron piles , both onshore and offshore , typically on soft bottoms such as mud , sand , and swamp . alexander mitchell invented the screwpile , a major improvement over the standard straightpile construction type . with his son , he patented his wrought-iron screwpile design in england in 1833 . the walde lighthouse in northern france ( pas-de-calais ) , established in 1859 , was based on mitchell 's design . although discontinued in 1998 and shorn of its lantern , it is the only remaining screwpile lighthouse in france . screw-pile lighthouses in the united states . the first screwpile lighthouse type built in the united states was at brandywine shoal , delaware bay , an area served by a lightship since 1823 and an ordinary straightpile lighthouse which stood briefly there in 1828 but was destroyed by ice . major hartman bache , a distinguished engineer of the army corps of topographical engineers , began work in 1848 and completed the task in 1850 , at a construction cost of 53,317 . alexander mitchell served as consultant . the screwpiles were turned by a 4-foot capstan worked by 30 men . to protect the structure from ice floes an ice-breaker consisting of a pier of 30 iron screwpiles 23 feet long and five inches in diameter was screwed down into the bottom and interconnected at their heads above the water reinforcing them together . subsequently , though , the use of caisson lighthouses proved more durable in locations subject to ice . image : middlebay1940 300.jpg left thumb 200px middle bay lighthouse in mobile bay screwpile lighthouses were relatively inexpensive , easy to construct , and comparatively quick to build . they became especially popular after the civil war when the lighthouse board adopted a policy to replace inside ( bays , sounds , and rivers ) light vessels with screwpile lighthouses . most screwpile lighthouses were made with iron piles , though a few were made with wooden piles covered with metal screw sleeves ( these sleeves were probably adopted because they were less expensive and easier to insert into the bottom , plus the sleeve protected the wood from marine-boring invertebrates ) . the typical screwpile lighthouse was hexagonal or octagonal in plan consisting of a central pile which was set first and then the six or eight perimeter piles were screwed in place around it . metal screwpiles were used to form the foundation of many lighthouses built on sandy or muddy bottoms . the helicoidal or screw-like cast-iron flange at the end of the metal pile was augured into the bottom increasing the bearing capacity of the pile as well as its anchoring properties . yet lighthouses built with these foundations were found to be vulnerable to ice floes . in areas such as the florida keys , where the bottom is soft coral rock , diskpile foundation lighthouses were built . wrought iron piles were driven through a cast-iron or semi-steel disk which rested on the sea floor until a shoulder on the pile prevented further penetration . the disk distributes the weight of the tower more evenly over the bottom . in coral reef areas where sand is also prevalent , a cast-steel screw was fitted to the end of the pile to give it more anchoring ability . cofferdams were used generally in shallow waters where it was not necessary to deeply penetrate the natural bottom . the cofferdam enabled the water inside the dam to be pumped out and the foundation built '' in the dry '' . perhaps as many as 100 spider-like , cottage-type ( 1½-storey wooden dwelling ) screwpile lighthouses were built throughout the carolina sounds , chesapeake bay , delaware bay , along the gulf of mexico , at least two in long island sound and one even at maumee bay ( 1855 ) , lake erie , ohio . few survive to this day ; many were replaced with caisson-type lighthouses . the tall offshore skeletal tower type was built in exposed open water at major coastal sites where visibility over ten miles was required . six offshore skeletal towers were built in florida ; three before and three after the american civil war , as well as one in the gulf of mexico off louisiana prior to the civil war . surviving examples . spit bank lighthouse , in cork harbour , ireland was built by alexander mitchell between 1851 and 1853 and is still in use . carysfort reef light , four miles east of key largo , florida , was built in 1852 and was the oldest screw-pile ( with disk ) lighthouse still in service in the united states , until it was deactivated in 2014 . screw-pile lighthouses on the reefs in florida are tall skeletal towers , with living and working quarters set high above the reach of storm waves . the seven foot knoll light was built in 1856 and is the oldest screwpile lighthouse in maryland . it was initially installed on a shallow shoal , seven foot knoll , at the mouth of the patapsco river . the northern reach of this river is the baltimore inner harbor , where the now-decommissioned lighthouse has been placed as a museum . the thomas point shoal light is a historic lighthouse in the chesapeake bay and the most recognized lighthouse in maryland . the drum point light originally located off drum point at the mouth of the patuxent river , it is now an exhibit at the calvert marine museum . the hooper strait light originally located at the entrance to tangier sound , it is now an exhibit at the chesapeake bay maritime museum . the roanoke river light was built in 1877 , and has been moved twice . it is the only surviving screw-pile lighthouse in north carolina . fowey rocks light , built in 1878 , is seven miles south of key biscayne , florida . , it is the last screw-pile lighthouse still in operation on the florida reef . american shoal light , completed in 1880 ( deactivated in 2015 ) , is located east of the saddlebunch keys , in the florida keys . built in 1885 , the middle bay light in alabama 's mobile bay is an example of a common screw-pile lighthouse . gunfleet lighthouse off frinton-on-sea in essex was constructed in 1850 but abandoned in 1921 . replicas . full size replica of the stingray point light that once stood off stingray point near the mouth of the rappahannock river , located at stingray point marina in deltaville , virginia a replica of the roanoke marshes light overlooks roanoke sound in the village of manteo , north carolina on roanoke island a replica of the original roanoke river light was built in plymouth , north carolina . a faithful replica of the choptank river light stands on the waterfront in cambridge , maryland - the seat of dorchester county on maryland ’ s eastern shore . references . love , dean ( 1982 ) . reef lights , key west , florida : the historic key west preservation board . . external links . seven foot knoll light , maryland ( 1855 ) half moon reef light , texas ( 1858 ) southwest reef light , louisiana ( 1858 ) thomas point shoal light , maryland ( 1875 ) hooper strait light , maryland ( 1879 ) drum point light , maryland ( 1883 ) mobile middle bay light , alabama ( 1885 ) roanoke river light , north carolina ( 1903 ) carysfort reef light , florida ( 1852 ) sand key light , florida ( 1853 ) sombrero key light , florida ( 1858 ) ship shoal light , louisiana ( 1859 ) alligator reef light , florida ( 1873 ) fowey rocks light , florida ( 1878 ) american shoal light , florida ( 1880 ) gunfleet lighthouse , essex ( 1850 ) stingray point marina walde lighthouse , france ( 1859 )