Tourism in France

statistics . most tourists arriving to france in 2014 came from the following countries or territories : visiteurs internationaux en france en 2014 . touristic regions . paris . paris , the capital city of france , is the third most visited city in the world . it has some of the world 's largest and renowned museums , including the louvre , which is the most visited art museum in the world , but also the musée d'orsay which , like the nearby musée de l'orangerie , is mostly devoted to impressionism , and centre georges pompidou , dedicated to contemporary art . paris hosts some of the world 's most recognizable landmarks such as the eiffel tower , which is the most-visited paid monument in the world , the arc de triomphe , the notre-dame de paris , or the sacré-cœur on montmartre . the cité des sciences et de l'industrie , located in parc de la villette , is the biggest science museum in europe . near paris are located the palace of versailles , the former palace of the kings of france , now a museum , and the medieval village of provins . both attractions are protected as unesco world heritage sites . french riviera . with more than 10 million tourists a year , the french riviera ( french : côte d'azur ) , in southeastern france , is the second leading tourist destination in the country , after the île-de-france . according to the côte d'azur economic development agency , it benefits from 300 days of sunshine per year , of coastline and beaches , 18 golf courses and 3,000 restaurants . côte d'azur economic development agency . p . 31 crdp-nice.net each year the côte d'azur hosts 50 % of the world 's superyacht fleet , with 90 % of all superyachts visiting the region 's coast at least once in their lifetime . côte d'azur economic development agency , p . 66 main cities on the french riviera include nice , antibes and cannes ; cap ferrat is also a popular destination . cannes hosts the annual cannes film festival . tourists often visit port-cros national park , east of toulon , as well as the city-state of monaco , famous for its monte carlo casino , near the italian border . provence . a large part of provence , with marseille as its leading city , was designed as the 2013 european capital of culture . numerous famous natural sites can be found in the region , as the gorges du verdon , the camargue , the calanques national park and the typical landscape of luberon . provence hosts dozens of renowned historical sites like the pont du gard , the arles ' roman monuments or the palais des papes in avignon . several smaller cities also attracts a lot of tourists , like aix-en-provence , la ciotat or cassis , on the mediterranean sea coastline . loire valley . another major destination are the châteaux ( castles ) of the loire valley . the french revolution saw a number of the great french châteaux destroyed and many ransacked , their treasures stolen . the overnight impoverishment of many of the deposed nobility , usually after one of its members lost his or her head to the guillotine , saw many châteaux demolished . during world war i and world war ii , some chateaux were commandeered as military headquarters . some of these continued to be used this way after the end of the second world war . this world heritage site is noteworthy for the quality of its architectural heritage , in its historic towns such as amboise , angers , blois , chinon , orléans , and saumur , but in particular for its castles , such as the châteaux d'amboise , de chambord , d'ussé , de villandry , de chenonceau and de montsoreau , which illustrate to an exceptional degree the ideals of the french renaissance . french alps . the french alps are the portions of the alps mountain range that stand within france , located in the rhône-alpes and provence-alpes-côte d'azur regions . while some of the ranges of the french alps are entirely in france , others , such as the mont blanc massif , are shared with switzerland and italy . more than 20 skiing resorts make it a popular destination among europeans in the winter . corsica . corsica is the fourth largest island in the mediterranean sea after sicily , sardinia and cyprus . it is a popular attraction for tourists with both cultural aspects ( with its main cities ajaccio and bastia and smaller towns like porto-vecchio and sartène ) and geographical features ( parc naturel régional de corse ) . the calanques de piana and scandola nature reserve are listed on the unesco world heritage list . the island is 183 kilometres ( 114 miles ) long at longest , 83 kilometres ( 52 miles ) wide at widest , has 1,000 kilometres ( 620 miles ) of coastline , more than 200 beaches , and is very mountainous , with monte cinto as the highest peak at 2,706 metres ( 8,878 feet ) and around 120 other summits of more than 2,000 metres ( 6,600 feet ) . mountains comprise two-thirds of the island , forming a single chain . forests make up 20 % of the island . notable places . cities . france has many cities of cultural interest , some of them are classified as '' town of art and history '' by the french ministry of culture . all major cities in france are worth seeing since they all have cultural and historic attributes . file : bordeaux place de la bourse with tram.jpg bordeaux file : panorama of marseille - panoramio ( 14 ) . jpg marseille file : toulouse capitole night wikimedia commons.jpg toulouse file : lyon - panoramio ( 100 ) . jpg lyon file : grand place , lille.jpg lille file : place de la comédie ( 2377437375 ) . jpg montpellier file : palais des ducs de bourgogne dijon.jpg dijon file : nice , france ( 15406655095 ) . jpg nice . villages . les plus beaux villages de france ( english : '' the most beautiful villages of france '' ) is an independent association , created in 1982 , that aims to promote small and picturesque french villages of quality heritage . as of 2008 , 152 villages in france have been labelled as the '' plus beaux villages de france '' . there are a few criteria before entering the association : the population of the village must not exceed 2,000 inhabitants , there must be at least two protected areas ( picturesque or legendary sites , or sites of scientific , artistic or historic interest ) , and the decision to apply must be taken by the municipal council . file : castelnaud - blick nach beynac.jpg beynac-et-cazenac , dordogne file : più bei borghi della francia montsoreau 1.jpg montsoreau , maine-et-loire file:120613-roussillon-03.jpg roussillon , vaucluse file : riquewihr altstadt 02.jpg riquewihr , haut-rhin file : place au beurre in sainte-enimie.jpg sainte-enimie , lozère file:110527-minerve-04.jpg minerve , hérault . specific destinations . religious sites . france attracts many religious pilgrims along the way of st . james , or to lourdes , a town in the hautes-pyrénées that hosts a few million visitors a year . john eade , '' pilgrimage and tourism at lourdes , france . '' annals of tourism research 19.1 ( 1992 ) : 18-32 online . the taizé community has become one of the world 's most important sites of christian pilgrimage . over 100,000 young people from around the world make pilgrimages to taizé each year for prayer , bible study , sharing , and communal work . theme parks . disneyland paris is france 's and europe 's most popular theme park , with 15,405,000 combined visitors to the resort 's disneyland park and walt disney studios park in 2009 . the historical theme park puy du fou in vendée is the second most visited park of france . other popular theme parks are the futuroscope of poitiers , vulcania in auvergne-rhône-alpes and the parc astérix near paris . most popular tourist attractions . the most popular tourist sites include ( visitors per year ) : notre-dame de paris ( 13.6 & nbsp ; million ) basilique du sacré-coeur ( 10.5 & nbsp ; million ) louvre museum ( 8.5 & nbsp ; million ) eiffel tower ( 6.2 & nbsp ; million ) palace of versailles ( 6 & nbsp ; million ) centre pompidou ( 3.6 & nbsp ; million ) musée d'orsay ( 2.9 & nbsp ; million ) musée du quai branly ( 1.3 & nbsp ; million ) arc de triomphe ( 1.2 & nbsp ; million ) mont saint-michel ( 1 & nbsp ; million ) notre-dame de la garde ( 800,000 ) château de chambord ( 711,000 ) sainte-chapelle ( 683,000 ) metz cathedral ( 652,000 ) bastille ( grenoble ) ( 600 000 ) centre pompidou-metz ( 550,000 ) château du haut-kœnigsbourg ( 549,000 ) puy de dôme ( 500,000 ) musée picasso ( 441,000 ) carcassonne ( 362,000 ) . gallery .