Soest, Germany

education . the city is home to a major branch of south westphalia university of applied sciences ( also : fachhochschule südwestfalen ( fh swf ) ) which offers various engineering , and business administration programmes . geography . soest is located along the hellweg road , approximately south-west of lippstadt , roughly east of dortmund and roughly west of paderborn . neighbouring places . bad sassendorf ense lippetal möhnesee werl welver . legends . the norwegian þiðrekssaga from the 13th century , a series of tales about the goths king theoderic the great , identifies soest ( called susat ) as the capital of attila 's ( ? –453 ) hunnic empire . the actual location of attila 's capital has not been determined . . history . because of the fertile soil ( dominantly brown silty clay loam , ) the area around soest was occupied long before 836 when the village is first mentioned in the dagobertsche schenkung , although the origin of this document is historically uncertain . but there is no doubt that soest has been inhabited for a long time ; excavations in the last two decades have uncovered signs of habitation stretching back more than 4000 years . in the 11th and 12th centuries , soest grew considerably , making it one of the biggest towns in westphalia with some 10,000 citizens . it was also an important member of the hanseatic league until 1609 . a self-confident soest from 1444 to 1449 liberated itself from the bishop of cologne , who controlled westphalia ( the so-called soest feud ) . as it was no longer capital of westphalia , the city aligned itself with the duke of cleves . this was a pyrrhic victory , however ; the city had shown itself strong enough to defy the powerful archbishop of cologne , but lost much of its trade : the '' liberated '' town was two-thirds surrounded by territories with other allegiances . when the last duke of cleves died in 1609 , that dukedom was inherited by brandenburg and , after a short siege , soest was incorporated into it . the painter peter lely , later to win fame in england , was born in 1618 to dutch parents in soest , where his father was an officer serving in the armed forces of elector johann sigismund of brandenburg . during and after the thirty years ' war , soest suffered a tremendous loss of both population and influence ; at the lowest point in 1756 , it had only 3,600 citizens . with the creation of the soest district in 1817 , its influence slowly rose . however , the industrialization of the ruhr area did not reach soest , which remained a small town . the nazi party placed soest in gau westphalia-south . historic centre during world war ii , soest was the target of several allied bomber raids targeted at the marshalling yard , which was one of the biggest in the reich , and the important battery factory akku hagen . later , soest suffered major fighting in early april 1945 , starting when allied forces captured the town at the beginning of the month . they were soon evicted by a german counterattack . destructive front-line combat raged in soest and its environs at the eastern edge of the ruhr pocket through the first week of april until the allies gained a permanent upper hand . from around 1953 to 1971 , a sizeable garrison of canadian soldiers and their families was stationed at soest ( with the canadian camps located just east of the town in bad sassendorf ) , as well as werl and hemer-iserlohn and deilinghofen to the southwest . also , several belgian kasernes were located in soest itself . in addition , an american nike battery ( 66th battalion ) was situated to the south , which was subsequently turned over to the german military . from 1971-1993 , the former canadian properties , including the married quarters along hiddingser weg , south of the b-1 , were used and occupied by the british military personnel and their families . on the closure of the belgian and british army facilities , many of these properties either became used for civilian purposes or were abandoned or demolished . the former married quarters area was converted to civilian housing . the former clfex ( the canadian army 's food and clothing store for nato families ) was converted to a naafi under the british and finally demolished in 2006 . gallery . file : soest , straatzicht3 foto4 2010-08-09 09.51.jpg soest , view to a street 1 file : soest , straatzicht4 foto2 2010-08-09 09.53.jpg soest , view to a street 2 file : soest , baudenkmäler markt 8 tm 12 ( dm406 tm 410 ) foto4 2015-09-12 09.01.jpg soest , view to a street 3 . notable residents . johannes von soest ( 1448-1506 ) , medieval musician , music theorist , poet , and composer johann gropper ( 1503–1559 ) , catholic church politician of the reformation period sir peter lely ( actually pieter van der faes ; ( 1618–1680 ) , english ( court ) painter otto modersohn ( 1865–1943 ) in rotenburg ( wümme ) ) , landscape painter and co-founder of worpswede , husband of paula modersohn-becker sigfrid henrici ( 1889–1964 ) , german army officer of armoured forces wilhelm morgner ( 1891–1917 ) , important expressionist painter in westfalen ( 1895–1960 ) , member of parliament ( cdu ) hartwig bleidick ( born 1944 ) , football player pete smith ( born 1960 ) , writer ralf könig ( born 1960 ) , known comic book creator sascha schmitz ( born 1972 ) , singer-songwriter , musician and actor sebastian hille ( born 1980 ) , german footballer oliver kirch ( born 1982 ) , footballer michael lejan ( born 1983 ) , footballer rebecca handke ( born 1986 ) , pair skater gaëtan bille ( born 1988 ) , belgian cyclist julian büscher ( born 1993 ) , german footballer . tourism . soest has a multitude of historical buildings and attractions . the many medieval churches are built from a greenish sandstone unique to this area . night life . the place comes alive on weekends , with the youngsters pub-hopping from dimwittekar to pesel , which is a pub with a dance floor . the place boasts a discothèque and several pubs serving fresh-brewed beer . st . patrokli . in 960 , bruno i , archbishop of cologne transferred relics of st . patroclus from troyes to soest . since 964 , they have been housed in what became the provost church st.-patrokli-dom ( st . patroclus ' '' cathedral '' ) , a particularly fine example of romanesque architecture . universities and education . the city houses a university , fh südwestfalen , which has students from pakistan , peru , mexico , india , usa , indonesia etc . , the swiss german university at the soest university has an influx of interns and exchange students from across india , africa and indonesia . the cathedral is a beautiful example of early medieval romanesque architecture fashioned from the local greenish sandstone . its massive squared bell tower or steeple can be seen for many kilometers , rising up out of the town centre of the old town and a landmark of the soester boerde . allerheiligenkirmes . the allerheiligenkirmes is named for all saints ' day as it starts every year at the first wednesday after all saints ' and lasts for five days . it is europe 's biggest inner-city fair and was held for the 673rd time in 2010 . specialties of soest . among the old specialties of soest are the möppken bread and pumpernickel . the haverland bakery in the town center , which formerly supplied the dark bread to the royal court of bavaria , has existed since 1570 . a newer specialty is bullenauge ( bull 's eye ) , a mocha liqueur , sold mostly at the allerheiligenkirmes . another specialty is the soester beer , also called zwiebel-bier , which literally translates as 'onion beer ' as since 1993 it has been brewed in the zwiebel ( onion ) inn . coat of arms . the coat of arms shows a key , which is the symbol for saint peter , the patron saint of cologne . the coat was not modified even after soest no longer fell within the jurisdiction of cologne . international relations . soest is twinned with : bangor , wales gotland , sweden guérard , france herzberg , germany kampen , netherlands sárospatak , hungary soest , netherlands strzelce opolskie , poland . references . external links . official site articles about '' aldegrever and the protestant reformation in soest '' / virtual exhibition '' iconoclastic controversy and sensual pleasure - heinrich aldegrever '' with introductory texts and about 170 commented copperplate engravings skydive soest - germany 's largest weekend dropzone .