Lifestyle (sociology)

individual identity . a lifestyle typically reflects an individual 's attitudes , way of life , values , or world view . therefore , a lifestyle is a means of forging a sense of self and to create cultural symbols that resonate with personal identity . not all aspects of a lifestyle are voluntary . surrounding social and technical systems can constrain the lifestyle choices available to the individual and the symbols she/he is able to project to others and the self . spaargaren , g . , and b . vanvliet ( 2000 ) '' lifestyle , consumption and the environment : the ecological modernisation of domestic consumption '' , environmental politics 9 ( 1 ) : 50-75 . the lines between personal identity and the everyday doings that signal a particular lifestyle become blurred in modern society . giddens , a . ( 1991 ) modernity and self-identity : self and society in the late modern age , cambridge : polity press for example , '' green lifestyle '' means holding beliefs and engaging in activities that consume fewer resources and produce less harmful waste ( i.e . a smaller ecological footprint ) , and deriving a sense of self from holding these beliefs and engaging in these activities . some commentators argue that , in modernity , the cornerstone of lifestyle construction is consumption behavior , which offers the possibility to create and further individualize the self with different products or services that signal different ways of life . ropke , i . ( 1999 ) '' the dynamics of willingness to consume '' , ecological economics 28 : 399-420 . lifestyle may include views on politics , religion , health , intimacy , and more . all of these aspects play a role in shaping someone 's lifestyle . giuffrâe , k . , & digeronimo , t . ( 1999 ) care and feeding of your brain : how diet and environment affect what you think and feel , career press . in the magazine and television industries , '' lifestyle '' is used to describe a category of publications or programs . history of lifestyles studies . three main phases can be identified in the history of lifestyles studies : berzano l . , genova c . , lifestyles and subcultures . history and a new perspective , routledge , london , 2015 ( part i ) . . lifestyles and social position . earlier studies on lifestyles focus on the analysis of social structure and of the individuals ' relative positions inside it . thorstein veblen , with his 'emulation ' concept , opens this perspective by asserting that people adopt specific 'schemes of life ' , and in particular specific patterns of 'conspicuous consumption ' , depending on a desire for distinction from social strata they identify as inferior and a desire for emulation of the ones identified as superior . max weber intends lifestyles as distinctive elements of status groups strictly connected with a dialectic of recognition of prestige : the lifestyle is the most visible manifestation of social differentiation , even within the same social class , and in particular it shows the prestige which the individuals believe they enjoy or to which they aspire . georg simmel carries out formal analysis of lifestyles , at the heart of which can be found processes of individualisation , identification , differentiation , and recognition , understood both as generating processes of , and effects generated by , lifestyles , operating '' vertically '' as well as '' horizontally '' . finally , pierre bourdieu renews this approach within a more complex model in which lifestyles , made up mainly of social practices and closely tied to individual tastes , represent the basic point of intersection between the structure of the field and processes connected with the habitus . lifestyles as styles of thought . the approach interpreting lifestyles as principally styles of thought has its roots in the soil of psychological analysis . initially , starting with alfred adler , a lifestyle was understood as a style of personality , in the sense that the framework of guiding values and principles which individuals develop in the first years of life end up defining a system of judgement which informs their actions throughout their lives . later , particularly in milton rokeach 's work , arnold mitchell 's vals research and lynn kahle 's lov research , lifestyles ' analysis developed as profiles of values , reaching the hypothesis that it is possible to identify various models of scales of values organized hierarchically , to which different population sectors correspond . then with daniel yankelovich and william wells we move on to the so-called aio approach in which attitudes , interests and opinions are considered as fundamental lifestyles ' components , being analysed from both synchronic and diachronic points of view and interpreted on the basis of socio-cultural trends in a given social context ( as , for instance , in bernard cathelat 's work ) . finally , a further development leads to the so-called profiles-and-trends approach , at the core of which is an analysis of the relations between mental and behavioural variables , bearing in mind that socio-cultural trends influence both the diffusion of various lifestyles within a population and the emerging of different modalities of interaction between thought and action . lifestyles as styles of action . analysis of lifestyles as action profiles is characterized by the fact that it no longer considers the action level as a simple derivative of lifestyles , or at least as their collateral component , but rather as a constitutive element . in the beginning , this perspective focussed mainly on consumer behaviour , seeing products acquired as objects expressing on the material plane individuals ’ self-image and how they view their position in society . subsequently , the perspective broadened to focus more generally on the level of daily life , concentrating – as in authors such as joffre dumazedier and anthony giddens – on the use of time , especially loisirs , and trying to study the interaction between the active dimension of choice and the dimension of routine and structuration which characterize that level of action . finally , some authors , for instance richard jenkins and a . j . veal , suggested an approach to lifestyles in which it is not everyday actions which make up the plane of analysis but those which the actors who adopt them consider particularly meaningful and distinctive . health . a healthy or unhealthy lifestyle will most likely be transmitted across generations . according to the study done by case et al . ( 2002 ) , when a 0-3-year-old child has a mother who practices a healthy lifestyle , this child will be 27 % more likely to become healthy and adopt the same lifestyle . ponthiere g . ( 2011 ) '' mortality , family and lifestyles '' , journal of family and economic issues 32 ( 2 ) : 175-190 for instance , high income parents are more likely to eat more fruit and vegetables , have time to exercise , and provide the best living condition to their children . on the other hand , low-income parents are more likely to participate in unhealthy activities such as smoking to help them release poverty-related stress and depression . case , a . , lubotsky d . & paxson c . ( 2002 ) '' economic status and health in childhood : the origins of the gradient '' , the american economic review 92 ( 5 ) : 1308-1334 parents are the first teacher for every child . everything that parents do will be very likely transferred to their children through the learning process . adults may be drawn together by mutual interest that results in a lifestyle . for example , william dufty described how pursuing a sugar-free diet led to such associations : william dufty ( 1975 ) sugar blues , page 204 : . class . lifestyle research can contribute to the question of the relevance of the class concept . . media culture . the term lifestyle was introduced in the 1950s as a derivative of that of style in art : bernstein ( 1991 ) p.23 : theodor w . adorno noted that there is a '' culture industry '' in which the mass media is involved , but that the term '' mass culture '' is inappropriate : adorno 1963 p.98 : the media culture of advanced capitalism typically creates new '' life-styles '' to drive the consumption of new commodities : . see also . aeromobility alternative lifestyle intentional living life stance lifestyle brand lifestyle guru otium personal life sustainable living simple living style of life tao