Emily Strayer

early life . emily erwin was born in pittsfield , massachusetts . parents paul erwin and barbara trask moved the family to the suburban town of addison , texas , on the northern edge of dallas , where she was raised with her two older sisters , julia and martha . her parents were both educators and nurtured the growing interest that both emily and martha ( later nicknamed martie ) shared , and together both sisters became proficient on several instruments while in elementary school . emily began playing the violin at age seven , and the banjo at age ten , afterward learning all the string instruments she could find . malkin , nina '' a little about martie '' , dixie chicks henhouse ( retrieved december 31 , 2007 ) . years later , martie joked that emily was better than she at the fiddle , and because she wanted to keep the fiddle as her instrument , she forced emily to learn something else . emily responded by mastering the five string banjo , by reading books to teach herself the chord progressions . from 1984–1989 , jane frost , ( director of the patsy montana and the walnut valley festival in winfield , kansas ) , remembers watching the sisters mature , teaming up with schoolmates troy and sharon gilchrist . the foursome were touring in a teenage bluegrass group they named the blue night express , in part because of the amount of traveling they had to do to reach far away festivals , frequently with a parent or friend of the family towing them back home long after dark at night . they thought it was worth the sacrifices to meet their musical heroes and experienced the friendly camaraderie and tricks of the trade on instruments from others . the sisters were said to have an '' almost obsessive '' interest in busking at small venues and attending bluegrass festivals . '' sharon gilchrist '' , faraway hills ( retrieved february 12 , 2008 ) . after martie graduated from secondary school at greenhill school with emily still completing her studies , both remained active in the bluegrass scene . the chicks . in 1989 , after years of attending bluegrass festivals and busking where they could , emily joined her sister martie , guitarist robin lynn macy , and upright bass player laura lynch . frost , again , recalls being privy to the discussion that the four women had about the possibility of a successful career as musicians together . martie felt they could do well . robin said , '' . it 's going to be a 'hot ' band , '' to which emily responded , '' i give it six months , and if we are n't making money by then , i 'm out of here ! '' . strayer was shy , and the youngest member of the group . she had enjoyed playing throughout school , but was at an age where she was already entertaining thoughts of working hard to be accepted by the united states air force academy . clark , renee '' can the dixie chicks make it in the big time ? '' dallas life magazine in the dallas morning news , march 1 , 1992 ( retrieved january 23 , 2008 ) . by 1993 , the band had evolved into a new direction . macy left the group for a '' purer '' bluegrass sound . lynch , thrust into the position of sole lead singer , was replaced by the sisters in 1995 with singer composer natalie maines after the group was unable to garner anything more than local interest . dickerson , james l . ( 2000 ) dixie chicks : down-home and backstage . taylor trade publishing , dallas , texas . strayer commented , '' we were prepared to pay our dues for as long as it took ; we were prepared for longevity . we know that we will always be playing music together , so we wanted to find someone who is just as determined and energetic as we are . '' but in later interviews , the sisters revealed what many had thought for a long time : the reason lynch was replaced was not commitment but a perceived lack of talent . in an article in the april/may edition of country music magazine , emily stated , '' we felt we needed the next calibre of singer . '' from there , massive commercial success ensued , with their 1998 and 1999 albums wide open spaces and fly both achieving diamond record status . strayer was a key element of the group 's look , with her hair dyed blond to match the other two at first , and then allowing it to return to her natural brunette color , and distinguishing herself visually from the other two . strayer and maguire 's instrumental virtuosity set the dixie chicks apart from many other country acts , male and female . strayer 's songwriting has also been a factor in the chicks ' recording career . strayer stood by maines when the controversy over maines ' remarks about u.s . president george w . bush hit the newswire on the eve before the iraq war in 2003 . she was the only bandmate to realize that , while in the u.k . , there was a big anti-war sentiment in the audience , but that back in the united states , maines ' criticism of president bush would not be well received . nevertheless , even when her home was trashed , and plenty of editorials were predicting the end of the dixie chicks ' successful careers in music , she remained loyal to maines , as did her sister . court yard hounds . strayer spent at least half of her life busking and touring nearly non-stop since high school , first with her older sister , and then with the changing lineups of the dixie chicks . after the bandmates celebrated their five grammy awards for taking the long way , the trio all had young children and took time out to spend with them , but strayer was eager to return to writing and touring . when strayer 's marriage came to an end , she began expressing herself by songwriting . some of her compositions include her feelings about the breakup with her former husband , and expected that soon , the band would resume its former schedule of writing and performing , but natalie maines was reluctant to do so . after four years , strayer became '' angry and frustrated '' , and in sending her new songs to her sister , conveyed her increasing disappointment . with natalie maines taking a break from music , rolling stone magazine announced in january 2010 that emily and sister martie have formed a side project called the court yard hounds , with strayer as lead vocalist . the band made their live debut in march at south by southwest with an album released in may 2010 . '' pair of dixie chicks plan album , tour as new band court yard hounds '' rolling stone , january 15 , 2010 ( retrieved january 19 , 2010 ) . strayer wrote all but one of the songs on their album . . personal life . on may 1 , 1999 , emily married country singer charlie robison . '' dixie chicks : dates & facts '' , front page publicity ( retrieved july 12 , 2008 ) . their wedding was held at the cibolo creek ranch . martie later revealed on a vh1 program that during their courtship , she had written the romantic hit song , '' cowboy take me away '' for them . they have three children : charles augustus , called '' gus '' , born november 11 , 2002 , '' charlie and emily robison welcome baby boy '' , cmt , november 12 , 2002 ( retrieved july 12 , 2008 ) . and twins julianna tex and henry benjamin born on april 14 , 2005 . '' emily and charlie robison welcome new daughter – and son '' cmt , april 25 , 2005 ( retrieved july 12 , 2008 ) . they divorced on august 6 , 2008 , after nine years of marriage . saldaña , hector '' dixie chick robison divorced '' mysa , august 6 , 2008 ( retrieved october 11 , 2008 ) . she became romantically involved with martin strayer while composing the court yard hounds album . with strayer she has a daughter , violet isabel strayer ( september 4 , 2012 ) . the couple later married in 2013 . discography . awards .