I, Claudius

novels . historical context . claudius was the fourth emperor of the roman empire , from ad 41 to 54 . a grandson of mark antony and great-nephew of augustus , he was a member of the julio-claudian family , rome 's first imperial ruling family . claudius ' family kept him out of public life until his sudden coronation at the age of fifty because of his persistent stammer , limp , and other nervous tics , which caused others to perceive him as mentally deficient and not a threat to his ambitious relatives . even as his symptoms began to wane in his teenage years , he ran into trouble as a budding historian ; his work on a history of the roman civil wars was too truthful and too critical of the reigning emperor augustus , and his mother antonia minor and grandmother livia quickly put a stop to it . this episode reinforced their initial suspicions that claudius was not fit for public office . claudius was portrayed this way by scholars for most of history , and graves uses these peculiarities to develop a sympathetic character whose survival in a murderous dynasty depends upon his family 's incorrect assumption that he is a harmless idiot . graves ' interpretation of the story owes much to the histories of gaius cornelius tacitus , plutarch , and ( especially ) suetonius ' lives of the twelve caesars . graves translated suetonius before writing the novels and claimed that after reading suetonius , claudius came to him in a dream one night and demanded that his real story be told . the life of claudius provided graves with a way to write about the first four emperors of rome from an intimate point of view . i , claudius is written as a first-person narrative of roman history from claudius ' perspective , covering the reigns of augustus , tiberius , and caligula ; claudius the god is written as a later addition documenting claudius ' own reign . the real claudius was a trained historian and is known to have written an autobiography ( now lost ) in eight books that covered the same period . graves provides a theme for the story by having the fictional claudius describe a visit to cumae , where he receives a prophecy in verse from the sibyl and an additional prophecy contained in a book of '' sibylline curiosities '' . the latter concerns the fates of the '' hairy ones '' ( i.e . the caesars – from the latin word '' caesar '' , meaning '' a fine head of hair '' ) who are to rule rome . the penultimate verse concerns his reign and claudius assumes that he can tell the identity of the last emperor described in the prophecy . graves establishes a fatalistic tone that plays out at the end of claudius the god when claudius correctly predicts his assassination and succession by nero . at cumae , the sibyl tells claudius that he will '' speak clear '' . claudius believes this means that his secret memoirs will one day be found and that he , having written the truth , will speak clearly , while his contemporaries , who had to distort their histories to appease the ruling family , will seem like stammerers . since he wishes to record his life for posterity , claudius explains that he chooses to write in greek , which he believes will remain '' the chief literary language of the world '' . this enables graves ' claudius to offer explanations of latin wordplay or etymologies that would seem unnecessary if his autobiography had been written for native latin speakers . i , claudius . writing in the first-person ( from an unspecified time period , presumably late in his own reign as emperor ) , claudius establishes himself as the author of this history of his family and insists on writing the truth , which includes harsh criticisms of the deified augustus and especially of livia . the narrative begins prior to his own birth , as he describes many of the events leading to the foundation of the roman principate and the increasingly firm emplacement of augustus as emperor despite augustus ' own publicly expressed intention to eventually restore the former republic . during his prosperous reign , augustus is plagued by personal losses as his favored heirs , marcellus , marcus agrippa , gaius caesar , and lucius caesar , die . claudius reveals that these untimely deaths are all the machinations of augustus ' third wife livia ( who is also claudius ' paternal grandmother ) , a calculating murderess who seeks to make her son tiberius ( claudius ' uncle ) succeed augustus as the next emperor . as these intrigues occur , the sickly claudius is born and is immediately shunned and mocked by his family . only his brother germanicus and his cousin postumus treat him with any kindness . he is eventually given a great tutor , the reputable historian athenodorus , who fosters a love of history and republican government in the young claudius . during these early years , claudius is advised by his idol asinius pollio to play the fool to survive . postumus is eventually framed for raping claudius ' sister livilla and beating his own niece aemilia ; augustus has him banished to an island off the coast of italy , but not before postumus reveals the truth to claudius . claudius then passes this on to germanicus , who convinces augustus of postumus ' innocence . augustus exchanges the exiled postumus with a double named clemens and secretly writes a will restoring postumus as his heir , but livia manages to discover this and poisons augustus . upon augustus ' death , tiberius is declared emperor , though his mother livia retains her power and influence as empress . the roman legions campaigning in germany refuse to accept the unpopular tiberius and begin to mutiny , instead declaring germanicus emperor . shocked and confused , germanicus refuses , declaring his loyalty to tiberius . he sends his wife agrippina and youngest son caligula away from the military frontier and asks claudius for an enormous sum of money to pay the soldiers . claudius agrees and pretends that they are gambling debts . with the money and the return of caligula , germanicus ends the mutiny and leads several successful campaigns in germany . in the midst of this , claudius is informed that postumus is alive and secretly forming a resistance group to take back his rightful place in rome . claudius ' letters to germanicus about postumus are intercepted by livia ; postumus is later captured and executed by tiberius . livia , recognizing that claudius is a threat , sends him to carthage to prevent him from having contact with germanicus . growing to fear germanicus ' popularity more and more , tiberius sends a hostile governor , gnaeus calpurnius piso , to spy on germanicus . germanicus soon becomes plagued by witchcraft before dying of poison . it is later revealed that germanicus ' son caligula was the instigator of the witchcraft . as tiberius becomes more hated by the public , he increasingly relies on his praetorian captain sejanus to administer his edicts and punishments , who is able to manipulate tiberius into suspecting that germanicus ' wife agrippina and his own son castor are plotting to usurp the monarchy . sejanus meanwhile secretly plots with livilla to usurp the monarchy for himself by poisoning castor and systematically eliminating any ally of agrippina and her sons . agrippina only survives due to the protection of livia , who holds vital information regarding augustus ' true opinion of tiberius . livia then hosts a surprising dinner , to which claudius and caligula are invited . she predicts that caligula ( and not his older brothers ) will become emperor and that claudius will succeed him . she privately admits to claudius to having ordered the poisonings and assassinations of many people , and then begs claudius to swear to deify her as a goddess , believing it will grant her a blissful afterlife , to which he agrees . claudius is later invited to livia 's deathbed and reveals that caligula betrayed his promise . claudius swears that livia will become the queen of heaven , which moves livia to declare he is no fool before she dies . tiberius , now free of livia , loses all compunction and executes hundreds of influential citizens on false charges of treason . he banishes agrippina and her son nero , while agrippina 's son drusus is imprisoned and starved to death in rome . tiberius retreats from public life to the island of capri and sejanus is given full command of the city in his absence , becoming de facto ruler of rome . tiberius is soon alerted to sejanus ' treachery by a letter from antonia minor and allies himself with caligula , despite his awareness of caligula 's growing wickedness and narcissism , and transfers control of rome to the even more despotic naevius sutorius macro . sejanus is executed along with his children ; claudius survives despite being married to sejanus ' sister , whom he quickly divorces . livilla is locked in a room by her mother antonia and starved to death , and antonia punishes herself for having raised livilla by listening to her daughter die . on his deathbed , the old and feeble tiberius is smothered to death by macro . caligula is declared emperor and at first appears to be enlightened and kind . to his surprise , claudius is recalled to rome from his peaceful life in capua writing history and living with his prostitute companion calpurnia . claudius quickly becomes the butt of many taunts and practical jokes by the imperial court . after recovering from a severe illness , caligula descends into madness , his behavior becoming ever more egomaniacal and irrational . he declares himself a god in human disguise , stages arguments and battles with other gods , bankrupts the country , and kills thousands . the madness having reached a tempest is finally quelled by cassius chaerea , a captain of the praetorian guard who plots with the other captains to assassinate caligula , along with his wife and daughter . horrified , claudius hides behind a curtain and is discovered by a disgruntled praetorian guard . realizing they need a new emperor , the guards suddenly and bemusedly declare claudius emperor . claudius pleads that he does not want to be emperor and only wants to see the republic restored , but the guards ignore him . he sadly accepts for the sake of his wife and unborn child , and for the access the emperorship will give him to valuable historical documents , on a whim deciding that as emperor he will finally be able to demand that people read his books . claudius the god . the story begins with an apology by claudius for having ended his first history on a dramatic point and continues with a brief history of his friend herod agrippa . herod was a schoolmate of claudius and was liked by claudius ' mother antonia . herod always finds himself in debts and danger in the east and in rome . he eventually gains the favour of caligula and is made king of bashan . herod is in rome when caligula is assassinated and quickly is able to convince claudius to accept the emperorship in order to avoid civil war . claudius reluctantly executes cassius chaerea and several of the other assassins and begins tirelessly working for the sake of rome . he applies himself to the law courts , demonstrates his intelligence in being able to locate one of augustus ' lost eagles , and orders the building of a harbour in ostia to help preserve the roman food supply . claudius is also able to quell two mutinies and conquers britain . herod agrippa conspires to take over the east , as he regards himself as the messiah . when he announces this he breaks the first commandment by declaring himself a god . herod quickly dies a painful death , just as his grandfather had died , imploring claudius to forgive him and not to trust anyone . throughout claudius ' reign he is unwittingly manipulated by his adulterous wife messalina , who kills many of her enemies as well as being involved in bribery . she eventually conspires to usurp the monarchy with her lover gaius silius . claudius is distraught and crushed by this news and is given an '' olympian mixture '' in order to manage through the ordeal . claudius arrests silius and the leaders of the coup . messalina is executed without claudius ' consent and claudius has no reaction during his '' olympian '' state , even bemusedly joking about being worshipped as a god in britain . on being relieved of the '' olympian mixture '' , claudius is crushed and decides that the only way the republic can be restored is by having a true mad monarch rather than the reign of a benevolent one . comparing himself to the fable of the frogs who desired a king , claudius privately refers to himself as '' old king log '' and plays a weak and easily manipulated fool . he then incestuously marries his niece agrippinilla , whom he openly despises . in his feeble old age claudius excessively enjoys gladiatorial games , is often intoxicated , and makes himself oblivious to agrippinilla 's schemes to gain power and make her son nero emperor . foreseeing that nero will be a terrible ruler , claudius plans on having his son britannicus removed to live with the northern britons and later to return as rome 's saviour . britannicus refuses and admits that while he loves the republic , the republic is dead and he wants to challenge nero for the right to rule rome as an emperor . dismayed , claudius agrees , knowing that he is sending his son to his death . claudius resignedly accepts that his death will be soon with numerous signs suggesting such . literary significance and criticism . the i , claudius novels , as they are called collectively , became massively popular when first published in 1934 and gained literary recognition with the award of the 1934 james tait black prize for fiction . they remain graves ' best known work , aside from his myth essay the white goddess , his english translation of the golden ass , and his own autobiography good-bye to all that . graves later claimed that the novels were written potboiler on a strict deadline . nonetheless , they are today regarded as pioneering masterpieces of historical fiction . adaptations . german translation . when the time came to translate the novels into german , graves , who spoke the language , decided instead to rework them into a one volume edition . he collaborated with translator hans rothe and they jointly produced a shortened edition which left out the many digressions which were incorporated into the english original , with the aim of presenting claudius ' story in a clearer and more effective way . the contents of the books were thus roughly cut down to a half . graves ' own preface to the german edition as published by paul list , münchen ( 1947 ) – the book is published as ich claudius , kaiser und gott ( i claudius , emperor and god ) with graves being styled robert von ranke graves , which is how he is credited in all german editions of his works . film and television . in 1937 , abortive attempts were made to adapt the first book into a film by the film director josef von sternberg . the producer was alexander korda , who was then married to merle oberon , who was cast as claudius ' wife messalina . emlyn williams was cast as caligula , charles laughton was cast as claudius , and flora robson was cast as livia . filming was abandoned after oberon was injured in a serious motor car accident . much of the footage completed for the film was included in the epic that never was , a 1965 tv documentary about the abortive production . in 1976 , bbc television adapted the book and its sequel into the popular tv serial i , claudius , starring derek jacobi , siân phillips , brian blessed , and john hurt . the production was awarded three baftas in 1977 and an emmy in 1978 . in 2008 , it was reported that relativity media had obtained the rights to produce a new film adaptation of i , claudius . jim sheridan was named as director . in 2011 , rights then passed to hbo and bbc2 to film a miniseries adaptation . jane tranter and anne thomopoulos , who previously worked on hbo/bbc2 's miniseries rome have been named as producers . radio . in november and december 2010 , as part of the classic serial strand , bbc radio 4 broadcast a series of six hour-long episodes of a dramatisation of both novels , adapted by robin brooks and directed by jonquil panting . performers were derek jacobi , tom goodman hill and full cast . it won the 2012 audie award in the '' audio dramatization '' category . i claudius , audiogo , 2011 . . comics . an episode from '' claudius the god '' was adapted for comics in the ec comics two-fisted tales 36 , in a story titled '' battle ! '' , written by colin dwakins and drawn by reed crandall . theatre . the novel has also been adapted for theatre . the 1972 production i , claudius was written by john mortimer and starred david warner . . audio . several audio recordings of the novel have been produced . derek jacobi performed two separate readings of the novel , both as abridged versions , one for dove audio ( 1986 ) and one for csa word ( 2007 ) . nelson runger performed unabridged readings of both i , claudius and claudius the god for recorded books ( 1987 ) . jonathan oliver performed an unabridged reading for isis audio books ( 1988 ) . frederick davidson performed an unabridged reading for blackstone audio ( 1994 ) . opera . the novel has also been adapted for opera by igor escudero under the title i , claudius ( opera ) ( 2019 ) . the three parts , or chapters , that form the trilogy are titled livia , caligula and claudius the god , and have been conceived to be performed not only sequentially , but also separately . . later references . a . e . van vogt 's 1957 novel empire of the atom is a wholesale translation of graves ' novel into science fiction . on the last page of the areas of my expertise , john hodgman includes a table comparing his '' future works '' with i , claudius . in 1998 , software developer c.j . silverio noted that several long passages of the novel the manchurian candidate seemed to be adapted from graves ' novel . i claudia , a 2018 novel by mary mccoy was loosely based on i , claudius and translates the characters into a modern day private high school with a problematic power structure . . influences . george r . r . martin , the author of the song of ice and fire series , has spoken of how he was inspired by i , claudius , in particular , central character stannis baratheon is partially based upon tiberius , particularly as portrayed by george baker in the bbc television series . . see also . count belisarius tacitean studies . references . external links . i , claudius project ( concentrates on the bbc production ) encyclopedia of television british film institute screen online ( tv series ) bbc programme guide web oficial de 'la casa de robert graves ' en deià , mallorca . de la fundación robert graves .