Marcher Lord

county palatine . some strong earldoms along the welsh border were granted the privileged status of county palatine shortly after the norman conquest , but only that based on chester survived for a long period . the term particularly applies to anglo-norman lords in wales , who had complete jurisdiction over their subjects , without recourse to the king of england . the king had jurisdiction only in treason cases , though the lords each bore personal allegiance to the king as feudal subjects . formation of the welsh march . the welsh marches contain britain 's densest concentration of motte-and-bailey castles . after the norman conquest , william the conqueror set out to subdue the welsh , a process that took well over two centuries , and was never permanently effective . during those generations the marches were a frontier society in every sense , and a stamp was set on the region that lasted into the time of the industrial revolution . amid violence and dangers , a chronic lack of manpower afforded opportunities for the intrepid , and the marcher lords encouraged immigration from all the angevin empire , and encouraged trade from their '' fair haven '' ports like cardiff . at the top of this culturally diverse , intensely feudalism and local society , the marcher barons combined the authority of feudal baron and vassal of the king among their normans , and of supplanting the traditional tywysog among their conquered welsh . nelson . marcher powers . the anglo-norman lordships in this area were distinct in several ways : they were geographically compact and jurisdictionally separate one from another , and they had special privileges which separated them from the usual english lordships . royal writ did not work in the marches : marcher lords ruled their lands by their own law & mdash ; sicut regale ( '' like a king '' ) as gilbert , earl of gloucester , stated , whereas in england fief-holders were directly accountable to the king . marcher lords could build castles , a jealously guarded and easily revoked royal privilege in england . marcher lords administered laws , waged war , established market town , and maintained their own chanceries that kept their records ( which have been completely lost ) . they had their own deputies , or sheriffs . sitting in their own courts they had jurisdiction over all cases at law save high treason . '' they could establish forests and forest laws , declare and wage war , establish boroughs , and grant extensive charters of liberties . they could confiscate the estates of traitors and felons , and regrant these at will . they could establish and preside over their own petty parliaments and county courts . finally , they could claim any and every feudal due , aid , grant , and relief '' , nelson , ch . 8 although they did not mint coins . their one insecurity , if they did not take up arms against the king , was of dying without a legitimate heir , whereupon the title reverted to the crown in escheat . welsh law was frequently used in the marches in preference to english law , and there would sometimes be a dispute as to which code should be used to decide a particular case . feudal social structures , which were never fully established in england , took root in the marches , which was not legally part of the realm of england . the traditional view has been that the norman monarchy granted these outright . a revisionist view is that such rights were more common in the 11th century throughout the conquest , but were largely suppressed in england , and survived in the marches . settlement was encouraged : knights were granted their own lands , which they held in feudal service to the norman lords . settlement was also encouraged in towns that were given market privileges , under the protection of a keep . peasants came to wales in large numbers : henry i encouraged bretons , flemings , normans , and english settlers to move into the south of wales . the tendencies of innovations in the plantagenet monarchy were towards a centralised bureaucracy and judiciary , with the gradual elimination of localisms . in the marches of wales these processes towards a '' high medieval '' authority were staunchly resisted . protests of the border lords surviving in the royal records throw some light upon the nature and extent of the privileges whose normal operation has left no record . on the local side , the able-bodied population was more directly essential to the local lord and was able to extract from him carefully defined and highly local liberties . a point of friction was in the lords ' funded churches where they appointed churchmen to livings held tightly under hierarchic control in the manner that had developed in normandy , where a highly organised church structure was well in the hands of the duke . the welsh church , on the celtic plan , closely connected with clan loyalties , brooked little authoritarian influence . the marcher lords were progressively tied to the english kings by the grants of lands and lordships in england , where control was stricter , and where many marcher lords spent most of their time , and through the english kings ' dynastic alliances with the great magnates . it was less easy to work in the opposite way , and establish a position among the hereditary marcher families , as hugh le despenser discovered . he began by exchanging estates he held in england and by obtaining grants in the welsh marches from the king . he even obtained the isle of lundy . when the last male heir of the de braose family died , despenser was able to obtain the de braose lands around swansea . in 1321 the marcher lords threatened to start a civil war and it was agreed that a parliament should be called to settle the matter . intermarriage with the welsh . while fierce hostility between the marcher lords and the welsh was a fact of life , nevertheless , much intermarriage occurred between the norman-descended barons and princely welsh families , ( often as a means of cementing a local agreement or alliance ) . the mortimers , de braoses , de lacys , grey de ruthyns , talbots , and the le strange families eventually acquired much welsh blood through politically advantageous marriages with the welsh nobility . roger mortimer , 1st baron mortimer ( 1231–1282 ) was a son of gwladys ddu , daughter of llewelyn the great of gwynedd . matilda de braose , a granddaughter of william de braose , 4th lord of bramber , married a welsh prince . he was rhys mechyll , prince of deheubarth . their daughter gwenllian married gilbert talbot , progenitor of the earls of shrewsbury . william de braose was himself a descendant of nesta verch osborne of wales through his mother bertha of hereford . another member of the de braose family , isabella , daughter of gwilym ddu or black william and eva marshal married prince dafydd ap llywelyn , whose mother joan was an illegitimate daughter of king john of england . charles cawley , medieval lands , wales queen consort anne boleyn descended directly from gruffydd ii ap madog , lord of dinas bran through his daughter , angharad who married william le boteler of wem , shropshire . end of marcher powers . by the 16th century , many lordships had passed into the hands of the crown , which governed its lordships through the traditional institutions . the crown was also directly responsible for the government of the principality of wales , which had its own institutions and was ( like england ) divided into counties . the jurisdiction of the remaining marcher lords was thus an anomaly . this was abolished by the laws in wales acts 1535–1542 ( also known as the acts of union ) , which organised the marches of wales into counties , adding some lordships to adjoining english counties . it also gave statutory recognition to the council of wales and the marches ( based at ludlow ) , responsible for oversight of the area . later claims . in 1563 , elizabeth i granted the former marcher lordship of denbigh to her favourite lord robert dudley , later the earl of leicester . the grant claimed that denbigh was given to him , : : '' in as large and ample a manner.as was used when it was a lordship marcher with as large wardes as council learned could devise . '' although the laws in wales acts had not been modified – and the claim to have the same rights as a marcher lordship could not therefore be legally possible – leicester had such political power that he was able to make this a reality in practice . early in the 21st century , businessman mark roberts styled himself lord marcher of trellech and purported to acquire the title of st . david 's from the university of wales , seeking to assert various associated economic rights including title in half the coastline of pembrokeshire . roberts contended that the bishop of st david 's were never themselves conquered and retained their ancient temporal possessions . the last welsh bishop had died in 1115 but the ensuing norman bishops acquired the ancient jurisdictional rights by use and eventually by a distinct royal charter . roberts claimed to be a corporation sole in succession to the bishops and to have the status of a rajah and effective state immunity . however , in may 2008 , the high court held that the laws in wales act 1535 had abolished the jurisdictional franchise of marcher lord entirely and that roberts had no such status . . list of marcher lordships . marcher lordships in the welsh marches and the successor shires max lieberman , the march of wales , 1067-1300 : a borderland of medieval britain , university of wales press , 2008 , flintshire : flint : hawarden : hopedale : maelor : mold denbighshire : powys fadog : chirkland : denbigh : ruthin ( dyffryn clwyd ) montgomeryshire : caus ( part ) : cedewain : ceri : montgomery ( part ) : powys radnorshire : cwmdauddwr : elfael : glasbury : gwrtheyrnion : maelienydd : radnor brecknockshire : blaenllyfni : brecon : builth : hay monmouthshire : abergavenny : caerleon : chepstow ( part ) : ewyas ( part ) : gwynllwg ( wentloog ) : monmouth : usk glamorgan : glamorgan : gower carmarthenshire : cantref bychan : kidwelly : emlyn : llansteffan : laugharne : st clears : ystlwyl pembrokeshire : cemais : cilgerran : haverford : llawhaden : narberth : pebidiog : pembroke transferred to english shires : bishop 's castle ( shropshire ) : caus ( part ) ( shropshire ) : chepstow ( part ) ( gloucestershire ) : clifford ( herefordshire ) : clun ( shropshire ) : ewyas lacy ( part ) ( herefordshire ) : kington ( herefordshire ) : huntington ( herefordshire ) : montgomery ( part ) ( shropshire ) : oswestry ( shropshire ) : whittington ( shropshire ) p . brown , p . king , and p . remfry , 'whittington castle : the marcher fortress of the fitz warin family ' , shropshire archaeology and history lxxix ( 2004 ) , 106–127 . : wigmore ( herefordshire ) . see also . english feudal barony . references . bibliography . davies , robert rees , sir , lordship and society in the march of wales , 1282–1400 ( oxford university press , 1978 . davies , robert rees , sir , the age of conquest : wales 1063–1415 ( oxford university press , 2000 ) reeves , a . c . , the marcher lords ( dyfed : christopher davies ) , 1983 .