Marmalade Boy

plot . miki koishikawa 's ordinary life as a sophomore in high school is turned upside down when her parents suddenly announce that they are getting divorced in order to swap partners with a couple they met back in hawaii . they seek her approval of the shocking change , and while at a restaurant during dinner where miki meets the other couple as well as their teenage son yuu matsura , who is around her age , she reluctantly agrees to the arrangement . at first , yuu appears to be a complete jerk who takes every opportunity to make fun of and tease miki , but he actually turns out to be fun and attractive , and miki finds herself falling in love with him . little by little , she accepts her new family arrangement and opens up to yuu as they become best friends . after a while , miki and yuu 's relationship starts to become complicated because of the former relationships that they 've had and developed with other characters . these include miki 's long time classmate and former crush from middle school , ginta suou , and yuu 's former girlfriend from his previous school , arimi suzuki . a secondary subplot develops when miki 's best friend , meiko akizuki , herself starts to have her own problems because of the relationship she has gotten into with one of the school teachers , shin'ichi namura . throughout the series , miki and yuu 's relationship is further developed and tried , influenced by the other characters around them and the relationships that they develop with these characters . characters . the cast of marmalade boy is diverse and largely defined by their relationships with miki koishikawa and yuu matsuura . although the relationship between these two protagonists is the primary focus of the series , many of the supporting characters are also well-developed . . production . when wataru yoshizumi first started planning marmalade boy , with miki , yuu , ginta , and meiko all the opposite genders of what they ended up being in the final versions . the original miki looked similar to yuu 's final appearance , while yuu was an attractive girl with long black hair and a '' devilish '' and '' unpredictable '' personality . yoshizumi notes several reasons behind the changes . part of the reason was that it was a request from the ribon publishers , who wanted a female as the central character as the story was going to be included in a '' mother 's day '' set with magnets featuring the characters . her associate editor also expressed concerns that a male hero would be a '' sissy '' when written about by a female writer . finally , yoshizumi herself decided that she would go with a heroine rather than a hero as most of the ribon readers are girls . in the original story , the title of marmalade boy was an indication of the hero miki 's cheerful , sweet , and naive nature . after redoing the concept , she wanted to keep the original title , changing its meaning to what is stated in the first volume , that yuu '' has lots of bitter bits inside '' him but people only see his sweet surface . the ending for the series was also very different from the final version . ginta and arimi were not going to be a couple in the original version , nor was meiko going to be reunited with namura . yoshizumi originally intended for miki and yuu to truly be blood siblings , and thus have to break up . afterwards , ginta would comfort miki and promising to wait for her to get over yuu . yuu and meiko would have been shown meeting four years later , having both having failed in their previous relationships . the ending would have been more open ending so readers would have had to wonder what really would happen to everyone . however , as she was writing the third chapter , yoshizumi became less certain of the ending , as it made miki and yuu 's parents appear to be awful people for doing such a thing to their children . she also was concerned how readers would react , and her own feelings of '' emptiness '' at the sad ending . her editor agreed that the ending would be bad , so she changed it to the happier one now found in the series . . media . manga . marmalade boy first premiered in the may 1992 issue of ribon where it was serialized monthly until its conclusion in the october 1995 issue . the 39 untitled chapters were collected and published in eight tankōbon volumes by shueisha starting on december 12 , 1992 ; the last volume was released february 20 , 1996 . shueisha later republished the series in six special edition volumes . the first special edition volume was released on march 15 , 2004 , with new volumes published monthly until the final volume was released on august 11 , 2004 . the series was licensed for an english language release in north america by tokyopop . the individual chapters were serialized by the company 's manga anthology smile from december 2001 through april 2002 . tokyopop released the first collected volume of the series on april 23 , 2002 , releasing new volumes monthly until the final volume was released august 5 , 2003 . it was one of the first manga series that tokyopop released in the original japanese orientation , in which the book is read from right to left , and with the original sound effects left in place . tokyopop 's volumes of the series are out of print . shueisha refused to renew the company 's license of the series after becoming part-owner of rival publisher viz media . it is also licensed for regional language releases in france by glenat , in mexico by grupo editorial vid , in spain by planeta deagostini comics , in italy by planet manga , and in germany by egmont . from march 2013 to september 2018 , a sequel to marmalade boy titled was serialized in cocohana . while miki and yuu make appearances , the new series , set 13 years after the end of the earlier one , focuses on rikka matsuura and saku koishikawa , yuu and miki 's respective sister and brother . . novels . marmalade boy was adapted into a series of japanese light novels by yumi kageyama , with wataru yoshizumi acting as illustrator . the ten volume series was published under shueisha 's cobalt bunko label from july 1994 through march 1996 . . anime . toei animation adapted marmalade boy into a 76-episode anime television series which aired on tv asahi in 1994 to 1995 . this was followed by a prequel theatrical anime movie in 1995 . the anime series was licensed for region 1 dvd release by tokyopop , which released the series in four box sets . tokyopop 's license had since expired , leaving the anime out of print , until may 6 , 2017 , when discotek media announced they have licensed the anime , and would release the series in two dvd sets . the first set ( episodes 1-38 ) has been released on august 29 , 2017 , and the second set ( episodes 39-76 ) on november 28 , 2017 . an sd on bd set has been announced for 2018 . the movie for the anime acts as a prequel to the story . taking place as a flashback after yuu kisses miki in the nurse 's office , he recalls the first time he met miki , shortly after his parents told him of their impending divorce and spouse swap . he found miki practicing tennis in the park and spent the rest of the day following her around , eventually finding out she was to be his new stepsister . according to this movie , yuu was in love with miki before the family 's meeting . the second discotek set , as well as the upcoming sd on bd set has the movie packaged in there . art books . marmalade boy : koi no style book , isbn marmalade boy : yoshizumi wataru illust-shū , . games . marmalade boy , a dating simulation video game was released by bandai entertainment for the nintendo game boy system in japan on january 1 , 1995 . based on the manga , the game puts players in the role of miki , who must try to win the heart of one of her three potential suitors from the series : yuu , ginta , or kei . it was released for the super famicom system on april 21 , 1995 . on release , famicom tsūshin scored the super famicom version of the game a 24 out of 40 , new games cross review : ママレード・ボーイ . weekly famicom tsūshin . no.335 . pg.29 . 12–19 may 1995 . giving the game boy version a 20 out of 40 . new games cross review : ママレード・ボーイ . weekly famicom tsūshin . no.323 . pg.37 . 24 february 1995 . . live-action television series . in taiwan , marmalade boy was made into a 30-episode live-action television series called 橘子醬男孩 ( pinyin : júzǐjiāng nánhái ) . the series starred pop star stella as miki and f4 member ken zhu as yuu ; stella also sang the theme song , '' 溫室的花 wēnshì de huā ( greenhouse flower ) '' . although the basic premise was the same , it did not feature many of the characters of the anime , and the love triangles were considerably simplified . reception . the english translation of the manga was favorably reviewed by anime news network , calling it a classic lighthearted shōjo romance that 's sweet and endearing and compulsively readable . serialized in tokyopop 's smile back in 2001 , then collected in 2002 , wataru yoshizumi 's marmalade boy helped introduce english language readers to the kind of situation found in shoujo manga , with its story of a pair of teens brought together when their parents swap spouses . the manga has over 10 & nbsp ; million copies in print . . references . external links . official shueisha marmalade boy manga website official toei marmalade boy anime website