Japanese beetle

description . adult p . japonica measure in length and in width , with iridescent copper-colored elytra and green thorax and head . a row of white tufts ( spots ) of hair project from under the wing covers on each side of the body . . distribution . popillia japonica is native to japan , but is an invasive species in north america . the first written evidence of the insect appearing within the united states was in 1916 in a nursery near riverton , new jersey . the beetle larvae are thought to have entered the united states in a shipment of iris bulbs prior to 1912 , when inspections of commodities entering the country began . as of 2015 , only nine western us states were considered free of japanese beetles . beetles have been detected in airports on the west coast of the united states since the 1940s . japanese beetles had not been found in wyoming , however on august 17 2020 the first finds were made in wyoming , specifically at kendrick park in sheridan . the first japanese beetle found in canada was in a tourist 's car at yarmouth , arriving in nova scotia by ferry from maine in 1939 . during the same year , three additional adults were captured at yarmouth and three at lacolle in southern quebec . japanese beetles have been found in the islands of the azores since the 1970s . in 2014 , the first population in mainland europe was discovered near milan in italy . in 2017 , the pest was detected in switzerland , most likely having spread over the border from italy . swiss authorities are attempting to eradicate the pest . . lifecycle . ova are laid individually , or in small clusters near the soil surface . within approximately two weeks , the ova hatch , the larvae feeding on fine roots and other organic material . as the larvae mature , they become c-shaped grubs which consume progressively coarser roots and may do economic damage to pasture and turf at this time . larvae hibernate in small cells in the soil , emerging in the spring when soil temperatures rise again . within 4–6 weeks of breaking hibernation , the larvae will pupate . most of the beetle 's life is spent as a larva , with only 30–45 days spent as an imago . adults feed on leaf material above ground , using pheromones to attract other beetles and overwhelm plants , skeletonizing leaves from the top of the plant downward . the aggregation of beetles will alternate daily between mating , feeding , and ovipositing . an adult female may lay as many as 40–60 ova in her lifetime . throughout the majority of the japanese beetle 's range , its lifecycle takes one full year , however in the extreme northern parts of its range , as well as high altitude zones as found in its native japan , development may take two years . . control . owing to its destructive nature , traps have been invented specifically to target japanese beetles . these comprise a pair of crossed walls with a bag or plastic container underneath , and are baited with floral scent , pheromone , or both . however , studies conducted at the university of kentucky and eastern illinois university suggest beetles attracted to traps frequently do not end up in the traps , instead , they land on plants in the vicinity and cause more damage along the flight path and near the trap than may have occurred if the trap were not present . during the larval stage , the japanese beetle lives in lawns and other grasslands , where it eats the roots of poaceae . during that stage , it is susceptible to a fatal disease called milky spore disease , caused by a bacterium called milky spore , paenibacillus ( formerly bacillus ) popilliae . the usda developed this biological control and it is commercially available in powder form for application to lawn areas . standard applications ( low density across a broad area ) take from one to five years to establish maximal protection against larval survival ( depending on climate ) , expanding through the soil through repeated rounds of infection . on field crops such as squash , floating row covers can be used to exclude the beetles , but this may necessitate hand pollination of flowers . kaolin sprays can also be used as barriers . research performed by many us extension service branches has shown pheromone traps attract more beetles than they catch . traps are most effective when spread out over an entire community , and downwind and at the borders ( i.e . , as far away as possible , particularly upwind ) , of managed property containing plants being protected . natural repellents include catnip , chives , garlic , and tansy , as well as the remains of dead beetles , but these methods have limited effectiveness . additionally , when present in small numbers , the beetles may be manually controlled using a soap-water spray mixture , shaking a plant in the morning hours and disposing of the fallen beetles , or simply picking them off attractions such as rose flowers , since the presence of beetles attracts more beetles to that plant . several insect predators and parasitoids have been introduced to the united states for biocontrol . two of them , istocheta aldrichi and tiphia vernalis , are well established with significant rates of parasitism . hostplants . while the larvae of japanese beetles feed on the roots of many genera of grasses , the adults consume the leaves of a much wider range of hosts , including these common crops : bean , cannabis , strawberry , tomato , pepper , grape , hop , rose , cherry , plum , pear , peach , raspberry , blackberry , corn , pea , okra , and blueberry . list of adult beetle hostplant genera . abelmoschus acer ( maple ) aesculus ( horse chestnut ) alcea aronia asimina ( pawpaw ) asparagus aster buddleja calluna caladium canna cannabis sativa chaenomeles castanea ( sweet chestnut ) cirsium ( thistle ) cosmos dahlia daucus ( carrot ) dendranthema digitalis dolichos echinacea ( coneflower ) hemerocallis heuchera hibiscus humulus ( hop ) hydrangea ilex ( holly ) impatiens ipomoea ( morning glory ) iris juglans ( walnut ) lagerstroemia liatris ligustrum ( privet ) malus ( apple , crabapple ) malva ( mallow ) mentha ( mint ) myrica ocimum ( basil ) oenothera ( evening primrose ) parthenocissus phaseolus phlox physocarpus pistacia platanus ( plane ) polygonum ( japanese knotweed ) populus ( poplar ) prunus ( plum , peach ) quercus ( oak ) ribes ( gooseberry , currants , etc . ) rheum rhododendron rosa ( rose ) rubus ( raspberry , blackberry , etc . ) salix ( willows ) sambucus ( elder ) sassafras solanum ( nightshades , including potato , tomato , eggplant ) spinacia ( spinach ) syringa ( lilac ) thuja ( arborvitae ) tilia ( basswood , linden , uk : lime ) toxicodendron ( poison oak , poison ivy , sumac ) ulmus ( elm ) vaccinium ( blueberry ) viburnum vitis ( grape ) weigelia wisteria zea zinnia . gallery . file : jblarva.jpg japanese beetle larva ( grub ) file : jbpupa.jpg japanese beetle pupa file : jbadult.jpg japanese beetle adult file : japanese beetle feeding on peach tree.jpg adult japanese beetles feeding on peach tree file : japanese beetles , ottawa.jpg mating , ottawa , ontario , canada file : japanese beetles on pasture rose , ottawa.jpg feeding , ottawa file : fullsizerender 36.jpg japanese beetle feeding on calla lily , ottawa , ontario , canada