Wikipedia:FAQ/Editing

how do i edit a page ? . : to edit the whole page at once , click the '' edit this page '' tab at the top . to edit just one section , click the '' edit '' link to the right of the section heading . to edit on wikipedia , you type in a special markup language called wikitext . see the wp : cheat for the most basic wikitext codes . see how to edit a page for more details and examples of making links , using bold and italics , linking to images , and many other things . see also alternative method of editing . but i have problems editing with my browser ! . : see wikipedia : browser notes . how do i make links ? . : edit any page to see how help : link are made . ( the edit-view is safe , and encouraged . ) the most basic syntax you 'll see in the wikitext is that the words of the link are surrounded by double square brackets : page name . : to add a link , find the page that supports both the immediate context and main topic . the spelling of the page name can come from visiting the target and copying its title , from the wp : search name-completion , or from a guess . : markup the link , and then activate a preview to diagnose and test the new link . a missing link will be red . finally , follow a new link to wp : testlink . : see help : link for more linking syntax , like the fact that the first letter ( that begins a page title ) will link just fine in lowercase . see wikipedia 's mos : link in good style , for example , without over-linking . how do i make a link appear different from a page name ? . : use a piped link to separate the page name from the way the link will appear : : : page name displayed text : note that the page name is the primary entry . : to add a suffix like '' s '' or '' ed '' or '' ing '' , just append these letters immediately to the right of the brackets : : : page names , page nameed , and page nameing : the additional letters will render in the same style as the link . see more wikilink examples at help : link wikilinks help : link . : see the help : pipe_trick examples for an in-depth look at how to save typing-in the right hand side of a piped link by appending the pipe character to the page name . ( the pipe character , ' ' , is a commonly used keyboard key nowadays . ) : to make the parenthetical phrase disappear from a page name : : : : to make the namespace name disappear from a page name : : : . how do i insert a new line ? . : normally , wikipedia does n't start a new line when you press the enter key . if you press the enter key twice , wikipedia will start a new paragraph . to force a single new line ( for instance , when you want to insert a poem ) insert the html element after the line . how do i rename a page ? . : registered users with a little bit of editing history under their belts can move a page ; this moves the page content and edit history to a new title , and creates a redirect page at the old title . this method is better than just copying and pasting the content by hand , as it preserves the article 's history , as required by wikipedia 's license . use the '' move this page '' tab at the top of the article to perform a move or rename . once you have moved a page , please click the '' what links here '' link in the '' toolbox '' in the left column and fix the links to the old page ( which will be labelled as a redirect in the '' what links here '' list ) . see how to rename ( move ) a page for more details . : images and other media files can only be renamed by administrators and file movers . instead , you may want to save a copy of the file to your computer , rename it there , and then upload it with the new name . fix any links to the old file to point to the new one , then tag the old file with an '' images for speedy deletion '' tag : copy the template into the image 's description page ( filling in the new image name ) . this will add it to the files for discussion category , and an admin will delete it for you . how do i delete a page ? . : first off , please do n't blank articles ( remove all the text from them ) . such changes will most likely get reverted soon afterwards , so they are pointless , too . : the procedure for deletions is explained at wikipedia : deletion policy . articles that should be deleted are most commonly nominated at wikipedia : articles for deletion . how do i edit a redirect page ? . : the easiest way to edit the redirected page is to click on the link you see at the top of the page after being redirected : '' redirected from . '' . for example , if you try to go to the william jefferson clinton page , you are redirected to the bill clinton page . at the very top of that page , you will see a message : '' ( redirected from william jefferson clinton ) '' , click on the william jefferson clinton link , and you will edit the redirect page . see redirect . how do i edit mobile subtitles ? . : the mobile version often displays a '' subtitle '' or '' subheading '' below the page name and in search results . it is often not stored in wikipedia but copied from the english wikidata description when there is one . it can be edited by clicking '' wikidata item '' under '' tools '' in the left pane of the desktop version of the page . mobile pages may have a '' desktop '' link at the bottom . wikidata descriptions are used in many other features . see wikidata : help : description for guidelines . some pages do not use wikidata but display a subtitle made with . see wikipedia : short description . how long should the ideal article be ? . : since one can link from page to page to page , how long should the ideal wikipedia article be ? a good rule of thumb would be fewer than 5000 words , unless the subject really , really needs much exposition . however , for a subject that is that complex , one can link several shorter articles together , using a hub page to tie all articles together . : for example : : foo : : history of foo : : physical description of foo : : relationship with bar : : modern cultural icons and foo : : foo and you : making it work in the long run : : minimum foo-tree , the gidsy-david algorithm . : if you write one long article , you will need new headings anyway . if you write a long paragraph , then you need to add new linebreaks . wikipedia : build the web , instead of a text that you read linearly . : see m : wiki is not paper for further discussion . : :keywords : length . how do i figure out how big an article is ? . : wp : s for the page name of interest by typing intitle : page name . the size in kilobytes is shown in parenthesis for each match in the list . see wp : size for more . : when the article size is over about 30 kilobytes , smartphones and dialups have problems . what do i do when an article is too long ? . : see wikipedia : summary style . how do i determine who made what changes to an article ? . : click the view history tab to see the revision history of a page . ( your user preferences offers customization . ) see help : page history . : on the left column of the page , activate the toolbox 's related changes to see the revision history of an article , classes of articles , or of the entire wikipedia . : the toolbox 's special pages offers logs that can report many types of recent changes . how can i add pictures to pages ? . : first , you need the right to publish the picture under the gnu free documentation license , an acceptable creative commons license or another free license . this means that either you created the picture and therefore own the copyright , or it is in the public domain . if you have a registered account that is four days old with at least ten edits , you can use wikipedia : file upload wizard to upload the image to wikipedia , including it in wiki pages by including its file name , the thumbnail option , and a caption : . : see also : : wikipedia : picture tutorial for general alignment and wikicode assistance related to images : wikipedia : uploading images for a general overview of the process of uploading images : commons : main_page for a repository with millions of reusable images : our image use policy for how and why some images can be used , especially copyrighted ones . how can i delete uploaded items ? . : only wikipedia : administrators can delete uploads , but anyone can upload a new item with the same name , thereby replacing the old one . : if you want to nominate an uploaded image for deletion , see wikipedia : files for discussion . how do i describe images ? . : click on the image to get the description page . also , when you upload the file everything you put in the upload summary is placed into the image description page . see : image : boat.jpg for an example of what goes onto one of these pages . are there any tools to make editing easier/faster/more fun ? . : see wikipedia : tools for a list of such tools . among other things , you can find browser plugins for faster editing and searching , tools for importing html and exporting documents from word processors , editing enhancements for the blind . how do i cite sources ? . : see wikipedia : how to cite sources and wikipedia : footnotes . is there any way to see how many people have viewed a particular page ? . : not exactly , but there is an official '' wikipedia article traffic statistics '' report available ( since september 2008 , developed by user : henrik ) . for each page , view its history page to activate its page-view statistics link . this report ca n't account for caching or mirroring views though . : there is no accurate way to account for the many viewings that occur beyond the officially reported number . 1 ) the servers that run the internet store copies of wikipedia in '' web cache '' to speed up access to the material . the many viewings of the cached copies are not counted . ( wikipedia does not have access to the many different companies which own those servers ) . 2 ) wikipedia is free for anyone to download , display , and serve out autonomously . how local links will function on fully mirrored copies are an important consideration . many websites , such as answers.com , provide their users with their copies of wikipedia articles . why does part of an article not appear , although it 's there in the edit screen ? . : this is normally due to a mistake in the wp : ref ; look for a tag without a matching tag ( 'closing tag ' ) , and add that closing tag in the appropriate place on the page . for more information , see wikipedia : footnotes . where can i find information on the markup used in editing , eg and ? . : see wiki markup and help : html in wikitext . why have i been blocked ? . : there may be several reasons for this & mdash ; if you feel you 've been blocked wrongly , then put the text tag on special : mytalk , putting the reason you think you have been wrongly blocked in for reason . an administrator will come and take a look . it may be due to an automatic block by the software . please be sure to include your ip address , which you can find in the block message . how can i insert a new section in an article ? . : see help : section . there is no automated way to create a new section within an article , it is done manually by placing 's around a heading , for example : : . original heading . : . new ( sub ) heading . : . new main heading . . where can i find the quotation templates ? . : the big , blue quotation mark templates are and . also see category : quotation templates . alternative method of editing . visualeditor ( ve ) is a way to edit pages without needing to learn wikitext markup . it is only available to registered logged-in users if they opt-in , by changing your preferences . for instructions on using visualeditor , see wikipedia : visualeditor/user guide . visualeditor is in the beta testing stages and may contain bugs and glitches . for full documentation on editing articles , see the help page , and the following articles : how to edit a page how to start a new page . wikipedia : talk page , which are used to discuss how to improve articles . how to rename ( move ) a page . wikipedia : redirect . help : reverting . wikipedia : disambiguation . wikipedia : interlanguage links . how to delete pages how to import articles how to break up a page how to use tables browser notes