Acer saccharinum

description . the silver maple tree is a relatively fast-growing deciduous tree , commonly reaching a height of , exceptionally . its spread will generally be wide . a 10-year-old sapling will stand about tall . it is often found along waterways and in wetlands , leading to the colloquial name '' water maple '' . it is a highly adaptable tree , although it has higher sunlight requirements than other maple trees . left the leaf are simple and palmately veined , long and broad , with deep angular notches between the five lobes . the long , slender stalks of the leaves mean that even a light breeze can produce a striking effect as the downy silver undersides of the leaves are exposed . the autumn color is less pronounced than in many maples , generally ending up a pale yellow , although some specimens can produce a more brilliant yellow and even orange and red colorations . the tree has a tendency to color and drop its leaves slightly earlier in autumn than other maples . the flowers are in dense clusters , produced before the leaves in early spring , with the seeds maturing in early summer . the fruit are samaras , each containing a single seed , and winged , in pairs , small in diameter ) , the wing about long . the fruit are the largest of any native maple . although the wings provide for some transport by air , the fruit are heavy and are also transported by water . silver maple and its close cousin red maple are the only acer species which produce their fruit crop in spring instead of fall . the seeds of both trees have no epigeal dormancy and will germinate immediately . seed production begins at 11 years of age and large crops are produced most years . like most maples , silver maple can be variably dioecious ( separate male or female trees ) or monoecious ( male and female flowers on the same tree ) but dioecious trees are far more common . they can also change sex from year to year . on mature trunks , the bark is gray and shaggy . on branches and young trunks , the bark is smooth and silvery gray . cultivation and uses . wildlife uses the silver maple in various ways . in many parts of the eastern u.s . , the large rounded buds are one of the primary food sources for squirrels during the spring , after many acorns and nuts have sprouted and the squirrels ' food is scarce . the seeds are also a food source for squirrels , chipmunks and birds . the bark can be eaten by beaver and deer . the trunks tend to produce cavities , which can shelter squirrels , raccoons , opossums , owls and woodpeckers . additionally , the leaves serve as a source of food for species of lepidoptera , such as the rosy maple moth ( dryocampa rubicunda ) . native americans used the sap of wild trees to make sugar , as medicine , and in bread . they used the wood to make baskets and furniture . an infusion of bark removed from the south side of the tree is used by the mohegan for cough medicine . tantaquidgeon , gladys 1928 mohegan medicinal practices , weather-lore and superstitions . si-bae annual report 43 : 264-270 ( p . 269 ) today the wood can be used as pulp for making paper . lumber from the tree is used in furniture , cabinets , flooring , musical instruments , crates , and tool handles , because it is light and easily worked . because of the silver maple 's fast growth , it is being researched as a potential source of biofuels . silver maple produces a sweet sap but it is generally not used by commercial sugarmakers because its sugar content is lower than in other maple species . thumb silver maple is often planted as an ornamental tree because of its rapid growth and ease of propagation and transplanting . it is highly tolerant of urban situations and is frequently planted next to streets . however , its quick growth produces brittle wood which is commonly damaged in storms . the silver maple 's root system is shallow and fibrous and easily invades septic fields and old drain pipes ; it can also crack sidewalks and foundations . it is a vigorous resprouter , and if not pruned , will often grow with multiple trunks . although it naturally is found near water , it can grow on drier ground if planted there . in ideal natural conditions , a . saccharinum may live up to 130 years but in urban environments often 80 or less . following world war ii , silver maples were commonly used as a landscaping and street tree in suburban housing developments and cities due to their rapid growth , especially as a replacement for the blighted american elm . however , they fell out of favor for this purpose because of brittle wood , unattractive form when not pruned or trained , and tendency to produce large numbers of volunteer seedlings . today the tree has fallen so far out of favor that some towns and cities have banned its use as a street tree . silver maple 's natural range encompasses most of the eastern us , the midwestern us and southern canada , that being southern ontario and southwestern quebec . it is generally absent from the humid us coastal plain south of maryland meaning it is confined to the appalachians in those states , and does not occur along the gulf coast or in florida outside a few scattered locations in the panhandle . it is also commonly cultivated outside its native range , showing tolerance of a wide range of climates , growing successfully as far north as central norway and south to orlando , florida . it can thrive in a mediterranean climate , as at jerusalem and los angeles , if summer water is provided . it is also grown in temperate parts of the southern hemisphere : argentina , uruguay , venezuela , the brazil ( as well as in a few low-temperature locations within the states of são paulo and minas gerais ) . the silver maple is closely related to the red maple ( acer rubrum ) and can hybridise with it . the hybrid is known as the freeman maple ( acer × freemanii ) . the freeman maple is a popular ornamental tree in parks and large gardens , combining the fast growth of silver maple with the less brittle wood , less invasive roots , and the beautiful bright red fall foliage of the red maple . the cultivar acer × freemanii 'jeffersred ' has gained the royal horticultural society 's award of garden merit . the silver maple is the favored host of the maple bladder gall mite vasates quadripedes . . references . external links . united states department of agriculture plants profile : acer saccharinum university of connecticut plant database : silver maple trees of western north carolina : silver maple acer saccharinum images from vanderbilt university trees of western north carolina : silver portrait of the earth , winter id pictures plant maps , interactive distribution map for acer saccharinum photo of herbarium specimen at missouri botanical garden , collected in missouri in 1989